Joseph Pine II and James H. Gillmore. Authenticity: What do customers really want. 2007

=Description=

From the publisher:

"Fake. Contrived. Disingenuous. Phony. Inauthentic. Do your customers use any of these words to describe what you sell or how you sell it? If so, welcome to the club. Inundated by fakes and sophisticated counterfeits, people increasingly see the world in terms of real or fake. They want to buy something real from someone genuine, not a fake from some phony. When deciding to buy, consumers judge an offering’s (and a company’s) authenticity as much as if not more than availability, costs, or quality. In Authenticity, James H. Gilmore and B. Joseph Pine II, the authors who brought us the best-selling business book The Experience Economy, argue that to compete today companies must grasp, manage, and excel at the new management discipline of rendering authenticity.

Through examples from a wide array of industries as well as government, non-profit, education, and religious sectors, the authors show how to manage customers’ perception of authenticity by
recognizing how businesses so often render their offerings inauthentic

· Appealing to five genres of authenticity

· Examining how to be true to self and be what you say you are

· Crafting and implementing business strategies for rendering authenticity

The first to explore in depth what authenticity really means for businesses and how companies can approach it both thoughtfully and thoroughly, this book is a must-read for any organization seeking to fulfill consumers intensifying demand for the real.Available: October 18, 2007 ISBN-13: 978-159139145


=Commentary=

Authenticity claims "that a lot of companies claim to be authentic in their advertisements whilst they are not. If you are authentic you do not need to say that you are . “It seems to be that people believe that authenticity is not of mankind, not of machine or technology, nor of money”. I actually dispute those introductory remarks, a sculpture or painting that is created by an artist is authentic by the artist and perceived by the public. Pine argues that “authenticity is personally determined”. I believe that is partially so, there is also an empirical reality if something is the first or originally created artefact or not. Pine & Gilmore present a 2×2 matrix whereby the dimensions are 1)True to it self(to the self) and 2) is what it says it is to others. In this matrix you can have four options. Something is true to itself and it is what it says it is(True True), something is true to itself but is not what it says it is(True/False).Something is not true to itself but it is what says what it is(False/True) and someting is not true to itself and is not what syas it is(False False). Read report on Joe’s lecture below


Being true to itself can de differentiated as follows;

1. Stating your identity

2. The essence of the enterprise

3. The nature of the offering

4. Effects of heritage"
(http://www.experience-economy.com/2007/06/17/authenticity-lecture-by-joe-pine-club-11/)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]