by [[Nathan Cravens]]

Free is Cheaper. 

=Global & National=
'''Robotic Delivery Vehicles (RDVs and MicroRDVs)'''<br>
The [http://www.edison2.com/very-light-car-overview/ Edison] four passenger vehicle hybrid gets 350 miles per gallon.
Solar panels would help it do more. Making the vehicles link-up in
transit will keep vehicles in motion without refueling. The Quadcar
method uses two vehicles to pull two idle vehicles until mid fuel to
switch roles, keeping vehicles recharged by the wheels of  idle
vehicles. Example: A laptop factory in Silicon Valley prepares to ship
computers from the factory to the end user. The MicroRDV takes the computer placed in a waterproof hard
plastic reusable shipping container, and drives itself to the RDV (our
converted four passenger vehicle) to stack itself atop other MicroRDVs
for a journey to Texas. 12 RDVs are sent loaded with
MicroRDVs, they link up for most of the journey, unless the road
becomes congested or less predictable. 4 each go to Dallas, Austin, and
Houston: one vehicle for each corner of each city. MicroRDVs then
disperse to homes and return to the mother ship. The
RDVs then return to the factory in Silicon Valley.

=Local=
'''Basky. General Purpose Robot & Local Delivery Platform'''<br>
This is a [http://www.segway.com/ Segway] type platform with hands able to do basic household
chores and repairs and local delivery. It uses bins to easily retrieve
and identify items for use. The kitchen will have its own bins for
cooking and cleaning; the living room for cleaning furniture; and so
on. The bins are held on hooks connected to the spine of the
robot. Hooks can move up or down. Bin tops are used as work surfaces
for tasks like chopping vegetables or repairing a broken coffee mug.

Basky will help revitalize local economies by providing free delivery
of organic farm produce like dairy, meat, and vegetables. This
could work as [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community-supported_agriculture Community Supported Agriculture]. Whatever funds needed for the initial phase
is crowdsourced via a Kickstarter or equivalent method. Food will be free
and healthier!

=Personal=
[http://opensourceecology.org/wiki/OSE@Home Open Source Ecology @ Home]<br>
This is an easy to maintain food and energy self-sufficiency kit where
food is grown aquaponically and energy comes from solar panels, wind
turbines, and biodiesel from algae. Marcin Jakubowski
et al. and Andrew Shindyapen and friends are potential candidates for this project. Andrew et
al. is developing the AutoMicroFarm aquaponic system.

Becoming more often faced with failing markets, its
vital we are able to care for ourselves in a more self-sufficient way. If
at least a large spare room or garage, it can be done.