

'''* Essay: Autonomous Politics and its Problems:  Thinking the Passage from Social to Political. Ezequiel Adamovsky'''

URL = http://www.choike.org/documentos/adamovsky_autonomous.pdf

=Description=

"My aim in this article is to present some hypotheses on issues of strategy for anti-capitalist emancipatory movements. 

The idea is to rethink the conditions for an effective politics, with the capacity to radically change the society we live in. 

Even if I will not have the space to analyze concrete cases, these reflections are not a purely “theoretical” endeavor, but spring from the observation of a series of movements I had the chance to be part of –the movement of neighbor’s assemblies in Argentina, some processes of the World Social Forum, and other global networks– or that I followed closely in the past years –the piquetero (unemployed) movement also in Argentina, and the Zapatistas in Mexico. 
From the viewpoint of strategy, the current emancipatory movements can be said to be in two opposite 
situations (somewhat schematically). The first one is that in which they manage to mobilize a great deal of social energy in favor of a political project, but they do that in a way that make them fall in the traps of “heteronomous  politics”. By “heteronomous” I refer to the political mechanisms by means of which all that social energy ends up being  channeled in a way that benefits the interests of the ruling class or, at least, minimize the radical potential of that 
popular mobilization. This is, for example, the fate of Brazil’s PT under Lula, and also of some social movements (for example certain sections of the feminist movement) that turned into single-issue lobby organizations with no 
connection to any broader radical movement. 

The second situation is that of those movements and collectives that reject any contact with the state and 
with heteronomous politics in general (parties, lobbies, elections, etc.) only to find themselves reduced to small identitygroups with little chances to have a real impact in terms of radical change. This is the case, for example, of some of the 
unemployed movements in Argentina, but also of many anti-capitalist small collectives throughout the world. The cost  of their political “purity” is the inability to connect with larger sections of society. 
To be sure, this is just a schematic picture: there are many experiments here and there of new strategic 
paths that may escape those two dead-end situations (the most visible example being that of the Zapatistas and their  “Sixth Declaration”). The reflections I present here are aimed at contributing to those explorations."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]