
=Discussion=


Langlois and Garzarelli:

A modular system is good at modular or
autonomous innovation, that is, innovation affecting the hidden design
parameters of a given modularization but not affecting the visible design rules.
But a modular system is bad at systemic innovation, that is, innovation that
requires simultaneous change in the hidden design parameters and the visible
design rules – simultaneous change in the parts and in the way the parts are
hooked together.

One might also add, however, that sometimes a modular system can improve in
performance even faster than a fine-tuned system. To the extent that such a system benefits
from “collective intelligence” and rapid-trial-and-error learning, the improvement in the
parts can dominate any benefits from fine-tuning. Personal computers are again a case in
point. PCs have come to outperform first mainframes, then minicomputers, then RISC
workstations, all of which, in their day, made their money as fine-tuned non-modular
systems (at least relative to PCs). Again, the extent to which modular innovation can
outperform fine-tuning may depend on the degree of inherent integrality in the system.

The benefits of an integral system in systemic change are related to the
benefits of fine-tuning to which Christensen points. Fine-tuning is after all
systemic change to improve performance. Thus integral systems may have
advantages not only when users demand high performance in a technical sense
but also when they need performance in the form of change and adaptability.
This latter may also be a function of how quickly the user needs the system to
perform; the front-end costs of a modular system may take the form of time costs
– the output forgone while waiting for the modularization to crystallize or the
visible design rules to get worked out. If a modularization is already in place, of
course, the system can adapt and respond quickly by simply plugging in new
modules to suit user needs. But if there is not yet a modularization, or if the
user needs a level of performance greater than can be achieved even with the
best possible assortment of available modules, then an integral system may do
better.

(The terms autonomous and systemic are from Teece (1986). There is a third possibility, what
Henderson and Clark (1990) call architectural innovation. Here the modules remain intact,
but innovation takes place in the way the modules are hooked together. (For a paradigmatic
example of this kind of innovation, visit Legoland.) The possibility of architectural
innovation underlies the benefits of economies of substitution discussed earlier.)

In terms of our earlier distinction between the corporate model and the
spontaneous or voluntary model, the need for performance and rapid
adaptability would tend to militate in the direction of the corporate (Langlois
1988). But this does not mean that unsatisfied needs for performance and rapid
systemic adaptation therefore call for central planning on a Soviet scale. In
Christiansen’s account, unmet performance needs do always call for an
integrated corporate structure. But the network theorist Duncan Watts (2004)
reminds us that a decentralized structure, with its ability to utilize “collective
intelligence,” can sometimes be marshaled even in the service of an emergency
response. His example is the way the Toyota Corporation responded in 1997
when the sole plant supplying a crucial component burned to the ground,
threatening to bring production of an entire model to a halt. Rather than
attempting to create centrally a new plant to make the component, Toyota
instead tapped the knowledge and capabilities of a large number of its divisions
and outside supplier with the intent of generating rapid trial-and-error learning.”


Choosing Hybrid Models as a Tradeoff for Innovation Benefits:

“hybrid models are actually far more typical of opensource
software development than are genuinely voluntary or spontaneous ones.
Indeed, perhaps all models of open-source software development are hybrid
models.

To the extent that innovative hybrid
arrangements are able to inject some of the benefits of central design and
integrality into a modular structure, such innovations will tend to make modular
arrangements more valuable and more widespread.” 
(http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf)

==Source==

Article:  [[Of Hackers and Hairdressers]]: Modularity and the Organizational Economics
of Open-source Collaboration. By Richard N. Langlois (The University of Connecticut, Richard.Langlois@UConn.edu) and Giampaolo Garzarelli (Università degli Studi di Roma, ggarzarelli@tiscali.it). Journal Industry & Innovation, Volume 15 Issue 2 2008

URL = http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf (2005 draft version)


=More Information=

[[Modularity in Open Source]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]