=Description=


West and O’Mahony:

“We define an autonomous open source
community as one that is presently independent
of any one firm and community managed (cf.
O’Mahony, 2007). A community-managed
governance system operates outside the reach of
authority embedded in employment relations.
Contributors to an open source project may be
volunteers or may be paid by their employers to
work on the project, but decision-making on the
project takes place independently from the
employment structure that guides the workplace.
These projects may be supported by a non-profit
foundation created specifically to support the
project, but such foundations have little
authority over their members (O’Mahony,
2005).

A sponsored open source community is one
where one (or more) corporate entities control
the community’s short- or long-term activities.
To refine these distinctions, in thus study, we
examine how sponsors approached the task of
building an open source community and how
these communities differed from their
autonomous counterparts.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Discussion=

==The tension between control and Openness==

West and O’Mahony:

“One key difference between autonomous
(community managed) and sponsored open
source software projects is that the sponsors of
open source projects faced a fundamental
tension between two conflicting goals. On the
one hand, sponsoring an open source project was
intended to advance the goals of the sponsoring
organization. Sponsoring an open source project
required significant investment in preparing the
code, hosting the site, providing introductory
materials and marketing the new opportunity. As
such, community sponsors sought to maintain
some degree of control over the project to assure
ongoing alignment between their investment in
the community and related product goals.

On the other hand, the provision of source
code under an open source license was an
inherently open approach intended to win
greater external participation and technological
adoption. In some cases, sponsors sought
adoption from prospective users (cf. West,
2003); in other cases, they sought adoption from
producers of complementary products or even
direct competitors.

We found that for the most open
communities, the participation of external
parties provided sponsors with both direct
benefits (such as code contributions and bug
reports from participants) and indirect benefits
(such as marketing and adoption benefits from
their open approach). For the most closed
communities, sponsors thought that the primary
benefit they received from creating an open
source community was not from direct
community contributions, but instead from
increased public awareness, accelerated low cost
distribution, and reduced costs of marketing.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


==Different approaches to community governance==


West and O’Mahony:
 
“Autonomous open source software
communities have received a great deal of
empirical and scholarly attention within the last
decade. However, there has been very little
research on corporate sponsored open source
communities, on how they differ from
autonomous ones, or on how such communities
contribute to a firm’s open innovation strategy.
This research takes a first step towards
answering these questions. By comparing
sponsored communities and autonomous
communities we found some important
commonalities. Both offer access to code that is
guaranteed by an open source license, which fits
the definition set by the Open Source Initiative.
Both also offer a high degree of transparency of
access to that code — without which the rights
to use the code would be useless.

However, our study showed that sponsored
open source software communities are
fundamentally different from autonomous
communities in the potential for goal conflict
between sponsor and community members.
Although both sponsors and members seek
widespread adoption, the primary goal of a
corporate sponsor is profiting from its
investment, while the goal of an open source
community would be improving the capabilities
of the shared technology.

To gain interest from a community of
contributors, sponsors needed to at least provide
transparency. The openness of sponsored
communities differed most in terms of
accessibility, with most sponsors retaining a
privileged (monolithic) rights for some portion
of the community’s decisions. In a few open
cases, the sponsor shared some control with the
community — and when sponsors relinquished
more control to the community, those sponsored
communities were transformed into autonomous
ones.

As consequence, we also found a dramatic
difference between most sponsored and
autonomous communities in terms of design
decision related to accessibility, particularly in
terms of governance. Governance of
autonomous projects was largely pluralistic,
shared widely among community members,
whereas the ultimate decisions of sponsored
communities were (with rare exceptions)
controlled by the sponsor.

The dichotomy is not complete, because not
all autonomous open source projects provide full
accessibility. Raymond’s (1999) stylized
typology of “The Cathedral and the Bazaar”
contrasts the tightly-controlled BSD projects
with the more open Linux. However, today the
“cathedral” archetype is relatively rare:
Raymond’s criticism (and the success of Linux)
have meant that successful autonomous projects
have largely followed Linux in granting
accessibility to potential contributors. However,
as a practical matter the importance of
community contributions constrains the
accessibility decisions of autonomous
communities more than sponsored ones:
independent communities that don’t attract
contributions will have trouble producing new
software, while sponsors can (and do) sustain
communities with their own resources — as
happened with MySQL and Berkeley DB in our
sample.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Source=

Article: The [[Role of Participation Architecture in Growing Sponsored Open Source Communities]]. By Joel West (San Jose State University College of Business) and Siobhán O’Mahony (UC Davis Graduate School of Management)

February 6, 2008 preprint version of  Industry and Innovation, Special Issue on “[[Managing Open Innovation Through Online Communities]]”

URL = http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf


=More Information=

Dahlander, Linus., Magnusson, Mats G., 2005,
“Relationships between open source
software companies and communities:
observations from Nordic firms,” Research
Policy, 34 (4), 481-493.


See also:

#[[Autonomous Open Source Community]]
#[[Sponsored Open Source Community]]

[[Category:Governance]]