
'''=  "a new research platform launching in June 2017 for the purpose of rethinking work in our societies".'''

URL = http://www.autonomyinstitute.org/


=Description=

Matthew Cole:

"The Autonomy Institute, a new research platform launching in June 2017 for the purpose of rethinking work in our societies. It is a theoretical, political, and economic project.

Our aim is to promote real freedom, equality and human flourishing. We are a team of researchers from various disciplines looking to develop this project in collaboration with researchers in relevant fields – but particularly with those working within political philosophy, critical theory, heterodox political economy, sociology, and geography. 

Work is at the core of modern society. However, the nature and function of work is continually changing. Currently we see accelerated changes occurring as the result of political, economic, social, and especially technological developments. 


Through collaborative conscious research we aim to: 

1.Diagnose the developing crises of work in all of its facets.

2.Propose solutions and generate ideas adequate to a future society and organisation of work that is free, equitable and just.


We believe that in order to face the new challenges that technology and the global economy pose to our working lives, we cannot draw on out-dated analyses or put forward traditional responses: the state of work today requires new thinking on the ground that seeks concrete and progressive solutions. We see the reorganisation of work and society as an opportunity for us to propose programs and policy for a more autonomous world. We seek cutting-edge empirical and theoretical expertise from different disciplines – political economy, philosophy, cultural studies, sociology, robotics and beyond – in order to build alternative models. To that end, Autonomy is a laboratory for new ideas and a platform for innovation on the issue of work."
(email, April 2017)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Research]]