
=Discussion=

William Irwin Thompson:

"The Axial Age, with its global epiphany of prophets, from Orpheus and
Pythagoras to Isaiah II, Buddha, Lao Tzu and Quetzalcoatl, seems to mark a critical turning point in the evolution of consciousness, for now the individual soul
seems capable of knowing and expressing a higher truth than the received wisdom of the ancestors, the idols of the tribe. 


Eric Havelock has described this transition as the evolution from the life-force of the Homeric thymos to the Socratic
psyche:

At some time toward the end of the fifth century before Christ, it became possible
for a few Greeks to talk about their ‘souls’ as though they had selves or personalities
which were autonomous and not fragments of the atmosphere nor of a cosmic life
force, but what we might call entities or real substances (Havelock, 1991, p. 197).
Orphism was the vehicle in which this transition from thymos to psyche became
articulated in hymns and instructions to the living on how to make their passage
in the realm of the dead.

Orphism was a religion with a belief in immortality and in posthumous rewards and
punishments. So far so good. But it had a more individual doctrine than that. Hades,
with its prospect of torment and feasting, was not the end. There was the doctrine of
the circle of birth, or cycle of births, and the possibility of ultimate escape from reincarnation to the state of perfected divinity (Guthrie, 1993, p. 164).

The figure of Orpheus, like that of Pythagoras or Quetzalcoatl, is a being of legend, so his story is more myth than history and serves as an allegorical performance of the truths to be passed from an initiate in the mysteries to the aspiring
novice. Like Quetzalcoatl in Mesoamerica, he is a reformer who seeks to eliminate human sacrifice and carry humanity forward in its evolution from sorcery
and blood magic to myth and a more stellar spirituality.

Just as Enkidu was warned not to partake of the food of the dead, less he be
trapped in their underworld, so Orpheus is warned not to look back as he seeks to
bring his beloved into light. In the esoteric practice of yoga nidra — the yoga of
sleep meditation — the realm of imagery is an intermediate world of perception
and deception, and only the realm of the nadam, of the cosmic sound, can enable
the practioner of yoga to reappropriate the realm of deep dreamless sleep in the
waking state of clear mind — a state of consciousness called samadhi.

Orpheus, as a musician of the heavenly harp given to him by Apollo, is an initiate of this cosmic sound — this music of the heavenly spheres — but according
to the mysteries, our human star nature has been mixed with the ashes of the
Titans at our emergence on Earth, and so humanity is a dyadic and contradictory
creature. Our spirit is split between body and soul, between Orpheus and
Euridyce. Because our star spirit has been captured in the vestiges of the elemental spirits of earth and matter, we must rescue it by shifting consciousness away
from the concrete density of visual imagery to the higher realm of imageless
music. But Orpheus looks back, seeking to hold his soul in sight, and so he loses
her entirely. As he returns to earth, alone and embittered, he spurns the love of
women and becomes a lover of men. The metaphoric complementarity of male
and female as a trope for the polarity of the incarnate being is lost.

This mythic trope, as allegory for initiates, is describing a blocking of the
union of ego and psyche, or waking mind and dreaming mind, in a psychological
implosion of the ego in narcissism: same is bonding to same in a projected form
of self love. But the male body, beautiful or not, can never serve as an answer to
the problem of death. Just as the Goddess Ishtar sought her revenge against the
male-bonding and defiance of the heroes Gilgamesh and Enkidu, so now the
Maeneads seek their revenge against the violation of archaic women’s mysteries.

The blood sacrifice that the reformer Orpheus had sought to eliminate is inflicted
on him as he is torn to pieces by the Maeneads — those vestiges of the neolithic



'''In the terms of Jean’s Gebser’s schema for the evolution of consciousness''',
Orpheus is the figure that marks the transition from the Magical to the Mythic
structure of consciousness.4 But the collective wins out, and just as the Renaissance was followed by the Inquisition and a new baroque economy of slavery
with its extravagant display of wealth, so Orpheus’s Apollonian reforms are followed by sacrificial rituals and his story is reappropriated into a cultural narrative of Dionysian ecstasy. The psyche remains trapped in the intermediate realm
of imagery and the mind’s identification of consciousness with imagery — the
familiar world in which ‘seeing is believing’.

But human spiritual evolution is not entirely stopped, and the reforms of the
Axial Age are partially absorbed as Greek culture carries on with its transition
from the Homeric thymos to the Orphic psyche — from the Bardic oral culture of
the Archaic era to the new literate culture of the sacred text of the Classical era.
As Steve Farmer has argued, it is the very portability of the new writing materials
that serves to construct the Axial Age and spread the new values from India to
Greece with Pythagoreanism in one direction, and from India to China with Buddhism in the other direction of the Silk Road.5 Indeed, in the evolution of consciousness from oral culture to literate civilization, the sacred text itself becomes
the oxymoron that embodies our contradictory human nature. The text exists in
the realm of imagery and is visually read, but it calls us back to a recollection
(anamnesis) of our stellar nature. Death itself becomes less biological and collective — as it was in the neolithic and megalithic eras of collective burials — and
becomes in the Classical era, more psychological and personal
matristic culture of the sacrificial dying male and the enduring Great Mother.

...


"The inheritor of the contributions of the Axial Age of Pythagoras and Orpheus
is, of course, Plato. But Plato does not put his faith in music as the yoga for uniting body and spirit; his distrust of the world of the senses leads him to reject the
passionate stirrings of modal music and for his perfect utopian society, he send
the poets into exile. In the place of Orphic music and poetry, he celebrates the
abstract and the sublimed geometrical, fleshless figure in the new genre of philosophy. Plato’s myths are not the kind that they were for Orpheus; they are
mythic allegories as the new mental code of the soul — ‘likely stories’ that
bridge the divide separating the Sensible and Intelligible worlds. The text that
embodies this transition from the Gebserian Mythic to the Mental level of consciousness is the ‘Myth of Er’ from Plato’s Republic.
In this ‘likely story’ with which he ends this dialogue, Plato shifts from the
dialectical search for the nature of truth, to the dramatic mode of myth and story.

In a way, the dialogue has prepared us for this shift, for it opens with a description
of the Panathenaic procession in which horseman passes the torch to horseman,
and this serves as a trope for the rational soul seated atop the beast of the physical
body and passing the torch of the search for truth from speaker to speaker as the
dialogue progresses. But logic and the dialectical method only take us so far.

Ultimately the Orphic and Pythagorean Plato returns to myth and ends his dialectical inquiry into the nature of justice with a tale of karma, forgetfulness and
souls falling like shooting stars to their next birth, and their next chance to
redeem themselves in a process of metempsychosis and moral refinement of their
coarse appetites and passions. This essential text marks more than the first imagining of a political utopia, it expresses in itself the evolutionary shift from the
shame-culture of the tribe to the guilt-culture of the individual (see Dodd, 1951),
for the afterlife Er describes is now presented in moral and karmic terms of
reward and punishment for one’s individual actions in life. Escape from the collective in individual transcendence and enlightenment can now be envisioned for
any man, and not just a Pharoah, a Pythagorean initiate or the yogic hermit of the
Upanishads.

A more physiological and internal way of considering this cultural transformation from the Homeric thymos to the Orphic psyche was articulated in the seventies by the psychologist Julian Jaynes in his book The Origin of Consciousness in
the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind (1976).7 Indeed, one can argue that the
whole movement of Consciousness Studies that followed — of which this journal is a prime expression — was greatly advanced by this seminal work. Jaynes
argued that Achilles’ somnambulistic consciousness came from the projection of
the processing of the imagistic mode of the right hemisphere into external space.
Visions were experienced as literally taking place, so in the ‘Anger of Achilles’
Athena could be seen and felt by Achilles to restrain his anger and sword, though
no one else saw Athena. Jaynes further argued that the corpus callosum was not
yet functionally orchestrated to integrate the activities of the hemispheres and to
recategorize hypnagoic activities exclusively to the dream-state.

Jaynes drew heavily on the German Classicist Bruno Snell’s book, The Discovery of the Mind (1982). But like many Classical scholars, Snell was not familiar with contemplative practices or even with Egyptian ideas concerning the
subtle bodies, so Snell did not recognize that the Homeric thymos was not a
Greek invention but simply a Greek translation of the Egyptian ka. In his
understandable enthusiasm for his own fascinating insights and discoveries,
Jaynes let go of the reins of scholarly restraint and tried to alter the chronology
of literary texts to fit his theory. So the Gilgamesh Epic — which seemed too
psychologically advanced to be so early — had to be redated and made to take on
the date of its last copy in the Library of Ashurbanipal. Thus for Jaynes, the cultural transformation of the Axial Age was not caused by the rise of alphabetic and
ideographic technologies or their transcultural portability; these were outward
expressions of an evolutionary mutation in cerebral organization. It would not be
until the 1980s and ’90s that the new sciences of complexity, as popularized by
the Chaos Collective at the University of California at Santa Cruz and the Santa
Fe Institute, would help people to see that causation is rarely singular and linear,
and that most often an emergent domain is brought forth through bottom-up
chains of mutiple and mutually interacting agents. Gebser, McLuhan, Havelock,
Jaynes, Steve Farmer and I were all seeing aspects of the cultural phenomenology of the evolution of consciousness, but were focusing on what was closest to
our own immediate world of experience.

Nothing is clearer when one goes from the epic of the Iliad to the Odyssey than
that something has happened in the world view of humanity. Indeed, one of the
reasons that I accepted the old eighteenth-century idea of ‘Die Homerishe
Frage’ — in which there are two Homers and not one — is because the Odyssey is
so different in world view from the Iliad. Crafty Odysseus does not have the
archaic somnambulistic consciousness of Achilles; his mind is clear, corpuscular
and discreet; he stands at the threshold of the underworld, but does not cross over
or descend. Aeneas, the demigod as son of Venus, is able to descend, into the
underworld, but even he must be accompanied by the archaic figure of the
Cumaen sybil. Yet even in the case of the shamanistic sybil, human consciousness is now so discreet and stabile — and no longer fluid and astrally permeable — that the god has to break in upon her if she is to become conscious of the
visionary realms and prophesy. The image that Virgil presents is of the god
breaking in a wild stallion. In the simile of a horseman forcing a bridle into the
mouth of a wild horse, the god is presented as a hostile mode of consciousness
that must be thrust into the mind and mouth of the sybil if he is to control her and
speak prophetically out of her body.

It is this ancient Greek vision of the Elysian Field of Plato’s Myth of Er that
Virgil both inherits and recalls, and it is clear in the entire narrative of the Aeneid
that the kairos of Virgil in its cultural process of individuation has passed from
the thymos of Homer to the psyche of Plato and on to the worldly ego with its
dutiful sense of self in the illustrious example of ‘pius Aeneas’. In fact, the architectonic structure of the Aeneid, with its movement from Western Asia to Western Europe, and its soldierly rejection of love for a female Queen in favour of the
founding of a patriarchal empire, is a recapitulation of an earlier movement from
matristic to patriarchal, and is a newly energized performance of the shift from
collectivist Asia to individualistic Rome with its grand imperial theatre of personal ambition, of arms and the man. But implicit in this shift from East to West
is also an archetypal shift from psyche to ego. It is not the love of woman, or the
experiences of the soul in subtle and immaterial realms that are to matter now; it
is duty and action in the world; it is the world of Empire. Ego and Empire are
co-dependantly originating psychological structures, in which humanity now
leans more heavily towards rationality than towards psyche.

In terms of cultural evolution, for which mythological and literary texts serve
as fossil records, we see here a developmental movement through three stages, or
structures, thymos, psyche and ego. With thymos, the focus of attention is on the
subtle energy body, the Egyptian ka, or the pranayamakosha in yogic psychology (see Mookerjee, 1982, p. 12). In this cultural complex, death seems to be collective, as if humans were still closely identified with the structure of a group
soul rather than an individual one. With this formation in archaic Greece and
ancient Egypt, we seem to be looking back towards an even more ancient formation of shamanism and animal possession. In Ice-Age art, the shaman is pictured
in cave paintings and carvings as a human in animal form, or half-human,
half-animal. Religion often preserves an ancient structure and envaluates it to see
new formations or levels of cultural organization as evil. In the ancient culture of
animal possession and blood sacrifice, Orpheus and Quetzalcoatl are threats to
the ways of sorcery and magic. They represent a movement away from possession and group consciousness towards individuation.
At the psychic level of organization, the individual is represented as a dyadic
being, one split between conscious and unconscious, between a social life of
norms and duty, and a pull backward to the unconscious through erotic transfiguration and death. This dyadic mode of being is polarized between sex and death,
so the archetypal iconography for this cultural construction is that of the male
body as the waking consciousness and the female soul as the dreaming and
visionary consciousness: Orpheus and Euridyce. But as the process of individuation continues to develop in the classical Roman world, there is a reversal of this
signification of the soul as feminine and the ego as masculine. In the myth of
‘Psyche and Eros’, as retold in Apulieus’ Golden Ass, it is the god who comes by
night that is presented as masculine and the receptive personality that is presented as feminine. Indeed, the whole story of the invisible lover who must not be
seen seems to echo with mystical allusions that take us back to Gnostic and
Kabbalistic sources. The sisters of Psyche, who are jealous of her intimacy with
the god, recall the angels who were jealous at the creation of man and refused to
bow down and adore God’s latest creation — as is told in both the Hebraic Midrash and the Koran. Since the angels and jinn were made of light and fire, they
were repelled at adoring a creature made out of mud. If the sisters are thus an
echo of the jealous angels, then Psyche is a trope for the uniqueness of the human
soul and Eros is a metaphor for the indwelling god, the hidden god that is intimately embedded with its beloved individual being. The stricture that Psyche is
not to try to ‘see’ the god is, of course, an echo of the interdiction to Orpheus that
he should not try to turn and ‘see’ Euridyce as he leads her out of the underworld.
The mystical significance of this trope is that the divine substratum of the human
being is not experienced in the waking or dreaming consciousness, but only in
the fullness of a non-perceptual mind that is experienced in deep, dreamless
sleep. It is this state of mind that the yogi of the Upanishads is taught to try to
reappropriate in the samadhi of meditation — a mode of higher consciousness
that is not dreaming or restricted to the perceptual field of wakeful consciousness. What ‘Psyche and Eros’ represents is an evolution of consciousness in
which a higher self is only available to Mind — as opposed to conscious awareness — through the higher dimensional modes beyond three-dimensional
perception.

In this evolution of Graeco-Roman culture from psyche to ego, there arises in
the exoteric, secular realm of life a turning away from the female to the call of
duties in the imperial world, and this is archetypally expressed in Aeneas turning
away from Dido to found Rome and the beginnings of Western Europe. But
coeval with this emergence of egohood in the classical world is a new mythic narrative in which the soul does not simply descend into the underworld, but journeys upwards through the solar and starlit heavens — as we see in the Jewish
apocalyptic texts of The Book of Enoch and the Christian apocryphal Vision of
Paul (see Barnstone, 1984, pp. 485, 537). Here the focus of consciousness seems
to be shifting from the waking mind to another mode, one that is not unconscious
or dreaming but rather of ‘spirit’ or a higher mind in which the world is no longer
three dimensional, but has higher dimensionality. If we apply the yogic terminology of the energy sheaths that constitute the fully incarnate being, then the
thymos is the Egyptian ka, or the Vedic pranamayakosa, and the psyche is the
Egyptian ba or the Vedic manomayakosa, and the journey through the heavens is
effected with the higher minds of the Pharaohonic Sahu, or the Vedic
vijnanamayakosa and the anatamayakosa."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.8.5742&rep=rep1&type=pdf)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

=More information=

* The [[Shift from Aural to Alphabetic Consciousness]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]