
=Contextual Quote=

"The conception of the cosmos, which encompassed both the world of the gods and of men, was superseded by the division between this world and the hereafter, the holy was separated out and the world, to use Max Weber’s words, was ›demystified‹. A single person was no longer enfolded within a cosmic cultic society, but must instead himself bridge the resulting gap between here and there. With the discovery of transcendence in his own case he experienced himself as subject, person and individual that is as someone quite different from his contemporaries. Since the search for meaning did not have to be based on an afterlife at all, which either with or without divine beings would be radically different from this world, it could also lie in self-transcendence, namely the overcoming of selfishness. The ethical demands of the Axial Age were emphatically underlined only just recently as follows: »The moral moved into the center of spiritual life. The only way to meet that which they termed ›God‹ , ›nirvana‹ , ›Brahman‹  or the ›way‹  was to live a life characterized by compassion.« On the other hand the individual was able to recognize this world as malleable, to develop utopias and consciously carry out social changes. Thus the so-called Axial Age was also the birth of the intellectual."

- Michael Borgolte [https://www.medievalworlds.net/0xc1aa5576%200x00324b67.pdf]


=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Axial Age (from the German Achsenzeit) is a term coined by the German philosopher Karl Jaspers. It refers to broad changes in religious and philosophical thought that occurred in a variety of locations from about the 8th to the 3rd century BC.

According to Jaspers, during this period, universalizing modes of thought appeared in Persia, India, China, the Levant, and the Greco-Roman world, in a striking parallel development, without any obvious admixture between these disparate cultures. Jaspers identified key thinkers from this age who had a profound influence on future philosophies and religions, and identified characteristics common to each area from which those thinkers emerged.

The historical validity of the Axial Age is disputed. Some criticisms of Jasper's include the lack of a demonstrable common denominator between the intellectual developments that are supposed to have developed in unison across ancient Greece, Israel, India, and China; lack of any radical discontinuity with "preaxial" and "postaxial" periods; and exclusion of pivotal figures that do not fit the definition (for example, Jesus, Muhammad, and Akhenaten).[5] Despite these criticisms, the Axial Age continues to be an influential idea, with many scholars accepting that profound changes in religious and philosophical discourse did indeed take place but disagreeing as to the underlying reasons. To quote Robert Bellah and Hans Joas, "The notion that in significant parts of Eurasia the middle centuries of the first millennium BC mark a significant transition in human cultural history, and that this period can be referred to as the Axial Age, has become widely, but not universally, accepted."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial_Age)


=Characteristics=

'''1. From the Wikipedia:'''

"Jaspers presented his first outline of the Axial age by a series of examples:

Confucius and Lao-Tse were living in China, all the schools of Chinese philosophy came into being, including those of Mo Ti, Chuang Tse, Lieh Tzu and a host of others; India produced the Upanishads and Buddha and, like China, ran the whole gamut of philosophical possibilities down to materialism, scepticism and nihilism; in Iran, Zarathustra taught a challenging view of the world as a struggle between good and evil; in Palestine the prophets made their appearance from Elijah by way of Isaiah and Jeremiah to Deutero-Isaiah; Greece witnessed the appearance of Homer, of the philosophers—Parmenides, Heraclitus and Plato,—of the tragedians, of Thucydides and Archimedes. Everything implied by these names developed during these few centuries almost simultaneously in China, India and the West


Jaspers argued that the Axial Age gave birth to philosophy as a discipline.

Jaspers described the Axial Age as "an interregnum between two ages of great empire, a pause for liberty, a deep breath bringing the most lucid consciousness" It has also been suggested that the Axial Age was a historically liminal period, when old certainties had lost their validity and new ones were still not ready.

Jaspers had a particular interest in the similarities in circumstance and thought of its figures. Similarities included an engagement in the quest for human meaning and the rise of a new elite class of religious leaders and thinkers in China, India and the Mediterranean.

These spiritual foundations were laid by individual thinkers within a framework of a changing social environment. Jaspers argues that the characteristics appeared under similar political circumstances: China, India, the Middle East and the Occident each comprised multiple small states engaged in internal and external struggles. The three regions all gave birth to, and then institutionalized, a tradition of travelling scholars, who roamed from city to city to exchange ideas. After the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period, Taoism and Confucianism emerged in China. In other regions, the scholars were largely from extant religious traditions; in India, from Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism; in Persia, from Zoroastrianism; in the Levant, from Judaism; and in Greece, from Sophism and other classical philosophies.

Many of the cultures of the axial age were considered second-generation societies because they were built on the societies which preceded them."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial_Age)


'''2. A critical quote'''

"In my view the change from divine immanence (divinity within the world) into transcendence (divinity beyond the world) has provided this biggest transformation, it has split the spiritual from the material along hard lines, and made the spiritual inaccessible except under controlled gatekeepers. Since then the physical world has been stripped of any and all divinity, a desacralised carcass left to be scavenged by the vultures of communism and capitalism."

- Hwitgeard [https://imperiumpress.substack.com/p/myth-of-the-21st-century]

=History=

==Origin of the idea of Axial Age==

From the Wikipedia:

"Jaspers introduced the concept of an Axial Age in his book Vom Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte (The Origin and Goal of History), published in 1949. The simultaneous appearance of thinkers and philosophers in different areas of the world had been remarked by numerous authors since the 18th century, notably by the French Indologist Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron. Jaspers explicitly cited some of these authors, including Victor von Strauß (1859) and Ernst von Lasaulx (1870). He was unaware of the first fully nuanced theory from 1873 by John Stuart Stuart-Glennie, forgotten by Jaspers' time, and which Stuart-Glennie termed "the moral revolution". Stuart-Glennie and Jaspers both claimed that the Axial Age should be viewed as an objective empirical fact of history, independently of religious considerations. Jaspers argued that during the Axial Age, "the spiritual foundations of humanity were laid simultaneously and independently in China, India, Persia, Judea, and Greece. And these are the foundations upon which humanity still subsists today."

Jaspers identified a number of key thinkers as having had a profound influence on future philosophies and religions, and identified characteristics common to each area from which those thinkers emerged. Jaspers held up this age as unique and one to which the rest of the history of human thought might be compared."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial_Age)


==The Two Phases of the Axial Age==

Deep Noetics:

“Historians tend to differ in their assessment of when to pinpoint the beginning and end of the Axial Age. For the purpose of this outline, I will focus on the first and last emergence of large territorial empires with a novel abstract, or monotheistic, state religion. This means, we begin with Ancient Persia, around 500BC, and end with the first Islamic Caliphate at around 700AD. After that, nothing comparable to Islam has emerged as a new religion of similar magnitude.

For Europe, the first half of the Axial Age is characterised by Classical Antiquity, including the Hellenic and Roman World. The second half is characterised by the emergence of Christianity as a state religion, culminating in the political and doctrinal schism between Western Catholicism and Eastern Othodoxy.

In Asia, the Indian Subcontinent started with Buddhism dominating the Maurya empire, whilst the early Qin and Han Dynasties of China established Confucianism as an official doctrine. Towards the end of the Axial Age Buddhism became more dominant in China as India was adopting a kind of Vishnu-centered monotheism.

What all of the various ancient empires had in common is a new kind of strategy that was missing in the previous realms of the Bronze Age. In preceding ages, empires rarely succeeded to unify territories beyond the limit of a dozen city states. With Egypt being a notable exception, we find that even the kingdom of the Nile never created something of the scope of the Macedonian or Roman empire.
To understand the origins of the Axial Age, we need to focus on what emerged out of the rubble of the collapsed Bronze Age. This is a particular dark age, as the lack of sources from any larger empires leaves us oblivious to much of what was happening back then. The most notable exception is the Old Testament. The Torah, Tanach, and many of the texts which would later compose the biblical corpus provide detailed descriptions of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, their wars with their neighbors and their ultimate conquest by the Assyrians and Babylonians.

Assyria and Judah can be seen as the first pro-Axial empires. Not because they were particularly large, but because they exhibited elements that in combination would allow for large imperial structures. 


The kingdom of Judah was the first to (attempt to) maintain a state enforced monotheistic form of worship, as the book of Kings tells us:

- And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest... to bring out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the Asherah, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them outside Jerusalem... And he broke down the houses of the male cult prostitutes who were in the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the Asherah.
2 Kings 23:4–7

Moreover, the Assyrians combined the military strategy of iron metallurgy with a brutal practice of elite eugenics, where the noble families of conquered cities were forcibly displaced or eradicated, and ultimately replaced by an Assyrian group.

Another missing piece of the puzzle is the emergence of the phonetic alphabet on written paper, a transportable medium. The Phoenicians and Arameans were among the first to make use of this highly effective innovation. After the necessary clean break brought about through the Bronze Age Collapse, this ecology of already preexisting strategies suddenly entered their time to expand and grow to prominence.
The Persians were the first known to us to rule over a (though largely empty) gigantic territory. We can observe with the Persians a profound synthesis bringing together all of the aforementioned strategies. The Aramaic script in combination with the proto-monotheistic Zoroastrianism allowed for a more sophisticated way of expansion than the cruel methods which the Assyrians had employed. The mass adoption of the official religion of the Aechemid Persians was a simple way to homogenise the elites of various realms.


Ahura Mazda, the supreme deity was seen as the ultimate reality behind the myriads of gods and goddesses that were being worshipped throughout the region. He could be prayed to via many deities and thus was easily adopted as a refinement of each realms already existing religious cult.

A similar development could be seen in the Greek world with the rise of philosophy. Unlike in Persia, the state religions stuck with the pagan worship of local deities, however, the emergence of Pythagorean and Platonic thought initiated a long and far reaching intellectual tradition, giving rise to Stoicism, a philosophy followed by slaves and emperors alike.

It would take centuries of Jewish and Hellenic cross-fertilisation of thought until Christianity would eventually emerge as a unified religion for most of the Mediterranean and Levantine world. Until the spread of Christianity, we can still regard the Persians, Greeks, Phonecians, and Romans as polytheists. But in the same way as Buddhism, a similarly abstract spiritual teaching, was making its rise among a nominally polytheistic society, the seeds were already being sown for the world to come.

The abstraction that is represented in a monotheistic deity cannot stand on its own. It is only in combination with all of the other mentioned innovations of the Axial Age that its true power unfolds. The phonetic alphabet on a portable medium allows us to spread the message in its exact original wording, stopping a monotheistic deity from defaulting to the regional sun god or other highest pagan deity. The possibility to split the mundane from the otherworldly, the physical from the spiritual, is also represented in the most transformative economic revolution in history: the rise of money."

(https://deepnoetics.substack.com/p/the-discovery-of-the-unus-mundus)

=Discussion=


==The [[Axial Age and Its Place in the Evolution of Human Consciousness and Culture]]==

William Irwin Thompson:

"The Axial Age, with its global epiphany of prophets, from Orpheus and
Pythagoras to Isaiah II, Buddha, Lao Tzu and Quetzalcoatl, seems to mark a critical turning point in the evolution of consciousness, for now the individual soul
seems capable of knowing and expressing a higher truth than the received wisdom of the ancestors, the idols of the tribe. 


Eric Havelock has described this transition as the evolution from the life-force of the Homeric thymos to the Socratic
psyche:

At some time toward the end of the fifth century before Christ, it became possible
for a few Greeks to talk about their ‘souls’ as though they had selves or personalities
which were autonomous and not fragments of the atmosphere nor of a cosmic life
force, but what we might call entities or real substances (Havelock, 1991, p. 197).
Orphism was the vehicle in which this transition from thymos to psyche became
articulated in hymns and instructions to the living on how to make their passage
in the realm of the dead.

Orphism was a religion with a belief in immortality and in posthumous rewards and
punishments. So far so good. But it had a more individual doctrine than that. Hades,
with its prospect of torment and feasting, was not the end. There was the doctrine of
the circle of birth, or cycle of births, and the possibility of ultimate escape from reincarnation to the state of perfected divinity (Guthrie, 1993, p. 164).

The figure of Orpheus, like that of Pythagoras or Quetzalcoatl, is a being of legend, so his story is more myth than history and serves as an allegorical performance of the truths to be passed from an initiate in the mysteries to the aspiring
novice. Like Quetzalcoatl in Mesoamerica, he is a reformer who seeks to eliminate human sacrifice and carry humanity forward in its evolution from sorcery
and blood magic to myth and a more stellar spirituality.

Just as Enkidu was warned not to partake of the food of the dead, less he be
trapped in their underworld, so Orpheus is warned not to look back as he seeks to
bring his beloved into light. In the esoteric practice of yoga nidra — the yoga of
sleep meditation — the realm of imagery is an intermediate world of perception
and deception, and only the realm of the nadam, of the cosmic sound, can enable
the practioner of yoga to reappropriate the realm of deep dreamless sleep in the
waking state of clear mind — a state of consciousness called samadhi.

Orpheus, as a musician of the heavenly harp given to him by Apollo, is an initiate of this cosmic sound — this music of the heavenly spheres — but according to the mysteries, our human star nature has been mixed with the ashes of the
Titans at our emergence on Earth, and so humanity is a dyadic and contradictory
creature. Our spirit is split between body and soul, between Orpheus and
Euridyce. Because our star spirit has been captured in the vestiges of the elemental spirits of earth and matter, we must rescue it by shifting consciousness away from the concrete density of visual imagery to the higher realm of imageless
music. But Orpheus looks back, seeking to hold his soul in sight, and so he loses
her entirely. As he returns to earth, alone and embittered, he spurns the love of
women and becomes a lover of men. The metaphoric complementarity of male
and female as a trope for the polarity of the incarnate being is lost.

This mythic trope, as allegory for initiates, is describing a blocking of the
union of ego and psyche, or waking mind and dreaming mind, in a psychological
implosion of the ego in narcissism: same is bonding to same in a projected form
of self love. But the male body, beautiful or not, can never serve as an answer to
the problem of death. Just as the Goddess Ishtar sought her revenge against the
male-bonding and defiance of the heroes Gilgamesh and Enkidu, so now the
Maeneads seek their revenge against the violation of archaic women’s mysteries.

The blood sacrifice that the reformer Orpheus had sought to eliminate is inflicted
on him as he is torn to pieces by the Maeneads — those vestiges of the neolithic.

'''In the terms of Jean’s Gebser’s schema for the evolution of consciousness''',

Orpheus is the figure that marks the transition from the Magical to the Mythic
structure of consciousness.4 But the collective wins out, and just as the Renaissance was followed by the Inquisition and a new baroque economy of slavery\ with its extravagant display of wealth, so Orpheus’s Apollonian reforms are followed by sacrificial rituals and his story is reappropriated into a cultural narrative of Dionysian ecstasy. The psyche remains trapped in the intermediate realm
of imagery and the mind’s identification of consciousness with imagery — the
familiar world in which ‘seeing is believing’.

But human spiritual evolution is not entirely stopped, and the reforms of the
Axial Age are partially absorbed as Greek culture carries on with its transition
from the Homeric thymos to the Orphic psyche — from the Bardic oral culture of
the Archaic era to the new literate culture of the sacred text of the Classical era.
As Steve Farmer has argued, it is the very portability of the new writing materials
that serves to construct the Axial Age and spread the new values from India to
Greece with Pythagoreanism in one direction, and from India to China with Buddhism in the other direction of the Silk Road.5 Indeed, in the evolution of consciousness from oral culture to literate civilization, the sacred text itself becomes
the oxymoron that embodies our contradictory human nature. The text exists in
the realm of imagery and is visually read, but it calls us back to a recollection
(anamnesis) of our stellar nature. Death itself becomes less biological and collective — as it was in the neolithic and megalithic eras of collective burials — and
becomes in the Classical era, more psychological and personal
matristic culture of the sacrificial dying male and the enduring Great Mother."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.8.5742&rep=rep1&type=pdf)


==The invention of freedom by Zoroaster==

Alexander Bard has some great video lectures where he explains how Zoroaster was the first to stress human freedom, and free the believers from the tradition and constraints of ancestor worship. From here on, the son could be different from the father and 'innovate' (and much later, the daughter). Bard is a conservative futurist. This, from Imperium Press, is a vision from 'archaistic conservatives', who like some progressive tendencies like the primitivism of John Zerzan, seeks to identify the bifurcation that made humanity stray from the traditional path:

IP:

"In each culture, the transition from Old Age to New Age took the same basic form, but the paradigm is the transition from the Indo-Iranian cults to Zoroastrianism. The Indo-Iranian familial cults had changed but little from Coulanges’ archaic Aryans; they were orthopraxic, particularistic, centred on the hearth in the domus, and constitutive of the state cults. Conscience did not enter into the regulation of conduct—each House Father performed the rites as he had received them from his father. He was such a rigorous formalist, performing the rites with such exactitude, that certain formulae were sufficiently old that he no longer understood their meaning. This is what Max Weber called the magical religious paradigm,7 which does not traffic in ideas of “true” or “false”, but in ideas of “ordinary” and “uncanny”. Within this paradigm, conduct is essentially automatic and formulaic; one might compare this with Julian Jaynes’ “bicameral mind”.

Into this ur-traditionalist paradigm was introduced Ahura Mazda. Ahura Mazda was not the innovation of Zoroaster, but was re-framed by him as the synthesis and culmination of the two other “ahuras”, Mithra and Varuna.10 Ahura Mazda was now the greatest of the three lords, the lord of Wisdom. But Zoroaster went further. Not content simply to elevate one deity, he recast the whole pantheon, particularly the venerated “daevas” such as Indra, as demons and illusions,11 to where there could be but one omnibenevolent god, Ahura Mazda. And yet, there is evil in the world. Not content to simply call this the absence of good, Zoroaster hypostatized all the lesser malevolent spirits into one, Angra Mainyu, the apotheosis of evil, whose real name Ahriman must be written upside down.

The depth of this world-shattering transition must be underlined. We have here the invention of freedom—man must now make a choice between the force of absolute good and the forces of absolute evil.12 He is no longer bound by the religion of his fathers; he is free, absolutely free, to go his own way. But he can only go his own way, he can only make this choice, on the basis of conscience. Man’s conduct is no longer circumscribed by his relationship to others, by where he sits in the network of familial ties. He has been freed, and his moral compass is now within himself, and himself alone13—we have here the invention of the individual. The seed of the Reformation has been planted, and it is only the hardness of the Aryan soil in which it was sown that will delay its flowering — but flower it will. We have more. Religion is no longer primarily about propitiating a god (carrying out the rites, i.e. obeying commands), but before the rites, it is about a transcendent right and wrong (belief, “truth”, the narrativized “explanation”). We have here the invention of the proposition nation, identity as defined above all by belief, by the truth. And because the truth is the same for a fire-worshipping Parsi as it is for a tadpole, religion based on truth ceases to be a constitutive principle for a distinct people, but at least irrelevant to it, and at worst hostile to it. There is still more. The stakes of this choice, this infant sola fide, are ultimate, but the consequences of the choice follow primarily in the next life. Prayers are said and the god invoked not primarily for worldly goods, but for otherworldly goods, constraining the powerful and casting his eye away from this world—it is a magnificent piece of what Nietzsche will call “slave morality”. In the demotion of this world, we have here the abstraction of man from his immanent reality—no longer is he a mere dirt farmer, or a merchant, or even a king, but he is, in his essence, something not of this world.

The reader will have already seen where this is going. In the introduction of freedom, of the individual, of the proposition nation, and in the abstraction of man from his brute facticity, from his thrownness, we have seen the advent of liberalism."

(https://imperiumpress.substack.com/p/axial-antinomianism-d1c)


==The Axial Age vs Mark Whitaker's [[Ecological Revolution]]==

Mark Whitaker:

"One might argue that Jaspers’ concept was a universal history statement, though it was still a Eurocentric history statement about the ‘modern European’ axial faiths as more modern and better than the past. That dichotomy is removed in Ecological Revolution. Ecological Revolution is the first amodernist, non-Eurocentric, universal history where past and present are analyzed without recourse to any modern versions being judged as better or different to the past. Thus, Ecological Revolution has three main critiques of Jaspers' framing and analysis. First, Whitaker argued that Jaspers' discussion that associated stability and singular successes of the axial faiths as deriving within this "axial age" period of origin is to misconstrue and conflate two phenomena—the origins of the axial faiths and the origins of their singular stabilities. (p. 201) These issues had different and distinct origins. To the contrary of Jaspers, Whitaker argues first the axial faiths were hardly stable or singular at their origins. They were whittled to fit and delimited in number after hard-won attempts at it for centuries by novel imperial elites. Instead, the origins of the axial age were characterized by many faiths—unstable, fractious, heterodox, anti-systemic or unconcerned with state power, untractable, and uncooperative—the direct opposite of the later more stable and singular systemic state-sponsored versions which were a neutered and delimited version of axial faiths instead of being part of the origins of the axial faiths per se. This singularity and stability to the axial faiths developed only after many hard-won and unpredictable attempts at whittling the "round" and boisterous communities of the axial faiths to fit the staid "square holes" of state jurisdictional authorities, instead ofit being possible to conflate the singularity and stability of the successful religions with the origins of the axial age itself. Instead, much religion in the origins of the axial age died out from lack of later sponsorship, was attempted to be selectively appropriated only, or was attempted to be wholly repressed. The singularity and stability is a project of later empires instead of the origins of the axial age itself. The empires conquering across the axial age selectively appropriated only a few narrow tactics and beliefs of the axial faiths, attempting to "repurpose" their tactics and ideas toward social projects unrelated to them like state support, bureaucratic staffing, hierarchical legitimacy, and subservience. Whitaker argues the true origins and original meaning of the axial faiths were more collectively inert to state elites or were collectively anarchistic, individually libertarian, solely regionally representative, and/or apolitical by expressing themselves in mysticisms of "hermitage, hedonism, and hermeticism" sometimes violently and sometimes with pacifism. (p. 200) In short, Whitaker argues that the axial age's character is far more anti-systemic and revolutionary. This is contrary to later delimited singular and "stable" forms of religion that were whittled down to serve elite attempts to re-acculturate people to state authority by highly policed and delimited texts or beliefs—that religious followers were allowed to have only to server as better acculturated state bureaucratic elites or followers. He argues encouraging later generations to acculturate to states and hierarchical religious leaderships is to forget truly the revolutionary, hydra-headed, and endlessly heterodox and unmanageable origins of the axial faiths that changed from region to region instead of having any singular shared tenets. Second, Whitaker disagrees as well with Jaspers' views that the "axial" context created that religious stability to the present either. Instead, both the original and growing axial geographies to the present innately house vast pluralities of different regions ever ready for reappropriation of the axial traditions toward anti-systemic revolt by sometimes collaborating across regions against elites yet in many cases additionally in self-destructive battles among themselves. This is why there is such a history of deep terror instate elites about heterodoxy that began in the origins of the "axial age" and attempted to continue after this nascent period by poking out whenever state elites got lax in policing against it. They saw such axial religions as making their territories ungovernable more than making them governable because motivated followers of axial religions could be "thoroughly uncontrollable". (p. 408) The history of the reputed stability of the axial faiths is a history of desperate policing against ever-inventive peasant or regional heterodoxy because the axial faiths remain a powderkeg of religiously-inspired secular social movements whenever they start to get used by people to develop their own future agendas as distinct from future agendas of where elites want to go. Third, the anti-humanist wing of environmentalism known as deep ecology has argued(for example, in the writings of David Suzuki) that that the religious movements of the axial context were a bad move away from "environmental" issues. This is denied by Whitaker because to the contrary the axial faiths were themselves "ecological revolutionary" regional movements that merged both ecocentrism and humanocentrism. His evidence is three kinds of environmentally-embedded regional concerns in the origins of the axial faiths as three similar issues seen in different historical cases: "health, ecology, and economy". The material politics of the axial faiths were fresh health/medicine movements, localization/ecological protection movements (some violent, some peaceful) against elite jurisdictions of external extraction or war, and were economic-technical self-help movements and welfare state movements without a state perse (like in early Christianity in the Roman Empire or in urban movements combining “unconditional love” and high technical savvy around Mozi in China, for examples). If the axial religious origins were an inventive cultural rejection of the earlier first nascent states on grounds of that such states increasingly eroded their “health, ecology, and economy”, then there is little need to "go back" to environmental concern presumably lost in the axial faiths, though simply to remember more correctly the true original meaning of the axial faiths more accurately as combining regional environmental concerns with regional social solidarity. This made them a formidable force particularly against divided and weakening states. However, as implied above, their ongoing hotly contested regional divisions made them easily divided and conquered by stronger disciplined martial states. Such states attempting military consolidation in retrospect regularly chose to align and to sponsor more violent versions of axial faith followers as clients, to encourage and organize them in wider group repression of others. These three points summarize why Whitaker argues the origins of the axial faiths were in hydra-headed multi-regional “ecological revolution” in their original meanings, while any(reputed) singular stabilities of the axial faiths were closer to a highly policed, fragile, and unpredictable endeavor that always threatened to get out of elite management. Whitaker attempts to provide evidence for an open-ended strategic and tactical interaction of the earlier, unrepresentative, nascent areas of state formation contributing to causing the later first ongoing axial-religious mobilizations against it, in those select regions only. This is seen in the first instances in the origins of the axial age and in later instances in the same dynamic throughout world history in any region, past or present once nascent states developed in different other regions worldwide or began to develop opposition in secondary states. This is why Ecological Revolution is considered the first amodernist, non-Eurocentric universal history." 

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/337050245_Updated_Summary_of_Ecological_Revolution_Nov_2019_3_Page_Comment_on_Karl_Jaspers%27_%27Axial_Age%27_Concept_and_Differences_with_Ecological_Revolution)


==The role of the invention of money==

Deep Noetics:


“The abstraction that is represented in a monotheistic deity cannot stand on its own. It is only in combination with all of the other mentioned innovations of the Axial Age that its true power unfolds. The phonetic alphabet on a portable medium allows us to spread the message in its exact original wording, stopping a monotheistic deity from defaulting to the regional sun god or other highest pagan deity. The possibility to split the mundane from the otherworldly, the physical from the spiritual, is also represented in the most transformative economic revolution in history: the rise of money.

As mentioned in previous articles, silver and gold had been used as means of keeping accounting records and trade promises, however, the Axial Age provided us with another innovation: the decoupling of monetary value from its underlying metallic substrate. In other words, the separation of mind and matter. Imagine the ancient style of city state expansion politics, only that using a particular mint of coinage would grant you privileges with these city states. 


The Greeks understood how to exploit this innovation to its fullest:

- As Alexander the Great conquered Persia, slaves were captured and forced to work in silver mines. This silver would mint coins to keep soldiers on the payroll, fueling further expansion … The author calls this the military‑coinage‑slavery‑complex.


The Mediterranean became the center of commerce and quickly rose to become the origin of the next large conquest by Alexander the Great, establishing the Macedonian Empire. Even its fragmented successors, the Ptolemies and Seleucids remained enormous for their times. Quickly, none of the old realms of the Levante or Egypt could rival the innovative trade networks of the naval city states in the Hellenic, Phonecian, and Roman sphere.

Yet, the Middle East would soon get its revenge. Already in the 3rd century, Eastern influences were beginning to dominate in Rome. The Syrian Dynasty of Roman emperors adopted a solar cult under Aurelian as the priests of Kybele, Attis, and Mithras expanded their mystery cults into the Roman sphere. Nothing, however, would compare to the culmination of Axial Age mystery in the figure of Jesus of Nazareth.
All of the Axial Age strategies came together: The detailed written accounts by the four apostles allowed for rapid expansion of the message. Salvation through the belief in the resurrection was open to all people of earth. And finally, the reign of coinage was toppled by a thorough separation of money and value.

 Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s.

- Matthew 22:21


David Graeber observes a similar separation from the material attachment to the world in the Buddhist doctrine, leading to an analogous development of retreat and incubation of ascetic communities that would dominate the late Axial Age and early Medieval period.

- The resulting tension between the two—market and moral worlds—came to a head in the Axial Age, which, as Karl Jaspers emphasized, was also the time when the major world religions that still endure today came into being. [...] These movements all took shape in opposition to military and political violence, and their rejection of existing institutions was often framed above all as a rejection of debt. They all began with a call to return to some primordial state of innocence. (David Graeber. Debt - The First 5000 Years)

(https://deepnoetics.substack.com/p/the-discovery-of-the-unus-mundus)

=More information=

* The [[Shift from Aural to Alphabetic Consciousness]]

* The [[Axial Age and Its Place in the Evolution of Human Consciousness and Culture]]. By William Irwin Thompson.


==Bibliography==

** Robert N. Bellah's Religion in Human Evolution: '''From the Paleolithic to the Axial Age''' (2011)
** sequel, '''The Axial Age and its Consequences''' (2012). 


From the Wikipedia [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial_Age] :

Armstrong, Karen (2006), The Great Transformation: The Beginning of our Religious Traditions (1st ed.), New York: Knopf, ISBN 0-676-97465-1. A semi-historic description of the events and milieu of the Axial Age.

Graeber, David (2011), Debt: The First 5000 Years, Brooklyn: Melville House Press.

Jaspers, Karl (1953), The Origin and Goal of History, Bullock, Michael (Tr.) (1st English ed.), London: Routledge & Keegan Paul, LCCN 53001441. Originally published as Jaspers, Karl (1949), Vom Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte [The origin and goal of History] (in German) (1st ed.), München: Piper, LCCN 49057321.

Provan, Iain (2013), Convenient Myths: The Axial Age, Dark Green Religion, and the World That Never Was, Waco: Baylor University Press, ISBN 978-1602589964.

Eisenstadt, S. N. (Ed.). (1986). The Origins and Diversity of Axial Age Civilizations. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0887060960

Hans Joas and Robert N. Bellah (Eds), (2012), The Axial Age and Its Consequences, Belknap Press, ISBN 978-0674066496

Halton, Eugene (2014), From the Axial Age to the Moral Revolution: John Stuart-Glennie, Karl Jaspers, and a New Understanding of the Idea, New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-349-49487-3

Muesse, Mark (2013), The Age of the Sages: The Axial Age in Asia and the Near East (1st ed.), Minneapolis: Fortress Press, ISBN 978-0-8006-9921-5.

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:P2P History]]