
=Contextual Quote=

"The axiological turn is about giving primacy to the ‘true value’ that emanates from life and nourishes life. The true sources of
value are all in commons form. Life itself is a commons, perhaps the most fundamental of them all after the cosmos. Life is a unity emerging out of a web of diversity. It is dynamic and in constant motion, cyclical yet self-enduring and self-flourishing, if its boundaries are not transgressed and if its capacities to thrive are not undermined, especially ironically in the name of ‘value’!"

- S.A. Hamed and Barry K. Gils [https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf]


=Discussion=

S.A. Hamed and Barry K. Gils:

"This book ([[Capital Redefined]] proposes a novel approach to theorizing capital and ‘capitalism’ by incorporating the ‘normativity of life’ into its critical analysis and recognizing the absence of inherent true value in capital. It challenges the
prevailing belief that capital is the ultimate source of worth and redirects our
attention to the flourishing of life and the preservation and enhancement of its
thriving capacities. This transformative perspective calls for a fundamental reevaluation of our socio-economic and political systems, aiming to transcend the destructive contradictions and deficiencies of capitalism.

Redefining capital necessitates redefining ‘value’ in the process. Although
the notion of value has been neglected in most modern social theories (Pitts,
2021), Marx’s assertion that “value forms the foundation of capital” (Marx,
1993: 421) remains as relevant as ever. This, however, raises the question
of how to redefine capital while also acknowledging the value of socio-ecological relations in shaping it. These relations should not be seen simply as a context or precondition, but rather as a set of interrelated causal mechanisms
that are embedded in and against capital. Merely contemplating the socioecological, cultural, and (geo-)political dimensions of capitalist functionality as the vital conditions for economic exploitation, without theorizing their re/
construction in the process of capitalist value production, is inadequate to
grasp the complex challenges posed by capital, and the prospects for profound
conflicts and paradigm shifts.

Redefining capital and value entails revisiting and expanding upon
Marxian conceptions while deploying a new perspective inspired by a new
discourse on the ‘commons’ and ‘commoning’ developed here in the form of
a ‘modular conceptual framework.’ This framework, built on a critical realist ontology, conceptualizes capital as an ensemble of multiple interrelated socio-historical (infra)processes, rather than as an analytically isolated inner
structure of ‘the capitalist system’ (see Chapters 3 and 4). This perspective
goes beyond the limitations of productivism, economism, and the post-value
turn while emphasizing intersectional and ecological dimensions and complex
relationships with post-capitalist alternatives and transformative movements.
This book reflects on the strengths, potentialities, and limitations of the
Marxian tradition of understanding capital in terms of value. It then argues
for expanding on these limitations and proposes relevant solutions by presenting a new normative value theory that prioritizes the sources of life as commons and their intrinsic value. Thus, offering a commonist value theory.

This theory encompasses both critical and analytical elements. According to
this new theory, the ultimate sources of what we call ‘true value’ are precisely
the organized life’s condiciones sine quibus non, which under capitalist relations are perverted into the causal sources of what we call ‘fetish value’ as the essence of capital (Hosseini, 2022a).

True value is sustainably (re)produced only through the commoning
modes of living and interconnecting. A commons, whether material or immaterial, naturally occurring or manufactured, is a living organism made up of communities of interconnected and interdependent entities. In normal conditions, the activities of these entities borrow their vitality from the entirety of the commons and, in return, contribute to the survival and thriving of the
whole, inclusive of all individual (living) entities. One for all, all for one, and
unity in diversity – this is how true value is regenerated.

Under the supremacy of capital, however, the so-called modern civilization
emerged as a development through which not only were commons expropriated, but also de-commonized, losing their essence as commons. 

Capitalism has now become capitality, a life-killing mode deeply coded into the genetics
of our daily lives, thanks to its axiological primacy. Only a profound (re-)
commonization of our modern socio-ecological relations can liberate life
from the immense grip and power of capital; a transformative process that
holds the potential to effectively transcend the predicament of mere survival,
while also transforming ubiquitous capitalist relations."

(https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]