


'''= cooperative traditional practice in Ecuador and other Andean countries with Inka backgrounds'''

=Description=

'''1. From the Wikipedia:'''

"Ayni (Quechua, also spelled Ayniy or Aini) is a traditional form of mutual help practiced in indigenous communities (ayllu) in the Andes. Ayni means proper relationship. Member of a community help another member for private purposes when support is needed, e.g. in house construction or agricultural works. Another time the family that got support will participate in other ayni work supporting the others. Participants are supplied with food and drink by the hosting family. Ayni is still practiced in traditional communities in Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia, especially among Quechuas and Aymara people."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayni)



'''2. Bernardo Gutierrez:'''

" Ayni is a term with a meaning that’s closely related to minga. It describes a system of work and family reciprocity among members of the ayllu (a community working on collective land). It is commonly exemplified in the sharing of tasks such as agriculture, shepherding, cooking or house construction. The tradition is still alive, not only in many peasant communities, but among the mestizo populations of Ecuador, Bolivia and Chile. Any Time Bank or hours exchange system, such as those of the Spanish 15M movement, could, in essence, be described as an ayni."
(http://guerrillatranslation.com/2014/03/27/3120/)


=More Information=

* [[Ayni]]


[[Category:Ecuador]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Neotraditional]]