
'''= "Self-managed Cohousing for Seniors" in Paris, France'''

=Description=

By Sharon Ede:

"Many countries share the challenge of how to support an aging population. Current models
of senior care can be expensive, unsustainable, and unappealing to those living longer
active lives. Aging women in particular tend to have limited options, since many do not
have financial savings due to having had low-wage jobs or unpaid caring work throughout
their lives. The Babayagas House, in eastern Paris, is a self-managed social housing
initiative. It was established by a group of older women who wished to maintain their
independence by living together in a supportive community. Residents pay an affordable
rent for their own small apartments and share the cost of a monthly visit by a health care
professional. There are around 21 women aged 66 to 89 living in the six-story house – a
third of whom live on the poverty line. Seniors have replicated the Babayagas model in
other cities across France and Canada."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=More Information=

Resources:

* Radio France Internationale article: http://en.rfi.fr/france/20130305-babayagas-house
* Senior Planet article: http://seniorplanet.org/senior-housing-alternatives-urban-cohousingthe-babayaga-way/

The case study excerpt is from the book:

* Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. Shareable, 2017

URL = http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf



[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Sharing Cities Book]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]