
=More information=

'''* Article: BAKHTINIAN THOUGHT AND THE DEFENCE OF NARRATIVE: OVERCOMING UNIVERSALISM AND RELATIVISM Hana M. Owen. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 7, no. 2, 2011'''

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/213/401

"The  modernist project, despite various attempts to give voice to those previously denied, has come under  criticism  for  tendencies  to  totalise  experience  and  overlook  or  exclude  differences.  On  the  other  hand,  the  postmodernist  glorification  of  difference  and  tendency  to  isolate  and  fragment  has  generated  a  kind  of  debilitating  uncertainty  in  the  form  of  absolute  relativism  rendering  any  pursuit  of  meaning  meaningless.  Alongside  the  recognition  of  these  limitations  are  attempts  to  overcome  the  negative  effects  of  these  modes  of  understanding  and  to  create  new ways of understanding ourselves, our relationship to others, human and non-human and to  the  larger  world  process  in  which  we  find  ourselves.  Despite  the  supposed  opposition  between  the  modern  and  postmodern  projects,  the  two  share  in  common  the  tendency  to  undermine  another  mode  of  understanding  that  by  its  very  nature  both  precludes  and  succeeds  them.

The  following  article  examines  and  highlights  in  detail  some  of  the  problems  surrounding  the  modern  and  postmodern  modes  of  thought  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  usefulness  of  narrative  theory  in  overcoming  these  problems.  In  order to augment the defence of narrative theory this article also draws considerably from the work of Mikhail Bakhtin."


[[Category:Integral Theory]]

[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]