
==Discussion==

A. [[Allen Butcher]]:


"Much is being said about values today by the media,
by government, by religious groups, by social organizations
and others. Conservative rhetoric challenges
the teaching of "moral relativism" as a cause of social
decay, while liberal litanies of cultural demise decry
the individual's focus upon what Gregory Bateson
termed the "skin encapsulated ego." Note that there is
a level of agreement in the views espoused by these
two cultural poles. Focusing upon this common
concern about the excess of individualism in our
society can provide a foundation for a consensus,
upon which a program of advocacy for communitarian
values may be built.

To successfully advance intentional community it is
important to not permit the debate to be defined as
the individual versus society, or vice versa, but rather
to advance the anthropologist Paul Radin's preference
that".. .the individual and the group .. . resist submergence
of one by the other" (Arthur Morgan, Guidebook
for Intentional Communities, Community
Service, Inc., 1988). 

A dynamic balance between
individual and society is the goal, encouraged in the
local community by its provision of a human scale,
knowable society in which individuals have reflected
to them, and recognize, the importance of their
personal roles. The community is comprised of a
range of different types of families, always changing
with the lifecycles of birth, growth, new births and
deaths.

Through all this the local community seeks to maintain
itself as an ongoing entity, providing a fixed context
against which to measure the changes in our personal
microcosms, and of the ever quickening and often
unsettling changes in the vast, global culture beyond
the community. Through first identifying just what
communitarian values are, then how they relate to the
issues of the day, a basic strategy can be developed
for creating a community-building industry. And we
may not be as far from this ideal as it may seem."<br />
(https://we.riseup.net/assets/4969/ELAN.pdf)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Community Economics]]