Check out the Delicious tag, http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Bangladesh

Thanks to Munir Hasan from Bangladesh Open Source Network and Fred from Byte4All for these links


=Introductions=

*[http://www.iosn.net/south-asia/countries/bangladesh/wiki/ FOSS in Bangladesh], status report and extensive directory of FOSS/Linux projects

=Organizations and Initiatives=
* [[BNNRC]] is a national networking body working for building a democratic society based on the principles of free flow of information, equitable & affordable access to Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for remote & marginalized population.
* FOSS-related Bangladeshi Community: [http://www.bdosn.org Bangladesh Open Source Network]; Address: 291 Sonargaon Road, Dhaka. It is a voluntary initiative. Initially to form an Umbrella organization for all OSS group in BD. However, it is now working as one of the hub of OSS related activity in the country.

* FOSS related articles in Bengali http://www.bdosn.org/all_articles.php still in infancy
*  FOSS-related mailing lists:
** http://groups.yahoo.com/group/bangla_wiki
** http://groups.google.com/group/bdosn
** http://groups.yahoo.com/group/bdlug

* D-Net Bangladesh: 

* FOSS Localization Project: http://www.ankur.org.bd/


=Technology=
* A science-technology related site http://www.biggani.com


=Communities=
* Bengali blog site - http://www.somewhereinblog.net/
* Most of the newspapers of the country has there own website in Bangla but not in unicode.: You may visit the following website to read one paper on Bangla localization (your home): http://bangladeshictpolicy.bytesforall.net/?q=node/147


=Wiki's=
*  Wikipedia, in Bengali. Over 17000 entries, according to the last count: http://bn.wikipedia.org <http://bn.wikipedia.org/>
*  Wiktionary in Bengali. http://bn.wiktionary.org/
*  Wikibooks in Bengali. http://bn.wikibooks.org/
*  Bangladesh-related articles in English Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Bangladesh-related_topics
*  Bangladesh-related Featured articles in English Wikipedia:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:FA-Class_Bangladesh_articles
*  WikiProject Bangladesh in English Wikipedia:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Bangladesh

*  Wikitravel on Bangladesh: http://wikitravel.org/en/Bangladesh

*  Bangladesh-related commons material -
**http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:Search?search=Bangladesh&fulltext=Search 
** http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Bangladesh

* Bangladesh-related Creative Commons-licensed photos/images in Flickr: http://flickr.com/search/?q=Bangladesh&l=cc&ss=2&ct=0


=Digital Content Initiatives=
* A broad information base on livelihood developed and maintained by D-Net Bangladesh. www.jeebika. com <http://www.jeebika.com/>,
* A Job portal in Local Language. www.ruralinfobd.com <http://www.ruralinfobd.com/> ,
* Further to my list. www.jeeon.com <http://www.jeeon.com/>,
* A rural info bank maintained by a commercial firm. www.abolombon.org <http://www.abolombon.org/>



[[Category:Asia]]
[[Category:Bangladesh]]
[[Category:Country]]