{{RightTOC}}

= Overview =

Secure, fast, and easy money transfer from A to B, at the cost of transmission.  Trustworthy and transparent design and governance.  Banktrusts networked together form the [[Money Commons]].


= Design Fundamentals =

* Credits can be saved, but no protected "banks" or accounts that charge or pay interest.  Interest between users is discouraged, but not actively policed; at own risk.



= Real World Case Studies =


== Paypal ==
* Not transparent or trustworthy
* Has commerce critical mass, monopoly
* Relatively easy?  How could the process be easier for users?


== QQ and QQ coins ==
* Designed in 2002 in China, QQ coins could be bought with money (yuan) or "earned" through playing games (possible to use games like ESP, peekaboom to capture "human cycles?")
* 2006, total trading volume in virtual items worth about $900 million, 45% of that used to buy Tencent items.
* Developed as parallel currency, government forced to act

== SecondLife ==

== Currency transfer in most MMOs ==


= Major Issues and Concerns =

* Exchange will happen with other currencies, like it or not (real-money trade, RMT).  What problems will this cause?  What design considerations are necessary?

* Through what means can people acquire credits?  Exchange, projects for the public good?  Opting into propertytrust.


= Possible Partners or Friends =

A list of sites that should be considered when developing or standardizing a basic banktrust model.

* http://www.commongoodbank.com
* http://www.opencoin.org
* http://ripple.sourceforge.net/


= Credentialtrust - component of Banktrust? =

== Purpose: ==
Anyone or anyplace I interact with only knows the bare minimum needed to identify me for my purpose of use.  I control my private information.

== Real World Case Studies ==
* ??? These examples are particularly weak.
* Sxip
* Steam


[[Category:Peertrust]]