
=Typology=

Sander Van Damme:

"Agarwal and Hauswald (2007) explain how banks have two sorts of debt they offer to
borrowers, the first one, relationship debt, depends on private information the bank has
through its relationship with the client; the second one, transactional debt, also called arm's
length debt, is granted based on public information and does not require any relationship
between the bank and the borrower. In this paragraph we will explore both types of debt and
try to identify what type peer to peer microfinance offers.

Relationship debt, as is implied by its name, is debt offered to a borrower based on his or her
relationship with the lender. It is dependent on private, usually soft information that only this
potential lender has about the borrower. As in any relationship, this interaction is usually not
limited to only one transaction, but it is of a more repetitive nature. Because of this preferred
relationship, the funder can 'get to know' the borrower and learn some details that others do
not know about, thus acquiring proprietary knowledge about the borrower. This leads to a
greater ease for the borrowing party to receive the loan and get the necessary funding, but at a
cost: the lender can extract a higher rent, knowing the true risks he takes and knowing what
the borrower can afford to pay (Agarwal & Hauswald, 2007). The lender can enforce
repayment through his relationship, which is built on trust and which supposes the borrower
wants to keep his good reputation with the bank and other lenders (Ashta & Assadi, 2009a)
On the other hand we have transactional debt; it is purely based on public, hard information
available to all competing lenders. This leads to heavier competition amongst possible
providers of money driving down interest rates. However, because of the lack of additional
information for the creditors, it is harder to get the actual funding, (Agarwal & Hauswald,
2007). Since the lender cannot rely on his relation and the reputation of the borrower; he
needs to rely on external mechanisms and putting in place controls to enforce repayment:
receiving collateral, third party coercion and extraction, etc. (Ashta & Assadi, 2009a).

Given that a transactional lender is conscious of the extra knowledge a relationship lender
possesses, the threat of adverse selection1 for him increases. This will lead the first to stay
away from the bidding process. Of course, if he would not refrain from this competition he
would be trapped in the winner's curse: if he does get to fund the loan, i.e. 'winning' from the
insider, there would probably be a reason why this more informed lender did not want to fund
the loan. Therefore he cannot win: if he as an outsider wins (gets to fund the loan), he loses
because of the higher odds of default; if he loses, he simply does not get to fund a loan which
the relationship banker found good enough to support (Von Thadden, 2004)."
(https://www.zidisha.org/editables/news_docs/Louvain.pdf)


==Discussion: How technology changes the relationship between relational and transactional debt==

Sander Van Damme:

"In their 2003 paper, Hauswald and Marquez researched the impact information technology
has on this model and banking competition in general. They hypothesized the improvements
in information technologies might have two opposite effects. On the one hand, because of
better processing techniques for all the information the relationship banker has, the
information gap between insiders and outsiders should increase, leading to less competition
and higher interest rates. However, as the internet and better communication technologies
create more spill-overs, there would be faster dissemination of this 'inside' knowledge to the
outside, taking away the informational asymmetry and driving down interest rates. This latter
also leading to a second perverse effect where “easier access to information, by preventing
banks from profiting from previously private information, results in less borrower screening.”
(Hauswald & Marquez, 2003, p. 933). Even though they did not conclude which of these
effects has the upper hand, both of these effects can have an important impact on the social
lending market.

...

We can understand how microfinance can generally be understood to offer relationship debt:

there is no public information on the borrowers since there are no records of previously repaid
credit. It therefore all depends on the relationship of the banker with his clients, or perhaps of
knowledge he gathers through contacts of the clients, as is often used in group banking. There
is also little collateral being offered which could be used to enforce the loan, making it even
more dependent on trust and goodwill. We notice how this reminds us of the Irish Loan Funds
(see Chapter 2). Because of their close proximity and local presence, the funds were able to
reliably lend out small amounts to poor Irish borrowers, while the bigger banks could not
because of their absence in the area. Later on however, when public information on previous
loans became available, banks could join the competition and try to outprice the loan funds.

Of course they should have been caught in the winner's curse: only funding the unreliable
borrowers, while the funds were able to keep the best ones. Unfortunately, counterproductive
legislation and the funds' mismanagement stopped them from exploiting this advantage and
eventually led to their demise. This seems to us an important lesson for the current MFIs;
while they are currently creating a credit history for the 'unbankable', they need to stay aware
of upcoming competition for these 'newly bankable'.

When looking at social lending however, we notice the dual traits it possesses. At first it
seems to be purely transactional lending: there is no relationship between the borrower and
the lenders, no physical proximity and no promise for future repeat funding. However, it has
some relational characteristics as well: it is not merely based on hard information, but
involves people's stories, pictures and other means of wooing the lenders. For this reason,
social lending sites are even being compared to dating sites (Hartley, 2010; Manjoo, 2006).

This soft information however, which used to define relationship lending and their insider
advantage for the bank, is now being dissipated using improved information technologies to
everyone bidding. There are no insider bidders anymore and competition drives the interest
rates down, as was suggested by Hauswald and Marquez (2003). Therefore social lending
continues to offer transactional debt, but includes private information in determining its
lending terms. Nevertheless, although there is no relationship with specific lenders, a lock-in
is created with the social lending platform. A registration fee needs to be paid when first
starting with the platform and any positive feedback on current loans cannot be transferred to
another website. However, this does not take away the previous conclusion that the loans
between the peers themselves have a clear transactional aspect.

Given that microfinance offers relationship debt and social lending offers transactional debt,
we need to ask ourselves what does peer to peer microfinance offer? Actually, it depends on
each platform; for those that use a local MFI as an intermediary, the website is closer to
microfinance and engages in relationship debt. On the other hand, platforms such as Zidisha
allow direct interaction between lenders and borrowers, and although they do incorporate the
soft information aspect in their bidding process; they are actually closer to arm's length
lending by offering open market competition and no insider information amongst the lenders."
(https://www.zidisha.org/editables/news_docs/Louvain.pdf)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]