
'''* Policy Plan: A government measure for open digitisation: free software and agile development of public administration services. The Open Digitisation Programme from Barcelona City Council’s Office for Technology and Digital Innovation.'''

URL = https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/digital/sites/default/files/LE_MesuradeGovern_EN_9en.pdf

This Guide was prepared by a team led by Francesca Bria, the Commissioner for Technology and Digital Innovation.

=Executive Summary=

"In September 2016, Barcelona City Council
embarked on an important digital transformation process announcing that public services
must be provided through digital channels from
the outset, following new guidelines oriented
towards citizens and the use of open standards
and open software and in accordance with an
ethical data strategy that puts privacy, transparency and digital rights at the forefront.

The decision taken by the city government
is based on the Barcelona Digital City Plan,
a government measure approved in October
2016 and new Spanish Law 39/2015 on Common Administrative Procedures for Public Authorities. This Law states that by 2020, digital
channels must take priority in the provision
of public services in the Spanish State. The
Barcelona Digital City Plan establishes a radical improvement in digital public services
as one of its main objectives, with the aim of
providing services to citizens on a 24/7 basis
that are of higher quality and better adapted
to their needs.

The Municipal Institute of Information Technology (IMI) is instrumental in enabling this
transformation to be carried out. In 2016,
Barcelona City Council created a Digital
Transformation Committee, and the IMI put
together a group for the promotion of Digital
Transformation made up of professionals from
various technological areas. Both of these
mechanisms were set up to drive and govern
this important process.

The Open Digitisation Programme: Free
Software and Agile Development of Services,
created by the Commissioner and the IMI in
October 2016, following the launch of the Digital Transformation Plan, is the impetus behind
technical innovation and excellence focused
on the delivery of results. 

In addition, this programme promotes a culture of innovation,
transparency and continuous development
throughout the whole of the City Council, emphasising:

· The promotion of the development and
delivery of agile, open and ethical digital services.
· The promotion of the development of
internal design skills and capabilities focusing
on users and agile methodologies, for the purposes of regaining control of digital services.
· Opening up public procurement, making
it more transparent, simple and objective,
while reducing the bureaucracy involved. Innovation in the procurement processes will also
enable diversification in technology providers.
· The creation, through a digital market
platform, of a diversified group made up of
expert local providers.
· The promotion of the use of agile methodologies in digital services, both internally
and in provider relations.
· The revision of procurement procedures
for technology assets and services to reinforce
technological and data sovereignty.
· The use of free and open source software in municipal systems, except in exceptional
and justified circumstances.
· The establishment of technological
practices based on open architectures and
standards.


This government measure provides an
overview of the transformation programme
and the proposed incremental changes. It
sets forth the structure how the transformation will be governed, its eminently practical
orientation, based on establishing clear measures and specific deliverables, and provides
a shared roadmap.

The measure will provide savings in resources
and more efficiency through the implementation of agile processes, while providing citizens
with the tools they need to interact with the
local authority more efficiently. Through open
data management and the use of free software
tools, we will be guaranteeing universal access, improvements in transparency and laying
the foundations for new initiatives based on
harnessing data and creating a network of
open source experts that will make the local
authority more resilient and independent.

This measure focuses on the delivery of agile
digital services, the process for accomplishing
technological sovereignty and the migration to
free and open software and open standards.

The annexes to this government measure contain documents that define the main standards
and give guidelines for the core areas in the
programme.


These documents include:

• The Digital Services Standard.
• The Code of Technological Practices.
• Agile Methodologies of Barcelona City
Council.
• Technological Sovereignty Guide.
• Details of the Migration Plan to Open
Source.
• Public Procurement of Technology Guide.


The responsible and ethical use of data is a key
element within Barcelona City Council’s Digital
Transformation Plan, especially the Open Data
and Data Commons strategies, “Data Driven”
projects and interoperability based on open
data formats. The corresponding directives
and their implementation will be developed in
a new government measure on the Strategy for
Responsible and Ethical Use of Data in Barcelona City Council, where its technical details,
processes and responsibilities will be detailed.

This government measure also explains how
agile development methodologies will be
applied in Barcelona City Council, by transforming vertical product teams into agile service-orientated work groups through flagship projects. That is why the IMI is putting an Agile
Technical Office and an agile projects team
into operation.

From a purely technological perspective,
the objective is to create a public and open
ecosystem and infrastructure composed of
interoperable and reusable applications and
services. So, the way in which the public authority operates must be changed through the use
of open standards and free and open source
software, by implementing open, public and
well-documented application-programming
interfaces (APIs) that provide access to the
City Council’s open data for the purposes of
enabling the ICT sector, and even other authorities, to collaborate with the City Council
to deliver agile, open and ethical applications
and digital services.

The services which will be first to benefit from
these changes include: the new citizen help
and information portal, mobile phone services
for citizens, the new calendar of events and
facilities in the city, the open city dashboard
for citizens, the technology providers portal
and the new mobile digital identity service.
The formation of new agile teams will enable
us to acquire the capabilities we need and
to develop a recruitment plan and an internal-skills creation programme for promoting
this transformation. At the same time, internal
capabilities will be complemented with skills
and services provided by the most innovative
companies in the sector, brought in by the City
Council, through innovative procurement and
the creation of a digital procurement platform.
Digital transformation and innovation are
not a destination or point of arrival but
rather a journey, an endless process, where 
steps are repeated one after the other until
the desired result is reached. Digital products
and services and their interfaces are evolving,
like a living organism, in accordance with the
needs of citizens and changes in technology.

The Agile Transformation Programme itself
is continuously evolving and our ambition is
to go ahead and do far more than what this
government measure states, as it only establishes the bases for a process of continuous
improvement."
(https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/digital/sites/default/files/LE_MesuradeGovern_EN_9en.pdf)

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Spain]]