
'''* Policy Report: Barcelona digital city: Putting technology at the service of people. Ajuntament de Barcelona /  Barcelona City Council,''' 

URL = https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/digital/sites/default/files/pla_barcelona_digital_city_in.pdf


=Description=

"At the Office of the Commissioner for Digital Technology and Innovation we believe
that we must go beyond the concept of a smart city to move towards an open, innovative, inclusive and democratic city, where digital technology help us solving the
big global challenges of our time: from climate change to sustainable mobility, energy
transition and healthcare.

The Barcelona Digital City Plan (2015-2019) aims to improve public services,
offering high quality services that are better suited to the needs of citizens. This
may only be achieved through collective intelligence and citizens’ participation.
The Decidim.Barcelona participatory platform is a good example of how we are all
together deciding what direction public policies should take. Thousands of people
are already configuring the city's political agenda and the City Council's actions are
based on these collective demands."

=Projects=

==Open Digitalisation Plan==

"For over two years, Barcelona has been working
on its Open Digitalisation Plan, which defines a
process of major and progressive change in order
to modernise the city’s administration and offer
better and agile digital services to its citizens."


==Ethical Digital Standards==

"One of the major outcomes of this has been
the creation of Ethical Digital Standards, which
include the use of open-source software, open
standards, data sovereignty, agile development
of digital services and guaranteed privacy, ethics
and security by design. All with the aim of creating
a government that is more open, transparent and
collaborative. The council is a pioneer in this area
and has committed to investing more than 70%
of the new software development budget into
free and open-source software and services
based on open standards, open formats, open
interfaces and interoperability.

This will lay the foundation for a people-centred digital future: cities will be able to
access a set of policy tools and standards that
will allow them to develop technologies and platforms based on the rights of city residents, to develop long-term social innovation. 

These principles and rules are summarised in the '''Manifesto in Favour of Technological Sovereignty''' shared with thousands of cities around the world:

at https://www.barcelona.cat/digitalstandards/


==FLOSS Barcelona==

"The FLOSSBCN platform is a Hub that
connects the public administration and the
local free and open-source tech ecosystem
and strengths the collaborative innovation
economy, providing access to projects, job
offers and events, and raising awareness about
open source software in the local industry.

Barcelona is the first city to join the
“Free Software Foundation, Public Money,
Public Code” campaign, and is one of the top
case studies:

* https://download.fsfe.org/campaigns/pmpc/PMPC-Modernising-with-Free-Software.pdf
* https://github.com/AjuntamentdeBarcelona


==Open Budget==

"Accountability and the right to know are
essential conditions for an open policy.
The current Catalan Law on Transparency
(2014) has led to many changes within the
administration, including having to publish expenses and revenue from public
money. In 2016, Barcelona City Council
created an Open Budget tool to make city
budgets more transparent and understandable for citizens.

Via this online tool, users can browse budget information by department and by year,
and find out invoicing information, public
expenditures in all key areas, among other
functionalities, which allows them to compare the budget forecast with what was
spent. It also includes interactive infographics that help users understand where revenue comes from, where public money is
being spent and why. All data is available in
open format, may be downloaded and can
be read in Catalan, Spanish and English."


==City OS / Data Lake==

"The City Council has developed an open data
infrastructure based on open-code, big data
and analytics technology for machine learning,
which uses single-window access and internal
data management, known as a "Data Lake":
City OS. This infrastructure provides better data governance, quality controls, more
effective privacy and security and, above all,
it gives the City Council a global overview of
this area. The City Council has also created a
new Municipal Data Office that uses City OS to
make informed, data-driven decisions.

City OS works with both internal
City Council data (adjudication of contracts, subsidies, Municipal Action Plan
projects, districts, etc.) and with external
agencies under municipal control which
hold information on the city, although
the City Council does not directly manage
them (transport, energy, water, environment etc.)." 



=Excerpts=


==From the introduction==

Francesca Bria:

"The Barcelona Digital Plan, co-created
with the city’s innovation ecosystem for rethinking the smart city, aims to transcend its
merely technological objectives, to rethink a
smart city that serve its citizens. At the core
of the Barcelona’s model there is a large scale
participatory experiment powered by a digital
participatory platform, Decidim that taps into
the collective intelligence of citizens to create
policies that better respond to their needs. It
is built with free software and guarantees personal privacy and public transparency in a way commercial platforms don’t. We used Decidim
to create the government agenda over 70 per cent of the proposals come directly from citizens. Those proposals highlighted what Barcelona’s citizens care about and thus became the priorities for the government’s Roadmap:
issues such as access to affordable housing,
climate change, energy transition and sustainability lie at its core.

Our Digital Government Plan outlines new directives that put citizens first; establish the use of agile methods for ICT projects and advocate for
technological sovereignty. Such measures insist
on re-establishing control over data and information generated by digital technologies as
well as promoting public digital infrastructures
based on free and open source software, open
standards and adopting privacy-enhancing and
rights-preserving technologies that protects
citizen's information-self-determination.

The Plan also includes an ethical data
strategy, which recognizes data sovereignty, privacy, encryption, collective rights to
data and other fundamental citizens’ rights as
its core values. We believe that city data is a
common good and a public infrastructure like
water, electricity, roads, and clean air. Data
should be openly accessible, helping the local
tech companies and local production networks
to build future data-driven and AI fuelled services and solutions that can create public value and social return.

That’s why we are promoting practical
alternatives, such as the DECODE project, an
open source, decentralised, privacy-aware and
rights-respecting data platform based on the
blockchain that give back to citizens greater
control and power over their data, and enable
them to decide what kind of data they want
to keep private, what data they want to share,
with whom, on what basis. This is a New Deal on
data, which does not exploit personal data to 
pay for critical infrastructure. In this way, the
immense economic value that such data represents should be returned back to citizens.
This is a decisive change that puts people
first in the design of government services and
reinforces their digital rights.

Barcelona aspires to evolve the smart city
Agenda towards becoming a digital sovereign city – a city which empowers citizens to
discuss and articulate their own priorities, set
direction as well as decide upon ethical uses of
technological innovations with clear social impact and public return. This transition process entails revitalising our economy and rethinking
the future of work in an age of automation and 
robotization, and democratise production in
the 4th industrial revolution with the goal of
supporting more circular, inclusive, and collaborative economic models. This is what we
are doing by creating an urban innovation lab,
and supporting makers’ communities, the Fab
City movement, and a real sharing economy.

This includes making public procurement more
transparent, and sustainable through an open
digital marketplace that facilitates the participation of local startups and small and medium companies.

Cities of course cannot do this big transformation alone. Everything we develop is open
source, and all the code is posted on Github,
so that our ideas and practices can spread.

Barcelona’s digital policies are based on a free
software platform so they can be shared, reused and adapted by other cities.
This will lay the foundations for a people
centric digital future. Our broader goal - hunderpinned by our strong belief in democratic and sovereign cities that enhance rather than
undermine common good – is to ensure that
the digital revolution is serving the many, not
just the few."


[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Spain]]