
* BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES: WHAT STANDS IN OUR WAY? By Hod Lipson & Melba Kurman. [[Factory@Home]]. pp. 75+

URL = http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf


=Excerpts=

Hod Lipson & Melba Kurman:

==Consumer Safety and Quality Control==

"Unlike other personal
technologies, a personal computer or cell phone, a personal fabrication machine can
physically harm its user since its use involves potentially hazardous materials and
sharp parts or lasers.

In addition to hazardous production environments, once
regular people and small businesses gain access to their own
powerful design and manufacturing tools, they will be able
to make any object they desire, including object that are
dangerous, counterfeited or shoddy. Poorly made or
inaccurate machine parts pose a potential safety risk for
their buyers. Faulty, low quality medical equipment or toxic
toys are also a potential risk. Finally, highly skilled designers
and tinkerers will be able to make powerful weaponry once
they have access to tools that used to be limited to carefully
selected manufacturing companies. Once electronic
blueprint designs for hand grenades and guns are available,
it won’t be long until enterprising users or terrorists start to
manufacture their own.

Finally, liability issues need to be addressed. If a person
makes and gives her friend a custom-designed object that later harms someone, who
is liable? The designer of the electronic blueprints? The person who actually
manufactured the object? The company that made and sold the personal fabrication
machine? Or whoever provided the material for the object? Since the players in the
personal fabrication ecosystem tend to be a decentralized web of loosely connected
individuals and small companies, it’s difficult to pin down who’s accountable for a
shoddy or harmful product."


==Hardware-Related Challenges==

"Technical challenges shared by all varieties of personal-scale manufacturing
machines are listed below.


* Compared to their factory counterparts, personal-scale manufacturing machines
take much longer to produce an identical object.

* DIY hobbyist kits are the predominant source for people to procure personal-scale
manufacturing machines today. As a result, there’s as significant amount of
undocumented variation in machines which makes version control and
standardization difficult, even in models purchased from the same company.

* Factories enjoy elaborate, global supply chains that bring together needed raw
materials. Personal manufacturers would not have access to the same networks,
nor would they purchase enough materials to enjoy economies of scale.

* Factory manufacturing machines are run by skilled and certified operators.
However, many hobbyists and early adopters lack the technical training required
to do high-level troubleshooting or repairs of their own machines."


==Hardware and Software Standards==

"The emerging market for makers of personal fabrication machines is fragmented and
decentralized. Equally fragmented is the marketplace for electronic blueprint
designs. Standards, or a lack thereof, are another major barrier facing machine
makers, software designers and consumers. Machine parts for personal-scale
manufacturing machines are not registered in an official, centralized parts registry.
As a result, similar to the early days of the automobile, it’s difficult to buy standard
replacements parts for a 3D printer or home-scale laser cutter.

If a sizeable small-scale manufacturing ecosystem is to emerge, interoperability issues
must be addressed. Standard, interoperable machine parts and software design files
need to be defined. Electronic blueprints designs exist in a broad range of different
file formats including some that may not be compatible with a particular type of
personal fabrication machine.

...

A large number of CAD software companies offer design software that relies
on a variety of proprietary file formats."


==Version Control==

"Due to the hobbyist culture underlying emerging personal design and manufacturing
technologies, version control remains an unresolved challenge for both software and
hardware."


==IP Issues==

Intellectual property issues are a leading
concern of businesses in the personal manufacturing space. 

* Aggregators are concerned about being held liable for
contributory intellectual property
infringement since their web sites serve
as storefronts and repositories for illegal
copies of patented or copyrighted
designs. 

* Designers worry that their
custom designed objects will be too easy
to copy, or that lesser designers will sell
counterfeit, black market blueprints under their more famous brand name.


* Consumers and businesses worry that they may unintentionally purchase a shoddy,
counterfeit blueprint or invest a significant amount of money buying a product or
machine part that later turns out to be in violation of another company’s patent.


* Makers run the risk of creating an object or product that unwittingly infringes
someone else’s patent or copyright.


...


The personal fabrication process spans both the digital and physical worlds and involves
two components that involve intellectual property issues: the electronic blueprints
and the resulting physical object. While one can protect a digital blueprint using
digital rights management, this approach offers only a partial solution, since once the
electronic blueprint is put to work fabricating physical objects, it can be used to
produce as many objects as the maker wants to make. The resulting physical objects,
unlike a music file, cannot be digitally signed.

...

Even if someone were to legally purchase an electronic blueprint, additional
intellectual property issues could arise depending on what the buyer does with the
object he or she creates from the blueprint. If a user buys a legal copy of a blueprint,
makes a tiny modification and then re-sells huge quantities of that object, is that a
violation of copyright law? Or, if a user buys a blueprint and uses the resulting object
in a novel way, does that qualify the object for a brand new patent? The production of
replacement parts for commercially produced, patented product on personal
fabrication machines offers another potentially troublesome IP-related grey area.

...

Another troublesome complication is what sort of IP protection would be appropriate
for personal manufacturing technologies: copyrights, patents,, or a blend of both? A
related question is how U.S. federal law and business models will address homebased,
non-commercial reproduction of commercial product and machine parts. The
scope of copyright and patent protection must be addressed. For example, if an
electronic blueprint is copyright protected, it’s not yet clear whether that copyright
protection extends to the resulting physical product. The ability of personal
fabrication technologies, particularly 3D printers, to manufacture items out of a broad
range of material will also likely trigger new IP disputes about what constitutes a
“novel” object or product.

So far, companies have not had much success preventing widespread copying of
digital media such as commercial software, music and videos. Personal fabrication
technologies will likely offer yet another battlefield over control of IP rights.

...

Attorneys at the Creative Commons are working with the personal fabrication
community to sketch out an equivalent open source licensing infrastructure for
hardware based on the success of open source software licensing models."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf
)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]]


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Articles]]