
'''= "Open Source Digital Fabrication Machines made in Barcelona".'''

URL = https://www.bcn3dtechnologies.com

=Description=

DIDIY:

"Barcelona 3D Technology is a project from the Fundació CIM to design
and create domestic and professional 3D printers in a way that the user
can learn with every print, thanks to their Open Source working method.
The project started as RepRap Barcelona and has gone through a series of
iterations of RepRap 3D printer designs and in 2016 added a DLP printer
and Laser cutter to its catalog. It benefits greatly from the foundation
being part of the technical university (UPC), where it runs an advanced
manufacturing facility, master programme and various hands-on
workshops in digital fabrication."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf


=Characteristics=

DIDIY:

==Community==

The main software and design repository is at github:
https://github.com/BCN3D while it offers online forums on their own
website. Additionally the foundation runs a series of municipal FabLabs
for the BCN City Council, participates in digital fabrication events and
offers workshops at their own facilities.


==Licensing==

The hardware designs of the last generation of machines, in particular the
SIGMA, are under the CERN Open Hardware License, while the BCN
3D+ is under the MIT license."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


==Business Model==

Revenue models: 

• Sale of hardware, in the form of kits, finished products and spare
parts, both through their online shop as through a distributor
network.
• Consultancy, prototyping and small scale custom made products.
• Course programmes and workshops.
• Technical support and coordination of makerspaces.


Modes of production:

Inhouse production of the machines and testing equipment with sourced
materials and components from local and regional providers. The
manufacturing process itself is considered a learning experience for the
UPC students.

The R&D and designs benefit from peer production globally shared
experiences and designs of improvements in the RepRap community in
particular and digital fabrication machine designers in general.


Indicators of impact 

• In February 2017 the foundation has 78 staff and 77 students, of
which 15 staff and 23 students are dedicated to the BCN 3D
Technology project.
• Machines sold: ca. 1500 RepRap kits have been sold and the
SIGMA machines around 2.000.
• Google Incoming Links (bcn3dtechnologies.com): 15.100.
• Alexa Global Rank (bcn3dtechnologies.com): 397.116.

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


==Governance models== 

• The project is part of the Foundation CIM, liaised with the
technical university of Catalonia, UPC:
https://www.fundaciocim.org.

• Replicability: the earlier designs were easier to replicate than the
last machine series

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Hardware]]

[[Category:Spain]]