=Bio=

"Beatriz Busaniche is a member of the Fundacion Via Libre (http://www.vialibre.org.ar) She is also a founding member of [[Wikimedia Argentina]], local chapter of [[Wikimedia Foundation]].  She has a Mass Communication Degree from National University of Rosario, and is currently a part time professor at Social Sciences Faculty, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. She's preparing her Master Degree on Intellectual Property at FLACSO Argentina.  Her complete resume in english is available [http://www.bea.org.ar/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/cv.english.web_.2010.pdf here]
She maintains a personal blog at http://www.bea.org.ar and a collective blog on free culure at http://www.culturalibre.org.ar 

==Publications==
===Journals and papers=== 
     
* Comments on “Issue Papers”. UN Working Group on Internet Governance. Vía Libre Foundation & Free Software Foundation Europe on “Intellectual Property Rights” and “Cybersecurity and Cybercrime” Online at http://www.wgig.org/Comments­Papers.html (2005) 


* “Between Words and Actions: Civil Society and Education at World Summit on Information Society”, Beatriz Busaniche – Diego Levis. ITID Information Technologies and International Development, MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) together with Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard Law School. Volume 1, Issue 3­4 (Spring/Summer 2004) Pages 97­99 (2003 ) ISSN:1544­7529 

===Books (editing and contributions)===
     
* Editor and contributor, “Argentina Copyleft. La crisis del modelo de derecho de autor y las prácticas para democratizar la cultura”.  Heinrich Böll Foundation. Vía Libre Foundation Editores.  (2010) ISBN 978­987­22486­7­3 http://vialibre.org.ar/arcopy.pdf  
      
* Editor and contributor, “Libres de monopolios sobre el conocimiento y la vida. Hacia una convergencia de movimientos” (Southern Cone edition). 2009. ISBN 978­987­22486­6­6 

* Editor, “Voto electrónico. Los riesgos de una ilusión” Via Libre Foundation (2009). Online at http://www.vialibre.org.ar/wp­content/uploads/2009/03/evoto.pdf  (In Spanish)  ISBN 978­987­22486­5­9

* Contributor, “Apropriações Tecnológicas ­ Emergência de textos, idéias e imagens do Submidialogia#3” karla Brunet. Edufba, Salvador Brazil (2008) Online at http://livros.karlabrunet.com/sub3.htm  (In Portuguese) 

* Editor and contributor, “Libres de monopolios sobre el conocimiento y la vida: Hacia una convergencia de movimientos” (Central America Edition) Vía Libre Foundation. (2008).      Online at  http://www.vialibre.org.ar/wp­content/uploads/2007/03/mabi.pdf (In Spanish) 
     
* Contributor, UNESCO Uruguay “Guía Práctica sobre Software Libre, su selección y aplicación local en América Latina y el Caribe”.  Online at http://www.vialibre.org.ar/wp­-content/uploads/2007/11/gsl.pdf  ISBN 92­9089­103­3

* Contributor, “Medios informáticos en la educación” Diego Levis and Roxana Cabello.  Prometeo Editors. (2007) http://www.diegolevis.com.ar/secciones/publicaciones5.html  (In Spanish) 

* Contributor, Dossier Copy/South – Law School, Kent University – Canterbury, UK Online at https://www.kent.ac.uk/law/copysouth/  (2007) (English and Spanish available) 

* Editor and contributor, “MABI: Monopolios Artificiales sobre Bienes Intangibles” Via Libre Foundation (2007) http:// www.vialibre.org.ar/wp­content/uploads/2007/03/mabi.pdf (In Spanish) ISBN 978­987­22486­2­8

* Contributor, Saperi del Futuro – Analisi di donne sulla societá della comunicazione. Editrice Missionaria Italiana. Bologna. Italia. (2006). (In Italian) 

*Contributor, “Visions in process II: The World Summit on the Information Society” – Heinrich Böll Foundation. Berlín­ Germany (2005).Online at   http://www.boell.de/downloads/medien/visions_in_process2.pdf  (In English) 

*Contributor, Democracia y Ciudadanía en la Sociedad de la Información: Desafíos y articulaciones regionales. Universidad Nacional de Córdoba. Compilation. (2005). (In Spanish) 

* Editor, “Prohibido Pensar, Propiedad Privada” Vía Libre Foundation, (2005) Online at http://www.vialibre.org.ar/wp­content/uploads/2006/11/prohibidopensarpropiedadprivada.pdf  (In  Spanish)  ISBN 978­987­22486­1­3
 
* Contributor, “¿Un mundo Patentado? La privatización de la vida y el conocimiento”. Heinrich Böll Foundation. (1st. Edition El Salvador 2004. 2nd. Edition Buenos Aires 2005) Online at http://boell­latinoamerica.org/download_es/Libro_biopolitica.pdf (In Spanish) 


[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:P2P Women]]
[[Category:IP]]