'''* Book: Reclaiming the Future. A Beginner’s Guide to Planning the Economy. Simon Hanna. Pluto Press, 2025'''

URL = https://www.plutobooks.com/9780745350202/reclaiming-the-future/


=Description=

'''1. From the publisher:'''

"In a world gripped by endless crisis and climate breakdown, the demand to reshape our economic system has never been more urgent. Reclaiming the Future by Simon Hannah is a beginner's guide to planning the economy, taking readers on a transformative journey towards a radically democratic society, where the power and control over our lives are firmly in our hands.

Decades of right-wing scaremongering has tried to consign economic planning to the dustbin, but the need for it is greater than ever - it might be the only thing that can save us from climate catastrophe. In this myth-busting and accessible guide, Hannah lays the building blocks for a grassroots economy that aligns our economy within human needs and environmental limits."


'''2.'''

"The book aims to introduce a general audience to the ideas of and necessity for ecosocialism and democratic economic planning for combatting the unfolding climate catastrophe. We will also discuss the role of introductory books like it in the literature ecosystem on democratic economic planning, which remains largely dominated by specialist academic research. What role do they play in popularizing these ideas among the wider public and the left? What challenges come with that and how can they be tackled effectively?"

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Books]]