'''Book: De Angelis, Massimo (2007). The Beginning of History. Value Struggles and Global Capital. London: Pluto'''

'''= about the Commons as a political movement inaugurating a new era of history'''



=Excerpts=

From a summary essay [http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf]
by Massimo De Angelis: 


==On [[Commoning]]:==

Massimo De Angelis:

"Commoning, a term encountered by Peter Linebaugh (2008) in one of his frequent travels
in the living history of commoners’ struggles, is '''about the (re)production of/through
commons'''. To turn a noun into a verb is not a little step and requires some daring.
Especially if in doing so we do not want to obscure the importance of the noun, but
simply ground it on what is, after all, life flow: there are no commons without incessant
activities of commoning, of (re)producing in common. But it is through (re)production
in common that communities of producers decide for themselves the norms, values and
measures of things. Let us put the “tragedy of the commons” to rest then, the basis of the
economists argument for enclosures: '''there is no commons without commoning, there are
no commons without communities of producers and particular flows and modes of
relations. Hence, what lies behind the “tragedy of the commons” is really the tragedy of
the destruction of commoning through all sorts of structural adjustments, whether
militarised or not'''."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)


Commoning as a political strategy:

'''1.'''

"the challenge is how to engage in a constituent process of new social relations,
which can only be a process of commoning, able to keep at bay and push back the form of
commoning predicated on capitalist relations and, therefore, capitalist value practices.
One basic condition for meeting this challenge is that we face up a hard reality of what
we are up against, that is capital as a social force and field of social relations that seeks to
reproduce itself through boundless expansion. This means first, that struggle is both
necessary for the subjects and ubiquitous across the social fields inhabited by capitalist
relations. However, it also implies that struggle is the life-blood of the system’s dynamism. 

Furthermore, second, this dynamism is predicated upon and produces a new vertical
segmentation of the condition of reproduction of labour power. The “working class” is
divided in a wage hierarchy and no ideological call for unity will ever bring the different
segments to work together in the direction of a radical transformation of their production
in common beyond capital, and therefore beyond their hierarchy. Struggle therefore is also
divided across a wage hierarchy, which implies that the possibility of its capitalist
governance, predicated on division and exclusion at a point of crisis, are quite broad."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)


'''2.''' On Creating lines of flight, without capitalist landing:

"This is of course a crucial question for all those whose perspective is the sustainability of
the “beginning of history”, the persistence and development in time of new forms of
commoning, of producing in commons that push back those compatible with the selfpreservation
of capital.

From the point of view of the subjects, the clash of value practices implies first of all a
“refusal”, a “no” to indignity, as Holloway (2004) so clearly put it. However, we have an
immediate problem on our hand. How can we refuse capital’s measure without actively
and self-consciously participating in the constitution of other common measures? And
how can we participate in this commonality without at the same time setting a limit,
refusing capital’s measure of things and its drive to separate, subsume and co-opt? 7 The
setting of a limit to the “beast” and the problematic of how to constitute and sustain the
“outside” which is brought to life by the many struggles, are two inescapable strategic
coordinates of the beginning of history."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)



'''3.''' Value struggles

"The vacuum is filled with an ideological struggle that seek converted. In a
Western urban environment this might be expressed in this way: capital wants you to eat
meet, you must become vegan; capital wants you to earn money, you build a life-style
without money; capital wants you to compete, you proclaim “solidarity”, and so on.

However expressive of real desires and processes of identities production that seek
disengagement from capital’s value practices, an ideological struggle of this type can only
produce, precisely, singular identities, individual and groups whose values system is predefined
as ethical choice. But commoning is not only based on pre-existent values, preexistent
“ethical” choices. The commoning we seek is also and most importantly a field of
production of values, and the precondition for this production is that a wide range of
different ethics, different cultures, different life-styles, and, as we will see, different power
positions within the planetary wage hierarchy participate in the co-production of new
systems of values, of producing what is of common value together."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)



'''4.''' We have to avoid struggles that lead back inside
the problematic of the end of history, not for the creation of an outside, a beginning of
history:

"The bottom line of the discussion so far is that the minimum condition for alternatives
to be able to both reproduce themselves and set a limit to capital is that they constitute
processes of commoning through which cooperating subjects seek, establish, represent, and
communicate a field of value production which is not only opposed to that of capital, but
also propositive and constituent of new social relations at every occasion of struggle. In
this sense, the process of commoning beyond capital is a process of destructive creation as
opposed to the process of creative destruction of Schumpeterian memory. While for the
latter the creation of the new and the correspondent destruction of the old is concerned
with the mutation of the forms of capitalist social relations, we can understand the
concern of destructive creation the destruction of these very capitalist relations and the
correspondent creation of new forms of commoning predicated on different value
productions. Here the emphasis is on the constituent processes of commoning other than
capital, rather than on mutated forms of capitalist commoning."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)



==On [[Common Rights]]:==

Massimo De Angelis:

"It is because this organic relation between the activity of the commoners and the
commons that “commons” rights differ, in their constitution, from legal rights such as
“human”, “political” or “social” rights. In the latter sense, a “right” is a legal entitlement
to have or obtain something or to act in a certain way. A title deed constitutes evidence
of such a right. 

For the medieval English commoners instead,

- ''common rights are embedded in a particular ecology with its local husbandry. . . .
Commoners first think not of title deeds, but human deeds: how will this land be
tilled? Does it require manuring? What grows there? They begin to explore. One
might call it a natural attitude. Second, commoning is embedded in a labor
process; it inheres in a particular praxis of field, upland, forest, marsh, coast.
Common rights are entered into by labor. Third, commoning is collective. Fourth,
commoning, being independent of the state, is independent also of the
temporality of the law and state. It goes deep into human history''" (Linabough
2008: 44-45).
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)




==On the Middle Class as the political subject needing to be overcome==

Massimo De Angelis:

"'''The problem we face is therefore this: there will be no beginning of history without the
Middle Class, nor there will be one with the Middle Class (i.e. with the system that
reproduce labouring subjectivity as Middle Class) We must therefore seek an outside from which to stand on new ground.'''


'''There are three outsides to the Middle Class as we have defined it. The first one passes
through Middle Class subjects themselves, to all, to a variety of degree, and it is expressed
in atomic re-appropriations of labour time and its products and space away from capital,
or in molecular communities reproducing commons and their defense in factories, in the
offices, in the neighborhoods''', in the homes, in the streets, in cyberspace. It is the
frontline of value struggle passing through the bodies of labouring subjects. It’s the hint
that what we are doing in common, and how we are doing it, is crazy. It’s the daily
apprehension of reality beyond the fetish. It’s the guy responsible for purchasing chicken
in a supermarket chain, abhorring for an instant at the idea that he may be instrumental
for the appalling ways those chicken are produced. Or the woman taking up a job in a
development NGO and hating the fact that most of her time has to be spent to fine tune
projects to the requirements of donors. Or the precarious call center worker who hates
repeating stupid marketing questions to rude and uninterested respondents.

These outsides, if given an organizational form, might then well be later co-opted and
made to work for capital when articulated to its reproduction, but they nevertheless
sparks light when they appear. The Middle Class subjects, with all the dangers of
generalization, are divided subjects, a division which is an expression of their separation
from the commons. They face their commoning, their social production in common, as
an alien force posited outside them, as money, as “the economy”, and hence they face
one another within this social cooperation as “other” and “foreigner”. On the other hand,
they also face one another directly, as colleagues, friends, mothers and fathers, uncles and
aunts, friends or enemies, sons or daughters, mates or companions, neighbors and so on,
in a variety of modalities, social roles and forms of social intercourse. In this way, they
often combine and recombine communities of struggle in which they discover new
communal dimensions for their power through commoning at the frontline.

There is '''a second outside to the Middle Class. It is the political subjectivity that might be
created as a result of the change in composition''': suddenly, the Middle Class finds that
among itself there is an increasing section who either does not want to or cannot sustain
its livelihoods as Middle Class. In the first case, we are talking for example of the period
of the student movements in the 1960s, in which Middle Class youth battled against the
authorities of fathers, police, university professors and politicians, refusing with life-style
choices and mass gatherings, the life-style of its class. The beginning of history however is
not about individual’s life-style; it is about the production in common of life. Capital was
able to capture the playful-sexual energies liberated by those movements and channel
them into new life-styles filling creative jobs with many Middle Class children who had
to move on with their lives after the season of protests. It was thus able to turn the
struggle for freedom of this movement into a coherent neoliberal project in which
individuals pursuit of their “freedom” could occur within commons shaped by
disciplinary markets.

In the second case, we are talking about temporary work, casualisation, precarity in a
world of drastically reduced social entitlements and skyrocketing personal debt. The
specter is given voice in the news: for the first time in the history of capitalism, the
Middle Class children of Middle Class families might have to do with less than their
parents. The “American dream” the illusion according to which “more” is always
better and possible for all seem to have reached an impasse. Precarity seem to be the
condition of the age. The Middle Class precariat is often highly educated, the expression
of a mass intellectuality brought about by generations of schooling. Yet, many are in low
paid jobs that do not have anything to do with their education and the aspirations they
invested in them. They are the children of that moving goalpost that the interacting
subjectivities within the market always create. Aspirations are often frustrated. The
precarious subjects are often in condition to sell a type of labour power for living (say,
working as security guard or as hamburger flipper) and offer another type of labour
power as “gift” in order to add a line of “experience” on their CV (say as a “creative”
type of job in advertisement). Needs and desires are here held in check one against the
other. Ins and outs of one segment of the labour market create, amplify or soften up
cycles of depression and exhilaration in subjects. The precariat is thus in a condition of
limbo, its presence and imaginary is both outside and inside the Middle Class.19 This is a
dangerous situation for capital, as we might be in presence of a potential social detonator.
Needless to say, this situation, which coincides with some of the trends in the labour
market in Western economies in the last 30 years, is now aggravated by the incumbent
economic crisis in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis.

Finally, there is '''a third outside to the Middle Class''', an outside that remind us of the
social constitution itself of the Middle Class and, indeed of capitalist production. As we
have seen, the social constitution of the Middle Class is predicated on particular social
production of “order” and “betterment”. These are both predicated on the construction
of “the other”: the other as a foreign alien or the other as the poor, the unwaged, the
waged at the bottom of the scale (who cannot access “our” rights and entitlements, but
who can be forced into migration by “our” rights to capital movements seeking
valorization; who can clean “our” office toilets and subways, but who cannot speak to the
world about the conditions and remuneration of this because of the threat of detention;
who cannot follow the swings of their existential needs and desires, but who must endure
the swings of pervasive and never ending capitalist restructuring; who can mind our
children so as we can concentrate on the intensity demanded by waged employment, but
whose children are minded through an intensification process of unwaged labour of
reproduction of sisters and grandparents in the home countries).

In presence of this outside, and its struggles, the Middle Class is truly confronted with its
social constitution, the elements defining the invariant character of the Middle Class,
that which remains the same through consumer fashion, changes in governments, TV
comedy seasons, and structures of labour markets. What remain the same is that the
existence of the Middle Class qua Middle Class, even when it moves and struggles, is
predicated upon the order of gated communities, identity cards, national and
supranational border control which helps define the average social wage and the modality
of deviation from this average in given reproduction fields. The gate and the
management of the gate therefore contribute to structure a yardstick for measuring the
singularities’ distance from “betterment”, to measure their progress through the wage
hierarchy, whether in a life time or across generations. The policed gate in order to
manage a wage hierarchy, and a wage hierarchy in order to legitimize and produce a
policed gate: the dissipation of this double dimension involves the dissipation of the
Middle Class itself. 

'''The emergence of commoning across borders and through the wage
hierarchy in forms that are other than the commoning of capital reproducing borders and
the wage hierarchy is a commoning through which both borders and wage hierarchy are
problematised, and their dissipation seek. But since both borders and wage hierarchy are
pillars of the capitalist form of production in commons, to problematise them imply to
constitute new forms of production in common'''.
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)



==Conclusion==


In conclusion:

"How will this explosion be brought about I do not
know. But it is clear that if it will come at all, it will be through the creation of an outside
of capital which is far greater than the sum of the three outsides I have discussed. And
this because it is an outside constituted through the creation of commons across these
three outsides. Here the explosion of the Middle Class corresponds to a process of
political recomposition across subjects that connect the frontline struggles of capital
across the wage hierarchy and national borders resulting in new forms of value
production. Seeking commons across these actors is certainly difficult organizational
work, but what other ways are there to create the conditions for the explosion of the
Middle Class and open the ground for the constitution of new commoning beyond that
of capital. When we struggle across the wage hierarchy and/or across national borders, we
problematise the existing modalities of accessing social wealth created in common in the
global factory. When we do this, we cannot avoid transforming ourselves. But this is a
transformation of the self of a different nature of those planned out in the “me me me”
survival manuals of busy urban Middle Class. It is this process of transformation
associated to a commoning, of both the subjects involved in co-production and their
relation. The other is no longer alien but a co-producer of life in commons. The
explosion of the Middle Class seems to be truly our only hope to safe ourselves from
alienation, poverty and ecological disaster."
(http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf)

=More Information=

#Essay by Massimo De Angelis http://www.taller-commons.com/downloads/angelis.pdf
#[[Circulation of the Common]]


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]