
'''= methods to allocate benefits in proportion to contributions, in order to improve the creativity and the productivity of the network. based on data from the NRP-CAS ([[Network Resource Planning]] and contribution accounting), used in [[Sensorica]]'''

=Context=

'''NOTE:''' The concept was proposed by [[Sensorica]] in 2011, using the expression ''value equation''. Later, the expression ''value equation'' has been replaced with ''benefit redistribution algorithm''. 

More on the [http://ovn.world/index.php?title=Benefits_distribution_algorithm OVN wiki]. Thus, if we consider its origin and initial use, the expression ''value equation'' is not obsolete.  


'''= " the ''benefit redistribution algorithm'' is a distributed solution to time management, which can be applied in large scale p2p, co-creation processes".''' 


The base idea was explained [http://multitudeproject.blogspot.ca/2014/01/why-do-we-need-value-accounting-system.html this blog post] using the expression ''value equation'', which was later replaced by Sensoricans with 'benefit redistribution algorithm''.


=Description=

'''1.'''

From the OVN Wiki:

"The benefit redistribution algorithm prescribes how benefits (including revenue, access to governance, etc.) are distributed to all participants (active affiliates) in a collaborative process. In the case of revenue, it is used to compute a % of total revenue (fluid equity) for every participant/contributor, taking into consideration different forms of contributions and different modulators, and perhaps taking into consideration different cultures of constituent communities formed by participants.

The benefit redistribution algorithm describes how different types of contributions are amalgamated into a single dimension. The output can be a fluid equity piechart, a revenue redistribution piechart, a list of participants that have gained rights to make decisions, etc. It is a dimension reduction operator, taking all the complexity of contributions and customs of participants to project them onto the [0,1] real number domain.

The benefit redistribution algorithm can also be seen as a dimensional weighted sum of indices/parameters that are believed to increase the probability of creation of something perceived as valuable, i.e. may trigger a value experience. If we think in the context of revenue redistribution, it is not about the post facto priced exchange value of whatever is produced. It is more than the individual subjective evaluation. Exchange is a special event that triggers distribution of whatever exchange value is offered (which is either money or something of subjective nature to the recipient such as reputation)."

(http://ovn.world/index.php?title=Benefits_distribution_algorithm)



'''2.'''

"The ''benefit redistribution algorithm'' is seen as a third module of a ''contribution accounting system'' understood as:
* a contributions log
* evaluation of contributions
* ''benefit redistribution algorithm''

Note that the expression ''value accounting system'', or VAS, was initially by Sensorica, and was later replaced with ''[[contribution accounting system]]'' or CAS. 
  

The ''benefit redistribution algorithm'' "dictates" how benefits (ex. [[revenue]], access to governance, etc.) are distributed to all participants (active affiliates) in a collaborative process. When applied to revenue, it as designed to compute a % of total revenue for every participant/contributor, taking into consideration all different forms of contributions (in time, in money, etc.), affected by various modulators (frequency of contributions, duration of collaboration, quality of deliverables, priority of tasks, etc.), while considering cultural aspects of constituent communities formed by participants. It describes how different types of contributions are amalgamated into a single deliverable (output of the collaborative process). The ''value equation'''s output was a sweat equity piechart. It was considered a dimension reduction operator, taking all the complexity of contributions and customs of participants to project them onto the [0,1] real number domain.



A "past looking ''benefit redistribution algorithm''", applied to ventures that consume resources to create products, to later exchange them for money/revenue) the % of total revenue for every contributor is calculated based on past contributions. A "forward looking ''benefit redistribution algorithm''", applied best to ventures that produce social value and accept donations/grants to operate, the % of total revenue for every contributor is calculated based on a projection of contributions, evaluated against a plan.


In an OVN like [[Sensorica]], the ''benefit redistribution algorithm'' is not universal. Every venture / project can have one. 



=More Information=

see: 

* [[Incentive Network Protocols]]

* [[Open Value Accounting]]

* [[Contributions Log]]

* [[Governance Equation]]

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]