up to [[Berlin_Commons_Conference]]

Note - this page seems to be an archive related to the 2010 Berlin Commons Conference.
For the 2013 Berlin Commons Conference, see : http://p2pfoundation.net/ECC2013

----

On this page you find participating individuals and organisations grouped by country. We link to internal and external pages to explore participants work and background.

=Participating Individuals=

==Austria==

* [[Brigitte Kratzwald]], commons-oriented social scientist and political activist from Graz, maintainer of a Austrian [http://www.commons.at Commons blog]<br>
**See Brigitte's listing of: [[Commons-Oriented Websites in Austria]]
* [[Franz Nahrada]]; researcher and networker for the advancement of [[Global Villages]] 
** part of the ICC support team with focus on content and consensus
** main themes: Knowledge Commons and Global Virtual P2P Cooperation for liveable habitat and augmented human settlement fostering resonance with nature and landscape.

==Argentina==


* [[Patricio Lorente]], Wikimedia Argentina.

==Australia==

* [[Carolyn Lee]], [[Anthroposphere Institute]]

==Brazil==

* [[Rosa Acevedo]], University of Pará, [[UNAMAZ]], The Association of Amazonian Universities


* [[Camila Moreno]]; social movement activist


* [[Jose Murilo]], Digital Culture Coordinator at Brazil's Ministry of Culture


* [[Miguel Said Vieira]]; Brazilian researcher and activist in the field of free knowledge and culture; member of Epidemia, a Brazilian collective which advocates for free knowledge and culture

- Articles in Portuguese on collaborative production, commodification and the commons, available at http://impropriedades.wordpress.com/artigos


==Canada==

* [[Alain Ambrosi]], [[Communautique]], Canadian/Quebec videographer


* [[Maude Barlow]], [[Food and Water Watch]]


* [[David Eaves]], Open government, open source, negotiation. Writer, consultant, public speaker.


* [[Roberta Lentz]], Assistant Professor of Media and Public Policy in the Department of Art History and Communication Studies at McGill University in Montreal, Quebec (Canada). She is affiliated with Media@McGill [http://media.mcgill.ca]  - a hub of research, scholarship and public outreach on issues and controversies in media, technology and culture


* [[Simon Emmanuel Roux]], adjunct director at Communautique

==Colombia==

* [[Carolina Botero]], [[Fundación Karisma]] 



* [[Diego Leal]], oriented to the design of learning experiences that make visible educational commons and their possibilities

==Chile==

* [[Claudio Ruiz]], [[ONG Derechos Digitales]] 


==Costa Rica==


* [[Santiago Hoerth]], social movement and free software/free culture activist; founder and coordinator of the latinamerican collective Código Sur [http://www.codigosur.org].


==Ecuador==

* Alberto Acosta, Minister of the Economy (German-language bio: http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alberto_Acosta_(%C3%96konom))

* Maria Fernanda Espinoza, MINISTRA DE COORDINACIÓN DE PATRIMONIO [http://www.ecuadorembassy.de/boletines/MINISTRA%20MAR%CDA%20FERNANDA%20ESPINOSA%20PRESENTA%20INICIATIVA%20YASUN%CD.pdf]


===The Yasuni Amazon Commons===

English introduction via YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IOX9rGaNpec&feature=youtube_gdata

Dr. Acosta recommends the two following websites regarding the protection of biodiversity and the rights of indigenous peoples:

#http://www.amazoniaporlavida.org/es/
#http://yasuni-itt.gob.ec/

Two documents, available from the author:

#A modo de prólogo del libro. ITT-Yasuní Entre el petróleo y la vida ¡Basta a la explotación de petróleo en la Amazonía! Alberto Acosta
#El Buen (con) Vivir, una utopía por (re)construir. Alcances de la Constitución de Montecristi. Alberto Acosta1

==Egypt==

* [[Hala Essalmawi]], Library of Alexandria


==Finland==

* Jiri Rasanan (jiri.rasanen@iki.fi), [http://www.eCars-Now.org eCars Now]


==France (& Belgium)==

* [[Philippe Aigrain]], Co-founder and strategy adviser, [http://laquadrature.net La Quadrature du Net], CEO, [http://www.sopinspace.com SOPINSPACE], [http://paigrain.debatpublic.net personal blog].
**You can access his [http://paigrain.debatpublic.net/wp-content/uploads/pha-ICC.pdf presentation at ICC] and the corresponding [http://paigrain.debatpublic.net/wp-content/uploads/notestointerpreters.pdf speaking notes], as well as the [http://paigrain.debatpublic.net/wp-content/uploads/pha-ICC.zip sources].

* [[Geneviève Azam]], =Economist, University of Toulouse II, France. Scientific council of Attac-France

** - “Les droits de propriété sur le vivant”, dossier “Biens communs et propriété”  in [http://developpementdurable.revues.org/ Développement durable et territoire]. [http://developpementdurable.revues.org/document5443.html]

* [[Benjamin Coriat]], Professor of Economics at the University Paris 13. His research domains includes IPR Sytems

* [[Gaelle Krikorian]], " Leader of a working group on Access to Knowledge, i.e. [[Accès aux Savoirs]], in Paris, France.
** Forthcoming: Krikorian G. & Kapczynski, A. (2010 forthcoming), Access to Knowledge in the Age of Intellectual Property. (Zone Books Eds., New York), 652 p.

* [[Aurore Lalucq]]

* [[Herve Le Crosnier]]

* [[Marie Mazalto]], [[World Mountain People Association]]

* [[Ricardo Petrella]], (1941) professor (economy, political sciences) at the Catholic University in Louvain-la-Neuve (Belgium) is a noted advocate of the public domain and the public good, particularly in relation to (access to) water as a universal human right. He is also a great propounder of the 'solidary economy'

* [[Valerie Peugeot]], [[Vecam]]

* [[Frederic Sultan]], [[Vecam]]

* [[Wojtek Kalinowski ]], Co-Director of the program “[[Initiative for Rethinking Economy]]” (IRE) at the [[Charles Leopold Mayer Foundation]]

==Germany==

* [http://bennibaermann.de/ Benni Bärmann] Blogger at [http://www.keimform.de keimform.de], Commonaut, Frankfurt am Main.

* [[Veronika Bennholdt-Thomsen]], German social scientist: Women’s Studies and Peasant Studies (in Mexico, Austria, Germany)
** Documentation:
**- Mies, Maria/ Bennholdt-Thomsen, Veronika, '''Defending, Reclaiming and Reinventing the Commons''', in: Canadian Journal of Development Studies, Vol. XXII, Special Issue, 2001, S. 997 – 1023 

* [[Christoph Bruch]] Head, Open Access Unit , Max Planck Digital Library ; Open Access Working Group [http://www.allianzinitiative.de/en/core_activities/open_access/working_group/] ; [[Coalition for Action "Copyright for Education and Science"]] ; [[IUWIS]] ; PEER, [[Publishing and the Ecology of European Research]]

**Proposed short introduction: Open Access 
**- Die Digitale Chance nutzen. Neue Herausforderung für Verlage und Wissenschaftsbetrieb [http://www.kulturrat.de/dokumente/puk/puk2009/puk04-09.pdf]
**Documentation:
**- The [[Göttingen Declaration on Copyright for Education and Research]]

* [[Stephan Dohrn]], IASC

* [[Hannes Foth]], researching doctoral thesis on justifications of property rights arrangements

* [[Sebastian Gallehr]], E5, the [[European Business Council for Sustainable Energy]]

* [[Andrea Goetzke]], [[Netzpolitik]] [[http://Netzpolitik.org]

* [[Volker Ralf Grassmuck]], media sociologist and author; currently he is a visiting reasearcher at the Research Group on Public Policy for Access to Information (GPOPAI) at the School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities (EACH) of the University of São Paulo (USP). 
** Recommended text:
**- A Copyright Exception for Monetizing File-Sharing. A proposal for balancing user freedom and author remuneration in the Brazilian copyright law reform, 19. März 2010, http://www.vgrass.de/?p=193

* [[Silja Graupe]], assistant professor of philosophy and economics at [http://www.alanus.edu/ Alanus University] of Arts and Social Sciences, Germany.

* [[Jörg Grossman]], producer of 'green' documentaries via the German-language Internet TV channel [http://www.green.tv/de Green TV] and [http://www.greenfilm.eu greenfilm production]

* [[Friederike Habermann]], economist, historian and political scientist, active in social movements

* [[Imma Harms]], a computer scientist, philosopher, journalist and documentary filmmaker;  participant in [[PaG]], ‘Projektwerkstatt auf Gegenseitigkeit’, which is based on the concept of separating ownership of a property from its use. The name PaG can be roughly translated as  ‘workshop for mutual support’.  

* [[Margrit Kennedy]]  [http://www.margritkennedy.de], promotes implementation of practical examples of regional and sectoral complementary currencies in Europe; advocate of the concepts of the “[[Financial Commons]]” and the “Post-Growth-Economy”
** - Intervention by [[Margrit Kennedy]], [[Ludwig Schuster]]: [[Sustainable Financial Markets as a Global Commons]]

* [[Michael Kirk]], Professor of Development Economics, Agricultural Economics and Cooperation Economics at the Philipps-Universität Marburg. 

* [[Stephan Krall]], German Development Cooperation (GTZ), programme on sustainable management of resources in agriculture

* [[Birgit Kraemer]], social scientist at Economic and Social Research Institute (WSI), private interest in cooperatives, community structures and regional development, active in social movements  

* [[Rainer Kuhlen]] University of Konstanz, Information Science (www.kuhlen.name) - An ethical foundation of knowledge as a commons; Representing NETHICS, [www.netethics.net], (Ethics in the Net, mainly A2K topics)
**Recommended publications:
**- Ethical foundation of knowledge as a common. Preprint Vortrag Seoul 8.10.2010 (text: http://bit.ly/b85rUO) 
**- Towards a commons-based copyright. IFLA World Conference Gothenburg 14.8.2010 (PP: http://bit.ly/9aa3Zg)
**- Gemeingüter – Wohlstand durch Teilen (with Wolfgang Sachs, Christian Siefkes et al.) Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung 22.10.2010 (http://bit.ly/by8kBR)

* [[Farah Lenser]], facilitator of Open Dialogue Groups. 

* [[Sten Linnander]], Frankfurt, Germany; President of the [[Future Link Foundation]]  [http://www.future-link.org]]

* [[Thomas von Loeffelholz]], Berlin, Germany; Researching on Commons-based Peer-Production of Physical Goods.

* [[Stefan Meretz]], Co-founder of the bilingual Keimform-Blog [http://www.keimform.de] and of the Oekonux-Project [http://www.oekonux.org]
**Recommended text:
**- Commons in a taxonomy of goods http://www.keimform.de/2010/commons-in-a-taxonomy-of-goods/ 

* [[Elisabeth Meyer-Renschhausen]], community gardening activist, member of new founded commens office
"Allmende-Kontor" in Berlin

* [[Fritz Mielert]], architect and political activist
 
* [[Juergen Neumann]], co-founder of the [http://www.freifunk.net Freifunk] campaign to spread
knowledge about open wireless networks;  founder of the Open Hardware Initiative; associated with the [[Open Source Hardware and Design Aliance]] [http://www.ohanda.org] ; lobbying for more open licensing models for the radio spectrum via [http://openspectrum.eu Open Spectrum EU]

* [[Michael Opielka]] University of Applied Sciences Jena 
*Proposed text:
**- The [[Case of Basic Income for Third Way Politics after the Global Crisis]]. Paper presented at the Colloquium of the Center for Social Science together with the Institute of Social Welfare of Seoul National University, May 27, 2010 


* [[Herman Ott]], climate policy spokesman for the German Greens

* [[Thorsten Schilling]], head of multi media department & IT of the federal agency for civic education

* [[Dagmar Scholle]], broadcast freelancer [http://www.zeileeins.de/]

* [[Ludwig Schuster]], advocate and researcher in energy-backed currencies, applications for financing renewable energies, and currency design in general
**- Intervention by [[Margrit Kennedy]] and [[Ludwig Schuster]]: [[Sustainable Financial Markets as a Global Commons]]


* [[Christian Siefkes]], author of the book proposing a model for the Commons economy: [[From Exchange to Contributions]]; Co-founder of the bilingual Keimform-Blog [http://www.keimform.de/].
**- Short text on building blocks of a commons-based society: Christian Siefkes: The Commons of the Future (2009), http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/siefkes_future-commons.pdf

* [[Felix Stein]]

* [[Antje Toennis]], communications manager at [[GLS Treuhand]], a non profit organisation that can play the role of an intermediary in the personal process of transferring wealth for community oriented benefits

* [[Stefan Tuschen]], free software inspired commons advocate, ICC support team,
**English summary of a recent article (in German) on commons and development policy:
**- [[Thoughts on Development Politics and the Commons]]
**-Original German article: See: Michael Frein und Stefan Tuschen. Zwei Konzepte, ein Ziel?. [[Überlegungen zu Entwicklungspolitik und Commons]]

* [[Ernst Ulrich von Weizsäcker]], Co-Chair, UNEP Resource Panel(formerly founder and president of the Wuppertal Institute)
**Read Mr. von Weizsäcker's contributions to the policy debate:
**- [[Limits to Privatization]]

* [[Elisabeth Voß]], business economist and publisher in the [http://www.solioeko.de/voss solidary economy]. 

* [[Andreas Weber]], author and biologist, on 'nature as a commons'

* [[Gerd Wessling]]  Co-Founder of Transition Town Bielefeld &  [http://www.transition-initiativen.de Transition D/A/CH], Transition Trainer, Phycisist
**More info via [http://www.transitionnetwork.org International Transition Network]

==Greece==

* [[Frosini Koutsouti]], [http://www.ikarianregeneration.org  Ikarian Regeneration]

* [[Maria Bareli]], University of Crete (Greece), [http://www.ikariandocs.wordpress.com Documentation Research and Action Center of Ikaria]

* [[Nikos Salingaros]], [[Gruppo Salingaros]]: a think tank of architects, urbanists, sociologists and scientists, for the moment mostly active in Italy and Portugal,  who are planning a new urban future for Italy and Europe.
** Dr. Salingaros has published key articles on Peer-to-peer Urbanism. 
** Websites:
#http://32.hoppakay.com/home.html
#http://zeta.math.utsa.edu/~yxk833/
#http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikos_Salingaros

==India==

* [[Jagdeesh V. Puppala]], Chief Executive of the [[Foundation for Ecological Security]]


* [[Narahari Rao]], founder of the [[Vagdevi Educational Trust]] 


* [[Jai Sen]], Director of ‘India Institute for Critical Action: Centre In Movement’. i.e. [[CACIM]] [http://www.cacim.net]
* Contributions:
**- [[From Open Space to Open Politics]]: In this essay for Antipode, Vol 42 No 4, 2010 (ISSN 0066-4812), pp 994–1018, In his essay Sen gives further depth to the discussion of the commons, through an exploration of the concept of open space, principally through his direct engagement with the World Social Forum. He explores three key organising principles of open space: self organisation, autonomy and emergence, which together define a powerful new kind of politics. (Full original unedited version available @ http://cacim.net/twiki/tiki-index.php?page=Publications.)
**- ‘[[Against Ecological and Information Enclosures]] : Towards a Convergence of “Commons”. A Note on a Workshop in New Delhi, December 13 2007’. Available @ http://cacim.net/twiki/tiki-index.php?page=Multilogues2Notes ([[Cacim]] 2008)
**- The Delhi Commons Convergence process, http://wiki.kandalaya.org/cgi-bin/twiki/view/CommonsConvergence/WebHome

==Ireland==

* [[Brian Davey]], UK, with [[Feasta]] (not exclusive to Ireland)

==Italy==

* [[Marco Berlinguer]]


* [[Marco Fioretti]], [http://opendocumentfellowship.com/ OpenDocument Fellowship], [http://digistan.org/ Digistan]
* Suggested readings:
** About "Design and Manufacturing Commons": [http://p2pfoundation.net/Thoughts_on_P2P_production_and_deployment_of_physical_objects Thoughts on the P2P production and deployment of physical objects]
** About data commons: [http://stop.zona-m.net/active-citizens/open-public-data-are-so-good-its-hard-start-explaining-why Open Data, Open Society]: a research project about openness of public data in EU local administrations


* [[Ezio Manzini]]


* [[Giovanna Ricoveri]]
* Recommended text:
** - [[Commons vs Commodities]]. Paper by Giovanna Ricoveri for the 13th Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of the Commons (IASC), “Sustaining Commons: Sustaining our Future” 
10-14 Jan. 2011, Hyderabad, India.

==Kenya==

* [[Esther Mwangi]]


==Netherlands==

* [[Jaromil]], aka Denis Roio, [[Dyne]].org; researcher with the [[NIMk Artlab]], Netherlands Media Art Institute

Suggested readings:

- extensive interview Armin Medosh has made me http://www.thenextlayer.org/node/421

- on network collectivism, http://jaromil.dyne.org/journal/net_collectivism.html


* [[Wouter Tebbens]], [[Free Technology Academy]]


* [[Robin Temple]], working with knowledge commons curation - using social technologies to create online education about the Commons [http://www.commonspractice.org]


* [[Frank van Laerhoven]], Editor-in-Chief [[International Journal of the Commons]]


* [[Patrice Riemens]], Geographer, cultural and Internet activist, independent researcher and translator, advocate of Free and/or Open Source Software, 'social hacker'. Formerly with the Tactical Technology Collective, now with the Antenna Foundation.
[http://www.antenna.nl], [http://fredericknoronha.wordpress.com/2009/03/28/732/]

==Nicaragua==

* [[Victor Campos]]



==Norway==

* [[Erling Berge]]; founding co-editor-in-chief of the [[International Journal of the Commons]]  [http://www.thecommonsjournal.org/] ; member of the council of the [[International Association for the Study of Commons]] 

==Philippines==

* [[Roberto Verzola]] [http://rverzola.wordpress.com/], author, [[SRI-Pilipinas]] coordinator, and Philippine Greens member

**[[Abundance and the Generative Logic of the Commons]], Keynote speech for Stream III: “The Generative Logic of the Commons” 

** Representative pieces:

**- Towards a Political Economy of Information /(Constantino Foundation, Quezon City: 2004) (http://rverzola.wordpress.com/2008/01/26/towards-a-political-economy-of-information-full-text/)

**- "Toward Global Knowledge Sharing: Examples from the Philippines" (http://www.scu.edu/sts/nexus/summer2005/VerzolaArticle.cfm)

==South Africa==

* [[Gino Cocchiaro]] is a lawyer with a South African based NGO named [[Natural Justice]]. Natural Justice works with communities in Africa, South Asia and Latin America, to facilitate processes that secure the rights of communities to their resources and knowledge.

Recommende Report:

- [[Imagining a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]. A community approach to sharing traditional knowledge for non-commercial research. IDLO, 2009. By Elan Abrell et al. [http://www.idlo.int/publications/TraditionalKnowledge.pdf]

- [[Implementing a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]. Opportunities and Challenges. Developments following the Traditional Knowledge Commons Workshop, December 2009, Cape Town, South Africa. Natural Justice, 2010. [http://www.naturaljustice.org/images/naturaljustice/implementing%20tkc.pdf]

==Spain==

* [[Ana Méndez de Andés]], architect and urban planner, [[Observatorio Metropolitano]] de Madrid


* [[Jordi Claramonte]], La [[Tabacalera]] social center

Some english texts on his works on the [[Aesthetic Commons]]:

#http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/10/aesthetic-commons.html
#http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/04/modal-aesthetics.html

Active in:

#http://lalistadesinde.net/
#http://hacktivistas.net/ 
#http://www.sindominio.net
#http://medialab-prado.es/article/culturas_de_lo_comun
#http://medialab-prado.es/article/ontologia_juridica_libre_-_laboratorio_del_procomun


* [[Mayo Fuster Morell]]. Ph.D on governance of digital commons. Research website: [[http://www.onlinecreation.info/]]

Texts on her research work on digital commons:

# Fuster Morell, M. (Ed.) (2009). [http://openfsm.net/projects/freecultureforum/preparation-discussion-and-working-materials/MayoFusterMorell_PasticipationAsAnEco_Barcelona.pdf Online creation communities for the building of digital commons: Participation as an eco-system?.] In M. Fuster Morell (Ed.) (2009). Organizational principles and political implications of free culture: A reader. International forum on free culture – Barcelona October 30 2009.
# Fuster Morell, M. (2009). [http://intradociep.upmf-grenoble.fr/Spip/spip.php?article308  Governance of online creation communities: Provision of platforms of participation for the building of digital commons, Self-provision model: Social forums case study]. Internet & Politics section, European Council of Political Research General Conference, Potsdam, September 2009.
# Fuster Morell, M. (2010). [http://www.egosnet.org/jart/prj3/egosnet/data/uploads/OS%202010/W-080.pdf Commercial providers of platforms of participation online: Flickr case study]. 5th European Group of Organization Studies (EGOS) summer workshop: “Social Movements, Civil Societies and Corporations”- Organization Studies Journal, Margaux, France, 26 to 28 of May,
 
Active in:

# International forum on access to knowledge and digital rights (Barcelona, October 28 to 31 2010) and Charter for Innovation, Creativity and Access to Knowledge, 2009. http://www.fcforum.net
# Networked Politics Collaborative Research on new forms of political organizing http://www.networked-politics.net
# World Social Forum http://www.forumsocialmundial.org.br/


* [[Beatriz Garcia]], part of the [[Traficantes de Sueños]] project as editor, proofreader and coordinator of Nociones Comunes, a formation and knowledge production space.

==Thailand==

* [[Arthit Suriyawongkul]], [[Thai Netizen Network]]


==UK==


* [[Brian Davey]], [[Feasta]]


* [[Massimo De Angelis]]; Professor of Political Economy at the University of East London; founding editor of the journal The Commoner. His most recent book: The Beginning of History. Value Struggles and Global Capital, Pluto 2007


* [[Glyn Moody]], advocate for openness in the UK and globally [http://opendotdotdot.blogspot.com]; [http://www.slideshare.net/glynmoody/glyn-moody-commons-versus-openness-berlin-commons-conference Slideshare presentation]


* J. [[Martin Pedersen]], Lancaster University, co-founder of [[Knowledge Lab]] [http://knowledgelab.org.uk] (PhD thesis: [[Property, Commoning and the Politics of Free Software]])


* [[George Por]], [[Community Intelligence]]

See also: * [[Earth Commons Rising]], a forum of commons news of global relevance [http://www.worldcitizenpanels.org/forum/topics/earth-commons-rising]


* [[Denis Postle]], advocate of the [[Psychological Commons]], Independent Practitioners Network [IPN]


* [[Hilary Wainwright]], co-editor of Red Pepper [http://www.redpepper.org.uk]

==Uruguay==

* [[María Selva Ortiz]]. REDES-Amigos de la Tierra Uruguay

==U.S.A.==

* [[Alexa Bradley]], Fellow, [[On The Commons]]


* [[Leo Burke]], co-founder of the [[Anthroposphere Institute]] [http://www.a-institute.org], an educational organization that champions the global commons through courses and action-learning initiatives


* [[Neal Gorenflo]]  [http://bit.ly/9gnY4X], [[CommonSource]], a Tides Center project and publisher of [[Shareable]] Magazine.
Suggestion to ICC participants: I invite you to link to each other's web sites in order to bring more attention to the commons.  I also invite participants to link to Shareable.net.  That would help us immensely.  I'm happy to return the favor.  Just send the URL of your site to neal at shareable dot net.  Thank you, Neal 


* [[Thomas Greco]], advocate of the [[Credit Commons]]; author of the book The [[End of Money and the Future of Civilization]], (ChelseaGreen.com)


* [[Wenonah Hauter]], Executive Director of [[Food and Water Watch]]


* [[Wolfgang Hoeschele]], author of the book, The [[Economics of Abundance]], Truman State University - Missouri, USA
** Recommended graphic: [[Choosing the Right Form of Common Property]]



* [[Michael Madison]], professor of law at the School of Law at the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania


* Marc Mascarenhas-Swan, Just Alternative Sustainable Economics ([[JASecon]] [http://www.jasecon.org/]


* [[Ruth Meinzen-Dick]], 1) Senior Research Fellow at the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI); 2) Coordinator of the [[CGIAR System-wide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights]] (CAPRi) ; President of the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]]

Text of keynote lecture: [[Commons as a Transformation Paradigm]]


* [[Kathryn Milun]], creator and director of the [[Solar Commons project]] [http://www.solarcommons.org] 


* [[James Bernard Quilligan]], [[Global Commons Trust]] [http://globalcommonstrust.org/]. 

Presentation: Beyond State Capitalism: The [[Commons Economy in our Lifetimes]] [http://www.onthecommons.org/beyond-state-capitalism]


* [[Julie Ristau]], co-director of [[On The Commons]]


* [[Nancy Roof]], [[Kosmos Journal]] [http://www.kosmosjournal.org]


* [[Trent Schroyer]] ; Emeritus Professor of Sociology-Philosophy from Ramapo College in N.J. ; member of the International Network for Cultural Alternatives to Development; presently living in Greece and working on a book on 'Transformative Learning ' that examines commons models from around  the world.


* [[user:Betsy.taylor|Betsy Taylor]] ; Senior research scholar at Virginia Tech & is a cultural anthropologist, activist and co-author (with Herbert Reid) of Recovering the Commons: Democracy, Place, and Global Justice (University of Illinois Press, 2010).



* [[Lisinka Ulatowska]], Co-Founder of the Commons Action for the United Nations, U.N. NGO Representative [http://www.worldcitizensaction.com/ Association of World Citizens]


* [[Jay Walljasper]] ; [[On The Commmons]]


* [[Burns H Weston]], Director, Climate Legacy Initiative (CLI); The University of Iowa College of Law [http://www.law.uiowa.edu] and Center for Human Rights [http://www.uichr.org]

Recommended works:

- “Climate Change and Intergenerational Justice: Foundational Reflections,” 9 Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 375 (2009)
 
- Co-Director (with David Bollier begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting of the [[Commons Law Project]] (CLP), dedicated to reinventing the law and governance of the ecological commons and thereby operationalize the human right to a clean, healthy, ecologically balanced, and sustainable environment.

=Participating Organizations=



==International==

* [[Association of World Citizens]], [[Lisinka Ulatowska]]

* [[CGIAR Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights]] (CAPRi), [[Ruth Meinzen-Dick]]

* [[Commons Action for the United Nations]], [[Lisinka Ulatowska]]

* [[Community Intelligence]], [[George Por]]

* [[European Business Council for Sustainable Energy]] (e5); [[Sebastian Gallehr]] and [[Julio Lambing]]

* [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]], President: [[Ruth Meinzen-Dick]]

* [[International Food Policy Research Institute]]  [http://www.ifpri.org/], [[Ruth Meinzen-Dick]] [http://www.ifpri.org/staffprofile/ruth-meinzen-dick]

* [[International Journal of the Commons]]; [[Erling Berge]] and [[Frank van Laerhoven]]

* [http://www.transitionnetwork.org International Transition Network]

* [[ Open Source Hardware and Design Aliance]], [[Juergen Neumann]]

* PEER, [[Publishing and the Ecology of European Research]], Dr. [[Christoph Bruch]]

* Charter for Innovation, Creativity and Access to Knowledge: Citizens’ and Artists’ Rights in the Digital Age http://fcforum.net/  & International Forum on Access to Culture and Knowledge in the Digital Era – Organization and Action (FCForum) http://2010.fcforum.net/en  Delegate: [[Mayo Fuster Morell]], among others.

* [http://freeknowledge.eu Free Knowledge Institute] Delegates: [http://freeknowledge.eu/about/people#Wouter_Tebbens Wouter Tebbens] and [http://freeknowledge.eu/about/people#Franco_Iacomella Franco Iacomella]

* [http://ftacademy.org Free Technology Academy] international online study programme about Free Software and Open Standards at master level. Coordinated by the Free Knowledge Institute Delegates: Wouter Tebbens and Franco Iacomella.

==Brazil==

* [[Brazilian Digital Culture Forum]] [http://eco-rama.net/2009/08/03/culturadigitalbr-an-open-way-to-build-public-policy/], [http://startupi.com.br/en/2009/culturadigitalbr-government-launches-social-network-for-public-policy-suggestions/]; [[Jose Murilo]]

* [[UNAMAZ]], The Association of Amazonian Universities; [[Rosa Acevedo]]


==Canada==

* Communautique, [http://www.communautique.qc.ca] is a community organisation that supports civic participation by promoting information literacy, appropriation of information and communications technologies and contribution to their development; [[Simon Emmanuel Roux]], adjunct director; [[Alain Ambrosi]], videographer

==Finland==

[[eCars Now]] [http://www.eCars-Now.org], Jiri Rasanen


==France==

* working group "[[Accès aux Savoirs]]" (Access to Knowledge) in Paris; [[Gaelle Krikorian]]
* Association [[Vecam]] in Paris ; [[Frédéric Sultan]], [[Hervé Le Crosnier]], [[Valerie Peugeot]]
* IRE, Initiative for Rethinking Economy [http://www.i-r-e.org/]; [[Wojtek Kalinowski]] , Co-Director

==Germany==

[[Alanus University]]; [[Silja Graupe]]

[[Coalition for Action "Copyright for Education and Science"]]; Dr. [[Christoph Bruch]] 

German Development Cooperation (GTZ); Dr. [[Stephan Krall]]

[[GLS Treuhand]], [[Antje Toennis]]

[http://www.greenfilm.eu Greenfilm]:  film; TV and Internet communication and Production Company specialized in environment, social issues and sustainability; [[Jörg Grossmann]]

[http://www.green.tv Green.tv]: an Internet TV Channel for sustainability; [[Jörg Grossmann]]

[[IUWIS]], Infrastruktur Urheberrecht für Wissenschaft und Bildung, The purpose of IUWIS is to provide an integrated information and communication platform on copyright issues for the German research community; Dr. [[Christoph Bruch]] 

[[Netzpolitik]]: blog and political platform for freedom and openness in the digital age; [[Andrea Goetzke]]

[http://www.transition-initiativen.de Transition D/A/CH], Gerd Wessling

==India==

[[CACIM]], Jai Sen (director)

[[Foundation for Ecological Security]], [[Jagdeesh V. Puppala]] (chief executive)

[[Vagdevi Educational Trust]], [Narahari Rao]], founder

==Ireland==

* [[Feasta]]

==Philippines==

* SRI-Pilipinas, a network of farmers, academics, government officials and researchers promoting the system of rice intensification [http://ciifad.cornell.edu/sri/countries/philippines/index.html]; [[Roberto Verzola]]

* the Philippine Greens, a loose network of environmental activists in the Philippines ; [[Roberto Verzola]]

==South Africa==

* [[Natural Justice]] works with communities in Africa, South Asia and Latin America, to facilitate processes that secure the rights of communities to their resources and knowledge; [[Gino Cocchiaro]]


==Spain==

* [[Observatorio Metropolitano]] de Madrid; [[Ana Méndez de Andés]]

* [[Traficantes de Sueños]], Spanish publishing collective using open licenses; [[Beatriz Garcia]]

==Thailand==

* [[Thai Netizen Network]], [[Arthit Suriyawongkul]]


==U.S.A==

* [[Anthroposphere Institute]]; [[Carolyn Lee]]

* CommonSource, a Tides Center project and publisher of [[Shareable]] Magazine. Represented by [[Neal Gorenflo]]. Learn more: http://shareable.net.  Suggestion to ICC participants: I invite you to link to each other's web sites in order to bring more attention to the commons. I also invite participants to link to Shareable.net. That would help us immensely. I'm happy to return the favor. Just send the URL of your site to neal at shareable dot net. Thank you, Neal.

* [[Food and Water Watch]], [[Wenonah Hauter]]

* [[Future Link Foundation]], Arizona; President: [[Sten Linnander]]

* [[Global Commons Trust]], represented by [[James Bernard Quilligan]]

* Just Alternative Sustainable Economics ([[JASecon]] [http://www.jasecon.org/]. Represented by Marc Mascarenhas-Swan.

* [[Kosmos Journal]], [[Nancy Roof]]

* [[On The Commons]]; [[Jay Walljasper]]

* [[Socar Commons]], [[Kathryn Milun]]