up to [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Workshops]]


How can the commons paradigm contribute to the transformation of welfare
states?

Initiators: Beatriz Garcia, Brigitte Kratzwald, Hilary Wainworth

Other Participants: Phillippe Aigrain, Michel Bauwens, Brian Davey, Neal
Gorenflo, Friederike Habermann, Elisabeth Voss

'''Reporting: Brigitte Kratzwald'''

------

Input by Brigitte Kratzwald

Shortcomings of the welfare state:

Partriarchal, normativ, experts tell people what they have to do, power
and agency is taken from the people. marketisation and privatisation of
public goods and services, financial cuts due to the crises. As welfare
states are depending on waged labour over the whole lifespan there is a
financial gap due to unempolyment and precarious work, not enough money
comes out of the labourmarket. The welfare state model depends on growth
and thus is not feasible in a growthless economy. Today we face an
increasing social exclusion by long term unemployment, percarity, of
migrants or other social groups, growing inequality.

Benefits of the welfare state

But at the same time we should not forget that the welfare state brought
huge improvements for many people and – at least in many countries – still
does. I do not share the opinion of James Quilligan that there are no
welfare states anymore. For example in Austria we still have a very good
healthcare system and even though there is much to be critizised, I'm not
willing to abandon it unless we have something better to take its place.
Or, rather, I would suggest to find a way to transform it into a more
democratic and holistic institution where, for example, patients are seen
es subjects that have knowledge of their body and their living conditions
and patients as well as employees have the possibility to participate in
decision making and are not only objects of some technical processes.

Two main concerns about applying the commons approach to public services:

We must not abandon the redestribution issue because without resources
commoning is not possible and, because we have to deal with the most
vulnerable groups of society, resources must be provided by the state, by
administration, by society, by the public – how ever we want to call it –
without any preconditions. So the accountability of the state is not to be
abandoned but its role has to be redefined.

Commons are a concept from feudal times. civil right brought equality
before the law, non-discrimantion, etc. How can we provide these goods and
services as commons without loosing the achievements of civil law, without
giving care work back to the private realm of the family and thus to the
women? How can we strongly and emanzipatory define the realms of public –
common – private?

Discussion

Strong claim

We still should claim redistribution and adequate administration of public
resources because city governments currently tend to get rid of their
acountability by the catch word of „big society“, which actually is about
handing responsibility over to the citizens without adequate resources,
leaving them more vulnerable than before.

Core questions:

Is it about the change of relations within existing structures within the
state system or about total autonomy and for which fields we should turn
to which models? <br>
Are commons an „additional“ project to strengthen the welfare state or
should they replace it?  <br>
Can the commons be embedded in social services? <br>

Answers:

We have to discuss and define the concept of „public goods“ and „global
public goods“. <br>
We have to implement new structures of governance. <br>
It should stay the responsibility of the state to provide e.g. healthcare
systems, but people have to get the knowledge to participate in decision
making. <br>
The commons can be an opportunity to bring the public back to the people,
not only as citizens with rights, but as an active community. <br>

Example old age pensions: <br>
We should claim pensions back from the pension funds! <br>

One possibility already practised in telephone or energy provision: The
government provides technical assistance and financial resources, local
cooperatives run the services. Assemblies decide about the
principles of production and distribrution. <br>

There was one interesting intervention by Phillippe Aigrain: <br>
The digital commons are highly indebted to the welfare state, because it
was the precondition for their rise. Actually this is also true for all
self-managed intiatives and movements for selfdetermination. The welfare
state created the conditions for autonomy. <br>
How to deal with this contradicting arguments: welfare state enables
people and at the same time creates the conditions for autonomy?

Role of money

A sustainalbe economic system can only work if the state provides money
for commons. <br>

James Quilligan: one possibility for finacing commons is a tax on land
rents. Taxes on labour income are not useful as currently there comes more
profit from credits than from waged labour. <br>
Answer: Are we looking for solutions for today or for the long run? In the
long run all land should be common – no more rents – no more tax-income! <br>

The most important conclusions in my opinion: <br>
We should defend the essence of the welfare state but not the form. The
commons idea is not only relevant and applicable for autonomous entities
but it is also to be displayed within public institutions – which means a
strong plead for a „partner state“