

The article that started the debate:

'''* Article: From the Communism of Capital to Capital for the Commons: Towards an Open Co-operativism. By Michel Bauwens, Vasilis Kostakis. Triple C, Vol 12, No 1 (2014)''' 

URL = http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/561

"Abstract

Two prominent social progressive movements are faced with a few contradictions and a paradox. On the one side, we have a re-emergence of the co-operative movement and worker-owned enterprises which suffer from certain structural weaknesses. On the other, we have an emergent field of open and Commons-oriented peer production initiatives which create common pools of knowledge for the whole of humanity, but are dominated by start-ups and large multinational enterprises using the same Commons. Thus we have a paradox: the more communist the sharing license used in the peer production of free software or open hardware, the more capitalist the practice. To tackle this paradox and the aforementioned contradictions, we tentatively suggest a new convergence that would combine both Commons-oriented open peer production models with common ownership and governance models, such as those of the co-operatives and the solidarity economic models."

===The critics===

* Meretz, S. 2014. Socialist licenses? A rejoinder to Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Kostakis.
TripleC 12 (1): 362–65. URL= https://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/564

* Rigi, J. 2014. The coming revolution of peer production and revolutionary cooperatives. A response to Michel Bauwens, Vasilis Kostakis and Stefan Meretz. TripleC 12 (1): 390–404. URL= https://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/486

=A summary of the debate=

Vangelis Papadimitropoulos provides a good and fair summary of the debate at:

'''* Article: [[Reflections on the Contradictions of the Commons]]. By Vangelis Papadimitropoulos. Review of Radical Political Economics, 2018, Vol. 50(2) 317–331'''

URL = https://doi.org/10.1177/0486613417735660

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]