

=Source=

This is based on a re-ordering and reworking of Adam Arvidsson's bibliography in the essay, [[Capitalism and the Commons]]


=Bibliography=

==Antiquity to Feudalism==

* Anderson, Perry (1975) Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism, London, Verso

* Moore, Robert (2000) The First European Revolution, c. 970-1215 , Oxford; OxfordUniversity Press.

==Feudalism==

* Abu-Lughod, Janet (1989). Before European Hegemony. The World System AD 1250-1350. Oxford: Oxford Univeristy Press.

* Birrell, Jean (1987) ‘Common rights in the medieval forest: Disputes and conflicts in the thirteenth century.’ Past & Present , (117): 22-49

* Bloch, March (1961) Feudal Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

* Bravo, Giangiacomo & Tine de Moor (2008) ‘The Commons in Europe: From Past to Future.’  International Journal of the Commons 2 (2): 155-61.

* de Munck, Bert (2011), ‘Guilds, Product Quality and Intrinsic Value. Towards a History of Conventions?’  Historical Social Research 36 (4): 103–24.

* de Moor, Tine (2008) ‘The silent revolution: A new perspective on the emergence ofcommons, guilds and other forms of corporate collective action in Western Europe.’ Supplement. Internationaal Instituut Voor Sociale Geschiedenis, 53, 2008 pp. 179–212

* Gustafsson. Bo (1987) ‘The rise and economic behaviour of medieval craft guilds. An economic theoretical interpretation.” Scandinavian Economic History Review  35 (1): 1–40.

* Lucassen, Jan, Tine de Moor & Jan Luiten van Zanden, (2008), ‘The return of the guilds: Towards a global history of the guilds in pre-industrial times’  International Review of Social History  53: 5–18.

* Pirenne, Henri. Economic and social history of medieval Europe. Routledge, 2015.

* Pirenne, Henri. Medieval Cities: Their Origins and the Revival of Trade-Updated Edition. Princeton University Press, 2014.

==Feudalism to Capitalism==

* Black, Antony (1984) Guilds and Civil Society in European Political Thought from the Twelfth Century to the Present 
. London; Routledge.

* Bois, Guy (1976). Crise du féodalisme

* Braudel, Fernand (1984) Civilization and Capitalism. 15th - 18th. Century. Vol III. The Perspective of the World , New York; Harper & Row.

* Epstein, S.R. (1998). ‘Craft guilds, apprenticeship, and technological change in preindustrial Europe.’ The Journal of Economic History, 58 (3): 684-713

* Grief, Avner (2006)  Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade.  Cambridge; Cambridge University Press.

* Heller, H. (2011). The Birth of Capitalism: A Twenty-first-Century Perspective . London:Pluto Press.

* Hill, Christopher (1972) The World Turned Upside Down. Radical Ideas during the English Revolution.  London: Temple Smith.

* Hong, Ho-fung (2001) ‘Imperial China and capitalist Europe in the 18th century global economy.’  Review: Fernand Braudel Center   24, (4): 473–513.

* Linebaugh, Peter (2008) The Magna Carta Manifesto.  Berkeley: University of California Press.

* Lopez, Roberto (1976). The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950-1350 . Cambridge; Cambridge University Press.

* Macpherson, Crawford (1973) The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. From Hobbes to Locke,  Oxford; Oxford University Press.

* Mokyr, Joel, (2010) ‘Entrepreneurship and the Industrial Revolution in Britain.’ Eds. Landes,David, Mokyr, Joel & William Baumol,
The Invention of Enterprise. Entrepreneurship from Ancient Mesopotamia to Modern Times , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 183-210.

* Moore, Jason (2002). ‘The crisis of feudalism: An environmental history.’ Organization & Environment , 15 (3), 301-322.

* Nuccio, Oscar (1983) ‘Medieval and Italian Sources of Economic Rationalism." Rivista di Politica Economica: Selected Papers  (17): 69-131

* Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origin of our Time, Boston; Beacon Press.

* Pomeranz, Kenneth (2009). The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy . Princeton; Princeton University Press.

* Rees, John (2017) The Leveller Revolution. Political Organization in England, 1640-1650, London.

* Sabel, Charles & Jonathan Zetlin (1985) ‘Historical alternatives to mass production. Politics, markets and technology in nineteenth-century industrialization.”  Past & Present   108: 133-76.

* Sweezy, P. M., Dobb, M., Takahashi, K., Hilton, R., Hill, C., Lefebvre, G., & Procassi, G.(1976). The transition from feudalism to capitalism  (p. 22). London: NLB.

* Thompson, Edward P. (1971), ‘The moral economy of the English crowd in the eighteenth century.” Past & Present 50: 76–136.

* Wallerstein. Immanuel (1992) ‘The West, capitalism, and the modern world-system.’  Review :Fernand Braudel Center,
15 (4), pp.

==Capitalism==

* Arrighi, Giovanni (1994). The Long Twentieth Century, London; Verso.

* Baran, Paul & Paul Sweezy (1966), Monopoly Capital . New York; Monthly Review Press.

* Chandler, Alfred. (1977), The Visible Hand. The Managerial Revolution in American Business.
Cambridge (MA); Harvard University Press.

* Foster, John Bellamy (2011) ‘Monopoly and Competition in Twenty-First Century Captialism.’  Monthly Review  62 (11): 1–43.

* Hardt, Michael & Antonio Negri (2000), Empire, Cambridge (Mass): Harvard University Press.

* Moore, Jason (2015) Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital . London: Verso

* Rosa, Hartmunt (2013) Social Acceleration. A New Theory of Modernity. New York: Columbia University Press.



===Cognitive / Collaborative / Digital Capitalism===

* Adler, Paul & Charles Heckscher (2006) ‘Towards collaborative community’ eds. Heckscher,Charles & Paul Adler,
The [[Firm as Collaborative Community]], Oxford; Oxford University Press, pp. 11-105.

* Deka, Maitrayee (2018). ‘Embodied commons: Knowledge and sharing in Delhi’s electronic bazaars.’
The Sociological Review , 66  (2): 365-380.

* Dyer-Witheford, N. (1999) Cyber-Marx: Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in High-Technology Capitalism. Urbana; University of Illinois Press.

* Fernandez, Valérie , Puel, Gilles and Clément Renaud (2016) ‘The Open Innovation Paradigm: From Outsourcing to Open-Sourcing in Shenzhen, China.’  International Review for Spatial Planning and Sustainable Development 40 (4): 27–41.

* Gao, Bao. (2011), ‘The informal economy in the era of information revolution and globalization: The Shanzhai Cell-phone industry in China. Chinese Journal of Sociology , 2(31):1-41.

* Lee, Joonkoo , Kim, Jong-Cheol & Jinho Lim (2016) ‘Globalization and Divergent Paths of Industrial Development: Mobile Phone Manufacturing in China, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan,’  Journal of Contemporary Asia  46( 2): 222–46

* Li, Anthony (2017)’ Ecommerce and TaoBao villages.” Current Affairs: China Perspectives  3: 57–62.

* Machlup, Fritz (1973) The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States , Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1973

* Mathews, Gordon, Gustavo Ribeiro, and Carlos A. Vega (2012), Globalization from Below: The World’s Other Economy . London; Routledge, 2012.

* Mattelart, Armand (2000)  Networking the world, 1794-2000. Minneapolis; University of Minnesota Press.

* Morris-Suzuki, Theresa (1986).’ Capitalism in the computer age.’ New Left Review , (160),81. 

* Qui, Jack, (2016) Goodbye iSlave , Chicago; University of Illinois Press.

* Scholz, Trebor (2016) Platform Cooperativism. Challenging the Corporate Sharing Economy. New York: Rosa Luxemburg Stiftung.

* Srnicek, Nick (2017) Platform Capitalism, Cambridge: Polity Press.

* Tarrius. Alain (2015) Etrangers de Passage. Poor to Poor, Peer to Peer.  La Tour d’Aigues:Editions de l’Aube.

* Terranova, T. (2000). ‘Free labor: Producing culture for the digital economy.’ Social text , 18 (2), 33-58.

* Turner, Fred (2010) From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism . Chicago; University Of Chicago Press.

* Zhu, Sheng and Yongjuang Shi. (2010) ‘Shanzhai Manufacturing - an Alternative Innovation Phenomenon in China.’ Journal of Science and Technology Policy in China 1 (1): 29–49.


==Capitalism to X==

* Arvidsson, Adam (2019). Changemakers. On the Industrious Future of the Digital Economy. Cambridge; Polity.

* Arvidsson, Adam, Alessandro, Caliandro, Alberto Cossu, Maitrayee Deka, Alessandro Gandini, Vincenzo Luise, Brigida Orria and Guido Anselmi (2016). ‘Commons based peer production in the information economy’, Research Report, [[P2P Value]],  Bruxelles, European Commission, 
[https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alessandro_Caliandro/publication/310624903_Commons_Based_Peer_Production_in_the_Information_Economy/links/5834403108ae004f74c85030.pdf]  (accessed 11 May 2018).

* Arvidsson, Adam and Nicolai Peitersen (2013). The Ethical Economy. Rebuilding Value afterthe Crisis.  New York; Columbia University Press.

* Bauwens, Michel (2005) ‘The political economy of peer production’ Ctheory , Jan 12, 2005, [http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499] (accessed, Feb 1, 2018).

* Benkler, Yochlai. (2006) The Wealth of Networks,  New Haven; Yale University Press.

* Beverungen, Armin, Anna-Maria Murtola. & Gregory Schwartz, (2013) ‘The Communism of Capital.’ Ephemera 13 (3): 483-95.

* Caffentzis, George and Silvia Federici (2013) ‘Commons Against and Beyond Capitalism.’ Upping the Anti 15: 83–91.

* Hardt Michael. & Antonio Negri (2004) Multitude. London; Penguon Press.

* Hardt, Michael & Antonio Negri (2009) Commonwealth , Cambridge; Harvard University Press.

* Moore, Jason (2011). ‘Transcending the metabolic rift: a theory of crises in the capitalist world-ecology.’ The Journal of Peasant Studies , 38 (1), 1-46.

* Ocejo, Richard (2017) Masters of Craft: Old Jobs in the New Urban Economy. Princeton; Princeton University Press.

* Rifkin, Jeremy (2015) The Zero Marginal Cost Society, New York, Palgrave.

* Streeck, Wolfgang. (2014). How will capitalism end?. New Left Review , (87), 35-64.



==After Capitalism==

* Mason, Paul (2015)  Post-Capitalism , London; Penguin.

* De Angelis, Massimo (2017) Omnia Sunt Communia. On the Commons and the Transformation to Postcapitalism. London; Verso, 2017

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P History]]