

=Bibliography=

Anderson, Chris. Makers, the New Industrial Revolution. New York: Random House
Business Books, 2012.

Ashbee, Charles Robert. A Few Chapters in Workshop Re-Construction and Citizenship.
London: The Guild and School of Handicraft, 1894. Internet Archive. Available at
https://archive.org/details/fewchaptersinwor00ashbrich [Accessed 9 April 2014]

Atkinson, Paul. “Orchestral Manoeuvres in Design.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van Abel,
et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/orchestral-manoeuvres-in-design-paul-atkinson/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Atkinson, Paul. “Do it Yourself: Democracy and Design.”

Benkler, Yochai, and Helen Nissenbaum. “Commons–based Peer Production and Virtue.”
Journal of Political Philosophy 14.4 (2006): 394–419.

Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks. How Social Production Transforms Markets and
Freedom. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2006.

Ceraso, Antonio, and Jeff Pruchnic. “Introduction: Open Source Culture and Aesthetics.”
Criticism 53.3 (2011): 337–75.

de Bruijn, Erik. “On the Viability of the Open Source Development Model for the Design of
Physical Objects: Lessons Learned from the RepRap Project.” MSc Thesis. University of
Tilburg, 2010. The Netherlands.

“Home Factory: 3D Printing to Change our Shopping Habit.” Voice of Russia. 9 Jan 2014.
Available at http://voiceofrussia.com/news/2014_01_09/Home-factory-3D-printing-tochange-our-shopping-habit-0826/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]78

Huang, Samuel, et al. “Additive Manufacturing and its Societal Impact: A Literature
Review.” International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 67.5-8 (2013):
1191–203.

Kaur, Satwant. “How is “Internet of the 3D Printed Products” Going to Affect our Lives?”
IETE Technical Review 29.5 (2012): 360–4.

Kennedy, Gabrielle. “Joris Laarman’s Experiments with Open Design.” Open Design Now.
Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/joris-laarmans-experiments-with-open-sourcedesign-gabrielle-kennedy/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Klaassen, Roel, and Peter Troxler. “Do it with Droog.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van
Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/do-it-with-droog-roel-klaassen-peter-troxler/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Kurman, Melba. Skype Interview conducted by Lassi Patokorpi. 21 Oct 2013.

Lipson, Hod, and Melba Kurman. Fabricated: The New World of 3D Printing. Somerset, NJ,
USA: Wiley, 2013.

Moilanen, Jarkko, and Tere Vadén. “3D Printing Community and Emerging Practices of Peer
Production.” First Monday (2013): Oct 29 2013.

Parvin, Alastair. Architecture for the people by the people. Technology, Entertainment,
Design (TED), 2013. Online video clip. Available at
http://www.ted.com/talks/alastair_parvin_architecture_for_the_people_by_the_people
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Patokorpi, Erkki. “Role of Abductive Reasoning in Digital Interaction.” Åbo Akademi, 2006:
Åbo. Ph.D. Thesis. Available at
http://www.cspeirce.com/menu/library/aboutcsp/patokorpi/abduction.pdf [Accessed 9 April
2014]81

Thackara, John. “Into the Open.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam:
Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/into-the-openjohn-thackara/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Troxler, Peter. “The Beginning of a Beginning of the Beginning of a Trend.” Open Design
Now. Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/the-beginning-of-a-beginning-of-the-beginningof-a-trend-peter-troxler/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Vance, Ashlee. “3-D Printing Spurs a Manufacturing Revolution.” New York Times. 13 Sep
2010. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/14/technology/14print.html [Accessed 9
April 2014]


=Source=

* see: [[3D Printing, the Arts and Crafts Movement and the Democratization of Art]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Articles]]