
=The Economics of the Social Knowledge Economy=

==General==

Anderson, Chris (2009). Free: The Future of a Radical Price

Botsman, Rachel and Rogers, Roo (2010). What's Mine is Yours: The Rise of Collaborative Consumption. HarperCollins 

Brown, Marvin T. (2010). Civilizing the Economy. A new economics of provision. Marvin T. Brown. Cambridge University Press

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Saunders, Adam (2009). Wired for Innovation: How Information Technology is Reshaping the Economy. MIT Press

Chesbrough, Henry (2003). Open Innovation — The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology, Harvard Business School Press

De Angelis, Massimo (2007). The Beginning of History. Value Struggles and Global Capital. Pluto

Eistenstein, Charles (2011). Sacred Economics: Money, Gift, and Society in the Age of Transition. EVOLVER EDITIONS/North Atlantic Books

Gansky, Lisa (2010). The Mesh: Why the Future of Business is Sharing. Portfolio / Penguin Group

Graeber, David (2011). Debt: The First 5,000 Years. Melville House Publishing

Haque, Umair (2011). New Capitalist Manifesto. Building a Disruptively Better Business. Harvard Business Press

Hayes, Tom (2008). Jump Point: How Network Culture is Revolutionizing Business, McGraw-Hill
  
Hoeschele, Wolfgang (2010). The Economics of Abundance: A Political Economy of Freedom, Equity, and Sustainability. Gower Publishing

Howe, Jeff (2008). Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business, Crown Business

Kelly, Kevin (1999). New Rules for the New Economy, Penguin

Li, Charlene and Bernoff, Josh (2008). Groundswell: Winning in a World Transformed by Social Technologies, Harvard Business School Press

Liebowitz, Stan (2002). Re-Thinking the Network Economy: The True Forces that Drive the Digital Marketplace. AMACOM

Patel, Raj (2010). The Value of Nothing. Portobello Books

Schor, Juliet B. (2010). The New Economics of True Wealth. Penguin

Siefkes, Christian (2007). From Exchange to Contributions: alternative proposal for an effort-sharing/task-auctioning based system of organizing the economy. Siefkes-Verlag

Tapscott, Don & D. Williams, Anthony (2010). Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything. Portfolio Trade; Expanded edition

==Ecological Economics==

Brown, Peter (2007). The Commonwealth of Life. Black Rose Books

Daly, Herman (1991). Steady-State Economics. Island Press

Douthwaite, Roger (1996). Short Circuit: Strengthening Local Economies for Security in an Uncertain World. Lilliput Press

Princen, Thomas (2005). The Logic of Sufficiency. MIT Press

==IP==

Bessen, James  and Meurer, Michael J. (2009). Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators at Risk. Princeton University Press

Boldrin, Michele and Levine, David K. (2010). Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge University Press

Boyle, James (2008). The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind. Yale University Press

Fisher, William W. (2007). Promises to Keep: Technology, Law, and the Future of Entertainment, Stanford Law and Politics

Gillespie, Tarleton (2009). Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture. The MIT Press

Hyde, Lewis (2011). Common as Air. Revolution, Art, and Ownership. Farrar, Straus and Giroux

Krikorian, Gaelle  and Kapczynski, Amy (eds.) (2010). Access to Knowledge in the Age of Intellectual Property. . Zone Books

Lessig, Lawrence (2002). The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. Vintage

Lessig, Lawrence (2009). Code 2.0. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform

Vaidhyanathan, Siva (2003). Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How it Threatens Creativity. NYU Press

Landes, William  and Posner, Richard (2003). The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law.  Belknap Press

Vaidhyanathan, Siva (2005). The Anarchist in the Library: How the Clash between Freedom and Control is Hacking the Real World and Crashing the System. Basic Books

=Peer Production, Peer Governance, Peer Property=


==Peer Production==

Anderson, Chris (2008). The Long Tail. Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More. Hyperion

Barnes, Peter (2006). Capitalism 3.0. Berrett-Koehler Publishers

Benkler, Yochai. (2007) The Wealth of Networks. How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale University Press

Bruns, Axel (2008). From Production to Produsage. Peter Lang International Academic Publishers

Carson, Kevin (2010). The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low-Overhead Manifesto. BookSurge Publishing

Carlsson, Chris (2008). Nowtopia: How Pirate Programmers, Outlaw Bicyclists, and Vacant-lot Gardeners are Inventing the Future Today. AK Press

Chopra,  Samir , Dexter,  Scott D. (2007), Decoding Liberation: The Promise of Free and Open Source Software. Routledge

von Hippel, Erik (2006). Democratizing Innovation. The MIT Press

Mason, Matt (2009). The Pirate's Dilemma. Free Press

Raymond, Eric (1999). The Cathedral and the Bazaar. O'Reilly

Shirky, Clay (2008). Here Comes Everybody. Allen Lane

Soderbergh, Johan (2012). Hacking Capitalism. Routledge

Surowiecki, James (2005). The Wisdom of Crowds. Anchor

de Ugarte, David (n.d.). Phyles: Economic Democracy in the Network Century. Las Indias (self-published)

Van Abel, Bas  et al. (2011). Open Design Now: Why Design Cannot Remain Exclusive.  BIS Publishers

Walljasper, Jay (2010). All That We Share: A Field Guide to the Commons. New Press

Weber, Steve (2005). The Success of Open Source. Harvard University Press

==Peer Property and the Commons==

Coulter, Karen (2007). The Rule of Property. The Apex Press 

Ghosh, Rishab A. (2006) CODE: Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Economy. The MIT Press

Hyde, Lewis (2010). Common as Air: Revolution, Art, and Ownership. Farrar, Straus and Giroux

===History of the Commons===

Federici, Silvia (2004). Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation. Brooklyn: Autonomedia

Hill, Christopher (2006). Winstanley ‘The Law of Freedom’ and other Writings. Cambridge University Press

Hill, Christopher (1984). The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English Revolution. Penguin

Kennedy, Geoff (2008). Diggers, Levellers, and Agrarian Capitalism: Radical Political Thought in 17th Century England. Lexington Books

Leaming, Hugo P. (1995). Hidden Americans: Maroons of Virginia and the Carolinas. Routledge

Linebaugh, Peter (2008). The Magna Carta Manifesto: Liberties and Commons for All. University of California Press

Linebaugh, Peter and Rediker, Marcus  (2000). The Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic. Boston: Beacon Press

Mitchel, John H. (1998). Trespassing: An Inquiry into the Private Ownership of Land. Perseus Books

Neeson, J.M. (1996). Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in England, 1700—1820. Cambridge University Press

Price, Richard (1979), editor. Maroon Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas. The Johns Hopkins University Press

Rexroth, Kenneth (1974). Communalism: From Its Origins to the Twentieth Century. Seabury Press

=The Governance of Social Knowledge Economy Organizations=

Bonnici, Jeanne P. (2008). Self-Regulation in Cyberspace.  T.M.C. Asser Press

Brafman, Ori and Beckstrom, Rod A. (2006). The Starfish And the Spider: The Unstoppable Power of Leaderless Organizations. Portfolio Trade

Bygrave, Lee A. and Bing, Jon (eds) (2009). Internet Governance: Infrastructure and Institutions. Oxford University Press

Goldsmith, Jack and Wu, Tim Wu. Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World. Oxford University Press

Himanen, Pekka (2002). The Hacker Ethic. Random House Trade Paperbacks

Kalathil, Shanthi & Boas (2002), Taylor C. Open Networks, Closed regimes: The Impact of the Internet on Authoritarian Rule. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace

Kane, Pat (2005). The Play Ethic. Macmillan UK 

Malone, Thomas W. et al. (2003). Inventing the Organizations of the 21st Century, MIT Press

Mueller, Milton L (2004). Ruling the Root: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace. The MIT Press

Mulholland, Andy et al. (2008). Mashup Corporations: The End of Business as Usual. Evolved Technologist Press

Nielsen, Jeffrey (2011). The Myth of Leadership. Nicholas Brealey America

O'Neill, Mathew (2009). Cyberchiefs. Pluto Press 

Spinello, Richard A (2002). Regulating Cyberspace: The Policies and Technologies of Control. Praeger 

Thierer, Adam D. & Crews, Clyde W. (eds.)(2003). Who Rules the Net?: Internet Governance and Jurisdiction. Cato Institute

Thompson, Ken (2008). Bioteams: on Bioteaming. Meghan Kiffer Pr

=Politics in and for the Social Knowledge Economy=

Bollier, David (2009). Viral Spiral. How the Commoners Built a Digital Republic of Their Own.New Press

Borsook, Paulina (2001). Cyberselfish: A Critical Romp Through the Terribly Libertarian Culture of High Tech. PublicAffairs

Castells, Manuel. (2003) The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society. Oxford University Press

Chester, Jeff (2007). Digital Destiny: New Media and the Future of Democracy. New Press

Day, Richard (2005). Gramsci is Dead. Pluto Press

Dyer-Whiteford (1999), Nick. Cyber Marx. University of Illinois Press

Feld, Lowell and Wilcox, Nate (2008). Netroots Rising. How a citizen army of bloggers and online activists is changing American politics.  Praeger

Hands, Joss (2010). @ Is For Activism. Pluto Press

Hindman, Matthew S. (2008). The Myth of Digital Democracy. Princeton University Press

Joyce, Mary (ed.) (2010). Digital Activism Decoded. Idebate Press

Juris, Jeffrey (2008). Networking Futures. Duke University Press Books

Kelly, Christopher (2008). Two Bits, on the strategy of Recursive Publics. Duke University Press Books

Kleiner, Dmytri (2010). The Telekommunist Manifesto. Dmytri Kleiner. Institute for Network Cultures

Nunziato, Dawn C. (2009). Virtual Freedom: Net Neutrality and Free Speech in the Internet Age. Stanford Law Books

Trippi, Joe (2008). The Revolution Will Not Be Televised: Democracy, The Internet, and the Overthrow of Everything. Harper Paperbacks

Wark, McKenzie (2004). The Hacker Manifesto. Harvard University Press

=Power in the Social Knowledge Economy=

Castells, Manuel (2010). Communication Power. Oxford University Press

Galloway, Alexander (2007). The Exploit: A Theory of Networks. Univ Of Minnesota Press 

Galloway, Alexander (2006). Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization. The MIT Press

Grewal, David (2009). Network Power. Yale University Press

Noveck, Beth (2009). Wiki Government. How Technology Can Make Government Better, Democracy Stronger, and Citizens More Powerful. Brookings Institution Press

Shirky, Clay (2009). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing without Organizations. Penguin Books

Vail, Jack (2004). Theory of Power. iUniverse, Inc.

=Technology and Media in the Era of the Social Knowledge Economy=

Carr, Nick (2009). The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google. W. W. Norton & Company

Fingar, Peter, and Aronica, Ronald (2009). Dot Cloud. Meghan-Kiffer Press

Jarvis, Jeff (2009). What Would Google Do?. HarperBusiness

Malone, Thomas W. et al (2012) Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology. Psychology Press

Mulholland, Andy et al. (2008). Mesh Collaboration. Evolved Technologist

Nold, Christian and van Kranenburg, Rob (2011). The Internet of People for a Post-Oil World. Situated Technologies Pamphlets 8. Architectural League of New York

Pearce, Joshua (2011). Open-Source Lab: How to Build Your Own Hardware and Reduce Research Costs. Elsevier 

Rushkoff, Douglas (2010). Program or Be Programmed: Ten Commands for the Digital Age. Soft Skull Press

Ryan, Johnny (2010). A History of the Internet and the Digital Future. Reaktion Press

van Schewick, Barbara (2010). Internet Architecture and Innovation. MIT Press

Siegel, Lee (2008). Against the Machine: Being Human in the Age of the Electronic Mob. Spiegel & Grau

Zittrain, Jonathan (2009). The Future of the Internet - and how to stop it. Yale University Press

=Human Relations and Community in the Era of the Social Knowledge Economy=


Chayko, M. (2002). How We Form Social Bonds and Communities in the Internet Age. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.

de Waal, F. (2009). The Age of Empathy: Nature's Lessons for a Kinder Society. Harmony Books.

Fiske, Alan P. (1991a). Structures of Social Life: The Four Elementary Forms of Human Relations. New York: Free Press.

Henrich, Natalie and Joseph. (2007). Why Humans Cooperate: A Cultural and Evolutionary Explanation. Oxford University Press.

Lo, A. (2008). Open collaboration. Lulu. URL = http://www.lulu.com/content/3664657 . Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Keltner, D., Marsh J. et al. (2009). The Compassionate Instinct: The Science of Human Goodness, WW Norton.

Kumar, S. (2002). You are Therefore I am: A Declaration of Dependence. Green Books

Rheingold, Howard (2003). Smart Mobs.  Basic Books

Rifkin, J. (2009). The Empathic Civilization: The Race to Global Consciousness. In A World In Crisis. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin.

Tomasello, M. (2009). Why We Cooperate. Boston Review Books.

Turow, J. and Tsui, L. Eds. (2008). The Hyperlinked Society: Questioning Connections in the Digital Age. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Watts, D. (2003). Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. Watts, Duncan. Norton Press.

Wilkinson, P. and Pickett, K. (2009). The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger. Bloomsbury Publishing

Willson, M. (2006). Technically Together: Rethinking Community within Techno-Society. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.

=Subjectivity and Spirituality in the Era of the Social Knowledge Economy=

Eisenstein, Charles (2013). The Ascent of Humanity. EVOLVER EDITIONS

Fox, j. (2007). Digital Virtues, Lulu.com, ID:1021109

Gibson, James W (2010). A Reenchanted World: The Quest For A New Kinship With Nature. Picador

Heron, John (2010). Participatory Spirituality - A Farewell to Authoritarian Religion. Lulu

Himanen, P. (2002). The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age. Random House.

Hjalmarson, J. and La Grou, J. (2008). Voices of the Virtual World: Participative Technology and the Ecclesial Revolution. Wikkiklesia Press.

Kane, P. (2004). The Play Ethic. A Manifesto for a different way of living. Macmillan.

Siegel, Lee (2008). Against the Machine: Being Human in the Age of the Electronic Mob. Spiegel & Grau

Solove, Daniel (2008). The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy on the Internet. Yale University Press 

Talbott, Steve (2007). Devices of the Soul: Battling for Our Selves in an Age of Machines.  O'Reilly Media

Turke, Sherry. (2010). Alone Together: Why We Expect More From Computers and Less From Each Other. Basic Books.

Vedro, S. (2007). Digital Dharma. A User’s Guide to Expanding Consciousness in the Infosphere. Steven R. Vedro. Quest Books.

=Education and Epistemology in the Age of the Social Knowledge Economy=

Araya, Daniel and Peters, Michael A., Eds. (2010). Education in the Creative Economy: Knowledge and Learning in the Age of Innovation. Peter Lang International Academic Publishers

Boyle, James (2008). The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind. Yale University Press

Edu-factory Collective (eds) (2009). Toward a Global Autonomous University. Cognitive Labor, The Production of Knowledge, and Exodus from the Education Factory. New York: Autonomedia 

Ostrom, Elinor et al (2006). Understanding Knowledge as Commons. MIT Press 

Siemens, George (2006). Knowing Knowledge. Lulu

Sunstein, Cass (2008). Infotopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge. Oxford University Press

Suoranta, Juha and Vaden, Tere (2010). Wikiworld: Political Economy of Digital Literacy, and the Road from Social to Socialist Media. Pluto Press 

Weinberger, David (2008). Everything is Miscellaneous. The Power of the New Digital Disorder. Holt Paperbacks

=Culture in the Age of the Social Knowledge Economy=

Aigrain, Philippe (2012). Sharing and the Creative Economy: Culture in the Internet Age. Amsterdam University Press

Battelle, John (2006). The Search: How Google and its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our Culture.  Portfolio Trade

Castronova, Edward (2005). Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture of Online Games. University Of Chicago Press

Gillmor, Dan (2006). We the Media: Grassroots Journalism By the People, For the People. O'Reilly Media

Jenkins, Henry (2008). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. NYU Press

Lessig, Lawrence (2005). Free Culture: The Nature and Future of Creativity. Penguin Books

Lessig, Lawrence (2009). Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. Penguin Books

Mason, Matt (2009). The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism. Free Press

Palfrey, John and Gasser, Urs (2010). Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives. Basic Books

Stalder, Felix, Ed (2006). Open Culture and the Nature of Networks. Futura publikacije Novi Sad http://kuda.org/en/open-culture-and-nature-networks-felix-stalder

Tapscott, Don (2008). Grown Up Digital: How the Net Generation is Changing Your World. McGraw-Hill

Weinberger, David (2003). Small Pieces Loosely Joined: A Unified Theory of the Web. Basic Books

[[Category:Commons Transition]]