
=Source=

* Bibliography:  The food commons in Europe. Compiled by Jose Luis Vivero Pol et al.

URL = https://docs.google.com/document/d/134TDYkjUQgoGzfCB55Ao9doMtmt1DqMSXcteAb060fA/edit

Still being updated via that source.


=Bibliography=

* Bravo, G., & De Moor, T. (2008). The commons in Europe: from past to future. International Journal of the Commons, 2(2), 155–161. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.98

* M De Moor, P Warde, L Shaw-Taylor, The management of common land in north west Europe, c. 1500-1850 - 2002 https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0d58/c783c92aba95368ed68695a78d1878817708.pdf 

* Felix Creutzig. Govern land as a global commons https://www.nature.com/news/govern-land-as-a-global-commons-1.22065 


==Austria==

* Elisabeth Johann. (2013) “The History of Utilization and Management of Commons and Consequences of Current Social Change in the Alpine Region of Austria” https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-007-6159-9_9 

* Peter Herbst. (2004) “Rural common property in Austria”. Conference paper, available at http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/1990. 

* Hein van Gils, Gerhard Siegl, Rohan Mark Bennet. “The living commons of West Tyrol, Austria: Lessons for land policy and land administration.” Land Use Policy, Volume 38, May 2014, Pages 16-25 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264837713002068.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Belgium==

* Dirk Holemans, Stijn Oosterlynck and Tine De Moor. “Appraisal of the new wave of commons in the light of Polanyi’s double movement: a case study of newly established commons in Belgium”. http://www.dirkholemans.be/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/NOT180531-Paper-EMES-conference-DEF.pdf 

* Kristof Van Tricht, Anne Gobin, Sven Gilliams and Isabelle Piccard. “Synergistic Use of Radar Sentinel-1 and Optical Sentinel-2 Imagery for Crop Mapping: A Case Study for Belgium” https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/10/10/1642 

* Veronique Beckers, L. Poelmans, A. Van Rompaey, N. Dendoncker. “The impact of urbanization on agricultural dynamics: a case study in Belgium”. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1747423X.2020.1769211 

* Alain Peeters, NicolasDendoncker, SanderJacobs, “Enhancing Ecosystem Services in Belgian Agriculture through Agroecology: A Vision for a Farming with a Future” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124199644000226 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Bulgaria==

* Vyara Stefanova and Yanka Kazakova, “Overview of Common Grazing in Bulgaria”. European Forum on Nature Conservation and Pastoralism,  2010. http://www.efncp.org/download/common-grazing-BG.pdf 

* Vesseline Hekimova, Anna Karakovska, Mieke Meurs, and Rossitsa Stoyanova. “The Decline in Common Lands in Bulgaria in the Early 20th Century”. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mieke_Meurs2/publication/277186231_The_Decline_in_Common_Lands_in_Bulgaria_in_the_Early_20th_Century/links/55bf612608ae092e96661545/The-Decline-in-Common-Lands-in-Bulgaria-in-the-Early-20th-Century.pdf 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Croatia==

* Igor Bogunovic, Antonio Viduka, Ivan Magdic, Leon Josip Telak, Marcos Francos and Paulo Pereira. (2020) “Agricultural and Forest Land-Use Impact on Soil Properties in Zagreb Periurban Area (Croatia)” https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4395/10/9/1331 

* Kristina Svržnjak Developing agrarian structure through the disposal of state-owned agricultural land in Croatia https://hrcak.srce.hr/125556 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Cyprus==

* Zomeni, Maria, Martinou, Angeliki F., Stavrinides, Menelaos, Vogiatzakis, Ioannis N. (2018). https://ktisis.cut.ac.cy/handle/10488/13408 

* S.P.Burton “Land consolidation in Cyprus: A vital policy for rural reconstruction” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0264837788900154 

* Johannes Halbe and others. “Governance of transitions towards sustainable development – the water–energy–food nexus in Cyprus” https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02508060.2015.1070328 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Czech Republic==

THOMAS SIKOR “The Commons in Transition: Agrarian and Environmental Change in Central and Eastern Europe” DOI: 10.1007/s00267-003-3007-5
Zdeněk Lipský, Pavel Kukla. MAPPING AND TYPOLOGY OF UNUSED LANDS IN THE TERRITORY OF THE TOWN OF KUTNÁ HORA (THE CZECH REPUBLIC)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Denmark==

According to this page from Eurostat, common land does not exist in Denmark (look under the voice “Common Land”) https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Archive:Agricultural_census_in_Denmark#:~:text=In%20Denmark%2C%20common%20land%20does,Structure%20Survey%20in%20this%20country. 


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Estonia==

Lilian Pungas “Food self-provisioning as an answer to the metabolic rift: The case of ‘Dacha Resilience’ in Estonia” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743016718306272?casa_token=cyD-OtJyUicAAAAA:BjNYRmIZAi5LkvYSteAWo8FYQSX5s9-1vHwUaX0qWAXCjFMdZK3xWC5CoCYLtyX8Ag9siJmwZNk 
Metspalu, L. “Fostering healthy food systems through organic agriculture - focus on Nordic-Baltic region, Tartu, Estonia, 25-27 August 2009.” https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/20093238820 
VV. AA. “Valuing the commons: An international study on the recreational benefits of the Baltic Sea” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479715001759?casa_token=2iGxGo6orvAAAAAA:7IjkwI4DYyE0-0XIUZWpEVfXKgfWExC1WzWRCak1cNUUryLqFSzufBdpwxVlCf1ZThuvVjwC0T0
VV. AA. “Social landscape: Ten years of planning ‘valuable landscapes’ in Estonia” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264837710000372?casa_token=6XqaPvLwltoAAAAA:hxJBYPnYvU1dGocTMLMR7LkVbKhULLmvdElAkDu-P_mqLTEMX4jrKmdKqSjRNy4CUJkJN_0XMTI 


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Finland==

Anna-Maria Isola and Janne Laiho. “Commoning surplus food in Finland – actors and tensions” https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/64300544/ECEWAWS_final_e-book.pdf?1598641661=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DEnacting_community_economies_within_a_we.pdf&Expires=1606675495&Signature=fPG8DQjdJ30KMHzCDYVyoaGWSEd6E2~Oqk3OpXNP4abLXZqaDrhmy95XDhWbTSth0BXfbzzy94ZV8UCW5sv1HCYNAe0NMNAkPgQIFPLQnfyCRyneQVwH~Patoy9MmZMpK~UAXrhBQyJ-hO9PsiXYxniHX-J2QOIrdVCAVZ~xHLN~sNr3S7MML56XyDt4s0C~CthcCBXn8rS-cES4EjsLQkiR1c-Vfp1WVk9Gd2O-dts1K9Rq0ZkKA6TU3wutZ0pGJxA~e1FHC04K5HlGEwVOSlX~nBU9pbiKBc0W4XexHgsmSFA44exel~V3L2nMdBHI7If2WIehvUljRZAxmdz-Dw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA#page=108 (SEE PAG. 108)
Svels, Kristina. Åkerlund, Ulrika “The commons and emergent land in Kvarken Archipelago, Finland: governing an expanding recreational resource” (2018) https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1273048&dswid=8815 
Anna-Kaisa Kosenius, Emmi Haltia, Paula Horne, Matleena Kniivilä, Olli Saastamoinen. “Value of ecosystem services? Examples and experiences on forests, peatlands, agricultural lands, and freshwaters in Finland” (2013). http://www.ptt.fi/media/liitteet/rap244.pdf 
VV. AA. “Are Alternative Food Systems Socially Sustainable? A Case Study from Finland” (2009) https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10440040902997819?casa_token=AAQgiy0KH3IAAAAA%3AGHnvgl7Q4e0IPk7U_WUeTr6Oiq9UwQ2PHyRehMBNlhYLxPjF7mP9Nwha3dNvZexF4SOP-e8fC7lDhA 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


==France==

AA.VV. “Les biens communs en agriculture, tragédie ou apologie?” https://www.lgdj.fr/les-biens-communs-en-agriculture-9782711033911.html#:~:text=Propri%C3%A9t%C3%A9%20fonci%C3%A8re%2C%20eau%2C%20alimentation%2C,sous%20le%20prisme%20des%20Communs. 
Diane Giorgis. “Biens publics et Agriculture. Construction sociologique des Biens Communs en agriculture. Cas d'étude du Haut-Var en France” 2012. https://hal-univ-tlse3.archives-ouvertes.fr/MEM-AGRO-OUEST/dumas-00754363v1 
Christian Barrère, Quentin Bonnard and Véronique Chossat. “Chapter 7: Food, Gastronomy and Cultural Commons” https://www.elgaronline.com/view/edcoll/9781781000052/9781781000052.00016.xml 
Pierre Donadieu, Élisabeth Rémy, et Michel-Claude Girard. Les sols peuvent-ils devenir des biens communs ? Natures Sciences Sociétés, 24, 261-269 (2016) https://www.nss-journal.org/articles/nss/abs/2016/03/nss160025/nss160025.html 
Hanna Edelmann , Xiomara Fernanda Quiñones-Ruiz, Marianne Penker, Silvia Scaramuzzi, Kristina Broscha, Philippe Jeanneaux, Giovanni Belletti, Andrea Marescotti. 2020. “Social Learning in Food Quality Governance – Evidences from Geographical Indications Amendments” https://www.thecommonsjournal.org/articles/10.5334/ijc.968/ 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Germany==

Rogge, N., & Theesfeld, I. (2018). “Categorizing urban commons: Community gardens in the Rhine-Ruhr agglomeration, Germany.” International Journal of the Commons, 12(2), 251–274. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.854 
Göttl, I., & Penker, M. (2020). “Institutions for Collective Gardening: A Comparative Analysis of 51 Urban Community Gardens in Anglophone and German-Speaking Countries.” International Journal of the Commons, 14(1), 30–43. DOI: http://doi.org/10.5334/ijc.961 
Wolter, H., & Sievers-Glotzbach, S. (2019). “Bridging traditional and new commons: The case of fruit breeding. International Journal of the Commons”, 13(1), 303–328. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.869 
Scharf, N.; Wachtel, T.; Reddy, S.E.; Säumel, I. Urban Commons for the Edible City—First Insights for Future Sustainable Urban Food Systems from Berlin, Germany. Sustainability 2019, 11, 966. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/4/966 
Oona Morrow. “Sharing food and risk in Berlin’s urban food commons”. Volume 99, February 2019, Pages 202-212. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016718518302641 
Morrow, O. Community Self-Organizing and the Urban Food Commons in Berlin and New York. Sustainability 2019, 11, 3641. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/13/3641 
Forests as a Global Commons: International governance and the role of Germany https://www.wpn2030.de/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/W%C3%A4lder-1.pdf 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Greece==

Bieler A, Jordan J. Commodification and ‘the commons’: The politics of privatising public water in Greece and Portugal during the Eurozone crisis. European Journal of International Relations. 2018;24(4):934-957. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354066117728383 
Kioupkiolis, Alexandros and Theodoros Karyotis (2015) “Self-managing the commons in contemporary Greece”, in Azzelini, Dario (ed.) An Alternative Labour History, Chicago, Zed Books. (PDF of pre-edited version saved in Greece folder).
Alexandros Kioupkiolis and Theodoros Karyotis. “The commons in theory and practice: Self-management in contemporary Greece” https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Charalampos_Tsavdaroglou/publication/301560110_Urban_and_Regional_Social_Movements/links/571a018208ae986b8b7c232b.pdf#page=143 
Karyotis, Theodoros (2019) “Beyond hope: prospects for the commons in austerity-stricken Greece” in Holloway, John, Katerina Nasioka and Panagiotis Doulos (eds.) Beyond Crisis: After the Collapse of Institutional Hope in Greece, What?, San Francisco, PM Press.  (PDF of pre-edited version saved in Greece folder)
Rafael Caballero, Federico Fernandez-Gonzalez, Rosa Perez Badia, Giovanni Molle, Pier Paolo Roggero, Simonetta Bagella, Paride D´Ottavio, Vasilios P. Papanastasis, Georgios Fotiadis, Anna Sidiropoulou, Ioannis Ispikoudis. GRAZING SYSTEMS AND BIODIVERSITY IN MEDITERRANEAN ÁREAS: SPAIN, ITALY AND GREECE http://polired.upm.es/index.php/pastos/article/view/1712 
Athanasios Ragkos, Stavriani Koutsou, Maria Karatassiou and Vasiliki Lagka. LAND ACCESS AND TRANSHUMANCE IN GREECE: ECONOMIC ASPECTS AND SOCIAL CONFLICTS http://ikee.lib.auth.gr/record/319940/files/Karatassiou%20et%20al.pdf 
Paschalis A. Arvanitidis and George Papagiannitsis. “Urban open spaces as a commons: The credibility thesis and common property in a self-governed park of Athens, Greece” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264275119303932 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Hungary==

Bálint Balázs. “Local Food System Development in Hungary”. Int. Jrnl. of Soc. of Agr. & Food, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 403–421. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Balint_Balazs4/publication/259673623_Local_Food_System_Development_in_Hungary/links/0deec52d43719a0445000000/Local-Food-System-Development-in-Hungary.pdf 
Katarzyna Cegielska, Tomasz Noszczyk, Anita Kukulska Marta Szylar, Józef Hernik, Robert Dixon-Gough, Sándor Jombach, István Valánszki, Krisztina Filepné Kovács. “Land use and land cover changes in post-socialist countries: Some observations from Hungary and Poland” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026483771830615X 
Anna Burger. Agricultural development and land concentration in a central European country: a case study of Hungary. Land Use Policy Volume 18, Issue 3, July 2001, Pages 259-268. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264837701000230#! 
Agnes Neulinger  Fanni Bársony  Natasha Gjorevska  Orsolya Lazányi  György Pataki  Sándor Takács  Anna Török. Engagement and subjective well‐being in alternative food networks: The case of Hungary. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12566 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ijcs.12566) 
VV. AA. Green for Commons: Paths of Development in Hungary, Germany and Georgia. https://scholarworks.umass.edu/fabos/vol5/iss1/53/ 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Ireland==

Van Rensburg, T. M., Murphy, E., & Rocks, P. (2009). Commonage land and farmer uptake of the rural environment protection scheme in Ireland. Land Use Policy, 26(2), 345-355.
Di Falco, S., & Van Rensburg, T. M. (2008). Making the commons work: Conservation and cooperation in Ireland. Land Economics, 84(4), 620-634.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Latvia==

VV. AA. “Valuing the commons: An international study on the recreational benefits of the Baltic Sea” https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479715001759?casa_token=2iGxGo6orvAAAAAA:7IjkwI4DYyE0-0XIUZWpEVfXKgfWExC1WzWRCak1cNUUryLqFSzufBdpwxVlCf1ZThuvVjwC0T0
THOMAS SIKOR “The Commons in Transition: Agrarian and Environmental Change in Central and Eastern Europe” DOI: 10.1007/s00267-003-3007-5

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Lithuania==

Kiskis, Mindaugas, Creative Commons Problems in Lithuania (December 1, 2010). Proceedings of the International Conference on Social Technologies, 2010 , Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1726042 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Luxembourg==

Benedetto Rugani, Davide Roviani, Paula Hild, Bianca Schmitt, Enrico Benetto. Ecological deficit and use of natural capital in Luxembourg from 1995 to 2009 https://www.scien, cedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969713009066#

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Malta==

Cassar, C. (2016). Maltese food habits. Valletta: Arts Council Malta. https://www.um.edu.mt/library/oar/handle/123456789/26127 
Alicia Said, Joseph Tzanopoulos and Douglas MacMillan. The Contested Commons: The Failure of EU Fisheries Policy and Governance in the Mediterranean and the Crisis Enveloping the Small-Scale Fisheries of Malta. Front. Mar. Sci., 06 September 2018 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00300 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Netherlands==

The management of common land in north west Europe, c. 1500-1850 https://www.brepolsonline.net/doi/book/10.1484/M.CORN-EB.5.105947 
Van Zanden, Jan Luiten. “Chaloner Memorial Lecture: The Paradox of the Marks. The Exploitation of Commons in the Eastern Netherlands, 1250-1850.” The Agricultural History Review, vol. 47, no. 2, 1999, pp. 125–144. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/40275568. Accessed 1 Dec. 2020. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Poland==

Piotr Guzowski. The commons in late medieval and early modern Poland (see PDF saved in shared folder)
Maja Grabkowska. Urban space as a commons in print media discourse in Poland after 1989. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264275117303074 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Portugal==

Brouwer, Roland. Baldios and Common Property Resource Management in Portugal. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/9493 
Luis Filipe Gomes Lopes et al. Institutionalization of common land property in Portugal: Tragic trends between “Commons” and “Anticommons”. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2013.05.007
Lopes, Luis Filipe Gomes. Advanced Studies on Mainland Portuguese Common Lands and Forests. https://search.proquest.com/openview/ea68023e799e779119a3296b366fc658/1?cbl=2026366&diss=y&pq-origsite=gscholar 
António Cardoso, Goretti Barros & Carlos Matias. Communities’ Resistance towards Common Lands: A Communal Property Historically Disputed by Private Entities, Municipalities and The Government. Journal of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences December 2019, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 86-97. DOI: 10.15640/jaes.v8n2a11. URL: https://doi.org/10.15640/jaes.v8n2a11 
Hespanha, Pedro Manuel. The role of communal lands in the revitalization of rural areas in Portugal. https://estudogeral.sib.uc.pt/handle/10316/87244 
Roland Brouwer. Changing Name-Tags. A Legal Anthropological Approach to Communal Lands in Portugal. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07329113.1999.10756527 
Cabo, Paula et al. The change in the use and exploit of common lands through three generations. 2016. https://bibliotecadigital.ipb.pt/handle/10198/13475 
Roland Brouwer. Between Policy and Politics: The Forestry Services and the Commons in Portugal. Forest & Conservation History, Vol. 37, No. 4 (Oct., 1993), pp. 160-168. https://doi.org/10.2307/3983554 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Romania ==

Sutcliffe, L. M. E., Paulini, I., Jones, G., Marggraf, R., & Page, N. (2013). Pastoral commons use in Romania and the role of the Common Agricultural Policy. International Journal of the Commons, 7(1), 58–72. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.367 
ANNA DAHLSTRÖM, ANA-MARIA IUGA AND TOMMY LENNARTSSON. Managing biodiversity rich hay meadows in the EU: a comparison of Swedish and Romanian grasslands. doi:10.1017/S0376892912000458 
Irina‐Sînziana Opincaru. Elements of the institutionalization process of the forest and pasture commons in Romania as particular forms of social economy. https://doi.org/10.1111/apce.12294 
Vasile, M. (2006). Obștea Today in the Vrancea Mountaines, Romania. Self-governing Institutions of Forest Commons: Obștea Today in the Vrancea Mountains, Romania. Self-governing Institutions of Forest Commons. Sociologie Românească, 4(3), 111-129. Retrieved from http://revistasociologieromaneasca.ro/sr/article/view/2006_3_vasile 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Slovakia==

Tatiana Kluvánková, Veronika Gežík. Survival of commons? Institutions for robust forest social – ecological systems. Journal of Forest Economics Volume 24, August 2016, Pages 175-185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfe.2016.01.002 
Robert Pazúr et al. Spatial determinants of abandonment of large-scale arable lands and managed grasslands in Slovakia during the periods of post-socialist transition and European Union accession. Applied Geography Volume 54, October 2014, Pages 118-128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.07.014 
Robert Pazúr et al. Abandonment and Recultivation of Agricultural Lands in Slovakia—Patterns and Determinants from the Past to the Future. Land 2020, 9(9), 316; https://doi.org/10.3390/land9090316 
Lieskovský, J., Kenderessy, P., Špulerová, J. et al. Factors affecting the persistence of traditional agricultural landscapes in Slovakia during the collectivization of agriculture. Landscape Ecol 29, 867–877 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-014-0023-1 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Slovenia==

Tine Premrla, Andrej Udovč, Nevenka Bogata, Janez Krč. From restitution to revival: A case of commons re-establishment and restitution in Slovenia. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2015.05.004 
Janez Krč et al. A Forest Commons Revival in Slovenia. https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.918225 
Mateja Šmid Hribar, Jani Kozina, David Bole, Mimi Urbanc. Public goods, common-pool resources, and the commons: The influence of historical legacy on modern perceptions in Slovenia as a transitional society. https://www.ceeol.com/search/article-detail?id=675034 
Ann Dill, Joanne Coury. Forging a new commons: Self-help associations in Slovenia and Croatia. https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1016/S1057-6290(08)10012-2/full/html 
Paola Gatto, Nevenka Bogataj. Disturbances, robustness and adaptation in forest commons: Comparative insights from two cases in the Southeastern Alps. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2015.03.011 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Spain==

Jose-Miguel Lana , Iñaki Iriarte-Goñi. “Commons and the legacy of the past. Regulation and uses of common lands in twentieth century Spain” https://www.thecommonsjournal.org/articles/10.18352/ijc.488/ 
Francisco J. Beltrán Tapia, Commons, social capital, and the emergence of agricultural cooperatives in early twentieth century Spain, European Review of Economic History, Volume 16, Issue 4, November 2012, Pages 511–528, https://doi.org/10.1093/ereh/hes014 
VV.AA. Biodiversity conservation effectiveness provided by a protection status in temperate forest commons of north Spain. Forest Ecology and Management Volume 433, 15 February 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2018.11.040 
Lana, J.-M., & Iriarte-Goñi, I. (2015). Commons and the legacy of the past. Regulation and uses of common lands in twentieth century Spain. International Journal of the Commons, 9(2), 510–532. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.488 
VV. AA. Hybridizing the commons. Privatizing and outsourcing collective irrigation management after technological change in Spain. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.104983 
VV. AA. Forest commons, traditional community ownership and ecological consequences: Insights from Spain. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2020.102107 
Alonso-González, Pablo; Fernández Fernández, Jesús. Rural Development and Heritage Commons Management in Asturias (Spain): The Ecomuseum of Santo Adriano. https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/126379
IRIARTE-GOÑI, I. (2002). Common Lands in Spain, 1800–1995: Persistence, Change and Adaptation. Rural History, 13(1), 19-37. doi:10.1017/S0956793302000225  
Serrano Alvarez, J. A. (2014). When the enemy is the state: common lands management in northwest Spain (1850–1936). International Journal of the Commons, 8(1), 107–133. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.389 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

==Sweden==

ANNA DAHLSTRÖM, ANA-MARIA IUGA AND TOMMY LENNARTSSON. Managing biodiversity rich hay meadows in the EU: a comparison of Swedish and Romanian grasslands. doi:10.1017/S0376892912000458 
Lars Carlsson. “The strategy of the commons: history and property rights in central Sweden”. https://books.google.it/books?hl=it&lr=&id=Y5FnAq9kjxgC&oi=fnd&pg=PA116&dq=sweden+commons&ots=-v05bijB5W&sig=NqHLCVxTB5QYsqW5z6IbJ62cPK0#v=onepage&q=sweden%20commons&f=false 
Eva Holmgren. Forest Commons in Boreal Sweden. Aims and Outcomes on Forest Condition and Rural Development. https://pub.epsilon.slu.se/2173/1/Kappa_Finalrev_1.pdf 
Camilla Widmark & Camilla Sandstrom (2012) Transaction Costs of Institutional Change in Multiple-Use Commons: The Case of Consultations Between Forestry and Reindeer Husbandry in Northern Sweden, Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 14:4, 428-449, DOI: 10.1080/1523908X.2012.739298 
Kerstin Sundberg. Nordic common lands and common rights. Some interpretations of Swedish cases and debates. https://www.brepolsonline.net/doi/abs/10.1484/M.CORN-EB.4.00178 


==NON-EU COUNTRIES:==

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Albania===

BERNARD, Claire (Ciheam-IamM), CROUTEIX, Orianne (AgroParisTech), LERIN, François (Ciheam-IamM), LOPEZ, Ruben (AgroParisTech). Forests and Pastures’ Devolution Process in Albania: A Sustainable Management of Mediterranean Commons? https://terramed.iamm.fr/images/publications/Forest_and_pastures_devolution_albania.pdf 
Bombaj, F., Barjolle, D., Casabianca, F., & Anthopoulou, T. (2018, July). How does decentralization of pasture management affect the local communities? Evolution and perspectives from Southeast Albania. In 13. European IFSA Symposium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Iceland===

Eggertsson, T. (1992). Analyzing institutional successes and failures: A millennium of common mountain pastures in Iceland. International Review of Law and Economics, 12(4), 423-437.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Moldova===

SEMENIUC, ANNA. SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN MOLDOVA AND GERMANY. COMMON ASPECTS AND DIFFERENCES. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Uestuener_Birben/publication/273636400_The_Bundle_of_Rights_Theory_and_Private_Forest_Ownership_in_Turkey/links/5507e43c0cf27e990e087471.pdf#page=250 (PP. 250 SS).
Richard Ross Shaker. Examining sustainable landscape function across the Republic of Moldova. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2016.11.002 
Simone Piras. Home‐grown food and the benefits of sharing: The “intergenerational pact” in postsocialist Moldova.  20 December 2019 https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12351 
Victor MOROZ, Anatolie IGNAT. LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT IN THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES. https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/44443943/Art43.pdf?1459880916=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DLocal_food_systems_development_in_the_Re.pdf&Expires=1606916542&Signature=L2c8utMXuUWuB11TUsqsFyu8kPegsKo6qTbkdatedZgKnJf6B3-zUfuyt0bBiKerdsApLIeraLmDxYIjbi92M1XpF05AB~8SLi8-OgsGYL4ye5Cj81rt9CgFiLdq66A7qmzFyETXhbaI56yJr5es7zIFzfUV8G7H2t6RC3-myOENPQbeGfvyXJXHMbjfwsZC8eauDlz8IM12moosSkBxRvanhkyBeCZogFdcgJnnFzabYD2YhwROhKYya0LBDJm2-BRFuXGZ5xVCJTiv95~otB9ibCt1ep4hRKvw5VOcDrGHgvVuRsIrHNqJr7mcXGPzHvaEtYOILseGI4E4tq9mbw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Norway===

Berge, Erling; Mitsumata, Gaku; Shimada, Daisaku. Legislation on Commons in Norway. 2011. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/7657 
Hans Sevatdal and Sidsel Grimstad. Norwegian Commons: History, Status and Challenges. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/59 
Marin, A., & Bjørklund, I. (2015). A tragedy of errors? Institutional dynamics and land tenure in Finnmark, Norway. International Journal of the Commons, 9(1), 19–40. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.586 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===Switzerland===

Baur, I., Liechti, K., & Binder, C. R. (2014). Why do individuals behave differently in commons dilemmas? The case of alpine farmers using common property pastures in Grindelwald, Switzerland. International Journal of the Commons, 8(2), 657–685. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.469
Axel Franzen et al. Governing the Commons: Why SelfAdministered Farm Outlets Flourish in Switzerland. https://www.thecommonsjournal.org/articles/10.5334/ijc.960/print/ 
Rémi Schweizer. Avoiding the Commons Trap: An Exploration of Local Community Governance of Water in Valais, Switzerland. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/978-1-137-60086-8_2 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
===United Kingdom===

Jones, G. “Common land – common heritage, common issues?”,  European Forum on Nature Conservation and Pastoralism http://www.efncp.org/download/common-ground2015/Commons1introduction.pdf




====England====

Short C, and Waldon J,(2013) The apportionment of agri-environment schemes monies on common land in England.  Report to the European Forum for Nature Conservation and Pastoralism.  Foundation for Common Land: Penrith. http://www.efncp.org/download/aescommonsfclresearchreport23nov13final.pdf



====Scotland====

Brown, K. M (2006). New challenges for old commons: The role of historical common land in contemporary rural spaces. Scottish Geographical Journal 122: 109–129. 
Andy Wightman, Robin Callander & Graham Boyd. Common Land in Scotland: A Brief Overview. http://radicalimagination.co.uk/assets/com/commonweal_3.pdf 
Robin Callander. The History of Common Land in Scotland. http://radicalimagination.co.uk/assets/com/commonweal_1.pdf 


====Wales====

Stamp, Dudley L.;  Hoskins, W. G. The common lands of England and Wales. https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/19631802678 
J. W. Aitchison and E. J. Hughes. The Common Lands of Wales.https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/622778.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A685354b469f44efd72df992ee1759089 
L. Dudley Stamp. The Common Lands and Village Greens of England and Wales. https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1792256.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A38c64b1931bf34ccf1c47d7baf83ee88 
Gary Higgs, John Aitchison, Ian Bracken, Hilary Crosweller & Phil Jones (1994) The national GIS demonstrator of common lands for England and Wales, Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 37:1, 33-51, DOI: 10.1080/09640569408711958 
Aitchison, J. W. “The Commons and Wastes of England and Wales 1958-1989.” Area, vol. 22, no. 3, 1990, pp. 272–277. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/20002870. Accessed 2 Dec. 2020. 
J. W. Aitchison & E. J. Hughes (1986) Commons, conservation and amenity in Wales, Landscape Research, 11:3, 17-21, DOI: 10.1080/01426398608706207
Short, C. (2008). The traditional commons of England and Wales in the twenty-first century: meeting new and old challenges. International Journal of the Commons, 2(2), 192–221. DOI: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.47

[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:Belgium]]