
=Bibliography=

English-language books selected from a list maintained by Berenice Gagne [https://medium.com/anthropocene2050/enjeux-post-d%C3%A9coloniaux-c64405e01dc]:

* Ulrich BRAND, Markus WISSEN, The Imperial Mode of Living. Everyday Life and the Ecological Crisis of Capitalism (Verso, 2021). Traduction (vers l’anglais) par Zachary King.

* David CHANDLER, Julian REID, Becoming Indigenous. Governing Imaginaries in the Anthropocene (Rowman & Littlefield, 2019).

* Michelle L. COCKS, Charlie M. SHACKLETON (dir.), Urban Nature. Enriching Belonging, Wellbeing and Bioculture (Routledge Studies in Urban Ecology, 2020).

* Candace FUJIKANE, Mapping Abundance for a Planetary Future. Kanaka Maoli and Critical Settler Cartographies in Hawai’I (Duke University Press, 2021).

* Amitav GHOSH, The Nutmeg’s Curse. Parables for a Planet in Crisis (Chicago University Press, 2021).

* Max HAIVEN, Palm Oil: The Grease of Empire (Pluto Press, 2022).

* Hamza HAMOUCHENE, Katie SANDWELL (dir.), Dismantling Green Colonialism. Energy and Climate Justice in the Arab Region (Plutot Press, 2023).

* Samia HENNI (dir.), Deserts Are Not Empty (Columbia University Press, 2022).

* Philipp LEHMANN, Desert Edens. Colonial Climate Engineering in the Age of Anxiety (Princeton University Press, 2022).

* Max LIBOIRON, Pollution Is Colonialism (Duke University Press, 2021).

* Max LIBOIRON, Josh LEPAWSKY, Discard Studies. Wasting, Systems, and Power (MIT Press, 2022).

* Meg PARSONS, Karen FISHER, Roa Petra CREASE, Decolonising Blue Spaces in the Anthropocene. Freshwater management in Aotearoa New Zealand (Palgrave Macmillan, 2021).

(https://medium.com/anthropocene2050/enjeux-post-d%C3%A9coloniaux-c64405e01dc)

[[Category:Reference]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]