
Source: https://unvirtual.us/bibliography/bibliography-hunter-gatherers-in-progress/

Below is the version of 28/11/2019


=Bibliography=

Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117 ,497-529.

Baumeister, Roy F., Twenge, Jean M., & Nuss, C. (2002). Effects of social exclusion on cognitive processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces intelligent thought. Journal of personality and Social Psychology, 83, 817-827.

Boehm, Christopher , Harold B. Barclay, Robert Knox Dentan, Marie-Claude Dupre, Jonathan D. Hill, Susan Kent, Bruce M. Knauft, Keith F. Otterbein, Steve Rayner, (1993). '''Egalitarian Behavior and Reverse Dominance Hierarchy''' [and Comments and Reply], Current Anthropology, Vol. 34, No.3. (Jun., 1993), pp. 227-254, Stable URL: http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0011-3204%28199306%2934%3A3%3C227%3AEBARDH%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9

Brewis, Alexandra. (2019). Anthropological Perspectives on Infanticide, Arizona Anthropologist, Vol 8, p. 103-119 retrieved at https://journals.uair.arizona.edu/index.php/arizanthro/article/view/18264 on 10/11/2019

Denham, Woodrow W. (1974). Population Structure, Infant Transport, and Infanticide among Pleistocene and Modern Hunter-Gatherers, Journal of Anthropological Research, Vol. 30, No. 3 (Autumn, 1974), pp. 191-198 (8 pages), Published by: The University of Chicago Press, retreived at https://www.jstor.org/stable/3629843?read-now=1&refreqid=excelsior%3Ac7b71a9225f9969221930b952a39d0e7&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents on 8/11/2019

Dyble, M, Salali, GD, Chaudhary, N, Page, A, Smith, D, Thompson, J, Vinicius, L, Mace, R & Migliano, AB, (2015). '''‘Sex equality can explain the unique social structure of hunter-gatherer bands’''' Science, vol. 348, no. 6236, pp. 796-798, retrieved at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276356710_Human_behavior_Sex_equality_can_explain_the_unique_social_structure_of_hunter-gatherer_bands on 5/10/2019

Dyble, Mark & Thorley, Jack & Page, Abigail & Smith, Daniel & Migliano, Andrea. (2019). Engagement in agricultural work is associated with reduced leisure time among Agta hunter-gatherers. Nature Human Behaviour. 3. 10.1038/s41562-019-0614-6. Retrieved at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333226364_Engagement_in_agricultural_work_is_associated_with_reduced_leisure_time_among_Agta_hunter-gatherers on 18/11/2019

Dunbar, Robin I. M. (2016).The Social Brain Hypothesis and Human Evolution, Cognitive Psychology/Neuroscience, Social Psychology Online Publication Date: Mar 2016 DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.44, retrieved at https://oxfordre.com/psychology/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.001.0001/acrefore-9780190236557-e-44 on 15/08/2019

Eisenberger, Naomi, Matthew D. Lieberman, Kipling D. Williams, 2003, Does Rejection Hurt? An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion, Science, Vol. 302, p. 290-292, http://www.cepr.net/publications/social_exclusion_2006_08.pdf

Endicott, Kirk M. & Karen L. Endicott, (2008). The Headman was a Woman, The Gender Egalitarian Batek of Malaysia, Waveland Press Inc., ISBN 978-1-57766-526-7.

Felton, Silke & Heike Becker, (2001). A Gender Perspective on the Status of the San in Soutern Africa, Legal Assistance Centre (LAC), Windhoek April 2001.

Gonzalez-Fortes and Jones et al.,(2017). “Paleogenomic Evidence for Multi-generational Mixing between Neolithic Farmers and Mesolithic Hunter-Gatherers in the Lower Danube Basin”, DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.023, retrieved at https://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(17)30559-6 on 1/11/2019

Gurven, Michael (2004). To give and to give not: The behavioral ecology of human food transfers, Behavioral and Brain Sciences (2004) 27, 543–583 retrieved at https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5768/3b665a5461002504a63ce6b48f496f59a98a.pdf on 22/10/2019

Hammer, Michael F. ,Fernando L. Mendez,Murray P. Cox,August E. Woerner,Jeffrey D. Wall, (2008), Sex-Biased Evolutionary Forces Shape Genomic Patterns of Human Diversity, PLOS | Genetics, Published: September 26, 2008, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000202, retrieves at https://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1000202 on 15/11/2019

Huberman, Bernardo A. and Romero, Daniel M. and Wu, Fang, (2005). Social Networks that Matter: Twitter Under the Microscope (December 5, 2008). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1313405 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1313405

Johnson, Eric Michael, (2012).The Case of the Missing Polygamists, in The Primate Diaries, Scientific Amarican, January 6, 2012, available at https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/primate-diaries/case-of-the-missing-polygamists/

Lew-Levy, S., Lavi, N., Reckin, R., Cristobal-Azkarate, J., & Ellis-Davies, K. (2018). How do hunter-gatherer children learn social and gender norms? A meta-ethnographic review. Cross-Cultural Research, 52 213-255. https://doi.org/10.1177/1069397117723552

Marlowe, W. Frank, (2005). Hunter-Gatherers and Human Evolution, Evolutionary Anthropology 14:54 –67, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.20046, citations: 360, retreived at https://www.academia.edu/12030949/Hunter_gatherers_and_human_evolution on 11/07/2019

O’Connell, James F. (1999), Genetics, archaeology, and Holocene hunter-gatherers, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Sep 14; 96(19): 10562–10563, doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.19.10562, retrieved at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC33739/ on 20/11/2019

Powell, John Wesley. (1880), Sketch of Lewis H. Morgan, Popular Science Monthly Volume 18 November 1880, retrieved at https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Popular_Science_Monthly/Volume_18/November_1880/Sketch_of_Lewis_H._Morgan on 22/10/2019

Pinxten, Rik. (2011). Mensen, Een Inleiding in de Culturele Antropologie, Uitgeverij LannooCampus, Leuven, ISBN 97890209885740

Sahlins, Marshall (1972). '''Stone Age Economics''', Aldine·Atherton, Inc., Chicago & New York, ISBN 0-202-01098-8

Schulz, Jonathan F., Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan P. Beauchamp en Joseph Henrich, (2019). The Church, intensive kinship, and global psychological variation, Science 366, 707 (2019), DOI: 10.1126/science.aau5141.

Stepanov, Alexander (1985). Towards a Theory of Causal Implication. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Polytechnic University of New York, 1985, PDF

Stroeken, Koen, (2013). De ondeelbare mens: Antropologie ingeleid, Garant, Antwerpen – Apeldoorn, ISBN 978-90-441-3010-2, D/2013/5779/14, NUR 761/764

Walker, Robert S. ,Kim R. Hill, Mark V. Flinn,Ryan M. Ellsworth, (2011).Evolutionary History of Hunter-Gatherer Marriage Practices, Plos|One, Published: April 27, 2011https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0019066 retieved at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0019066 on 15/11/2019

Wiessner, P. (1982), Risk. reciprocity and social influences on !Kung San economies. In (E. Leacock & R. Lee eds.) Politics and History in Band Societies, 61-84, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Wilkinson, Richard & Kate Pickett (2018), '''The Spirit Level. How More Equal Societies Reduce Stress, Restore Sanity and Improve Everyone’s Well-being''', Pinguin Books, ISBN: 978-0-141-97540-5.

Zhivotovsky, Lev A., Noah A. Rosenberg and Marcus W. Feldman. (2003) Features of Evolution and Expansion of Modern Humans, Inferred from Genomewide Microsatellite Markers, American Journal of Human Genetics, May 2003.




[[Category:P2P History]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]