


=Bibliography=

#Cantijoch, M. (2009). Reinforcement and mobilization: [http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1398 the influence of the Internet on different types of political participation]. Prepared for the seminar Citizen Politics: Are the New Media Reshaping Political Engagement? Barcelona, May 28th-30th 2009. Barcelona: IGOP.
#Castells, M. (2007). “[http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1387 Communication, Power and Counter-power in the Network Society]”. In International Journal of Communication, 1, 238-266. Los Angeles: USC Annenberg Press.
#Chadwick, A. & Howard, P. N. (2008). [http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1216 Routledge Handbook of Internet Politics]. New York: Routledge.
#Chadwick, A. (2009). “Web 2.0: [http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1401 New Challenges for the Study of E-Democracy in an Era of Informational Exuberance]”. In I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society, 5 (1), 9 – 41. Columbus: Ohio State University.
#Cristancho, C. & Salcedo, J. (2009). [http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1402 Assessing Internet Mobilization] – Integrating Web Analysis and Survey Data. Prepared for the seminar Citizen Politics: Are the New Media Reshaping Political Engagement? Barcelona, May 28th-30th 2009. Barcelona: IGOP.
#Gibson, R. K. (2009). “[http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1405 New Media and the Revitalisation of Politics]”. In Representation, 45 (3), 289 – 299. London: Routledge.
#Gonzalez-Bailon, S. (2008). The inner digital divide: [http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1377How the web contributes (or not) to political equality]. Working Paper Number 2008-02. Oxford: University of Oxford.
#Hara, N. (2008). “[http://ictlogy.net/bibciter/reports/projects.php?idp=1393 Internet use for political mobilization: Voices of the participants]”. In First Monday, 7 July 2008, 13 (7). [online]: First Monday.


=Source=

Selected from:

# A bibliography on Spanish online politics and Politics 2.0. By Ismael Peña-López 

URL = http://ictlogy.net/20091226-a-bibliography-on-spanish-online-politics-and-politics-2-0/


[[Category:Politics]]