
=Source=

* see: [[Transition Policies for the Development of the Distributed Energy Model]]

=Bibliography=

George Dafermos et al.:

Alanne, K. & Saari, A. (2006) ‘Distributed energy generation and sustainable development’. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 10: 539-558

Ansar, A., Flyvbjerg, B., Budzier, A. & Lunn, D. (2014) ‘Should we build more large dams? The actual costs of hydropower megaproject development’. Energy Policy 69: 43–56

Ariza-Montobbio, P., Farrell, K.N., Gamboa, G. & Ramos-Martin, J. (2014) ‘Integrating energy and land-use planning: socio-metabolic profiles along the rural–urban continuum in Catalonia (Spain)’. Environment, Development and Sustainability.

Bauwens, M. (2009) ‘Setting the broader context for P2P infrastructures: The long waves and the new social contract’. Re-public (Special Issue on P2P Energy). In file with the author.

Bauwens, M. (2012) ‘Scope, not scale: What do medieval monks, Cuban socialists and Wikipedia have in common?’ Aljazeera (Mar 22). Retrieved from http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/03/2012319125340857774.html

Bell, D. (1974) The Coming of Post-Industrial Society. London: Heinemann

Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale University Press
CEDA (2012) Ecuador ¿estamos en transición hacia un país pospetrolero?. Centro Ecuatoriano de Derecho Ambiental, Quito

Dafermos, G. (2015) ‘Transforming the productive base of the economy through the open design commons and distributed manufacturing’ (in this issue)

FAO – Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2011) Energy-Smart Food for People and Climate. FAO: Rome

Fischer-Kowalski, M. (1997) ‘Society’s metabolism: on the childhood and adolescence of a rising conceptual star’, in Redclift, M. & Woodgate, G. (Ed.) The International Handbook of Environmental Sociology. Edward Elgar Publishing

Gómez, M. (2008) Sistema de generación eléctrica con pila de combustible de óxido sólido alimentado con residuos forestales y su optimización mediante algoritmos basados en nubes de partículas. PhD Thesis. Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia. Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros Industriales.

Guayanlema V., Corral A., Quintana P. & Rivela, B. (2014) Líneas estratégicas de acción en el sector transporte para la mitigación de cambio climático en Ecuador. Línea Sur Nº 7- Revista de política exterior del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de Ecuador

Handwerk, B. (2012) ‘Nepal’s mountain villages tap the power of “eternal snows” with micro-hydro’. National Geographic (Jul 20). Retrieved from http://newswatch.nationalgeographic.com/2012/07/20/nepals-mountain-villages-tap-the-power-of-eternal-snows-with-micro-hydro/

Harvey, A. (1993) Micro-hydro Design Manual: A guide to small-scale water power schemes. Intermediate Technology Publications.

Hatziargyriou, N. (2014) Microgrids: Architectures and Control. Wiley-IEEE Press

Hatziargyriou, N., Asano, H., Iravani, R. & Marnay, C. (2007) ‘Microgrids: An Overview of Ongoing Research, Development, and Demonstration Projects’.IEEE Power & Energy Magazine 5(4): 78-94

Hawken, P., Lovins, A. & Lovins, H. (1999) Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution. Little, Brown & Company

Hess, D.J. (2014) ‘Sustainability transitions: A political coalition perspective’. Research Policy 43: 278-283

Hornborg, A. (1998) ‘Towards an ecological theory of unequal exchange: articulating world system theory and ecological economics’. Ecological Economics 25: 127-136.

IRENA – International Renewable Energy Agency (2014). REmap 2030: A Renewable Energy Roadmap. IRENA: Abu Dhabi. Retrieved from http://www.irena.org/remap

Jacobsson, S. & Bergek, A. (2004) ‘Transforming the Energy Sector: The Evolution of Technological Systems in Renewable Energy Technology’. Industrial and Corporate Change 13 (5): 815-849

Latouche, S. (2006) La apuesta por el decrecimiento. Icaria, Barcelona.

Margolis, R. & Zuboy, J. (2006) Nontechnical Barriers to Solar Energy Use: Review of Recent Literature. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, US Dept. of Energy. Retrieved from http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy07osti/40116.pdf

MICSE – Ministerio Coordinador de Sectores Estratégicos (2013). Balance Energético Nacional 2013. Año base 2012. Series históricas 1995-2012.

Mumford, L. (1963) Technics and Civilization. Harcourt Brace

OECD, World Bank & United Nations (2012) Incorporating Green Growth and Sustainable Development Policies into Structural Reform Agendas (G20 Report on Green Growth and Sustainable Development). Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/g20/topics/energy-environment-green-growth/G20_report_on_GG_and_SD_final.pdf

Papanikolaou, G. (2009) ‘Peer to Peer Energy Production and the Social Conflicts in the Era of Green Development’. Re-public (Special Issue on P2P Energy). Retrieved from http://p2pfoundation.net/Peer_to_Peer_Energy_Production_and_the_Social_Conflicts_in_the_Era_of_Green_Development

Pearce, J.M. (2012) ‘The case for open source appropriate technology’. Environment, Development and Sustainability 14 (3): 425-431

Piggott, H. (2008) Wind Turbine Recipe Book: The Axial Flux Windmill Plans.
National Secretariat of Planning and Development (2013) National Plan for Good Living, 2013-2017. Retrieved from http://www.buenvivir.gob.ec

Practical Action (2014) Practical Action’s position on small-scale hydropower. Retrieved from http://practicalaction.org/small-scale-hydro-power-2

Practical Action (undated) Up-scaling Micro Hydro: a success story?. Retrieved from http://practicalaction.org/docs/energy/microhydro_scaling_up.pdf

Pretty, J., Ruben, R. & Thrupp, L.A. (2002) ‘Institutional Changes and Policy Reforms’ in Uphoff, N. (Ed.) Agroecological Innovations: increasing food production with participatory development (pp. 251-260). London: Earthscan Publications

Ramirez, R. (2014) ‘Hacia la independencia intelectual’. Retrieved from http://reneramirez.ec/del-capitalismo-cognitivo-a-la-economia-social-del-conocimiento/

Rogers, H. (2010) ‘The greening of capitalism?’ International Socialist Review 70. Retrieved from http://isreview.org/issue/70/greening-capitalism

Schnitzer, D., Lounsbury, D.S., Carvallo, J.P., Deshmukh, R., Apt, J. & Kammen, D.M. (2014) Microgrids for Rural Electrification: A critical review of best practices based on seven case studies. United Nations Foundation

Smart Grids European Technology Platform (2006) Vision and Strategy for Europe’s Electrivity Networks of the Future. Brussels: European Commission. Retrieved from ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/fp7/energy/docs/smartgrids_en.pdf

Sovacool, B.K. (2009) ‘Rejecting renewables: The socio-technical impediments to renewable electricity in the United States’. Energy Policy 37: 4500-4513

Takahashi, K., Baker, S. & Kurdgelashvili, L. (2005) Policy Options to Support Distributed Resources. Center for Energy and Environmental Policy, University of Delaware. Retrieved from http://ceep.udel.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/2005_es_policy_options_distributed-resources11.pdf

Tselepis, S. (2010) ‘Greek experience with Microgrids: Results from the Gaidouromantra site, Kythnos island’. Presentation at Vancouver 2010 Symposium on Microgrids. Fairmont Pacific Rim, Vancouver, Canada

UNEP (2012) The end to cheap oil: a threat to food security and an incentive to reduce fossil fuels in agriculture. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)/GEAS

Wallerstein, I. (2006) Análisis de sistemas-mundo: Una introducción. Madrid: Siglo XXI Editores

Wallis, V. (2010) ‘Beyond “Green Capitalism”‘. Monthly Review 61 (9): 32-48. Retrieved from http://monthlyreview.org/2010/02/01/beyond-green-capitalism

Webster, F. (2006) Theories of Information Society. Routledge

World Bank (2005) Stimulating the Picohydropower Market for Low-Income Households in Ecuador. World Bank-ESMAP Technical Report.

World Bank (2010) Power and People: Measuring the benefits of renewable energy in Nepal. South Asia Energy Unit, Sustainable Development Dept.

World Bank (2012) Inclusive Green Growth: The Pathway to Sustainable Development. Washington: The World Bank. Retrieved from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSDNET/Resources/Inclusive_Green_Growth_May_2012.pdf

Xu, Y. (2005) ‘Models, Templates and Currents: The World Bank and Electricity Reform’. Review of International Political Economy 12(4): 647-673


[[Category:Energy]]