

=Source=

'''* Compilation: Post-capitalist reading in a time of pandemic. By Julia Steinberger'''

URL = https://medium.com/@JKSteinberger/post-capitalist-reading-in-a-time-of-pandemic-945467e67a9e



=Article Directory=

Excerpt from the compilation on March 26, 2020:


==Connecting the pandemic and social/economic change==

* Coronavirus is a historic trigger event — and it needs a movement to respond by Paul Engler. Even in times of social distancing, building a collective, social response to the pandemic is our only salvation. [https://wagingnonviolence.org/2020/03/coronavirus-historic-trigger-event-needs-movement-response/?]
* Building Back Better Depends on Addressing the New Divides in our Economy by Katherine Trebeck. The spread of covid-19 shines a light on our economy — its inequalities, power structures and absurdities. The opportunity is to address some of the cleavages between parts of our society by building a wellbeing economy … [https://bellacaledonia.org.uk/2020/03/20/building-back-better-depends-on-addressing-the-new-divides-in-our-economy/]
* Green jobs are the answer to the coronavirus recession by Kate Aronoff. The climate case for making the government the employer of last resort. [https://newrepublic.com/article/156962/green-jobs-answer-coronavirus-recession]
* The Unexpected Reckoning: Coronavirus and Capitalism by Radhika Desai. The coronavirus pandemic has provoked a severe economic and social crisis, and a reckoning with capitalism’s unmanageability. [https://canadiandimension.com/articles/view/the-unexpected-reckoning-coronavirus-and-capitalism?]
* We can waste another crisis, or we can transform the economy by Kate Aronoff, Alyssa Battistoni, Daniel Aldana Cohen and Thea Riofrancos. It’s a perfect time to pour massive amounts of money into green public investment, both to shore up the economy and to put us on a path toward a low-carbon future. [https://jacobinmag.com/2020/03/green-new-deal-coronavirus-stimulus?fbclid=IwAR3mtx4BcYjX9OtqRWoEwBYguTfOkip8F8Q8Md_8FFwXOi1Fz21Qc8hyBJo]
* The Covid-19 crisis is a chance to do capitalism differently. By Mariana Mazzucato. Government has the upper hand for the first time in a generation. It must seize the moment.[https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/18/the-covid-19-crisis-is-a-chance-to-do-capitalism-differently]
* Johnson says this is war. But his response to Covid-19 is laughably inadequate. By Aditya Chakrabortty. We are facing a depression unless governments go big and fast. But Britain is charging into battle armed only with a peashooter. [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/18/boris-johnson-covid-19-response?CMP=share_btn_tw]
* We can’t let this economic crisis go to waste by Thomass Hanna and Carlos Santos Skandier. As the coronavirus threatens financial markets, any government intervention must be in close alignment with a green industrial strategy. [https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/oureconomy/we-cant-let-economic-crisis-go-waste/?mc_cid=d7f75fe303&mc_eid=978b07273d]


==Coronavirus, systems thinking and social change==

* Coronavirus, synchronous failure and the global phase-shift by Nafeez Ahmed. A systems analysis uncovering the light at the end of the tunnel. [https://medium.com/insurge-intelligence/coronavirus-synchronous-failure-and-the-global-phase-shift-3f00d4552940]
* 10 steps for rebalancing our world in times of crisis by Donnie Maclurcan. The coronavirus outbreak makes one thing abundantly clear: we’re interconnected and in this together. Yet our greatest vulnerability comes from a system in which money, resources, and power have accumulated for far too long. [https://medium.com/post-growth-institute/10-steps-for-rebalancing-our-world-during-times-of-crisis-b7ce5e78a128]
* Planning for the World After the Coronavirus Pandemic. By David Steven & Alex Evans. In just a few months, the tightly connected systems of a globalized world have transformed the novel coronavirus from a handful of cases in China to a global pandemic. But we have yet to see an international response that matches the scale of the threat. [https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/28611/planning-for-the-world-after-the-coronavirus-pandemic]

==Connections between climate, environment and coronavirus==

* Ecological Reflections on the corona virus. By Dr Vandana Shiva. One Planet, One Health — Connected through Biodiversity: From the forests, to our farms, to our gut microbiome.
* COVID-19 Can Help Wealthier Nations Prepare for a Sustainability Transition. By Maurie Cohen, Joseph Sarkis, Patrick Schröder, Magnus Bengtsson, Steven McGreevy, and Paul Dewick. The coronavirus situation provides, challenging though they may be, several leverage points for opening pathways to a sustainability transition.
* Coronavirus: The lacklustre UK measures are a repeat of our failures on climate change by James Dyke. We can only conceive of incremental change, even when disaster is staring us in the face.
* Bringing climate justice thinking to the COVID-19 pandemic, by Teresa Anderson & Niclas Hällström. Like the climate crisis, coronavirus and its spiralling impacts will hit women, the poor and marginalised the hardest — that is not an acceptable trade-off for reducing emissions


[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Politics]]