

=Bibliography=

Via Orsan Senalp et al.:


R. Carnap, The Unity of Science (Routledge, 2013).

L. von Bertalanffy, Symposium. General system theory: A new approach to unity of science - 1. Problems of general system theory. Human Biology 4, 23, 302–312 (1951). 

K.E. Boulding, General systems theory: The skeleton of science. Management Science 2, 3, 197–208 (1956).

N. Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine (Technology Press, 1948).

N. Wiener, Cybernetics. Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 3, 7, 2–4 (1950).

R.W. Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics (Champman & Hall, 1956).

E. Morin, Method: Towards a Study of Humankind. Translation of Methode Vol. 1 Nature De La Nature (1977), trans. J. R. L. Belanger (Peter Lang Publishing, 1992).

M. Gell-Mann, The Mind, the Brain and Complex Adaptive Systems (Routledge, 1994).

M. Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex (W.H. Freeman, 1994).

E. Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy: Toward a New Paradigm of Contemporary Thought (Routledge, 1972).

E. Laszlo, Evolution: The Grand Synthesis (New Science Library/Shambhala Publications, 1987).

E. Laszlo, The Interconnected Universe: Conceptual Foundations of Transdisciplinary Unified Theory (World Scientific, 1995). 

F. Capra, The Tao of Physics (Wildwood House, 1975).

F. Capra, The Web of Life: A New Synthesis of Mind and Matter (Flamingo, 1996).

F. Capra, P. L. Luisi, The Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision (Cambridge University Press, 2014). 

G. Midgley, Eds., Systems Thinking (Sage, 2003).

G.E. Mobus, M.C. Kalton, Principles of Systems Science (Springer, 2015).

M.C. Jackson, Critical Systems Thinking and Management of Complexity (Wiley, 2019) 

D. Cabrera, L. Cabrera, G.R. Midgley, Eds., Routledge Handbook of Systems Thinking (Routledge, 2021).

R.L. Flood, M.C. Jackson, Critical Systems Thinking (Springer, 1991).

R.L. Flood, N.R. Romm, Eds., Critical Systems Thinking: Current Research and Practice (Springer, 1996).

G. Minati, M.R. Abram, E. Pessa, Eds., Towards a Post-Bertalanffy Systemics (Springer, 2016).

G. Minati, “General System(s) Theory 2.0: A Brief Outline” in Towards a Post-Bertalanffy Systemics, G. Minati, M.R. Abram, E. Pessa, Eds. (Springer, 2016), pp. 211–219.

G. Minati, The past, present and possible future for systems. International Journal of Systems and Society 4, 1, 1–9 (2017).

B. Scott, Guest column: In defence of pure cybernetics. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 26, 4, 99–109 (2019).

D. Cabrera, L. Cabrera, G. Midgley, “The Four Waves of Systems Thinking” in Routledge Handbook of Systems Thinking, Eds. (Routledge, 2021).

J. Wilby, et al., “Philosophical Foundations for the Modern Systems Movement” in Systems Thinking: New Directions in Theory, Practice and Application, Proceedings of the 17th Conversation of the International Federation for Systems Research, St. Magdalena, Linz, Austria, 27 April - 2 May (2014), pp. 32-42.

D. Rousseau, J. Wilby, J. Billingham, S. Blachfellner, Manifesto for general systems transdisciplinarity. Systema 4, 1, 4-14 (2016).

D. Pouvreau, The project of “general systemology” instigated by Ludwig von Bertalanffy: Genealogy, genesis, reception and advancement. Kybernetes 42, 851–868 (2013).

W. Hofkirchner, M. Schafranek, “General System Theory” in Philosophy of Complex Systems. Vol. 10 in Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, C. Hooker Eds. (2011), pp. 177-194.

D. Pouvreau, M. Drack, On the history of Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s “general systemology” and on its relationship to cybernetics. International Journal of General Systems 36, 281–337 (2007).

D. Pouvreau, On the history of Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s “general systemology” and on its relationship to cybernetics - Part II: Contexts and developments of the systemological hermeneutics instigated by von Bertalanffy. International Journal of General Systems 43, 172–245 (2014).

M. Drack, D. Pouvreau, On the history of Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s “general systemology” and on its relationship to cybernetics – Part III: Convergences and divergences. International Journal of General Systems 44, 523–571 (2015).

L. von Bertalanffy, An outline of general system theory. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 1, 134–165 (1950).

L. von Bertalanffy, General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications (Braziller 1968). 

L. von Bertalanffy, A. Rapaport, General Systems:Yearbook of the Society for the Advancement of General Systems Theory 1 (1956).

A.A. Bogdanov, Bogdanov’s Tektology: Universal Science of Organisation – Book 1, trans. of the first part of the 1989 eds. by V. N. Sadovsky, A. Kartashov, V.V. Kelle, and P. Bystrov. P. Dudley Eds. (Centre for Systems Studies, University of Hull, 1996).

G. Midgley, “Systems Thinking: An Introduction and Overview” in Systems Thinking, Vol. 1, Eds. (Sage, 2003).

1989 eds. by V. N. Sadovsky, A. Kartashov, V.V. Kelle, and P. Bystrov. P. Dudley Eds. (Centre for Systems Studies, University of Hull, 1996).

G. Gorelik, Re-emergence of Bogdanov’s tektology in Soviet studies of organization. Academy of Management Journal 2, 345–357 (1975). 

G. Gorelik, Principal ideas of Bogdanov’s tektology: The universal science of organization. General Systems 20, 3–13 (1975). 

G. Gorelik, Bogdanov’s Tektology: Its Basic Concepts and Relevance to Modern Generalizing Sciences. Human Systems Management 1, 4, 327–337 (1980). 

G. Gorelik, Bogdanov’s Tektology: It’s Nature, Development, and Influence. Studies in Soviet Thought 26, 1, 39–57 (1983).

G. Gorelik, Bogdanov’s Tektologia, General Systems Theory, and Cybernetics. Cybernetics and Systems 18, 2, 157–175 (1987). 

M. Zelený, Cybernetics and General Systems – A Unitary Science? Kybernetes 8, 17–23 (1979)

P. Dudley, Back to basics? Tektology and General System Theory (GST). Systems Practice 9, 273–284 (1996).

P. Dudley, “Tektology: Birth of a Discipline?” in The Origins of Systems Thinking in Soviet, J. Biggart, P. Dudley, F. King, Eds. (Ashgate, 1998).

A. Gare, Aleksandr Bogdanov and Systems Theory. Democracy & Nature 6, 3, 341–359 (2000).

L. von Bertalanffy, “The Meaning of General System Theory” in General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications, Eds. (Braziller, 1968).

L. von Bertalanffy, The history and status of general system theory. The Academy of Management Journal 15, 4, 407–426 (1972).

D. Hammond, The Science of Synthesis: Exploring the Social Implications of General Systems Theory (University Press of Colorado, 2003). 

G. Nicolis, I. Prigogine, Exploring complexity: An introduction (W. H. Freeman, 1989).

E. Morin, On Complexity (Hampton Press, 2008).

W. Weaver, The emerging unity of science. Annals of the Japan Association for Philosophy of Science 2, 2, 98–113 (1962).

J. Biggart, P. Dudley, F. King, Eds., Alexander Bogdanov and the Origins of Systems Thinking in Russia (Ashgate, 1998).

R. Mattessich, The systems approach: Its variety of aspects. Journal of American Society for Information Science 30, 6, 383–394 (1982).

R. Mattessich, “Cybernetics and Systems Theory: A Search for Identity"” in The Study of Information: Interdisciplinary Messages, F. Machlup, U. Mansfield, Eds. (John Wiley & Sons, 1983), pp. 445–452. 

V.N. Sadovsky, Systems Thinking on the Threshold of a Third Millennium (The Polytechnique, 1991).

A.A. Bogdanov, Essays in Tektology, trans. G. Gorelik, 1st ed. (Intersystem Publications, 1980). 

P. Dudley, S. Poustilnik, Reading the Tektology: Provisional Findings, Postulates and Research Directions. Research Memorandum 7 (Centre for Systems Studies, University of Hull, 1995). 

A. Gare, Aleksandr Bogdanov’s history, sociology and philosophy of science. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 31, 2, 231–248 (2000).

A.A. Bogdanov, “Science and the Working Class,” 1918, trans. by F. Tompsett and republished in Culture as Organization in Early Soviet Thought, P. Tikka, Eds. (Spherical Book, 2016).
F. Heylighen, Cybernetics and the Integration of Knowledge. Principia Cybernetica Web (1991)(September 16, 2021).

S.A. Umpleby, “Cybernetics: A General Theory that Includes Command and Control,” prepared for the 20th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium (ICCRTS), Annapolis, MD (2015).

S.A. Umpleby, Second-order cybernetics as a fundamental revolution in science. Constructivist Foundations 11, 455–481 (2016).

J.G. Biggart, G. Gloveli, A. Yassour, Bogdanov and His Work: A Guide to the Published and Unpublished Works of Alexander A. Bogdanov (Malinovsky) (Ashgate, 1998).

J. Schaffer, Monism: The Priority of the Whole. Philosophical Review 119, 31–76 (2010).

J. Schaffer, “Monism” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, digital eds. (2018)(September 16, 2021).

J. Cat, “The Unity of Science” in The Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, digital eds. (2017)(September 16, 2021).
 
J.G. Fichte, Foundations of the Science of Knowledge, trans. from 1794 eds. (Cambridge University Press, 1982).
 
A.N. Whitehead, Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology (Macmillan Company, 1929).
 
D. Pouvreau, The Dialectical Tragedy of the Concept of Wholeness: Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s Biography Revisited (ISCE Publishing, 2009).

[[Category:Network Theory]]