Compiled by Michel Bauwens, June 20, 2011:

=Part 1: P2P as Intersubjective Process=


==A Articles, Essays, Blog and Wiki Entries==

Adler, P. and Heckscher, C. Towards Collaborative Community. Chapter 1, draft of: 
Corporation as a Collaborative Community. URL: http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~padler/research/01-Heckscher-chap01%20copy-1.pdf. Retrieved June 20, 2011

Aguiton, C. and Cardon, D.  2007. The strength of Weak Cooperation.  Communication & Strategies, No. 65, 1st Quarter 2007.  Excerpt on the thesis: Contemporary Individualization is Relational, via: http://p2pfoundation.net/Contemporary_Individualization_is_Relational. Retrieved June 20, 2011

Arias, E. , Eden, H. et al.  2000. Transcending the Individual Human Mind. Creating Shared Understanding through Collaborative Design. ToCHI submission. URL: http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~gerhard/papers/tochi2000.pdf .  Retrieved June 20, 2011

Atlee, Tom. 2009, Strategic synergy between individual and collective. Tom Atlee's Posterous, October 14, 2009. URL: http://tom-atlee.posterous.com/strategic-synergy-between-individual-and-coll.  Retrieved June 20, 2011

Bar-Yam, Y. 2002. Complexity Rising: From Human Beings to Human Civilization, a Complexity Profile. Reproduced from: Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS, Oxford, 2002). URL:  http://necsi.edu/projects/yaneer/Civilization.html. Retrieved June 20, 2011

Bauwens, M. 2006. Introduction on Individuality, Relationality, and Collectivity. P2P Foundation Wiki. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Introduction_on_Individuality,_Relationality,_and_Collectivity. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Bauwens, M. 2006. Peer production in an integral and intersubjective framework. Integral World, 2006. Originally written for the Conference of the Association for Critical Realism. Tromse, 2006. URL: http://www.integralworld.net/bauwens3.html .  Retrieved June 20, 2011

Bauwens, M. 2007. Passionate Production and the Happiness Surplus. International Conference. On “Happiness and Public Policy”. United Nations Conference Center (UNCC) Bangkok, Thailand. 18-19 July 2007.  URL: http://ppdoconference.org/session_papers/session14/session14_michel.pdf .  Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Bauwens, M. 2008. Peer to Peer | The New Relational Dynamic. Kosmos Journal. Spring | Summer 2008. Access via ToC:http://www.kosmosjournal.org/kjo/backissue/s2008/index.shtml

Bauwens, M. with Arvidsson, A. and Peitersen, N. 2008. The Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy. Journal of Futures Studies, May 2008, 12(4): 9 – 20.  URL: http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/12-4/A02.pdf. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Bauwens, M. with Father Vincent Rossi.. Dialogue on the Cyber-Sacred and the Relationship Between Technological and Spiritual Development. In Cybersociology. Issue Seven: Religion Online & Techno-Spiritualism. September 1999. Retrieved from http://www.cybersociology.com/files/7_bauwensrossi.html

Bechler, R. 2009. Unselfish Individualism. Open Democracy, September 10, 2009. URL: http://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/rosemary_bechler/plurality_and_the_individual. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Belden, D. 2009. A Collective Awakening? Buddhist Reflections on Copenhagen. Tikkun Daily, December 16th, 2009. URL: http://www.tikkun.org/tikkundaily/2009/12/16/a-collective-awakening-buddhist-reflections-on-copenhagen/ . Retrieved June 20, 2011. Contains excerpt from David Loy, “On the Relationship between Individual and Collective Awakening”. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/On_the_Relationship_between_Individual_and_Collective_Awakening. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Benkler, Y. and Nissenbaum, H. Commons-based Peer Production and Virtue. The Journal of Political Philosophy: Volume 14, Number 4, 2006, pp. 394–419. URL: http://www.nyu.edu/projects/nissenbaum/papers/jopp_235.pdf. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Daniels, M. 2009. Perspectives and vectors in transpersonal development. Michael Daniels. Transpersonal Psychology Review, Vol 13, No. 1, 87-99. (April, 2009). Excerpt: The Difference between Descending Depth-Psychological vs. Relational-Participatory Extending Aprroach to Spirituality. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Difference_between_Descending_Depth-Psychological_vs._Relational-Participatory_Extending_Aprroach_to_Spirituality.  Retrieved June 20, 2011.

De Landa, M. n.d. Meshworks, Hierarchies, and Interfaces. Zero News Datapool. URL: http://t0.or.at/delanda/meshwork.htm . Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Deresiewicz, W. 2009. The End of Solitude. The Chronicle Review, January 30, 2009. URL: http://chronicle.com/article/The-End-of-Solitude/3708. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Fiske, Alan P. 1992. The Four Elementary Forms of Sociality: Framework for a Unified Theory of Social Relations. Psychological Review, 99:689-723

Fox, J. Virtue. 2008. The 'Commons', and all things computer. P2P Foundation Wiki. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Virtue_and_the_Digital_Commons. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Hartzog, P.  2007. Oneness, Nihilism, and the Multitude. P2P Foundation wiki, October 17, 2010. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Oneness,_Nihilism,_and_the_Multitude. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Hopkins, J. 2007. In The Presence of Networks: A Meditation on the Architectures of Participation. Presentation for the Pixelache 2007 festival publication), Helsinki, 17 March 2007. Excerpt via: http://p2pfoundation.net/Meditation_on_Participation. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Jurgenson, N. 2011. Digital Dualism versus Augmented Reality. Cyborgology blog,  February 24, 2011. URL: http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2011/03/10/virtual-mediated-and-augmented-reality/ Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Lahood, G.A. 2010. Paradise Unbound. Relational Spirituality and other Heresies in New Age Transpersonalism. G. A. Lahood . Draft of paper  submitted The International Journal of Transpersonal Studies. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Relational_Spirituality_and_other_Heresies_in_New_Age_Transpersonalism. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Logan, R. 2009. The Suppressed Ideas of Kropotkin on Evolution . Trust is the only Currency blog, October 25, 2009. URL:  http://trustcurrency.blogspot.com/2009/12/suppressed-ideas-of-kropotkin-on.html. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Noubel, J.F. 2008. Collective Boddhisattvas.. Kosmos Journal, Spring 2008. URL: http://www.thetransitioner.org/Kosmos_Journal_Spring_2008_JF_Noubel.pdf . Retrieved June 20, 2011. Excerpt: Creating Invisible Architectures for Collective Wisdom. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Creating_Invisible_Architectures_for_Collective_Wisdom. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Olson, G. 2008. We Empathize, Therefore We Are: Toward A Moral Neuropolitics. Znet, January 18, 2008. URL: http://www.zcommunications.org/we-empathize-therefore-we-are-toward-a-moral-neuropolitics-by-gary-olson. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Penzin, A.  The Soviets of the Multitude: On Collectivity and Collective Work: 
An Interview with Paolo Virno. Mediations, Vol. 25, No. 1, n.d. Excerpt, Paolo Virno on Collectivity and Individuality. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Paolo_Virno_on_Collectivity_and_Individuality. Retrieved June 20, 2011

Pollard, D. 2009. What It Means to Be Human: Being Covalent Instead of Ambivalent About Community. How To Save the World blog, August 13, 2009. URL: http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2009/08/13.html#a2423. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Pollard, D. 2007. The Dynamics of Social Networks.  How To Save the World blog, July 26, 2007. URL: http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2007/07/26.html#a1934. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Postle, D. 2010. Honouring the Psychological Commons: Peer to Peer Networks and Post-Professional Psychopractice. AN eIPNOSIS REVIEW. March 8, 2010 
URL = http://ipnosis.org/RTFDOCS/P2P_essayeIpnosisReview.doc . Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Spivack, N. 2008. Towards Healthy Virtual Selves for Collective Groups. P2P Foundation Wiki, 1 November 2008. URL: http://p2pfoundation.net/Towards_Healthy_Virtual_Selves_for_Collective_Groups. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Stewart, J. 2006. The Future Evolution of Consciousness. ECCO Working paper, 2006-10, version 1: November 24, 2006. URL:  http://cogprints.org/5270/1/Consciousness-Evolution.pdf. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Whitworth, Brian and Alex. 2010. The social environment model: Small heroes and the evolution of human society. First Monday, Volume 15, Number 11 - 1 November 2010 
URL = http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/3173/2647 Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Zubizarreta, R. 2006. Primary vs Secondary Individual-Group Mentality. P2P Foundation Wiki, July 2, 2006. URL:  http://p2pfoundation.net/Primary_vs_Secondary_Individual-Group_Mentality.  Retrieved June 20, 2011.


==Books==

Chayko, M. 2002. How We Form Social Bonds and Communities in the Internet Age. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press.

de Waal, F. 2009. The Age of Empathy: Nature's Lessons for a Kinder Society. Harmony Books.

Fiske, Alan P. 1991a. Structures of Social Life: The Four Elementary Forms of Human Relations. New York: Free Press.

Fox, j. 2007. Digital Virtues,  Lulu.com, ID:1021109 

Himanen, P. 2002 The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age. Random House.

Hjalmarson, J. and La Grou, J. 2008. Voices of the Virtual World: Participative Technology and the Ecclesial Revolution. Wikkiklesia Press.

Henrich, Natalie and Joseph. 2007. Why Humans Cooperate: A Cultural and Evolutionary Explanation. Oxford University Press.

Heron. j. 2006. Participatory Spirituality: A Farewell to Authoritarian Religion, Lulu Press. 

Kane, P. 2004.. The Play Ethic. A Manifesto for a different way of living. Macmillan. 

Keltner,  D., Marsh J. et al. 2009. The Compassionate Instinct: The Science of Human Goodness, WW Norton.

Kumar, S. You are Therefore I am: A Declaration of Dependence. Green Books, 2002 
Lo, A. 2008. Open collaboration. Lulu. URL = http://www.lulu.com/content/3664657 . Retrieved June 20, 2011.

Rifkin, J. 2009. The Empathic Civilization: The Race to Global Consciousness. In A World In Crisis. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin. 

Tomasello, M. 2009. Why We Cooperate. Boston Review Books.

Turke, Sherry. 2010. Alone Together: Why We Expect More From Computers and Less From Each Other. Basic Books.

Turow, J. and Tsui, L.  Eds. 2008. The Hyperlinked Society: Questioning Connections in the Digital Age. Joseph Turow and Lokman Tsui, Editors. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Watts, D. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. Watts, Duncan. Norton Press.

Vedro, S. 2007. Digital Dharma. A User’s Guide to Expanding Consciousness in the Infosphere. Steven R. Vedro. Quest Books.

Wilkinson, P.  and Pickett, K. 2009. The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2009

Willson, M. 2006. Technically Together: Rethinking Community within Techno-Society. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.



[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Research]]