'''Book: Nicholas Carr. The Big Switch: Our New Digital Destiny. Norton, 2008.'''

on  the shift from in-house computer systems to ‘cloud computing

Website of the book: http://www.nicholasgcarr.com/bigswitch/

Nicholas Carr’s blog: http://www.roughtype.com/


=Summary=

From the publisher:

"A hundred years ago, companies stopped producing their own power with steam engines and generators and plugged into the newly built electric grid. The cheap power pumped out by electric utilities not only changed how businesses operated but also brought the modern world into existence. Today a similar revolution is under way. Companies are dismantling their private computer systems and tapping into rich services delivered over the Internet. This time it's computing that's turning into a utility. The shift is already remaking the computer industry, bringing new competitors like Google to the fore and threatening traditional stalwarts like Microsoft and Dell. But the effects will reach much further. Cheap computing will ultimately change society as profoundly as cheap electricity did. In this lucid and compelling book, Nicholas Carr weaves together history, economics, and technology to explain why computing is changing—and what it means for all of us."


=More Information=

#Review by Geert Lovink at http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/2008/05/26/nicholas-carr-the-big-switch-a-review/
#Carr’s unbundling thesis, a fragment of The Big Switch:
http://www.britannica.com/blogs/2008/04/the-great-unbundling-newspapers-the-net/
#Andrew Orlowski’s review of The Big Switch
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2008/01/17/nick_carr_big_switch_review/
#See also: [[Grid Computing]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Technology]]