'''* Article: Rodrigue, Barry H. 2022. “Big History — A Study of All Existence: Part 1: A World Connected.” Journal of Big History 5 (1): 1-47.DOI''' | [https://doi.org/10.22339.jbh.v5i1.5101 doi]

URL = https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582

''"This is a brief overview of the field of big history and my personal reflection on its significance."''


=Excerpts=

==The [[Great Drying]]==

Barry Rodriguez:

"Then another period of aridification began 8000 years ago—the  Great  Drying.  In  North  Africa,  wetlands  evaporated as grazing herds compounded the climate problem.  Prairies  degraded  into  Sahara  dunes.  Some  adapted  to  desert  life,  such  as  the  Bedouin,  but  oth-ers relocated to new areas of water: the Mediterranean, Lake Chad, and the Niger and Nile rivers."

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


==The [[Prehistory of Big History]]==

Barry Rodriguez:

"Far from just a European phenomenon, the new global engagement had grown from the silk-road system into a planetary sphere of interaction that is more properly designated as ‘global civilization.’ Neo-Confucian  scholar  Miura  Baien  (1723–1789)  merged   Japanese   concepts   with   Chinese  and  Euro-pean  ideas  to  develop  a  new  vision  of  the  world  and  existence, as in his masterpiece, 玄語  [D e e p    Wo r d s]. Miura’s  work  has  been  compared  favourably  with  the  later  studies  of Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859).  Anthropologist  Keiji  Iwata,  for  example,  sees  Miura’s   work  as  an  expression  of  Eastern  cosmology  /   existence,   with  Humboldt’s  studies  expressing  Western  perspectives.  Humboldt  had  studied  at  the  University  of  Göttingen,  where  his  professors  sought  to  unify  knowledge  and  deploy  it  so  individuals,  society, and nature  could coexist. His five-volume study, were big histories, since they began with cosmology  (as  it  was  then understood) and subsequently linked in the human genealogy.”

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


==The evolution of 19th-20th Century  Cross-Disciplinary Studies==

Barry Rodriguez:

"Despite growing institutional resistance to universal models of knowledge, holistic frameworks continued. Geographer  Peter  Kropotkin’s  Siberian  natural  his-tory  fieldwork  in  the  1860s  and  1870s  contributed  to  his  theories  of  global  social  responsibility,  as  in  Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution in 1902. The next year, biogeographer Alfred Wallace, co-discoverer of evolutionary theory with Charles Darwin, released his syn-thesis  of  existence,  Man’s  Place  in  the  Universe.  Such  macro-thinking  percolated  widely  through  popular and ecumenical culture. Author  H.  G.  Wells’s  Outline  of  History  (1920)  was  updated  with  new  scientific  breakthroughs  over  the  next  fifty  years.  Engineer  Hiram  Maxim  composed  Life’s  Place  in  the  Cosmos  (1933),   which   considered   the  existence  of  life  beyond  Earth,  based  on  the  latest scientific knowledge. Scholar, artist, and Nobelist Rabindranath Tagore encouraged the global-networking  of  science  and  philosophy,  ideas  that  he  collated  in  Bengali  essays  as  विश्व परिचय हैै  [Our  Uni-verse] in 1937. Christian scholars like palaeontologist Pierre  Teilhard  de  Chardin  and  astronomer  Georges  Lemaître  advanced  science  and  how  it  related  to  the  human condition.15By the 1940s, universal notions entered primary education, as in Maria Montessori’s  pedagogy of cosmic education, adopted from an English model and developed while she was interned in India during the Second  World  War.16  Similarly,  ecologist  Kinji  Imanishi  composed his thoughts of life’s commonalities in 生物の世界  [The  World  of  Living  Things]  in  1941,  on  the  eve  of  his  military  deployment.  He  survived  the  war  and  expanded  on  his  concept  of  自然学shizengaku or  ‘deep  nature  thought’  as  an  integrated  view  of  ex-istence.17Each  rendition  incorporated  the  latest  discoveries  of science and considered how they could  be applied to  society.  In  industry,  cross-disciplines  arose  in  new  fields  like  astro/physics  and  bio/chemistry.  The  scientific  and  technological  ferment  of  the  World  War  and  Cold  War  eras  led  to  new  data,  which  required  ever-larger  frames  of  reference,  from  aerospace  and  oceanography   to  medicine  and  computer  science.  It  was a time of new frontiers. In 1949, the United Nations Educational, Scientific & Cultural Organization (UNESCO) set up a commission to assemble a history of all humankind, producing a multilingual, multi-volume series: The History of Humanity (1966, 2009). 

The Space Race also galvanized efforts for new interdisciplinary discoveries, while so-cio-historical scholarship struggled to understand the post- colonial world through its many disciplinary and social lenses. Soviet  scholars  developed  an  integrated  pedagogy  that   spanned   the   natural   and   social   sciences.

Astrophysicist Josif Shklovsky wrote an early book of this new view of existence: Вселенная. Жизнь. Разум. [Universe,  Life,  Intelligence]  in  1962.  Four  years  later,  an  expanded  English  adaptation  was  produced  with  US  astrophysicist  Carl  Sagan  as  Intelligent  Life  in  the  Universe. This  international  co-operation  was  not  accidental  as  a  similar  macro-study  had  developed  in  the  Unit-ed States. From the 1920s through the 1950s, Harlow Shapley had promoted cosmography, a study that examined the interlinked nature of stars, the Earth, life, and  humanity  at  the  Harvard  College  Observatory.  In the 1960s, Carl Sagan offered his rendition, and, in 1974,  astrophysicists  George  Field  and  Eric  Chaisson  began a course on cosmic evolution.

Likewise,  in  the  1970s,  astrophysicist  G.  Siegfried  Kutter  integrated  celestial  studies  with  studies  of  life  and society as part of the cutting-edge, interdisciplinary  course  structure  at  Evergreen  State  College.  His  synthesis  appeared  as  Universe  and  Life:  Origins  and  Evolution.

Astronomer  Tom  Bania  taught  Cosmic  Evolution:  Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Life  at  Boston  University, while Earth scientist Michael Rampino had organized  The  History  of  the  Universe  from  the  Big  Bang to the Big Brain at New York University.

This wide thinking reflected the high-stakes competition going on among the respective allies of the Soviet Union and the US in the second half of the twentieth  century.  Many  of  these  scholars  began  to  move  beyond the technological rivalry of the times in order to look at the possibilities  of peaceful coexistence, not just with other humans but with our habitat and other lifeforms.  This  progress  toward  assembling  a  big  pic-ture of our place in the vast scheme of things emerged in other parts of the world as well. Hubert   Reeves   studied   physics   with   developers   of  the  atomic  bomb  and  became  an  astrophysicist  at  France’s  Centre  national  de  la  recherche  scientifique.  He brought his studies down to Earth in popular books like Patience dans l’azure: l’évolution cosmique [Patience in the Azure: Cosmic Evolution] in 1981, where he explained the stars, along with the significance of water, Einstein’s dog, and jazz. His work has become a main-stay  of  the  environmental   movement  and  a  youthful  audience seeking to change the world.

In  the  1980s,  Chinese  scholars,  including  the  celebrated rocket scientist, Qian Xuesen, began studies of complexity. They developed a paradigm that served as a  meta-synthesis  of  scientific  knowledge,  开放的复杂巨系统 [The Open Complex Giant System].

Such global awareness took place in many fields and began to produce a wealth of integrated knowledge about our existence. Other works included bio-geologist Preston Cloud’s Cosmos,  Earth  and  Man  (1978)  and  astro-physicist  Erich  Jantsch’s  The  Self-Organizing  Universe  (1980).  Mathematician  Antonio  Vélez   in   Colombia  began  a  trilogy  on  universal  history  with  Del  Big  Bang  al  Homo  sapiens  [From  the  Big  Bang  to  Homo  Sapiens] in 1984.

Evolutionary  biologist  Lynn  Margulis  developed  a  universal view of existence via microbiology, which led her into collaboration with chemist James Lovelock to study self-regulating global systems; Lovelock’s friend and  neighbour,  author  William  Golding,  helped  to  name this the Gaia hypothesis. 26 Some works became very popular. The television series, Cosmos, with Carl Sagan (1980), was viewed by over 500 million people in  sixty  countries,   while  the  book,  A  Brief  History  of  Time (1988), by astrophysicist Stephen Hawking, sold over nine million copies.27This  search  for  meaning  also  found  expression  in  various   faith   traditions.   Philosopher   Jiddu   Krishnamurti  generated  an  understanding  that  embraced  humanity, nature, and the cosmos, as in his Beginnings of Learning (1975). A global movement of ‘Teilhard as-sociations’ sprang up, based on Teilhard de Chardin’s thinking in Le phénomène humain (1955). One of these activists, cultural historian Thomas Berry, expounded a  ‘new  story’  that  integrated  a  global  narrative  of  hu-manity  and  nature,  as  in  his  The  Dream  of  the  Earth  (1988). Both Krishnamurti and Berry set up organizations that developed education programs, multimedia productions, and converged with the new science and scholarship in the global articulation of holistic thinking.

Parallel  to  this  activity,  social  and  economic  studies  coalesced  with  international  relations  in  an  effort to comprehend the many faces of global development. Economic historian Andre Gunder Frank moved global  studies  outside  Cold  War  frameworks  to  describe  a  one-world  system,  while  social  scientist  Immanuel  Wallerstein  envisioned  interlocking  subsystems.  This  socio-historical work began to merge with larger paradigms,  as  when  economist  Graeme  Snooks  moved  his Theory of Global Dynamic Systems to encompass Earth history."

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


==[[Macro-Sociology as Big History Approach in China]]==

Barry Rodriguez:

"Physical  scientists  still  use  the  term,  cosmic  evolution, while the other designations remain in use, such as open complex giant system among cybernetic scholars  in  China  and  the  story  among  progressive  Chris-tians,  or  under  no  special  name  whatsoever,  when  seen  as  just  an  extension  of  a  discipline,  as  in  mac-ro-sociology. This holistic trajectory continued, arising elsewhere quite independently and often acquiring regional identities. In  China,  some  social  scientists  began  to  adapt  ideas  for  an  integrated  view  of  history  from  their  physical science colleagues.   Historians Qi Tao (1991) and Cheng  Ming (1994) each argued for interdisciplinary and holistic interpretations of ancient history. In  1996,  science  historians  Dong  Guangbi and Tian Kunyu published The Origin of Heaven and Earth—Natural Evolution and the Birth of Life. Three years later,  historian Ma  Shili, at Nanka  University, extended his text on world history to include cosmic origins  and  the  evolution  of    life. In  2000,  historian Huang Liuzhu called for uniting  natural  science and   human histories, urging his colleagues at Northwest University (Xi’an, Shaanxi) to initiate such a program.

...

The Asian Big History Association came together as a result of this work in China, Japan, and Korea. Its organizational meeting was held at the second IBHA conference in San Rafael, California with Sun, Tsujimura and  Kim  as  organizers,  along  with  Barry  Rodrigue.  Their initial work forged more solid links between its members. In 2014, Rodrigue accepted an offer as visiting scholar in big history at Shandong Normal University  in  Jinan,  Shandong  Province,  China.  This  was  arranged  by  Sun  Yue  with  historian  Qi  Tao,  who  had  advanced big history models twenty years earlier and had  become  deputy  governor  of  Shandong  Province.  This  assignment  was  in  preparation  for  the  International  Congress  of  Historical  Sciences,  held  the   next  year in Jinan. In  2013,  English  translator  and  historian  Sun  Yue  joined  the  IBHA  board  and,  as  editor  of  the  Global History Review, produced, with his colleagues, the first issue of a journal on big history  in China.55 In Beijing, CITIC  Press  also  began  publishing  a  series  of  books  on  big  history,  which  its  editor,  Ma  Xiaoling,  wrote  “... gives us all a broader vision, more possibilities and more attention to our common human future.”56In August 2015, Rodrigue and Sun organized a panel  on  big  history  for  the  ICHS  conference  in  Jinan,  where they joined the board of the Network of Glob-al  &  World  History  Organizations,  along  with  Low-ell  Gustafson  of  the  IBHA.  Sun  described  his  studies  about  the  twin  sides  of  humanity’s  perplexing  search  for social stability: its need for harmony and creativity that exists alongside witch hunts and conflict. He sees its resolution as a central issue of big history. Atmospheric  scientist  Alexis  Lau  劉啟漢  taught  at  the Hong Kong University of Science & Technology for twenty years and served as director of its Institute for the  Environment.  He  thought  about  cancelling  their  general  education  course  on  climate  change  because  he  saw  how  students  became  pessimistic  after  taking  it. Then he heard about big history from his colleague, Robert  Gibson,  and,  in  2015,  merged  it,  along  with sustainability  studies,  into  the  climate  change  course.  The  result  was  dynamic.  The  next  year,  graduate  student  Aidan  W.  H.  Wong  王瑋軒  joined  him  in  this  work and attended the third IBHA conference in Amsterdam. Their course,  Big History, Sustainability and Climate  Change,  remains  in  the  core  curriculum.  In  2017, they collaborated with the Hong Kong Academy for Gifted Education on a macro-sustainability course for secondary students. Two years later, Wong worked with Hong Kong scholars to publish a course book, Big History: A Scientific Origin Story (2019).58A public advocate in Taiwan, Gavin Lee first learned of big history in 2017 while he was writing a book on The  Maritime  Silk  Road  and  World  Civilization.  He  found that big history provided a more holistic way to understand  the  world’s  interconnectedness.  The  next  year,  he  started  Worldviews  Academy  as  a  vehicle  to  encourage  big  history,  beginning  with  a  six-class  sequence for the general public and for high school. After Taiwan’s K-12 education reform in 2019, Ming Dao High  School  added  this  course  as  an  official  elective  under the guidance of its principal, Albert Wang. Oters followed."

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


==Overview of the more recent Big History approaches==

Barry Rodriguez:

"Sociologist   Johan   Goudsblom   and   biochemist/social   historian   Fred   Spier   first   encountered  big history upon reading David Christian’s “The Case for ‘Big  History”’  (1991).  On  a  visit  to  Australia  the  next  year,  Goudsblom  met  Christian  and  brought  back  a  copy of his syllabus. He and Fred Spier started a course in  big  history  at  the  University  of  Amsterdam  two  years  later.  

Spier  then  produced  

* The  Structure  of  Big  History: From the Big Bang until Today (1996), in which he  outlined  the  parameters  of  the  new  field.  He  also  introduced  big  history  at  several  other  universities,  such as Eindhoven University of Technology and Amsterdam University College. These initiatives continue through the work of Esther Quaedackers, who herself contributed the important concepts of little big history and local big history to encapsulate focused studies in a big history context. In this way, three generations of a dynamic academic lineage have given continuity to big history in the Netherlands and Europe.

Eric   Chaisson’s   works   serve   as   a   standard   for   physical scientists, as with 

* Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of  Complexity  in  Nature  (2001).  

Akop  Nazaretyan  synthesized his principles in 

* Civilization Crises within the  Context  of  Universal  History:  Self-organization,  Psychology   and   Forecasts   (2001).   

David   Christian   developed  his  

* Maps  of  Time:  An  Introduction  to  Big  History (2004), while Cynthia Stokes Brown produced 

* Big  History:  From  the  Big  Bang  to  the  Present  (2007), which she worked into a continuum of world history. 

Fred Spier produced his own overview in 

* Big  History and the Future of Humanity (2010).

These and other works have been translated into world languages and appear in new editions; thus, a solid core of literature came  into  service  of  the  field.  These  works  also  drew  scholars  whose  works  had  already  moved  in   these  directions. "

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


===Bibliographic Details===

* Brown, Cynthia Stokes. 2007. Big History: From the Big Bang to the Present. New York: The New Press

* Christian, David. 2004. Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big History. Berkeley: University of California.

* Cosmic Evolution: The [[Rise of Complexity in Nature]]. Eric Chaisson. (2001)

==The [[Spiritual and Religious Aspects of Big History]]==

Barry Rodriguez:

"In 1954, the Institute on Religion in  an  Age  of  Science  (IRAS)  formed,  which  included  astronomer  Harlow  Shapley,  a  founder  of  cosmography, which had led  to studies in Cosmic Evolution at Harvard  University.  IRAS  helped  found  Zygon:  Journal  of  Religion  and  Science  twelve  years  later,  and  its  contributors  included  leading  scholars  and  educators  in  macro-historical  studies,  like  astrophysicist  Eric  Chaisson and biologist Ursula Goodenough.74Archbishop Lazar Puhalo of the Orthodox Church in  America  had  been  a  dynamic  and  early  advocate  for  science,  rationalism,  and  faith.  His  book,  On  the  Neurobiology of Sin (2010), served as a bridge between the two cultures. He joined the dialogue of big history, speaking, along with other big historians, at the Global Futures 2045 conferences in Moscow (2012) and New York  (2013).  He  raised  important  moral  questions  about issues like immortality and artificial intelligence and participated in the IBHA conferences.

Cosmologist  Brian  Swimme  worked  with  Catholic  philosopher  Thomas  Berry  and  began  the  Center  for  the  Story  of  the  Universe  in  1989,  which  was  affiliated  with  the  California  Institute  of  Integral  Studies  in  San Francisco. This led them into deeper collaboration with religion scholars John Grimm and Mary Tucker, who  founded  the  Forum  on  Religion  and  Ecology  at  Yale University in 2006. Their production of The Journey of the Universe (2011) was a multimedia synthesis of Berry’s and others’ views of spiritual meaning in the cosmos. Parallel to this work, the Philadelphia Center for Religion and Science had grown into the Metanexus Institute by 1997 and, through its director, William Grassie, became a supporter of big history. Jennifer  Morgan,  a  journalist  and  educator,  also  grew out of this tradition of the Universe Story. After participating  in  an  Earth  Literacy  Program  at  Gene-sis Farm in Blairstown, New Jersey, she composed the Universe Story Trilogy for children between 2002 and 2006, consulting with noted scholars like astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson and anthropologist Jane Goodall. She then developed the Deeptime Network (2014) with a mission to unite all faith traditions with each other and with science.77Pope  Francis’s  Laudato  Si’,  On  Care  for  our  Com-mon Home (2015) led to renewed actions by Catholics around the world to conserve the planet. Among them, in  2016,  Prashant  Olalekar  and  Orla  Hazra  merged  these ideas with Thomas Berry’s “New Story” and a big history paradigm to establish their course, Awakening to Cosmic Compassion, at the Department of Interreligious Studies, St. Xavier’s College, Mumbai.78Educator  Luis  Calingo  had  served  as  Provost  of  Dominican  University  of  California  when  it  added  big history to its core curriculum. In 2015, he became President  of  Holy  Angel  University,  a  major  research  institute in central Luzon, Philippines (his home area) and, two  years later, sent professors to the Summer Institute in Big History at Dominican. Holy Angel  then began a two-course big history sequence the following year.  With  the  largest  Roman  Catholic  population  in  Asia,  but  acknowledging  the  Philippines’  Islamic  and  animistic traditions, Holy Angel promotes big history along with its many philosophical traditions.79While much of the overt and well-publicized efforts at  rapprochement  between  science  and  religion  exist  in a western context, especially among Christians, that does not mean that such efforts do not exist elsewhere. Besides  helping  Malaysia’s  farmers  adapt  to  changing  land  and  climate,  soil  scientist  Shamshuddin  bin  Ju-sop  also  had  been  active  in  guiding  Muslims  to  see  how Islam and modern science are bound together, as in  his  popular  text,  The  Earth  Story:  Lessons  from  the  Quran and Science (2006). Similarly, physician H. Su-darshan, a Vedic scholar living among the Soliga tribal people of South India for over forty years, adapted his worldviews and medical practices in a complex weave of science and community service, as delivered by his medical/educational NGOs, the Karuna Trust, and the Vivekananda Girijana Kalyana Kendra.80While big history discussions often centre on urban forms of education, it must be kept in mind that many tribal societies from which civilization grew maintain holistic  and  inclusive  concepts  of  existence.  It  is  acknowledged  that  their  low-impact  survival  strategies  could  help  correct  the  lifestyle  of  dominant  societies.  Far  from  being  an  exotic  primitivism,  or  a  return  to  nature,   tribal   experience   encompasses   Traditional   Ecological  Knowledge  (TEK),  while  connecting  with  the  scientific  community,  as  in  the  1994  founding  of  the  Alaska  Native  Science  Commission.  Traditional  societies have a major potential to re-envision our future in a big  history context. Such   bridges   have   already   been   opened,   as   in   biologist Edward Wilson’s The Creation: An Appeal to Save Life on Earth (2006) and recently led to the global anthology, Science,  Religion,  and  Deep  Time  (2022), edited   by   big   historians   Lowell   Gustafson,   Barry   Rodrigue, and David Blanks."

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)


=More information=

Via [https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582]:

==Textbooks==

*  the first  college-level  textbook,  Big  History:  Between  Nothing  and  Everything


==Visualizations and Timelines==

"Eric Chaisson and his colleagues visualized their evolutionary models in 

* Cosmic Origins: A Logarithmic Rendering of Look-Back Time (2001) and 

* Arrow  of  Time:  A  Linear  Rendering  of  Forward  Time  (2007).  

Designer  Roland  Saekow  and  Walter  Alvarez  worked to develop their own highly interactive time-line, Chronozoom (2010)."


==Conferences==

"The first world conference on big history took place at the International University of Nature, Society and Humanity  in  the  Soviet-era  science  city  of  Dubna,  Russia in November 2005 on the theme of Big History and Synergetics. As a result of this gathering, an edition of Social  Evolution  &  History  was  devoted  to big history that year and included many of  the   field’s  innovators.  

In  October  2009 The  question  was  discussed  by  the  panel  for  '''Macroevolution:  Hierarchy,  Structure, Laws and Self- Organization at the Russian Academy  of  Sciences’  Fifth  Conference  on  Hierarchy &  Power  in  the  History  of  Civilizations  in  Moscow  in  2009. Barry Rodrigue, with other big historians, began assembling a global directory and bibliography to see who was doing such macro-studies.'''

...

In 2011, the IBHA fielded six panels and two roundtables at the 20th World History Association conference in Beijing, where board member Craig Benja-min  was  a  keynote  speaker.47  In  February  2012,  most  of the board presented at the Global Futures 2045 conference in Moscow, which Akop Nazaretyan and Barry Rodrigue co-organized with media executive Dimitry Itskov. The inaugural conference of the IBHA was held at Grand Valley State University in Michigan in 2012 on the theme of Teaching and Researching Big History: Exploring a New Scholarly Field. Independent  efforts  sprang  up  and  joined  with  big  history  associations,  such  as  Wendy  Curtis’s  The  Big-gest Picture: From the Formation of Atoms to the Emergence  of  Societies  (2013).  Besides  the  IBHA,  several  independent regional centres formed, often with additional themes of action. In 2011, the Eurasian Center for Megahistory & System Forecasting came together in the Russian Academy of Sciences’ Oriental Institute. 

They  focused  on  the  predictive  potential  of  historical  trends  to  understand  human  activity  and  avert  crisis,  and  co-present  conferences.  Akop  Nazaretyan,  a  scholar and advisor in conflict resolution, served as its first director. The Eurasian Center continued its study of macro-history with Uchitel Publishing, managed by Leonid Grinin and Andrey Korotayev. Their almanac, Evolution, is devoted to big history."

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P History]]