
'''* Article: Big Data In Our Hands. Berliner Gazette, 2015'''

URL = https://berlinergazette.de/big-data-in-our-hands/?p=20

Big issue and policy overview


=Text=

Excerpts via:

* [[Commons Data Centers‎‎]]

* [[Governance of the Data Commons]]‎‎ 

* [[From Open Data To Commons Data‎]] 

* [[Big Data Commons]]‎‎

* [[Commons Data‎]] 


=Bibliography=

* Tragedy of the Data Commons, by Jane Bambauer (formerly Jane Yakowitz), Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, Vol. 25, 2011. [http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1789749]

* Is Data the Oil of the 21 Century or a Commons? (German-language)
by Krystian Woznicki, Berliner Gazette, 2011.

* Big data and genetic material should be commons (German-language)
Social anthropologist Shalini Randeria, Principal of the Viennese Institute for Human Sciences (IWM), advocates the rediscovery of the concept of “commons” that are beyond the control of governments and commercial companies.

* The temptations of Big Data (German-language)
by Jeanette Hofmann. Die Versuchungen von Big Data. In: Markus Beckedahl und Andre Meister (Hg.): Jahrbuch Netzpolitik 2012. Von A wie ACTA bis Z wie Zensur. Berlin: epubli, S. 74-79. 2012.

* Socialize the Data Centres! by Evgeny Morozov. New Left Review 91, January-February 2015. [http://newleftreview.org/II/91/evgeny-morozov-socialize-the-data-centres]

* Big data from the bottom up. by Nick Couldry and Alison Powell. Big Data & Society, 1 (2). ISSN 2053-9517, 2014. [http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/57941/1/Couldry_Powell_Big-data-from-the-bottom-up_2014.pdf]

* Data is not an asset, it’s a liability. by Marko Karppinen. Data is not an asset, it’s a liability. September 2015. [https://www.richie.fi/blog/data-is-a-liability.html]

* Alternatives to the controlling corporations (German-language)
By Ayad Al-Ani. Alternativen zu den kontrollierenden Konzernen. Netzpiloten, February 2015.

* Big Data’s Radical Potential. by Pankaj Mehta. Today, big data is used to boost profits and spy on civilians. But what if it was harnessed for the social good? JacobinMag, March 2015. [https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/03/big-data-drones-privacy-workers/]

* Data as commodities (German-language)
by Herbert Zech. Daten als Wirtschaftsgut – Überlegungen zu einem „Recht des Datenerzeugers“. Gibt es für Anwenderdaten ein eigenes Vermögensrecht bzw. ein übertragbares Ausschließlichkeitsrecht? CR, No. 3/2015.

* Revised data retention sought
by Merkel cabinet. Germany’s cabinet has adopted revised legislation on data retention for police probes into severe crimes. Telecoms would log phone and Internet usage for 10 weeks. Privacy advocates and publishers are strongly opposed. May 2015.

* Controlling the future. Edward Snowden and the new era on Earth. by Elmar Altvater. Original in German. Translation by Ben Tendler. First published in Blätter für deutsche und internationale Politik 4/2014 [http://www.eurozine.com/articles/2014-12-19-altvater-en.html]

* Engineering the public: Big data, surveillance and computational politics. by Zeynep Tufekci. First Monday, Volume 19, Number 7 – 7 July 2014. [http://www.firstmonday.dk/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/4901/4097]

* Politics of Data – Between Post-Democracy and Commons. by Felix Stalder. Lecture at the conference Data Traces, July 3-4, 2015. This is an unedited live written english translation created by Felix Gerloff, an impressive on-the-spot summary. July 2015. [http://felix.openflows.com/node/335]


=More Information=

* [[Big Data Tools]]

* [[Big Data Institutions]]


[[Category:Big Data]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Articles]]