

=Example=

==Portland, Oregon, USA==

By Leila Collins:

Biking has become a way of life in Portland and many other cities around the world. Riders
enjoy reduced transit costs, health benefits, and social opportunities. In most cities,
however, these benefits are only accessible for those who can ride traditional bikes, or the
physically disabled who can afford special bikes. In Portland, riders lobbied the city
government to think about disabled riders in designing a bike-sharing system.

The city will eventually offer adaptive bikes for the physically disabled as part of the 1,000-
bike and 100-station bike sharing system that launched in July 2016. The city first
conducted a series of interviews with disabled riders to understand their needs. They
found that, in addition to needing a variety of adaptive bikes, disabled riders often required
storage options for wheelchairs and assistance at bike share systems. Adaptive bikes are
designed to fit the needs of individual riders. Some are designed with three wheels to
accommodate riders who have trouble balancing. Others are heavy duty to accommodate
larger riders or offer hand pedals for riders with limited or no lower body mobility. During
the interviews, officials discovered that disabled riders were looking to ride for exercise
and recreation, so it is crucial to offer more adaptive bikes and services near trails, rather
than at commuter bike stations.

The adaptive bike program was scheduled to roll out in June 2017. The city is holding or
has held educational events, such as the adaptive bike clinic, and providing scholarships
for biking classes, to ensure more people can enjoy the benefits of the forthcoming bikesharing
facilities."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)


=More Information=

Resources:

* Adaptive Bicycle Rental Pilot Project:
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/transportation/73371

* News story covering the policy: http://sharedusemobilitycenter.org/news/can-bikesharingserve-disabled-riders

* More on the adaptive bicycling pilot project from the city of Portland:
https://www.portlandoregon.gov/transportation/article/582518

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Transportation]]