

=Discussion=

Republished from Bill McKibben:

"I’ve spent most of my life as a writer—and one of the sweetest parts 
of that job is knowing that whatever I produce ends up in a library, an 
institution dedicated to the idea that we can share things easily. There 
are innumerable other examples of sharing all around—and they are 
the parts of our lives that we usually care most about. They don’t show 
up on balance sheets because they’re not producing profit—but they are 
producing satisfaction.

These things we share are called commons, which simply means 
they belong to all of us. Commons can be gifts of nature—such as fresh 
water, wilderness and the airwaves—or the products of social ingenuity 
like the Internet, parks, artistic traditions, or the public health service. 

The most crucial commons, perhaps, is the one now under greatest 
siege, and it poses a test of whether we can pull together to solve our 
deepest problems or succumb to disaster. Our atmosphere has been de 
facto privatized for a long time now—we’ve allowed coal, oil and gas 
interests to own the sky, filling it with the carbon that is the inevitable 
byproduct of their business. For a couple of centuries this seemed mostly 
harmless—Co2 didn’t seem to be causing much trouble. But two decades 
ago we started to understand the effects of global warming, and now 
each month the big scientific journals bring us new proof of just how 
vast the damage is: the Arctic is melting, Australia is on fire, the pH of 
the ocean is dropping fast. 

If we are to somehow ward off the coming catastrophes, we have 
to reclaim this atmospheric commons. We have to figure out how to 
cooperatively own and protect the single most important feature of the 
planet we inhabit—the thin envelope of atmosphere that makes our 
lives possible. Wrestling this key prize away from Exxon Mobil and other 
corporations is the great political issue of our time, and some of the solutions proposed have been ingenious—most notably the idea put forth by 
commons theorist Peter Barnes and others that we should own the sky 
jointly, and share in the profits realized by leasing its storage space to the 
fossil fuel industry. For that to work, of course, we would have to reduce 
that storage space quickly and dramatically. Barnes’ Cap-and-Dividend 
plan offers one way to make that economically and politically feasible.

But for this and other necessary projects to succeed, we need first to 
break the intellectual spell under which we live. The last few decades 
have been dominated by the premise that if we privatize all economic 
resources it will produce endless riches. Which was kind of true, except 
that the riches went to only a few people. And in the process they melted the Arctic, as well as dramatically increasing inequality around the 
world. The commons is a crucial part of the human story that must be 
recovered if we are to deal with the problems now crowding in on us. 

This story is equal parts enlightening and encouraging, and it is entirely 
necessary for us to hear it.”
(http://onthecommons.org/sites/default/files/celebrating-the-commons.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]