
=Description=

'''1.'''

"Biocapacity refers to the capacity of a given biologically productive area to generate an on-going supply of renewable resources and to absorb its spillover wastes. Unsustainability occurs if the area’s ecological footprint exceeds its biocapacity."
(https://www.greenfacts.org/glossary/abc/biocapacity.htm)


'''2. James Quilligan et al.:'''

"[[Biocapacity]] is the dynamic balance point between the number of
organisms within a given area and the amount of resources that are needed to
support them within this area. Thus, agricultural biocapacity indicates the
degree to which the population of a bioregion is greater or lesser than the
food that is available from the bioregion to feed it.

By combining scientific reason with place-based knowledge, culture and
history, biocapacity provides a baseline for sustainability by showing how
different interventions will effect different outcomes. This allows
communities to develop evidence-based guidelines for organizing their own
resource sufficiency while regenerating the ecology of their life-places.

...

To understand the sustainability of the region’s agriculture, we examine the
biophysical relationship between the arable land available in an area and the
aggregate needs of the population within that area. To do this, we use two
measures for food value: biomass (pounds) and bioenergy (calories). This
enables us to look at agricultural resources in terms of the thermodynamic
throughput between the thresholds of food accessible in a bioregion and the
allocations of food needed to support the people who live there.

In this way, the metrics of biocapacity allow us to bridge a human
community with the bioregion which provides its material support. This is
not something that most of us think about. We rarely consider how the human
population interacts with the resource system which sustains it."
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Agricultural_Sustainability_for_Bioregionalism_in_the_San_Francisco_Bay_Watershed)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Ecology]]