'''= text and concept by Aleksandr Svyatogor, a polemic against the interindividualism of Abba Gordin, written in July 1922.'''

URL = https://cosmos.art/cosmic-bulletin/2022/biocosmic-interindividualism


=Context=

Interindividualism: concept by Abba Gordin, a Russian universalist anarchist of the early 20th cy: "“self-organization minus society,” 


=Source=

"This is a translation of the text as published in Aleksandr Svyatogor, Poetika. Biokosmizm. (A)teologiya [Poetics, Biocosmism, (A)theology], ed. Eugene Kuchinov (Moscow: Common Place, 2017). Kuchinov prepared the preface and supplemented the footnotes for this occasion. Translated, from the Russian, by Thomas H. Campbell." [https://cosmos.art/cosmic-bulletin/2022/biocosmic-interindividualism]


=Description=

Aleksandr Svyatogor

"Biocosmic interindividualism focuses not only on individuality (which is dynamic and explosive), but also on the “inter,” on the perineum and intermediateness. Our interindividualism should be called interinternism, in which there is a difference between the two “betweens,” a difference in the repetition between. Here, in these nether regions, the biocosmic heart beats! Here, in this perineum, our words turn ruddy.

Everything about us is ruddy. Even our technology is ruddy. Only ruddy technology links life with the cosmos, links planet with planet. That’s why we rarely talk about interindividualism, saying instead: interplanetarianism.

The planets were correctly named “wanderers.”

Interplanetarianism returns the planets to their wanderings. It vulcanates them, tearing them from their dull monotonous routes and making them kissing, spawning suns. Now the wanderers wander not in the space of stable laws, but between stabilizations, vulcanating them.

So, not interindividualism, but:

-the freedom of organization of jumping organs

-ruddy technology and the freedom of connections and disconnections

-the interplanetarianism of kissing planets."

(https://cosmos.art/cosmic-bulletin/2022/biocosmic-interindividualism)

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Russia]]