'''= "a collective supporting bioregions to design, build, and implement [[Bioregional Financing Facilities]] (BFFs)".'''

URL = https://www.biofi.earth



=Description=

'''1.'''

""The ecological crisis requires urgent, large-scale regeneration of the biosphere rooted in ecological integrity and cultural revitalization.

This is possible if we ensure  financial resources flow to the many small groups all over the world doing the critical work of on-the-ground regeneration – acting in a coordinated, synergistic way.

We envision nothing less than the creation of a new layer in the global financial architecture of Bioregional Financing Facilities (BFFs) that enable both flow and organization.

It is our work to ensure that every bioregion on Earth gets a BFF to support its transition to a regenerative economy – so that finance can serve life."

(https://www.biofi.earth/)

'''2. Samantha Power:'''

"The BioFi Project is a collective supporting bioregions to design, build, and implement
Bioregional Financing Facilities (BFFs) that connect financial resources with regenerators. We
partner with bioregional organizing teams and Indigenous communities across North America
and around the world to apply the BFF templates and capital raising and allocation approaches
laid out in this book.

The BioFi Project team is made up of practitioners in the areas of economics, finance,
governance, bioregionalism, ecology, regeneration, and social justice. The BioFi Project
establishes partnerships with bioregions and then engages in a listening process; supports
asset mapping; identifies which BFF is best to start with; designs a detailed proposal for a BFF;
and supports the bioregion with capital raising, capital allocation, and governance
implementation. At the global level, the team also shares the concepts laid out in this book,
stewards a community of practice, builds relevant software tooling, and supports eco-credit
co-design facilitation. The BioFi Project is a fiscally sponsored project of Buckminster Fuller
Institute, a 501(c)(3) tax exempt non-profit organization."

[[Category:Bioregional]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]