

=Description=

[[Biohacking Safari]]:

"A biohacker is someone that has pretty much the same mindset of a hacker but who is working with different tools, such as pipettes, incubators, tubes or petrie dishes.  Part of the equipment is collected in all sorts of medical or research centers and wealthy biotech companies.

They also build their own scientific tools and equipment such as DIY Microscope or PCR machine (critical tool to tinker with DNA). All this is possible thanks to the extraodinary transdisciplinarity of knowledge and skills that you find in biohackerspaces (among other equipments that are most of the time collected in all sorts of medical centers and wealthy biotech companies).

Biohackers want to understand and analyze the food they eat, the water they drink, the air they breathe. Biohackers already made cheese without animals and dream — working hard — to produce their own insulin through genetic modifications. They want to see what their genome can teach them, even their gut bacteria is something of an interest.

Biohackers as hackers tend to share their researches with other communities. Of course the web is connecting as much as possible but they also organize events and workshops to open their knowledge and experiences. As a matter of fact next September, a conference made by Californian biohackers will happen in the mighty Counter Culture Labs building at the Omni Commons in Oakland, CA."
(http://makezine.com/2016/08/04/get-to-know-biohacking-safari/)


=More Information=

"Two key networks were pioneering this growing movemen:

* DIYBIO.org → an organization that has a great role connecting ideas throughout their mailing list. They shared a safety policy, sent to all new and interested biohackerspaces. They also build the first code of ethics for biohackers.

* Hackteria → a collaborative organization of scientists, hackers and artists who combine their expertise, share knowledge through “workshopology” and write critical and theoretical thoughts about life science technologies."
(http://makezine.com/2016/08/04/get-to-know-biohacking-safari/)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Open Science]]