'''= "A bioregion is a self-reliant geographic unit defined through watersheds, ecoregions, hard physical boundaries and the cultures that stem within them.” – Cascadia''' [https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?]

See also:

#[[Bioregioning]]
#[[Bioregionalism]]


==Contextual Quote==

" Bioregionalism is not a “return” to a more essential form of social life or State of Nature.  Rather it is the assertion that the spatial and temporal boundaries for our regenerative paradigm already exist. They emerge from the land itself in the form of watersheds, soil series, and wind currents. People typically understand what is east, what is west of them, but know very little about what is upstream and what is downstream of them. [[Undualing]], at the heart of [[Regeneration]] is the fertile ground to grow sovereign bioregional regenerative economies, which must navigate the water which flows downstream, and be accountable to them. Regenerative economies cycle value as they cycle energy and nutrients. They are defined by the “sheds'' of energy, nutrients, life, and activity which constitute a bioregion."

- Austin Wade Smith [https://mirror.xyz/austinwadesmith.eth/1wdm8BNkLJWnnzwshtYEmHYlHaXxRF3bLEt4y4-9OE8]


==Description==

'''1. John Thackara:'''

"A strong candidate for that connective idea is the bioregion. A bioregion re-connects us with living systems, and each other, through the places where we live. It acknowledges that we live among watersheds, foodsheds, fibersheds, and food systems – not just in cities, towns, or ‘the countryside’.

A bioregion, in this sense, is culturally dynamic because it is literally and etymologically a ‘life-place’, in Robert Thayer’s words, that is definable by natural rather than political or economic boundaries. Its geographic, climatic, hydrological, and ecological qualities – its metabolism – can be the basis for meaning and identity because they are unique.

Growth, in a bioregion, is redefined as improvements to the health and carrying capacity of the land, and the resilience of communities. Its core value is stewardship, not extraction, a bioregion therefore frames the next economy, not the dying one we have now."<br />

(https://economicdemocracyadvocates.org/2017/02/20/bioregions-notes-on-a-design-agenda/)


'''2. Knut Wimberger:'''

"Bioregions	are	territories	which	are	organized	along	natural	borders	of	ecosystems.	Snyder	
discusses	in	wonderful	prose	his	own	Pacific	Northwest	as	such	a	bioregion	being	
demarked	by	plants	like	the	costal	Douglas	Fir,	which	is	only	home	to	a	territory	of	a	
specific	climate	range.	It	is	this	unit	of	organization	which	comes	closest	to	Kohr’s	concept	
of	cultural	regions.	Kohr	looks	at	organization	according	to	human	cultural	boundaries,	
which	have	been	deformed	over	the	centuries	by	political	power	struggles.	Snyder	
integrates	human	culture	and	the	non-human	world	into	a	single	system	of	natural	
territories.	

In	the	old	ways,	the	flora	and	fauna	and	landforms	are	part	of	the	culture.	The	world	of	
culture	and	nature,	which	is	actual,	is	almost	a	shadow	world	now,	and	the	insubstantial	
world	of	political	jurisdictions	and	rarefied	economies	is	what	passes	for	reality. We	live	in	a	
backwards	time.	We	can	regain	some	small	sense	of	that	old	membership	by	discovering	the	
original	lineaments	of	our	land	and	steering	– at	least	in	the	home	territory	and	in	the	mind	–
by	those	rather	than	the	borders	of	arbitrary	nations,	states,	and	counties.	[p	40]

I	cannot	say	how	much	I	agree	with	these	lines.	Growing	up	in	Austria,	in	a	city	which	lies	at	
the	intersection	of	three	bioregions,	I	wondered	already	as	a	child	where	I	belonged	to.	I	
certainly	did	feel	a	strange	disconnect	from	the	political	entity, which	was	impressed	upon	
me.	An	early	and	- at	that	time	of	the	cold	war	separation	between	East	and	West -
extraordinary	desire	to	learn	Czech	was	an	expression	of	choosing	the	soft	hills	and	thick	
forests	of	the	Bohemian	Mass	over	the	naked	cliffs	and	deep	valleys	of	the	Alps	as	my	native	
bioregion.	I	chose	an	ecological	region	over	an	economic	one,	the	Bohemian	Mass	over	
West	European	capitalism.	It	was	nevertheless	the	political	entity	which	decided	over	my	
fate	as	subject	of	a	contemporary	form	of	social	organization.	Not	only	was	I	denied	
learning Czech	by	local	school	authorities,	but	I	ended	up	leaving my	homeland	for	good
being eternally at	odds	with its	unnatural	form	of	organization.	

Snyder	reminds	us	that	bioregions	were	and	can	be	the largest	possible	entities	to	organize	
human	activity	in	a	maximum	overlap	of	economy	and	ecology.	He	gently	draws	the	
borders	for	his	home	bioregion	by	applying	a	deep	understanding	of	the	local	ecosystem
and	shows	how	big	the	disconnect	between	modern	culture	and	the	natural	world	has	
become.	If	we	are	to	reestablish	a	meaningful	connection	of	human	scale	between	each	one	
of	us	and	the	planet,	we	must	organize	ourselves	in	bioregions,	commons	and	firepits.	Only	
then	will	we	be	able	to	live	again	in	harmony	with	mother	Earth.

Bioregional	awareness	teaches	us	in	specific	ways.	It	is	not	enough	just	to	“love	nature”	or	to	
want	to	be	in	“harmony	with	Gaia.”	Our	relation	to	the	natural	world	takes	place	in	a	place,	
and	it	must	be	grounded	in	information	and	experience.	For	example:	“real	people”	have	an	
easy	familiarity	with	the	local	plants.	This	is	so	unexceptional	a	kind	of	knowledge	that	
everyone	in	Europe,	Asia	and	Africa	used	to	take	it	for	granted.	Many	contemporary	
Americans	don’t	even	know	that	they	don’t	know	the	plants,	which	is	indeed	a	measure	of	
alienation.	[p	43]	"

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340023596)


'''3. David Haenke:'''

"A bioregion is a geographical area whose boundaries are determined by nature and not solely by humans. One bioregion is distinguished from another by characteristics of flora, fauna, water, climate, rocks, soils, landforms, and the human settlements and cultures these characteristics have given rise to.

“Bioregionalism is a comprehensive ‘new’ way of defining and understanding the place where we live, and of living there sustainably and respectfully. In truth, what Bioregionalism represents is only new for people who come out of the Western industrial-technological heritage. Its essence has been reality and common sense for native people living close to the land for thousands of years, and remains so. At the same time, bioregional concepts are rigorously defensible in terms of science, technology, economics, politics, and other fields of “civilized” human endeavor.

“Using ecology as the discriminator, bioregionalism takes the best and most presently relevant of the old, and synthesizes it with the most appropriate of the new. Bioregionalism is the most ecological of systems of social organization, excepting the life ways of native and indigenous peoples who still live traditionally in intact ecosystems. It is a complete and all-inclusive way of life, comprising the whole range of human thought and endeavor. Bioregionalism offers a comprehensive restructuring of most human systems using ecological design principles."

(https://www.recommon.land/litepaper)

Source: 1996 article titled Bioregionalism and Ecological Economics.[https://www.resilience.org/stories/2021-04-28/david-haenke-on-bioregionalism-ecological-economics/]


'''4. Sara Silva et al. :'''

"Bioregions are generally referred to as a geographical area defined not by political
boundaries but by ecological systems, as discussed across various definitions and
publications. Bioregion literally means “life-place” and was coined in 1975 by Allen Van
Newkirk, founder of the Institute for Bioregional Research. While the term “bioregion” was
already used by practicing biologists, bioregionalism scholar Richard Evanoff (2017) credited
Newkirk for popularizing the term.

One Earth, a nonprofit working with climate science, media, and innovations, mapped out the
world’s bioregions through its platform, oneearth.org, featuring 185 unique bioregions around
the world. On the next page is the the Indomalaya realm which holds 18 bioregions, with
three mega-diverse countries—Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines—where four of the
world's 25 biodiversity hotspots are located, which also shelter one-fifth of the Earth’s plant,
animal, and marine species.

Despite having fixed areas mapped on bioregions often based on shared catchment areas
or indigenous/ethnic identities, a growing practice of defining an approach to shaping
solutions through a bioregional approach has expanded this definition beyond its
geographical and ecological perspectives. Cascadia, a bioregional movement named after
the Cascadia region in the United States and Canada, defines a “bioregion” as “short for ‘biocultural region’” and is a geographically based area “defined by physical traits like land or
soil composition, watershed, climate, flora, and fauna; as well as the cultural traits of the
inhabitants that live within them, and act upon them.” Ultimately, bioregions are defined by
the people living within them."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)


==[[Bioregionalism]]==

Sarah Queblatin et al. :

"Interacting with bioregions integrates bioregional approaches with bioregionalism, a
philosophy that came from the collaboration between natural scientists, activists, artists,
writers, community leaders, among others (Foot, 2022). The goal of bioregionalism is “to
address the inequitable distribution of resources and the disproportionate strain that
current economic models place on natural environments and local people.” In grouping
areas into bioregions and considering issues from the bioregional approach, this inequitable
distribution can be addressed." (Bove, 2021)

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)

==Characteristics==

===Scope of a bioregion===

John Thackara:

"A bioregion is not an abstract model; it describes social as well as ecological systems that are unique to each place. The ways these social and ecological systems interact with each other are as significant as are list of species and social assets.

Stewarding a bioregion involves measuring the carrying capacity of the land and watersheds; putting systems in place to monitor progress; and feeding back results. This attention to ecosystem health is direct and ongoing; it involves diverse forms of expertise; translation skills, and open information channels, are needed to share different kinds of knowledge.

A bioregion provides livelihoods, not just amenity. It builds on existing economic relocalisation efforts that measure where resources come from; identify ‘leakages’ in the local economy; and explore how these leaks could be plugged by locally available resources.

===Bioregional food – and health===

One such ‘leak’ is food – and new kinds of work are involved in ecological agriculture. This work begins with understanding the soils – and growing crops, and rearing animals, in ways that regenerate them. Each farm has to be understood and designed as an ecosystem within a bioregional web of natural systems. This approach to farming is more knowledge-intensive than the industrial model it’s replacing; multiple skills, in new combinations, are needed to cope with that complexity.

At a bioregional scale, ecological agriculture also includes the development of new forms of land tenure, distribution models, processing facilities, financing, and training. With ‘social farming‘ and ‘care farming’- the direct participation of citizens in farm-based activities needs also to be enabled by service platforms.

Health and wellbeing are local and place-based, too. In place of a biomedical healthcare system designed around individuals and diseases, an ecological model of health gives priority to the vitality of food, water, air and other ecosystems, and interactions among them.

In the US, the idea of a Health Commons has been proposed as a geographical model for improving the health of ecosystems and the people who live in them. The Glasgow Indicators Project is another effort to develop tools that link community health and ecosystem health.


===Cities are in bioregions, too===

The thinking behind bioregions grew out of the conservation movement in the North Western United States, in the 1970s. It was inspired, then, by the notion of wilderness, and  focused on protected areas, biosphere reserves, species conservation, and ecosystem management.

But awareness is now growing that our cities are part of the bioregional story, too – that they do not exist separately from the land they are built on, and the resources that feed them.

Blogs and platforms such as Nature of Cities, Ecocity Design Institute, and Biophilic Cities, although they do not focus on a bioregional perspective, do encourage a city’s citizens, and its managers, to re-connect in practical ways with the soils, trees, animals, landscapes, energy systems, water and energy sources on which all life depends.

The urban landscape itself is re-imagined as an ecology with the potential to support us. Attention is turning to metabolic cycles and the ‘capillarity’ of the metropolis wherein rivers and bio-corridors are given pride of place."<br />

(https://economicdemocracyadvocates.org/2017/02/20/bioregions-notes-on-a-design-agenda/)


===Characteristics and Scope of [[Bioregional Mapping]]===


Mathias Rollot:


====1. Water, Watershed====

This can refer to a body of water (river, stream, lake, ocean…), a water point (natural or artificial lake…), a territory (watershed…), or even the ocean (a shoreline, an island…).


====2. Geology, Soils, Subsoils====

What defines the place? Is it plains, valleys, mountains, cliffs, unique landforms, or particular soil types (rocky, desert, sandy, fertile)? Are there also significant subsoil features (traces of the Roman Empire, magnificent cenotes, bunkers, tunnels, and other remnants of World War II)?


====3. Vegetation Profile====

Is there a generally identifiable vegetation type (forests, shrubs, garrigue…)? What are the region’s emblematic plant species? Are coniferous or deciduous trees more common? This category considers both quantity and quality, as well as the cultural imagination tied to vegetation.


====4. Human Settlements====

What cities, villages, or metropolitan areas define this "home"? This includes urban centers, local shops, workplaces, and distinctive landmarks in the landscape—ranging from classified heritage sites and monumental castles to old ruined mills, beautiful bread ovens, and abandoned factories.


====5. Fauna====

What is the totem animal of this place? Are there invasive species, welcome exotic species, or native animals that are part of the collective imagination? This could include real animals (deer, vultures, beavers…) or mythical creatures (Yeti, Dahu, the Grésivaudan Wolf…).


====6. Infrastructure====

What about infrastructure? What should be represented in terms of:

#Energy infrastructure (nuclear power plants, wind farms, solar panel fields…).
#Transport infrastructure (major highways, viaducts…).
#Industrial infrastructure (major industrial zones, semiconductor or nuclear arms industries, gas or fuel storage…)—even if these exist against our will.


====7. Agriculture====

Is the landscape dominated by vineyards or organic orchards, vast monoculture fields dependent on chemical inputs, or industrial mega-farms for pigs or battery-raised chickens? Are there small-scale local farming practices that are ethical and ecologically sound?


====8. Communities====

This layer represents the structuring human relationships within this shared "home": your friendships, sources of stability and comfort, and their geographical locations relative to other elements. It also includes neighborhoods you avoid out of fear or people you see as responsible for major social or environmental destruction. This is the "psycho-social" layer, mapping people and places. It’s also an opportunity to identify and name local communities that are "disanchored"—those prevented from participating locally due to exclusion, landlessness, or marginalization.


====9. Outbound Relations (Human)====

This represents relationships with human and non-human life that extend beyond this mapped "home." Through outward-pointing arrows at the map’s edges, one can place key external relationships (e.g., grandparents who take care of your children every summer, your German boss you meet via video calls, etc.).


====10. Inbound Relations (Material, Food, etc.)====

This final category covers inbound flows of objects, materials, and energy—things essential to daily life but originating elsewhere (imported clothing from Bangladesh, a phone made in China, extra-European gas used for showering, cooking, and heating, etc.)."

(https://topophile.net/savoir/cartographie-bioregionale-la-methode-101/)

==Discussion==


===What is the difference between a bioregion and a [[Ecoregion]]?===

Mark Whitaker explains:

"The number of approximately 1,100 ecoregions is not 'bioregions' 

(with "bioregions" defined as human cultural regions of natural/environmental affinity over time; like the bayou culture of French Acadians in Louisiana, or the dry desert areas of Spain for cattle raising and meat curing; or the Swiss alps and milk/cheese production, etc., and yodeling...; or the Plains Indians and buffalo hunting culture--once they got the horses from the Spanish in the 1500s. Bioregions are unique historical human-ecological-subsistence relationships with deep cultural meaning as well.)

For the other term, "ecoregions":

Ecoregions are defined more biologically and ecologically without reference to people; ecoregions are the unique flora, fauna, soil and microclimate ecological relationships in the world, that makes a unique places of ecological life on earth--slightly different than their neighboring ecoregions over time. These have only been mapped from around 2001 onward in any first tries. 

My total of 1,000 includes both these terrestrial ecoregions and the marine ecoregions (themselves only mapped from around 2007) for:

 ~1,099 territorial commonalities in ~1,099 total land  AND marine ecoregions worldwide 


The phrase “TEOW” (Olson et al., 2001) is the abbreviation for '''“terrestrial ecoregions of the world.”''' There are approximately 846 to 867 terrestrial ecoregions depending on classification criteria. 

The phrase “MEOW” (Spalding et al., 2007) is the abbreviation for '''“marine eco-regions of the world.”''' Currently, these are demarcated as 232 oceanic coastal ‘benthic’ zones (with ‘benthic’ defined as the many unique marine ecologies in coastal zones worldwide, measured to an ocean depth of 200 meters). The 232 marine ecoregions already are arranged in their own nested hydrological units with 12 marine biogeographic realms, 62 marine provinces, and 232 base marine ecoregions. This makes any of the 232 marine ecoregion identifiable easily for its own nested marine qualities by merging numbers for biographic realms, then, provinces, and then marine ecoregions. ...

...Totaling up this rich ecological variety, this means the total land ecoregions and the total oceanic benthic ecoregions of glomo 2 are approximately 1,100 (~867 terrestrial ecoregions + 232 marine benthic ecoregions = ~1,099 land/marine ecoregions). Both land ecoregions and marine ecoregions of glomo 2 get nested feedback and improvement from the three common watershed-based glomo levels of 5, 4, and 3. Due to the real-world empirical variety of sizes of terrestrial and marine ecoregions of glomo 2, there are sometimes vast differences in geographic size or internal human population compared to each other"..."

(email, February 2025)


==More Information==

* [[Wikipedia: Bioregion]]

===Bibliography===

Dig Deeper: What is a Bioregion? [https://thebioregionalist.com/maps/the-basic-litmus-test-for-a-bioregion/]

– Berg, P. et Dasmann, R. 1977. « Reinhabiting California », The Ecologist, vol. 7, n° 10, p. 399-401.
– Sale, K. 1985. Dwellers in the Land. The Bioregional Vision, San Francisco : Sierra Book Club.
– Sale, K. 1991. Le regioni della natura. La proposta bioregionalista, Milan : Elèuthera.
– Sale, K. 2019. L?Hypothèse biorégionale. Une habitation terrestre, Marseille : Parenthèses.
– Lawrence F. London, Jr., What is a Bioregion?, 10 May 2000
– Thayer, R. 2003. LifePlace. Bioregional Thought and Practice, Berkeley :University of California Press.

[[Category:Bioregional]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Geography]]