
'''* Report: Bioregional Governance for Climate-Resilient Ecosystems in Asia and the Pacific. Sarah Queblatin et al. Ecolise and  [https://resilient-cities.com/ The Climate Resilient and Inclusive Cities project], 2025.''' 

URL = https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?

''Also a 'Training Guide'.'' See: [[Bioregional Governance Training Guide for Asia and the Pacific]]


=Description=

'''1.'''

"This Bioregional Governance training guide aims to support the implementation of activities
of the Climate Resilient and Inclusive Cities (CRIC) project funded by the European Union
(EU).

The topic of bioregional governance was chosen to match the needs on the ground for
better management of the resources and needed agreements on a regional level, and to
secure regenerative management of water for the pilot cities of the CRIC project in
Indonesia and the members of UCLG ASPAC. ECOLISE, through the Global Ecovillage
Network Oceania and Asia and Living Story Landscapes in collaboration with Resilience
Earth, United in Diversity Foundation and Alam Santi, developed the training design.
In a series of local and national consultations with stakeholders from the 10 pilot cities in
Indonesia which are part of the CRIC Project from February to March 2024."


'''2.'''

"Led by Sara Silva from ECOLISE, this training guide was co-developed by the Global
Ecovillage Network Oceania and Asia and the Living Story Landscapes through Sarah
Queblatin, in close collaboration with Resilience.Earth through Erika Zárate and Oscar
Gussinyer, and the United in Diversity Foundation through Cokorda Istri Dewi and Namira
Iriwawan; and with support from Alam Santi Sustainable Design through Petra Schneider and
Nana Sohan.

...

During the in-person training, of which the present guide is a living outcome, community
engagement emerged as a priority for nine of the eleven cities representatives present. To
build resilient cities, we need to acknowledge the interconnection between the people who
"live the city", the urban and natural elements, and the region to where they belong,
understand their dynamics, and harness the creative potential of the diverse perspectives.
When polarising issues arose in the training such as natural elements extraction vs. resilience,
these were reframed as opportunities for dialogue.

This Bioregional governance framework supports us in grounding conversations in the story
and uniqueness of the place so that we can bring communities together and create shared
futures. This training guide also brings together learnings and insights from Asian and
European case studies whose approaches will –hopefully– serve as an invitation to explore
the transformative power of bioregional governance and community-led resilience towards
the well-being of all."


=More information=

* [[Bioregion]]

[[Category:Courses]]

[[Category:Bioregional]]

[[Category:Asia]]