

=Discussion=

James Quilligan:

"Bioregional trusts are an emerging horizon in environmental sustainability
and financial stability for the people of a common resource area. Since
governments and corporations were not created to manage ecosystems,
it’s not surprising that their attempts to do so are often unsuccessful. What
is generally missing is the input of the people who use these commons.
They have the unique expertise, cultural understanding and long-term
incentives for effective resource supervision. This is why local and regional
participation in the care and allocation of transboundary commons is now
becoming a crucial factor in international decisions on the governance of
large ecological areas.

The purpose of a bioregional trust is to safeguard a resource for future
generations. Just as some communities across the world have become
adept at preserving, creating and replenishing their local commons,
bioregional trusts can also apply the principles of subsidiarity, polycentricity
and inclusive decision-making to the protection and production of resources
that are shared on a broader scale. Integrative commons management
contributes not only to a clean and healthy biological environment, but also
to people’s social well-being. In addition, a bioregional trust may generate
funds which could be used for ecological restoration as well as a basic
income for the people of a region."
(proposal for the Great Lakes Commons Gathering Notre Dame University September 30 - October 2, 2012)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Bioregional]]