'''* Book: Bioregional Financing Facilities: Reimagining Finance to Regenerate Our Planet. by Samantha Power and Leon Seefeld. The BioFi
Project and and Dark Matter Capital Systems, 2024'''

URL = [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1gxcls1QmydC5R4ShX7A5Wj601_UTozt-/view]

''"How we get financial resources to synergistic portfolios of bioregional regeneration projects."''


=Description=

"The book proposes a groundbreaking solution: a network of bioregional institutions designed to
empower communities and channel financial resources to grassroots regeneration. As
awareness of the polycrisis grows, a wave of financial capital is forming that is attempting to
avert further ecological, social, and economic collapse. And yet, there is a significant risk that if
this capital flows through a financial architecture rooted in the same inequitable power
structures and logic based on abstraction, it will simply perpetuate, and perhaps even
accelerate, existing extractive processes. At this pivotal moment in human history, the authors
propose a new layer in the global financial architecture, through the creation of Bioregional
Financing Facilities to serve every bioregion on Earth.

Bioregional Financing Facilities can drive the decentralization of financial resource governance,
the design of project portfolios for systemic change, and the transition to a regenerative
economy. They have the potential to become the connective tissue between financial resources
and people engaged in on-the-ground regeneration. They can achieve this by enabling
integrated capital raised from a variety of sources to flow to aggregated portfolios of
systemically coordinated and supported regenerative projects on the ground. In return,
regeneration benefits can flow back to investors in a community-determined, non-extractive way.
This book lays out how this infrastructure can put financial systems in service to life."


=More information=

* The [[BioFi Project]]


=More information=

The e-book is now available for free at www.biofi.earth, www.darkmatterlabs.org, and
www.bfi.org.

[[Category:Bioregional]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Books]]