=Source=

Roam Research page from Michael Haupt, based on Perplexity's answers:

https://roamresearch.com/#/app/MichaelHaupt/page/B9P4nNjMm


=Description=

- Bioregional Governance represents a system of political organization and decision-making structured around naturally defined ecological areas called [[Bioregion]]s, rather than arbitrary political boundaries. This form of governance acknowledges the interconnectedness of social, economic, and ecological systems within geographical areas defined by natural features such as watersheds, mountain ranges, and ecosystems.

- Answer from Perplexity: pplx.ai/share


=History=

Historical Context and Development
    
- Bioregional Governance emerged as a response to the limitations of the nation-state system established by the [[Peace of Westphalia]] in 1648, which created the framework for national sovereignty and international relations[5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregionalism). While the Westphalian system enabled political stability through territorial integrity and non-interference, it established artificial boundaries that often ignored ecological realities and indigenous territories.
    
- The concept gained momentum in the 1970s when the term [[Bioregionalism]] was coined by figures such as Allen Van Newkirk and popularized by Peter Berg and Raymond F. Dasmann (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregionalism). As [[Globalization]], [[Neoliberalism]], and Debt-Based Monetary Systems increasingly challenged National Sovereignty throughout the late 20th and early 21st centuries, Bioregional Governance offered an alternative paradigm that reconnects political systems with natural boundaries and ecological imperatives.


==From National to Bioregional Sovereignty==

    
- The transition from national to bioregional sovereignty represents a fundamental shift in how communities organize politically. While National Sovereignty focuses on territorial control and centralized authority (leading to wars), Bioregional Sovereignty emphasizes local democratic control over natural commons and ecological systems (https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Bioregional_Democracy) (leading to local abundance). This shift aims to counter the erosion of democratic accountability that often accompanies [[Globalization]], where multinational corporations, global financial flows, and extractive industries can override local interests and environmental concerns.

=Characteristics=

Resilience.Earth: 

... defines bioregional governance framework in four levels, in which each one
refers to the capability of a system to sustain complexity, in increasing value, these four
levels are the following from the lower to the higher:

* Centralized governance: a system which is capable of sustaining its operations and not
collapsing.

* Decentralized governance: A system that, beyond functionality, is capable of defining a
direction of improvement and efficiency.

* Polycentric governance: A system that is capable of significant transformation, oriented
to increase its adaptability.

* Bioregional governance: A system that is capable of generating new proposals of high
value from a wholeness approach."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)


==Core Principles==
    
- Bioregional Governance is characterized by several distinctive principles:


===Ecological Boundaries as Political Boundaries===
            
- Unlike conventional political systems defined by arbitrary lines on maps, Bioregional Governance aligns administrative districts with natural features such as watersheds, ecoregions, and ecological zones (https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1). This alignment acknowledges that environmental issues like water management, pollution control, and ecosystem preservation rarely conform to traditional political boundaries.


===Participatory Democracy and Local Decision-Making===
            
- Bioregional Governance emphasizes that those most affected by decisions should have a substantive role in making them[1](https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Bioregional_Democracy)[3](https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1). This principle manifests through decentralized governance structures that prioritize local knowledge, community participation, and collective decision-making processes that reflect the specific context of each bioregion.


===Economic Localization and Sustainability===
            
- Bioregional Governance promotes economies that are local, ethical, circular, and sustainable[3](https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1). Rather than prioritizing unlimited growth and global market integration, bioregional economic systems emphasize:
                
- Local production for local needs
                
- Circular resource flows that minimize waste
                
- Long-term sustainability over short-term profit
                
- Equitable distribution of resources and opportunities within ecological limits


===Indigenous Sovereignty and Traditional Knowledge===

- A central tenet of Bioregional Governance is the recognition and restoration of indigenous sovereignty and traditional ecological knowledge[ (https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1). This includes shared stewardship systems, truth and reconciliation processes, language and cultural revival programs, and indigenous representation in governance structures.


===Multi-Generational Thinking===
            

- Bioregional Governance embraces a multi-generational perspective, focusing on long-term impacts rather than immediate gains[3](https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1). This approach establishes a social contract ensuring that each generation inherits improved ecological conditions and quality of life compared to the previous one.

=How-To=

Implementation Mechanisms


==Bioregional Mapping and Planning==
        
- Bioregional Governance begins with participatory mapping processes that document both ecological features and cultural dimensions of a region[2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregional_mapping). These mapping initiatives empower communities to identify natural resources, traditional pathways, historical landmarks, and culturally significant sites as foundations for governance decisions.
        
- As Sheila Harrington notes, such mapping can become "a jumping off place for decision making about the future" by revealing "damaged lands and unsolved social ills" while highlighting "underutilized potentials" for sustainable prosperity[2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregional_mapping).


==Electoral and Commodity Reforms==
        
- Bioregional Governance encompasses both electoral reforms and commodity reforms designed to better represent environmental concerns in the political process[1](https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Bioregional_Democracy). These reforms aim to ensure ecological considerations are integrated into economic development decisions while maintaining broader civil rights protections.


==Resilience and Disaster Management==
        
- Bioregional Governance prioritizes local resilience through decentralized systems for:

            - Energy production based on alternative local resources
            - Water catchment and filtration
            - Food production and distribution
            - Mutual aid networks and emergency preparedness[3](https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1)
        
- These systems reduce vulnerability to both natural disasters and disruptions in global supply chains.


=Governance=

Central to Bioregional Governance is recognition of the interconnectedness of all living systems and the dependence of human communities on healthy ecosystems. This perspective views humans as embedded within, rather than separate from, natural systems.


==Bioregional Sovereignty==
            
- The principle of [[Bioregional Sovereignty]] asserts that individuals living within a bioregion collectively have rights to sustenance without external interference or harm (https://coda.io/@sog/state-of-grace/the-guiding-principles-54). 


This concept extends traditional notions of sovereignty to encompass five fundamental areas:

                
1. Water sovereignty through alternative management approaches
                
2. Food sovereignty through locally appropriate production methods
                
3. Shelter sovereignty through sustainable housing
                
4. Energy sovereignty through alternative local production
                
5. Cultural sovereignty through shared narratives and purpose

(https://coda.io/@sog/state-of-grace/the-guiding-principles-54)

==Corporate Governance in Bioregional Systems==

- As bioregional governance concepts gain traction, a new paradigm is emerging in corporate governance that aligns business practices with bioregional principles. This approach represents a significant departure from traditional Environmental, Social, and Governance ESG frameworks, focusing instead on integrating companies into the ecological and social fabric of their bioregions.


==Shift from ESG to Bioregional Integration==
        
- While ESG initiatives have aimed to improve corporate responsibility, they often operate within the existing globalized economic paradigm. Bioregional Corporate Governance, by contrast, fundamentally reimagines a company's role within its local ecosystem and community. 

This approach emphasizes:

            1. Local resource stewardship
            2. Community-centric decision making
            3. Long-term ecological sustainability


'''Key Principles of Bioregional Corporate Governance'''
        

1. **Localized Supply Chains**: Companies prioritize sourcing materials and labor from within their bioregion, reducing transportation costs and environmental impacts while supporting local economies[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).
        
2. **Ecosystem-Based Management**: Corporate strategies are developed with a deep understanding of the local ecosystem's carrying capacity and regenerative potential[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).
        
3. **Stakeholder Expansion**: The concept of stakeholders expands beyond shareholders to include local communities, ecosystems, and future generations[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).
        
4. **Circular Economy Integration**: Businesses design products and processes to minimize waste and maximize resource efficiency within the bioregion[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).
        
5. **Participatory Decision-Making**: Companies involve local communities in significant decisions that affect the bioregion's resources or social dynamics[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).


'''Emerging Practices'''
        
- **Bioregional Accounting**: Corporations are developing new accounting methods that incorporate ecological assets and liabilities specific to their bioregion.
        
- **Local Ownership Models**: Some companies are experimenting with ownership structures that give local communities a greater stake in corporate governance.
        
- **Ecosystem Services Valuation**: Businesses are increasingly factoring the value of local ecosystem services into their financial planning and risk assessments.
    

- ## Challenges and Opportunities
        
- The transition to bioregional corporate governance faces several challenges, including:

            - Reconciling global market pressures with local bioregional priorities
            - Developing new metrics for success that go beyond traditional financial indicators
            - Navigating existing regulatory frameworks that may not support bioregional approaches
        
- However, companies adopting these principles may gain significant advantages:

            - Enhanced resilience to global supply chain disruptions
            - Stronger community support and social license to operate
            - Improved long-term resource security
        
- As the Bioregional Governance movement grows, it is likely that more corporations will adopt these principles, potentially reshaping the relationship between business, society, and the natural environment within distinct ecological regions[1](https://earth.org/bioregionalism/).


=Discussion=


==[[Austin Wade Smith on the Core Patterns of Bioregional Governance]]==

Austin Wade Smith writes:


1 - Specific bioregional definitions of value must be governed by bodies of local human and more-than-human actors which form working consensus on local definitions of flourishing. You can call those bodies Ecological Institutions.

2 - Ecological Institutions (EI's for short) are an evolution of non-human personhood vis-à-vis earth law. Its a framework for the legibility of ecosystems, not just through law, but through economics, technology, and politics. Put another way, ecological niche construction in socio-technical systems.

3 - My colleagues and I believe that blockchains, and distributed digital addressing systems, **can** support essential patterns of commoning and mutualism. The most interesting thing to know about DAOs is that they can be a continuation of the commons movement. Hybrid commons - both biophysical and digital. So DAOs are commons. Bioregional governance is rooted in these hybrid biological and data commons.

4 - Bioregions get a lot of interest, but they have an important correlate. Guilds, or affinity based commons. Diverse knowledge in shared territory is the basis of bioregional commons. However, diverse actors holding shared knowledge / affinity is the domain of guilds. How we design the interaction between the two is a core question of bioregional governance.

5 - This one is my favorite right now. Every measure / metric is an agreement. Standards are based on consensus. Bioregions and locales must govern their own. The basis of any bioregional value system is the governance of what indices or measures are used to define wellbeing in a place. Bioregional governance of the "terms" / parameters / indices used to define local regeneration underpin all value mechanics. What should be included?

6 - Bioregional governance is the process of articulating sacred, situated, and contextually held knowledge into schemas that are legible to economic, legal, and technical systems. That's nuanced to say the least. *One way to think about governance is that its a shared effort to maintain the integrity of collective beliefs as they are translated across different domains.*

7 - Closer. There are several other really important domains where bioregional governance is fundamental. Regen Foundation foundation is sandboxing governance at the local level for all these points. We are probably most excited about the relationship of bioregional governance and data verification / validation. Its basically the holy grail. MRV and governance, in one sense, are fundamentally related. Particularly when we recognize the bio - cultural dimension of regeneration."

([https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn%3Ali%3Aactivity%3A7310255802362023936/?])


==Challenges and Critiques==

    
- Bioregional Governance faces several implementation challenges:
        

- ## Political Feasibility
            
- Transitioning from established nation-state systems to Bioregional Governance structures requires significant political will and institutional redesign. Existing power structures may resist reforms that decentralize authority or prioritize ecological considerations over economic growth.
   
     
- ## Cross-Boundary Issues
            
- Some environmental challenges transcend even bioregional boundaries, requiring coordination across multiple bioregions. Climate change, ocean pollution, and migratory species protection demand governance mechanisms that can operate at multiple scales simultaneously.
        - ## Economic Integration
            - While bioregional governance emphasizes local production, complete economic self-sufficiency is rarely practical. Determining appropriate scales of economic activity and developing fair cross-bioregional trade remains challenging.

=Examples=

- # Contemporary Applications
    
- Several regions have begun implementing elements of bioregional governance:
        

- ## [[Regenerate Cascadia]] Bioregion
            
- Spanning portions of Oregon, Washington, British Columbia, and adjacent areas, the Cascadia movement represents one of the most developed expressions of bioregionalism in North America[5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregionalism). Initiatives in this region demonstrate how cultural identity and governance proposals can emerge from shared ecological features rather than existing political boundaries.
        

- ## Watershed Management Authorities
            
- Across various regions, watershed-based governance bodies have emerged to coordinate water management across traditional political jurisdictions. These entities represent early implementations of bioregional principles applied to specific resource domains.


==Asia-Pacific Examples / Case studies==

Sarah Queblatin, Sara Silva et al. :

Philippines - How creative climate narratives drawn from indigenous and local wisdom
inspired Pamumuno Leadership in typhoon impacted cities of Tabuk, Cebu, and Tacloban to
design for scaling landscape regeneration efforts for disaster resilience.

India - How the work of Tarun Bharat Singh revived 14 rivers, restored water for a million
people and thousands of water bodies in India.

Aotearoa/ New Zealand - How working for Northland’s bioregional regeneration was
inspired by the Te Ao Marama Creation Story.

Malaysia - How Forever Sabah convened as a collaborative social movement rather than a
bureaucracy or NGO and helped scale as a web of relations across communities and
organizations, as a living organism seeking to re-weave Sabah’s vision for the future.

Bangladesh - How the Sundarbans Eco Village from Bangladesh, implemented by the
Bangladesh Environment and Development Society (BEDS), exemplifies a holistic approach
to environmental sustainability and community development in the disaster-prone
Sundarbans coastal region of Bangladesh .

Indonesia - The story of Koalisi Ekonomi Membumi: How an earth centered economic
coalition for alternative economic pathways for Indonesia draws from sustainable nature-based innovations.

...

Thailand - How commoning and earth stewardship for transforming food systems in
Thailand was core to the work of Towards Organic Asia through the formation of the
Nothanbury Food Policy Council.

Bhutan - How the Gross National Happiness was institutionalized in sustainable
development requiring that it should have a holistic approach with equal importance to noneconomic dimensions such as well-being and happiness.

Japan - How the Sakihama district in Ofunato City in Japan worked with the spirit of
Satoyama culture and passed it on to future generations especially through restoration
efforts after the Great East Japan earthquake through the formation of the Sakihama
Restoration Council. This cultural change brought about the regeneration of the mountain
village (satochi-satoyama), and ocean culture (satoyama - satoumi) through the new
relationships among people."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)

==Asia-Pacific Cultural Worldviews Conducive to Bioregional Governance==

Sarah Queblatin, Sara Silva et al. :

"From India, there are Mahatma Gandhi’s teachings on Rāmarājya or रा मरा ज्य as a form of
government involving the empowerment of people at the grassroots, equal opportunity,
decentralization of administration, cooperative participation of people, and democratic self-governance or Swaraj स्वरा ज्

From Japan, Satoyama 里山, which is made up of the words sato (里) meaning "village" and
yama (山) meaning "hill or mountain" inspired ways of co-existing with nature, enhancing
biodiversity conservation around the world through the work of Satoyama Initiative.
From the Philippines, the deeper word for leadership is Pamumuno. Its root word
“puno” which means “tree,” is used and applied to ecosystem leadership for landscape
restoration initiatives rooted in the spirit of Kapwa. (the shared inner self) as
foundation for kincentric stewardship with others and with nature. Kapwa fuels the spirit of
bayanihan, or heroic collaboration, often activated in times of disasters or
adversity.

In Indonesia, the Tri Hita Karana philosophy weaves the relationship between spirit, nature,
and humans is embedded in farmers' democratic Balinese integrated management of water
and food systems. This is expressed through its Subak system, valued as a UNESCO heritage
asset.

In Thailand, the Sufficiency Economy เศรษฐกิจพอเพียพี ง (Setthakit Phophiang) is a philosophy
inspired by Buddhist principles aimed at improving the quality of life for people and
communities encouraging the balance between development and sustainability.

In Fiji, the Pacific concept of Talanoa or storytelling leads to consensus building and
decision making. It became an inspiration for climate change dialogues as part of the United
Nations 23rd Conference of Parties under the presidency of the Fiji government from 2017-
2018 to help countries implement and enhance their Nationally Determined Contributions by
2020.

In Aotearoa / New Zealand, Māori kaupapa guides purposeful leadership that is for and by
the collective and that kinship is established through shared experiences. Some leadership
principles include authentic change, service for others, inclusivity, Whanaungatanga or
forming relationships, Aroha which is showing love, value, and respect, and Manaakitanga is
about caring for others and doing the right thing for them."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)

=Conclusion=
    
- Bioregional Governance offers a compelling alternative to conventional political organizations by realigning human decision-making systems with ecological realities. As global challenges including climate change, biodiversity loss, and resource depletion intensify, bioregional approaches provide frameworks for more responsive, responsible, and resilient governance. By embedding political processes within natural boundaries and ecological understandings, bioregional governance seeks to reconcile human societies with the ecological systems upon which they depend while creating more democratic, just, and sustainable communities.

=More information=

==Report==

'''* Report: Bioregional Governance for Climate-Resilient Ecosystems in Asia and the Pacific. Sarah Queblatin et al. Ecolise and  [https://resilient-cities.com/ The Climate Resilient and Inclusive Cities project], 2025.''' 

URL = https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?

''Also a 'Training Guide'.'' See: [[Bioregional Governance Training Guide for Asia and the Pacific]]

"Led by Sara Silva from ECOLISE, this training guide was co-developed by the Global
Ecovillage Network Oceania and Asia and the Living Story Landscapes through Sarah
Queblatin, in close collaboration with Resilience.Earth through Erika Zárate and Oscar
Gussinyer, and the United in Diversity Foundation through Cokorda Istri Dewi and Namira
Iriwawan; and with support from Alam Santi Sustainable Design through Petra Schneider and
Nana Sohan.

...

During the in-person training, of which the present guide is a living outcome, community
engagement emerged as a priority for nine of the eleven cities representatives present. To
build resilient cities, we need to acknowledge the interconnection between the people who
"live the city", the urban and natural elements, and the region to where they belong,
understand their dynamics, and harness the creative potential of the diverse perspectives.
When polarising issues arose in the training such as natural elements extraction vs. resilience,
these were reframed as opportunities for dialogue.

This Bioregional governance framework supports us in grounding conversations in the story
and uniqueness of the place so that we can bring communities together and create shared
futures. This training guide also brings together learnings and insights from Asian and
European case studies whose approaches will –hopefully– serve as an invitation to explore
the transformative power of bioregional governance and community-led resilience towards
the well-being of all."


==Miscellaneous Links==

    
1. https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Bioregional_Democracy
    
2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregional_mapping
    
3. https://cascadiabioregion.org/bioregional-governance-1
    
4. https://coda.io/@sog/state-of-grace/the-guiding-principles-54
    
5. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregionalism
    
6. https://coda.io/@sog/state-of-grace/the-essential-elements-28
    
7. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioregion
    
8. https://in.boell.org/en/what-bioregional-approach-and-what-does-entail
    
9. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5554710/
        
10. https://www.oneearth.org/what-is-a-bioregion/
    
11. https://earth.org/bioregionalism/
    
12. https://www.oneearth.org/bioregions-2023/

[[Category:Bioregional]]