= "Due to the deep analogies one can notice between the living and linguistic systems, there can also be possible to find the general theoretical explanations which join these fields." [http://www.zbi.ee/~kalevi/interest.htm]

URL = http://www.zbi.ee/~uexkull/biosem.htm


=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"Biosemiotics  was  promoted  as  a  discipline  by  Thomas  Sebeok  (Sebeok  &  Umiker-Sebeok, 1992; Favareau, 2010, 35ff.). It was first established as a discipline in  Estonia  and  Denmark,  and  then  expanded  through  the  Czech  Republic,  Slovakia,  other  Scandinavian  countries,  Italy,  Russia,  USA  and  elsewhere.  In  Estonia and Denmark, the most important progenitors of biosemiotics were taken to be Jacob von Uexküll, who argued that all organisms define their environments as umwelten, that is, surrounding worlds that have meaning for them and to which they respond accordingly, and Charles Sanders Peirce, who had made the study of  signs  the  centre  of  his  philosophy.  Von  Uexküll’s    ideas  were developed  by  interpreting  them  through  Peircian  semiotics.  Peirce  has  also  been  the  main  inspiration  for  American  biosemioticians.  Italy  has  been  the  centre  for  the  development  of  code  biology  while  Slovakia, the  Czech  Republic  and  Russia  have also been influenced by hermeneutic philosophers such as Heidegger and Gadamer,   and   accordingly   are   also   centres   for   biohermeneutics.   

The relationships  between  biosemiotics,  code  biology  and  biohermeneutics  are  still  open  for  further  development.  

For  biosemioticians,  semiosis  is  the  defining  feature  of  all  life,  including  single-celled  organisms,  plants  and  ecosystems.  For  the  most  part,  they  reject  Peirce’s  pansemiotic  suggestion  that  in  the  universe  might  be  composed  exclusively  of  signs.  Semiosis  is  identified  with  life,  and  as  such has to be made intelligible as an emergent phenomenon in nature  (Barbieri, 2008). Peirce argued that semiosis is triadic, characterized by a sign, an ‘immediate’ object signified by the sign, and an interpretant of the sign, with the ‘dynamical object’ causally influencing the interpretant. What makes such semiosis possible is that there are real universals in the particularities of the world (that which today would be referred to as ‘natural kinds’), beings characterized by some degree of regularity  with  real  possibilities.  Semiosis  is  a  temporal  process  and  can  go  on  endlessly,  as  interpretants  and  their  objects  become  signs  for  more  developed  signs  with  better  defined  objects,  engendering  further  interpretants.  To  begin  with, Peirce was concerned with human reasoning and with developing symbolic logic.  Here,  interpretants  are  symbolic  signs,  for  instance,  sentences  expressing  propositions   within   a   language   or   mathematical   diagrams,   facilitating   imaginative conjectures about what is possible, or even impossible, from which necessary  conclusions  can  be  drawn.  Interpretants  can  be  developed  through  abduction,  the  creative  aspect  of  reasoning,  generally  involving  the  use  of  analogies or metaphors to interpret what is being investigated, and deduction and induction. Deduction is drawing out the implications of signs, while induction is identifying instances that can be signified and appreciating whether they conform to expectations.  

iosemioticians, developing Peirce’s suggestions, argued that interpretant can be  actions,  the  development  of  forms,  or  the  production  of  particular  proteins  within an organism (Kull, 2009; Lacková, & Faltynek, 2021). In each case, there can  be  the  equivalent  of  abduction,  with  creative  responses  to  problematic  situations generating new signs of these situations, deductive inferences from such signs, which can be actions or growth of forms or production of specific proteins, and induction, whereby situations or instances that can be signified by such signs are recognized, along with appreciating whether as recognized, they conform to what is anticipated. Such induction can be very basic, such as identifying what is food  to be ingested or what is a predator to be avoided and responding to the success  or  failure  of  responses  based  on  such  identification  and  associated  anticipations. The  most  primitive  forms  of  semiosis  do  not  involve  ‘objects’  as  such,  but  vague   differentiations,   perhaps   most   importantly,   the   living   being   itself differentiating itself from its environment, involving situating itself as an enduring entity  within  its  environment  and  responding  to  what  is  differentiated  by  it  as  significant in its environment, its umwelt.In the terminology of the mathematical biologist, Robert Rosen (1999, 259ff.), this involves the organism having a model of itself, although this terminology can be misleading if ‘model’ is taken to be a fractionated  component  of  the  organism  rather  than  a  function  of  the  whole  organism in the context of its environment. Here, identifying processes is more fundamental  than  identifying  ‘objects’;  it  is  identifying  the  processes  of  living.  This basic semiosis is evident in organisms having a primitive sense of their own existence   and   significance,   constraining   interactions   between   processes   to   maintain themselves in existence, and even augmenting the conditions for their existence. While  semiosis  in  non-human  life  is  characterized  by  iconic  (related  by  resemblance) and indexical (causally related) signs, humans are distinguished by the development of symbolic signs (related by convention) which make possible the  dissociation  of  semiosis  from  immediate  action  or  generation  of  form. Symbolic  signs  are  central  to  the  development  of  human  language  and  culture  (Deacon,  1997).  However,  symbolic  semiosis  presupposes  iconic  and  indexical  semiosis not only in thought, but in actions, biological forms and most basically, in endo-semiosis, including the production of proteins. All of these should also be understood as interpretants, ultimately participating in the semiosis of the whole organism  responding  to  its  environment,  and  as  such,  are  signs  engendering further semiosis. Human culture, with its distinctively symbolic semiosis, should always  be  understood  in  relation  to  these  other  forms  of  semiosis  on  which  symbolic semiosis is built (Kull, 2009). 

As Mark Johnson argued (1987; 2007), the body  is  in  the  mind.  The  relationships  in  ecosystems  as  characterized  by  biosemioticians are first and foremost semiotic bonds which form semiotic niches (Kull,  2010).  Organisms  themselves  can  be  regarded  as  highly  integrated  ecosystems  effected  through  constraining  component  processes  (Depew  and  Weber,  1996,  474f.),  and  so  these  eco-semiotic  bonds  are  the  condition  for  the  other forms of semiosis.

The kinds of inter-relationship between forms of semiosis is illustrated by the relationship   between   flowering   plants,   bees   and   bee-keepers.   Flowers   are   interpretants of flowering plants of signs of their environments of what is required to reproduce, serving as signs to bees, which can pollinate flowers, that there is nectar to be had. This is a symbiotic relationship in ecosystems in which flowers function as semiotic bonds. The actions of bees, flying to the flowers, often after fairly complex forms of communication in the hive involving dancing to indicate where the flowers are to be found, are also interpretants. Bee keepers, interpreting their environments, take their hives to where the flowers are likely to be found, and then extract the honey the bees have collected, store it and distribute it. Their actions  are  also  interpretants.  The  semiosis  involved  in  all  such  growth  and  activities presupposes and is dependent upon the complex endo-semiosis within organisms  bounded  by  membranes.  The  transport  and  selling  of  the  honey  is  made  possible  through  human  institutions,  including  language,  which  also  facilitates teaching apprentice bee-keepers their trade, and scientific research into bees, flowering plants, and semiotics itself, all of which are complexes of semiosis involving various kinds of interpretants.  

This  is  just  a  small  part  of  the  global  ecosystem  which  functions  through complexes of semiosis, making up the global semiosphere, as Jesper Hoffmeyer (1993, ch.5) characterized it, with human culture with its institutions and practices and  forms  of  communication  and  enquiry  being  just  components  of  this  semiosphere.  Conceiving  all  this  through  biosemiotics  also  grants  a  place  to  creative  evolution  in  which  interpretants  can  be  creative  responses  to  new  situations, creating new chemical structures and processes, new biological forms and new kinds of action, as well as new cultural products, including institutions and  ideas,  making  possible  ever  more  new  forms  of  symbiosis  facilitating  new  synergies.  Peter  Turchin  (2016)  pointed  out,  humans  are  the  most  cooperative  species  on  Earth.  Their  development  of  new  forms  of  symbiosis  and  new  synergies  through  such  cooperation,  facilitated  by  symbolic  semiosis,  that  accounts  for  their  success,  not  egoism  in  a  ruthless  struggle  for  survival  and  domination by individuals."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691)





=More Information=

* researcher [[Kalevi Kull]],  

* [[Ecosemiotics]]


[[Category:Complexity]]

[[Category:Science]]