
=Discussion=

Curtis Yarvin:

"The blockchain and the whitechain

'''"There is one centralized whitelist of registered addresses."'''

The libertarian dream of crypto isn’t dead yet—but we can see its death from here. Crypto is still a revolution. But it is a financial revolution, not a political revolution. Any political revolution will have to be a consequence of the financial revolution—and there is no certainty in any such revolution.

The future belongs to whitelists—or “allowlists” for our brilliant new century. A whitelist is a list of registered, or white, addresses. A whitechain is a blockchain in which sending tokens to an unregistered address either destroys or refunds them. There is one centralized whitelist of registered addresses.
Naturally, a legitimate address is matched to a legitimate account at a legitimate bank. Money laundering on the whitechain is as hard as money laundering with a bank account. If a token has ever left the whitechain and passed through a nonwhite address, it cannot be traded in any way by any legitimate exchange—it is just dead.

The larval state is the graychain, in which a centralized “denylist” lists “bad” wallets. For example, DoJ or Treasury could be posting a continuously updated list of blocked addresses, believed to belong to Russian oligarchs or whoever. Any traffic with these addresses would be traced by all legitimate exchanges and bar any sale or redemption.

It is surprising that the graychain does not already exist, forcing exchanges to check a live USG-certified blacklist before trading any tokens. But once there is a blacklist, the leap to a whitelist is just a matter of data—banks need to submit the addresses for all of their crypto-savvy customers. It can be uploaded on reels of tape, or something. If you have an outside wallet, send a form to the government."

(https://graymirror.substack.com/p/the-blockchain-and-the-whitechain?)

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto Economy]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]