'''= a not-for-profit social benefit corporation aiming at "Creating Open & Interoperable, Secure & Compassionate Digital Infrastructure".''' [https://www.blockchaincommons.com/home/]

URL = https://www.blockchaincommons.com/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Welcome to Blockchain Commons: Creating Open & Interoperable, Secure & Compassionate Digital Infrastructure:

"Advocating for the creation of open, interoperable, secure & compassionate digital infrastructure to enable people to control their own digital destiny and to maintain their human dignity online. Blockchain Commons works with developer communities to design, build, and maintain secure & compassionate decentralized architectures & tools for digital assets & digital identity based on responsible key management;"

(https://www.blockchaincommons.com/home/)


'''2.'''

"Blockchain Commons LLC was founded by Christopher Allen on April 25, 2019 as a not-for-profit entity focused on the creation of open, interoperable, secure & compassionate digital infrastructure, as described in our Vision. We want to advocate for the independent, private, and resilient control of digital assets, using open and interoperable specifications. The object is to put users and their human dignity first and to support and encourage their own safe and responsible management of digital assets.

The origins of Blockchain Commons lie with Rebooting the Web of Trust, an organization founded by Christopher in the Fall of 2015 to host design workshops that focus on decentralized identity and digital assets. The enormous growth of the workshops has resulted in the advancement of numerous concepts such as Verifiable Credentials and Decentralized Identifiers, which of which have become W3C recommendations. Blockchain Commons was founded in part to advance and expand the concepts of decentralization, independence, and self-sovereign identity that came out of RWOT (and that continue to be discussed and extended at recent workshops).

Blockchain Commons has codified many of its specifics goals for the creation of independent digital infrastructure in its Gordian Principles of independency, privacy, resilience, and openness. We’ve written specifications to support those principles, created coding libraries to embody those specifications, and developed reference apps such as Seed Tool and Coordinator. We’ve done all of this in collaboration with a community of developers and other interested parties, who we work with in our Community and at events such as our Silicon Salon. Blockchain Commons also advocates for its principles and offers testimony to agencies, legislatures, and other organizations."

(https://www.blockchaincommons.com/about/)


=More information=

* The [[Gordian Principles for the Self-Sovereign Control of Digital Assets]]

* Video: Blockchain Commons Technology Overview, at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RYgOFSdUqWY

[[Category:Crypto Technology]]

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Commons]]