
'''= "an open source project whose goal is to make online naming and identity management more secure and user-centered".'''

URL = https://blockstack.org/


=Description=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"Blockstack is an open source project whose goal is to make online naming and
identity management more secure and user-centered by reimagining user credentials,
DNS, certificate authorities, and public key infrastructure for the Internet. Similar to
public key infrastructure systems, their goal is to provide a way for users to “own their
own identity” outside of a mega-platform like Google or Facebook, giving an alternative
way of verifying identity and authenticity. Using Blockstack, an author associates a
public key with their username of choice, which can then be used to verify that
documents associated with that name were produced by that person. The author can
include any relevant identifying information as the value (like his website or profile) and
then (assuming his private key isn’t compromised) can make changes associated with
that name in a way that cannot be forged without undermining the Bitcoin blockchain.
This is done by cryptographically signing the hash (which serves as a unique, digital
“fingerprint”) of each new version of the website–the hash can be cross checked to
verify its consistency with the website’s latest version, and the cryptographic signature
cannot be forged unless the keys are compromised. The author gives the actual URL or
website to the verifier out of band."


=Discussion=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"Blockstack is implemented as a layer for storing name/value pairs built on top of
the Bitcoin blockchain, by registering Blockstack IDs. Blockstack uses Bitcoin’s
blockchain to act as a tamper-resistant record of ordered operations, stored in Bitcoin
transactions. Users issue two transactions to reserve a name–first a pre-order 90
transaction, which obfuscates the name being reserved but proves that the user was
first, and then a register transaction, which completes reserving the name and makes
the registration publicly visible. This is done to avoid front running–if everyone could see
the name being registered before it was confirmed, a sneaky party might try to claim it
first, or might use that information to undermine the user. Both of these transactions
must appear on the Bitcoin blockchain, and so might take up to an hour or longer to
confirm.

Once a name is registered, the owner of the private key used to sign the
transaction registering that name then has control over that name’s value; the user can
use their private key to make verifiable, signed changes to content, also in the form of
Bitcoin transactions. For example, if Jane Doe decides to create a Blockstack
username, ‘jane.id’, she could register that name in Blockstack, and others could see
that was only done by someone with Jane’s private key (presumably Jane herself). She
could then change the content that username points to, for example by updating her
profile. Blockstack is designed to separate the storage and agreement of operations on
the name/value pairs (like create, update, or delete) from the storage of the actual data
being modified and stored. Users can point to content stored in a variety of
places–Dropbox, Amazon web Services, IPFS, or their own website–by signing the
location of the content (the URL).

Other users can read the Bitcoin blockchain to find the Blockstack-specific
transactions, and check the operations on a username to determine its final value. For
example, Bob might be trying to read the latest updates from Jane. He sees some
information online that says that Jane stores her content on her website, JaneDoe.com,
but he is not sure if this is really the Jane he is looking for. Bob knows that the Jane he
is interested in has a username of ‘jane.id’ in Blockstack. He can read the Bitcoin
blockchain to find the Blockstack transaction where Jane registered ‘jane.id’.

Then Bob could continue reading the Bitcoin blockchain to find the latest
transaction signed with that registered public key to see where Jane stores her content,
and validate that it really is JaneDoe.com by checking the signed URL. Theoretically,
this could enable users to manage their own personal space on the internet for
publishing–Jane can change the location of her content at any time simply by issuing a
new Bitcoin transaction, and Bob can find and validate the change by reading the
Bitcoin blockchain. In addition, Blockstack would also like to make their usernames
usable as a single sign-on identity to login and federate user content across other
platforms. The system could enable publishing competitors to more easily bootstrap
new services since they could plug into existing, authenticated identities.
But for all its promise, Blockstack may face challenges in assimilating into
mainstream use on the web based on our three integration criteria: user adoption,
developer opt-in and business viability. User adoption is probably the most challenging
area for the Blockstack community to contend with. Prior efforts to support federated
identity, such as OpenID, have gained traction only with very niche user bases. At its
core, the limited adoption of independent identity systems like OpenID is tied to issues
of demand. The average user doesn’t see the need for secure identity and thus isn’t
interested in learning more about independently controlled identity solutions in order to
adopt them.

As security researchers Whitten and Tygar argue, “People do not generally sit
down at their computers wanting to manage their security; rather, they want to send
email, browse web pages, or download software, and they want security in place to
protect them while they do those things... Designers of user interfaces for security
should not assume that users will be motivated to read manuals or to go looking for
security controls that are designed to be unobtrusive.” Offering integration with a
decentralized identity system is probably not enough of a differentiator to motivate users
to put forth the effort to learn how its security tools work. When evaluating Blockstack’s
potential as a mass identity solution, we must ask whether or not it offers additional
benefits over these prior efforts, and if it effectively addresses the usability challenges
that other systems have struggled to overcome in the past. It is possible, however, that
Blockstack could find itself adopted as an essential component of another, very
compelling system.

The Blockstack developers have been very intentional about the design of their
system in order to address these challenges. Perhaps the biggest sticking point for
Blockstack’s usability is related to its dependency on public key cryptography.
Historically, strong cryptography has been very challenging for average users to deploy.
For example, work evaluating the usability of PGP, perhaps the most well-known 92
public key directory to date, has shown that there is a lot of misunderstanding among
users about how public key cryptography works and how to use it effectively. This 93
leads to serious use errors (i.e. accidently exposing secret keys) that nullify the overall
security of the system. In order for the decentralized vision of the Blockstack system to
work, the average user must either develop a coherent working model of how public key
cryptography works, or designers must create intuitive user interfaces that enable
average users to effectively manage their private keys.

In light of these challenges, the Blockstack team has made user experience
design for private key management one of their top priorities. These design choices
illustrate some of the important trade-offs that developers face when building
decentralized systems that are also user-friendly. Technically, the most “decentralized”
version of Blockstack would require users to download and validate the entire Bitcoin
blockchain (currently around 120 GB) in order to validate the location of a friend’s
content. This is impractical, given the amount of disk space the Bitcoin blockchain
takes, and the technical know-how required to independently manage one’s own
Blockstack and Bitcoin nodes.

Instead, Blockstack has mapped their cryptographic processes directly onto the
familiar username and password procedures that users are already familiar with, and
are utilizing third party providers. Today, new Blockstack users can register an identity
via a registrar service like onename.com, which manages private keys for users and
provides the familiar username/password login interface. Using onename.com, a user
creates a password that encrypts a generated private key. The user is provided with a
backup file that can be used to restore and reset their password in the event that he
forgets his password.

Although the encrypted private keys are stored on Onename’s servers, this
configuration is arguably more secure than the traditional username/password
approach, because the Onename servers do not have direct access to the private keys.
The user needs to decrypt the private key before issuing any update or transfer to the
account. Therefore, Onename cannot act maliciously on behalf of the user. At the
same time, the Onename model suffers from some of the same security problems as
the traditional username/password model -- if Jane’s Onename password is
compromised, for example via a phishing email, the attacker can still take over the
account and make changes -- for example by creating a new website and attaching it to
Jane’s Blockstack ID in order to post embarrassing content.

In the future, the Blockstack developers aim to eliminate passwords from their
process altogether. This could happen in a couple of different ways. First, name
registrars that build on top of Blockstack could develop alternative methods for
managing private keys. Second, Blockstack is working to develop a client that supports
a two-factor authentication process that would require authorization from multiple
devices (i.e. the user’s laptop and mobile phone). Ideally, users would be able to
authorize login requests with a simple click of a button, indicating their consent, without
the need to remember additional information, such as a password or private key. Even if
passwords were eliminated, however, the initial setup and recovery processes of putting
private keys on their devices could prove quite challenging for everyday users.
Blockstack is in the process of building a browser with a built-in wallet and built-in
private key management that would enable a more seamless experience upon
downloading. Of course, getting people to adopt a specialized browser to use your
software is far from simple–developers have long bemoaned the challenges of getting
users to download the latest version of the browser they already use, much less adopt
an entirely new one. The Blockstack team will need to think carefully about how they roll
out an effective adoption strategy for their specialized browser. Right now, they are
focusing on a “Blockstack installer,” which upgrades existing browsers like Chrome and
Safari, enabling users to access Blockstack from their default browsers.

The Blockstack project must also consider how to help users recover when their
private keys are compromised, for example when they lose a device on which the
private keys are stored. Traditional identity management providers accomplish this by
providing a way for users to prove their identity, and then the identity management
provider will reset their password. In​ ​a​ ​decentralized​ ​system,​ ​there​ ​is​ ​no​ ​authority
who​ ​can​ ​perform​ ​a​ ​reset.​ A related decentralized identity solution in development for
the Ethereum blockchain, UPort, has a scheme to do this by letting a user designate
“friends” who can perform the reset for them. It remains to be seen whether this works
in practice. There are many outstanding challenges–for example, if many users are
compromised at once, as has happened with the Sony and Target hacks, a user may
not have any friends left with available accounts to help.

The Blockstack developers are currently considering a multiple signature (aka
“multi-sig”) scheme for achieving this goal, whereby a selected subset of a user’s family
and friends would cooperate to reset one’s password on their behalf. In the coming
years, issues related to key recovery and compromised accounts will remain important
questions, ones that Blockstack will have to thoroughly contend with if their system is
ever to achieve mass adoption."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

=Status=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:


"Today Blockstack supports over 4,000 contributing members in its open source
community and has registered over 70,000 domain names. The open source code is 
maintained by Blockstack Inc., a company which recently announced that it raised $4
million in funding from venture capital firms like Union Square Ventures and the Digital
Currency Group. It will be interesting to see how this organizational structure will shape
Blockstack’s prospects of adoption as an open standard."

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]