=Examples=

Menno van Ginkel:

"Many projects are initiated to realize shorter food chains and peer-to-peer (P2P) economies, such as 

* Delicia, an Estonian based blockchain start-up which aims to connect regional food producers, restaurants, supermarkets, and consumers in networks with the main goal to reduce food waste (2018). 

* Other European start-ups like Ambrosus, OriginTrial, and Te-Food are creating the blockchain-enabled data infrastructure for traceability and food safety in the supply chain, and 

* Dutch start-up Fructus aims to create a blockchain-based marketplace where farmers can directly interact with consumers (Fructus, 2018). 

* Additionally, Backfeed and Odyssey are creating blockchain platforms as well as protocols for decentralized cooperation and decentralized sharing economies respectively, tools which can be leveraged to create open networks of food cooperatives. 

It can thus be argued that various aspects of the agrifood sector are rapidly being digitized, contributing to decentralized food networks and short food supply chains."
(https://hackernoon.com/leveraging-platform-cooperativism-and-blockchain-technologies-for-decentralized-food-networks-and-28dc5e7c42f1)


=More information=

* [[Collaborative Blockchain-Based Data Systems in the Food Supply Chain]]

Literature:

* Ambrosus. (2018). Ambrosus Whitepaper. Retrieved from https://ambrosus.com/assets/Ambrosus-White-Paper-V8-1.pdf

* Delicia. (2018). Whitepaper. Retrieved from https://delicia.io/delicia_wp.pdf

* Fructus. (2018). Whitepaper. Retrieved from http://fructus.io/WHITEPAPER.pdf

* Rakic, B., Levak, T., Drev, Z., Savic, S. & Veljkovic, A. (2017). OriginTrail White Paper. First purpose built protocol for supply chains based on blockchain. Retrieved from https://origintrail.io/storage/documents/ OriginTrail-White-Paper.pdf

* Te-Food. (2017). Making business profit by solving social problems. Retrieved from https://ico.tefoodint.com/te-food-white-paper.pdf

* IoF2020. (2017). Internet of Food and Farm. D1.3 Detailed Work Plan. Retrieved from https://www.iof2020.eu/deliverables/d1.3.-detailed-work-plan.pdf

* Yiannas, F. [IBMBlockchain]. (2017, August 22). Walmart’s food safety solution using IBM Food Trust built on the IBM Blockchain Platform [Video file]. Retrieved from https://youtu.be/SV0KXBxSoio

* McNamara, B. (2016, July 11). Examining the Need for a Decentralized Food System [Blog post]. Retrieved from https://medium.com/@CarFreeBrad/examining-the-need-for-a- decentralized-food-system-fc06420ba9c7

[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]

[[Category:Crypto_Ecology]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]