'''* Book: ( & Article): Blockchain government - a next form of infrastructure for the twenty-first century. By MyungSan Jun. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 2018, 4:7'''

URL = ; [https://www.amazon.com/Blockchain-Government-infrastructure-twenty-first-century/dp/171912714X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1529494466&sr=8-1&keywords=blockchain%20government book] ; [https://jopeninnovation.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40852-018-0086-3 article]


=Abstract=

"Today, more than 100 blockchain projects created to transform government systems are being conducted in more than 30 countries. What leads countries rapidly initiate blockchain projects? I argue that it is because blockchain is a technology directly related to social organization; Unlike other technologies, a consensus mechanism form the core of blockchain. Traditionally, consensus is not the domain of machines but rather humankind. However, blockchain operates through a consensus algorithm with human intervention; once that consensus is made, it cannot be modified or forged. Through utilization of Lawrence Lessig’s proposition that “Code is law,” I suggest that blockchain creates “absolute law” that cannot be violated. This characteristic of blockchain makes it possible to implement social technology that can replace existing social apparatuses including bureaucracy. In addition, there are three close similarities between blockchain and bureaucracy. First, both of them are defined by the rules and execute predetermined rules. Second, both of them work as information processing machines for society. Third, both of them work as trust machines for society. Therefore, I posit that it is possible and moreover unavoidable to replace bureaucracy with blockchain systems. 


In conclusion, I suggest five principles that should be adhered to when we replace bureaucracy with the blockchain system: 

1) introducing Blockchain Statute law; 

2) transparent disclosure of data and source code; 

3) implementing autonomous executing administration; 

4) building a governance system based on direct democracy and 

5) making Distributed Autonomous Government(DAG).

At the time I initially planned to investigate the subject of blockchain technology and government, I could not imagine that so many blockchain projects were underway in so many countries. Moreover, the speed of expansion of government-led blockchain projects worldwide is astonishing. For example, Estonia has used blockchain technology to issue e-ID for identity verification for their citizens. Additionally, electronic voting systems based on blockchain are being built in many countries including Ukraine, Estonia, and Australia. Honduras and Georgia attempted to introduce blockchain technology to manage their land registers. The United States is working to incorporate blockchain technology to record and share medical information, and the UK is pursuing research and development to apply blockchain technology to public services. China has announced plan to build a “Blockchain city,” based on blockchain technology. In addition, more than 100 blockchain projects are being conducted in more than 40 countries around the world. IBM reported that nine in 10 governments will invest in Blockchain projects by 2018."

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto_Politics]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:Articles]]