This page was created in 2018 by [[Strypey]] as a page on the [https://gitlab.com/fediverse/fediverse.gitlab.io/-/wikis/blockchain-social-apps original fediverse.party wiki], then moved with that project to its [https://codeberg.org/fediverse/fediparty/wiki/blockchain-social-apps new home on CodeBerg]. The page is now maintained here. Last reviewed and updated in August, 2025.

= Projects =

== Social network ==

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20180903004318/https://www.afari.io/ Afari] (defunct, [https://medium.com/@venturetwins/building-a-blockchain-startup-in-college-with-avthar-sewrathan-richard-adjei-and-felix-madutsa-cd2e93a46e35 formerly BlockX]) - A [https://kellercenter.princeton.edu/people/startups-teams/afari-2018 one year student project] to build a mobile-based social network on the BlockStack blockchain (now [https://www.stacks.co/ Stacks]).

* [https://akasha.world/ Akasha] (beta, [https://github.com/AKASHAorg/akasha-core/blob/next/LICENSE core is GPLv3]) - Originally pitched as a web-based social network app using the Ethereum blockchain, with a demo at world.akasha.org. As of 2025, they seem to be focused on building out their foundation as a [[Web3]] collaboration network, while maintaining the Akasha software as a set of foundational libraries for token-based social apps.

* [https://github.com/pocketnetteam/get.started Bastyon] ([https://github.com/pocketnetteam/pocketnet.gui/blob/master/LICENSE Apache 2.0]) - new name of Pocketnet. A web-based social network app that uses the Pocketcoin blockchain ([https://github.com/pocketnetteam/pocketnet.core Apache 2.0]). Includes video hosting and "decentralised ads". as of August 2025, existing web portals into the network were choked with white supremacist disinformation.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20200128205837/http://datong.nu/ Datong] (defunct) - just vapourware with a Patreon. Can't rule out the possibility it was a scam. Blockchains weren't specifically mentioned, but the homepage said "We will introduce an unique digital coin that you can exchange for services on the network itself".

* [https://ecency.com/ Ecency] ("[https://github.com/ecency/ecency-mobile/blob/development/LICENSE MIT]") - Tumblr clone created to run on the Hive blockchain, web and mobile apps available. [https://github.com/ecency/ecency-mobile Rebranding of eSteem], which began as a Steem-based project.

* [https://esteem.app/ eSteem] (defunct, "[https://github.com/ecency/esteem/blob/master/LICENSE.md MIT]") - Tumblr clone created to run on the [https://www.steem.center/index.php?title=ESteem Steem blockchain]. Homepage is still up, but both the desktop repo and mobile repo have been marked read-only. The mobile repo says it's deprecated in favour of Ecency. The [https://esteem.app/about about page on their website] suggests they migrated to the [https://cryptobriefing.com/what-are-steem-hive-comparison-both-decentralized-content-blockchains/ Hive fork].

* [https://crypto.news/leeroy-ethereum-based-alternative-to-twitter/ Leeroy] (defunct) - a web-based Titter clone developed by Jake Brukhman, using the [https://steemit.com/blockchain/@jbrukh/leeroy-a-decentralized-social-network Ethereum blockchain, and the MetaMask wallet app]. For a while their leeroy.io website was a message redirecting users to Peepeth.

* [https://memo.cash/ Memo] ([https://github.com/memocash/desktop/blob/master/LICENSE.md Apache 2.0])- According to its [https://memo.cash/blog/introducing-memo introduction page], "Memo is both a protocol and a front-end application. The protocol works by writing transactions to the Bitcoin Cash blockchain". They aim to create an uncensorable social network, "the blockchain is more than an uncensorable way to send money, it's an uncensorable way to store data. Memo is an experiment leveraging the blockchain's data storing capabilities".

* [https://gitlab.com/minds/minds Minds] ([https://gitlab.com/minds/minds/-/blob/master/LICENSE AGPL]) - a [https://www.minds.com/minds/blog/power-to-the-people-the-minds-jury-system-975486713993859072 community-moderated] web-based social network app that uses the Ethereum blockchain. In 2021, the in-house instant messenger at minds.com was [https://www.minds.com/newsfeed/1236784837018611712 connected to the Matrix network]. In 2024, Minds announced they would [https://networks.minds.com/blog/post/what-is-the-fediverse-the-next-evolution-of-social-media implement ActivityPub] to connect their public posting feeds to the fediverse.

* [https://archive.is/HYW0u Mycelia] (defunct) - a social network for musicians founded by Imogen Heap, planning a Creative Passport app using a blockchain and smart contracts. Nothing has been added to the [https://archive.is/wip/x6um Eevents page] since 2018, and as of 2025, HTTPS isn't working on the website.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20190324225913/https://www.numaverse.com/ Numaverse] (defunct, [https://github.com/numaverse "MIT"]) - a web-based social network app using the Ethereum blockchain. Was planning to bridge with ActivityPub networks. Abandoned, possibly due to competition from Peepeth and Minds.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20240620035525/https://peepeth.com/welcome Peepeth] (defunct) - a moderated web-based social network app that used the Ethereum blockchain. Attracted some [https://gitlab.com/peepeth experimental third-party apps]. The project was [https://bevanbarton.com/peepeth shut down by its core developer in 2025].

* [https://github.com/pocketnetteam/ Pocketnet] (renamed, [https://github.com/pocketnetteam/pocketnet.gui/blob/master/LICENSE Apache 2.0]) - Began as a volunteer-developed social network using its own blockchain. [https://news.bitcoin.com/pocketnet-changes-name-to-bastyon-and-releases-private-messaging-app-with-pkoin-chat-payments/ Renamed Bastyon] in 2021, URL redirects to the Bastyon site.

* [https://resonate.social/ Resonate DAO] (defunct?) - planned a social network on their own blockchain, with a RESO token. Not to be confused with Resonate.is (see Media-hosting section) or Resonate.finance.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20230528040949/https://revolutionpopuli.com/ Revolution Populi] (defunct, [https://github.com/Revolution-Populi/revpop-core/blob/development/LICENSE.txt "MIT"]) - a white paper looking for a user base. An ICO was in the works.

* [https://steemit.com Steemit] ([https://github.com/steemit/condenser/blob/master/doc/LICENSE.md "MIT"]) - a web-based social network app (Slashdot/Reddit-a-like with up/down voting) that uses the Steem blockchain.

* [https://archive.is/meGHO Twister] (defunct, [https://github.com/miguelfreitas/twister-core/blob/master/COPYING "MIT"]) - a micro-blogging app using the BitCoin protocol and a DHT based on libTorrent.

* [https://archive.is/zoToo WeKu] (defunct, [https://github.com/zahidsun/weku-chain/blob/master/LICENSE.md "MIT"]) - a blogging and social media app based on their own fork of the Steem blockchain (?).

== Media-hosting ==

* [https://bitsong.io/ BitSong] ([https://github.com/bitsongofficial/go-bitsong/blob/main/LICENSE Apache 2.0]) - music-hosting on its own blockchain

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20191016052325/https://choon.co/ Choon] (defunct) - BandCamp clone running payments on its own blockchain. [https://medium.com/emanate-live/emanate-welcomes-choon-8893cdb3e456 Merged with Emanate], which is also defunct.

* [https://dlive.tv/ DLive] - livestreaming on the Steem blockchain

* [https://d.tube/ DTube] ([https://github.com/dtube/dtube/blob/master/LICENSE GPLv3]) - video hosting on the Steem blockchain

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20231208195838/https://emanate.live/ Emanate] (defunct, [https://github.com/Emanate-official no license info]) - music-hosting on its own blockchain

* [https://lbry.io/ Lbry] ([https://github.com/lbryio/lbry-sdk/blob/master/LICENSE "MIT"]) - uncensorable storage and retrieval system for digital media, using its own blockchain.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20231220105858/https://musicoin.org/ Musicoin] (defunct, [https://github.com/Musicoin/explorer/blob/master/LICENSE GPLv3], [https://github.com/Musicoin/go-musicoin/blob/master/COPYING LGPLv3], [https://github.com/Musicoin/desktop/blob/master/LICENSE Apache 2.0/"MIT"]) - music streaming on its own blockchain.

* [https://odysee.com/ Odysee] ([https://github.com/OdyseeTeam/odysee-frontend/blob/master/LICENSE "MIT"]) - video streaming on the LBRY blockchain

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20191014035901/https://piepieapp.com/ PiePie] (defunct) - previously [https://www.asiacryptotoday.com/piepie-apps-new-features/ known as Lit]. Social media sharing on the Mithril blockchain

* [[Resonate]] (defunct?, [http://resonate.is/ homepage], [https://github.com/resonatecoop/mobile/blob/main/LICENSE GPLv3]) - music streaming using [https://www.bigchaindb.com/usecases/ip/resonate/ BigChainDB]. Last blog post in 2021, newsletter link broken. Not to be confused with Resonate.social (see Social Network section) or Resonate.finance.

* [https://socialx.network/ SocialX](defunct, [https://github.com/SocialXNetwork "MIT"]) - photo and video sharing on their own blockchain(?). The company is based in Singapore and got startup funding in an ICO using Ethereum. Was in beta in 2018, [https://medium.com/@socialx/closing-socialx-df75d7ee1ff4 closed in 2019.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20240225113954/https://steepshot.io/ Steepshot] (defunct) - photo-sharing using the [https://steemit.com/utopian-io/@timons/introducing-steepshot-how-to-login-and-how-to-create-a-post Steem blockchain].

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20210422032658/https://ujomusic.com/ Ujo] (defunct?) - BandCamp clone running payments on Ethereum. Partnered with [https://medium.com/consensys-media/evolution-of-ujo-music-the-tiny-human-retrospective-e23136197c31 Imogen Heap], musician and co-founder of Mycelia. As of July 2024, URL now redirecting to [https://www.mesh.xyz/about Consensys Mesh]. 

* [https://www.viberate.io/ Viberate] - Started out as a Last.FM clone running its own [https://www.geeksandbeats.com/2017/08/viberate-blockchain-live-performances/ VIB blockchain]. Seems to have pivoted from blockchains to "music analytics".

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20190724225718/https://www.voise.com/ Voise] (defunct) - a SoundCloud clone hosted on the Ethereum blockchain. Became a [https://finance.yahoo.com/news/blockchain-music-platform-voise-joins-044000227.html member of the Ethereum Enterprise Alliance] in 2017.

== Multi-App Protocols ==

* [https://archive.is/FkMwX Lens] (defunct, [https://github.com/lens-protocol/core/blob/master/LICENSE "MIT"]) - promoted itself as a protocol for creating social apps on the Polygon blockchain4, has had apps in the wild. Homepage went dark at the end of 2024.

* [https://web.archive.org/web/20211220174908/https://orbis.club/ Orbis] ([https://github.com/OrbisWeb3 "MIT"])- promoted itself as a multi-blockchain protocol for creating social apps, already has apps in the wild. In 2025, it's pivoted to offering its plumbing as a framework, calling itself [https://useorbis.com/ OrbisDB]. Built on [https://ceramic.network/ Ceramic], described as "a decentralized data network".

= Original Intro Text =

"All these apps are all distributed in some way, because they use a blockchain, but not federated. I think it's useful to have this list to point to, in case people think we just don't know about these apps, and because the non-scammy, free code ones might be worth approaching about implementing ActivityPub or Zot to bridge to the fediverse.

Because all these blockchain apps are in competition with each other, unlike the fediverse apps who cooperate on common protocols, it's hard to see how any of them will gain the network effect to compete with the legacy datafarms. Although some, like Resonate and Musicoin, are [https://www.opendemocracy.net/oliver-sylvester-bradley/ours-to-hack-and-own platform cooperatives], it seems like at least some of the others are just datafarm larvae like [https://davidgerard.co.uk/blockchain/2018/10/13/everipedia-the-wikipedia-for-being-wrong-but-on-the-blockchain/ Everipedia], aiming to enslave enough users to get Vulture Capitalist funding, and exit by acquisition or IPO."

2025 note:

Most of these projects foundered within a few years. To be fair, a lot of federated projects have died in that time too, even though the fediverse as a whole has grown massively. The survival rate for decentralised social network startups in general is low, whether they're hobby projects or funded businesses. But it's notable that most decentralised social app development is now focused on ActivityPub (the fediverse), ATProto ([https://thenewstack.io/bluesky-vs-nostr-which-should-developers-care-about-more/ BlueSky's vanity protocol]), and in the case of those still committed to crypto, Nostr.

= See Also =

* [[Crypto Social Networks]]
* [[Distributed Social Network Projects]]