'''* Article: Chain of thought: Exploring blockchain through the lens of philosophy. By Sasha Shilina. Paradigm, May 2023'''

URL = https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd


=Description=

'''1.'''

"This paper delves into the philosophical implications of blockchain technology and attempts to draw parallels between blockchain concepts and ones in the history of thought and modern theories such as posthumanism, transhumanism, accelerationism, critical theory, and speculative realism. '''We aim to conceptualize the philosophical core of blockchain, which encompasses cyberpunk, solarpunk, crypto-anarchism, and technolibertarianism among others'''. ''Additionally, we identify the thirteen philosophical pillars of blockchain''. We argue that this technology challenges traditional notions of identity and trust while enabling greater autonomy and agency. Furthermore, we suggest that blockchain has the potential to bring about significant societal transformations, including the emergence of new forms of governance and the expansion of human capabilities. Finally, we consider some of the critiques and challenges facing blockchain and reflect on its potential role in shaping the future of society and philosophy alike. We conclude by emphasizing the need for further research in this area."


'''2.'''

"This research paper seeks to explore the implications of blockchain in the context of classical and contemporary philosophical theories, with a particular focus on posthumanism, transhumanism, accelerationism, critical theory, speculative realism and cyberpunk, solarpunk, crypto-anarchism, and technolibertarianism movements. 


We aim to address questions such as:

* What ethical, epistemological, ontological, aesthetic, social, and political implications does blockchain have?

* How does blockchain fit within the broader philosophical frameworks?

* How is blockchain viewed by contemporary philosophical theories?

* What theories form the philosophical core of blockchain?

* How to conceptualize blockchain as a philosophy?


To address these questions, we will first provide an overview of blockchain technology, including its key components, features, main use cases, and limitations. We will then examine the philosophical implications of blockchain, and see it through the lenses of classical and modern philosophical theories. Then we will conceptualize a so-called hypothetical philosophical heart of blockchain that embraces concepts from cyberpunk and solarpunk to crypto-anarchism and technolibertarianism; and distinguish the thirteen philosophical pillars of blockchain. Finally, we will consider some of the critiques and challenges facing blockchain, and reflect on its potential role in shaping the future of society and philosophy alike.

Through this analysis, we hope to contribute to a deeper understanding of the philosophical implications of blockchain and to open up new avenues for philosophical inquiry and debate."


(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


=Excerpts=

==Libertarian Socialism and the Blockchain==

Sasha Shilina:

"Libertarian socialism is a political philosophy that seeks to combine the principles of socialism, such as social ownership and democratic decision-making, with individual freedom and autonomy. As Noam Chomsky (1970) put it, a consistent libertarian “must oppose private ownership of the means of production and wage slavery, which is a component of this system, as incompatible with the principle that labor must be freely undertaken and under the control of the producer”. Blockchain technology aligns with libertarian socialist principles by promoting decentralization, individual autonomy, and democratic decision-making.

Libertarian socialism rejects the concept of a state. It advocates for decentralized decision-making and self-management of resources, aiming to eliminate hierarchical structures and empower individuals and communities. Blockchain technology aligns with these principles by offering decentralized consensus mechanisms, enabling peer-to-peer interactions, and facilitating autonomous governance through smart contracts. Blockchain’s ability to distribute power and decision-making aligns with the core tenets of libertarian socialism.

Libertarian socialism emphasizes collective ownership and control over resources. Blockchain technology can support libertarian socialist ideals by enabling DAOs that promote collective ownership, democratic decision-making, and social justice. Blockchain-based DAOs can empower individuals to create and manage decentralized, community-driven projects and initiatives.

Moreover, blockchain technology can facilitate the implementation of libertarian socialist policies, such as universal basic income (UBI). Smart contracts can automate the distribution of resources and ensure transparency and accountability.

Libertarian socialism seeks to create a society based on trust, transparency, and accountability. Blockchain technology’s inherent features, such as immutability, transparency, and auditability, can enhance trust in economic and social interactions. Through blockchain-based systems, information can be recorded and accessed by all participants, reducing the need for blind trust in centralized authorities. This aligns with the goals of libertarian socialism to establish systems that prioritize openness and accountability.

While there are potential interconnections between libertarian socialism and blockchain technology, certain challenges and considerations should be acknowledged. These include addressing the digital divide to ensure equal access and navigating regulatory frameworks that may impact the decentralized nature of blockchain systems. Additionally, careful attention must be given to prevent the replication of existing power dynamics within blockchain communities and to ensure inclusivity and diversity.

Various historical and contemporary currents and movements often categorized as libertarian socialism encompass a range of ideologies. These include anarchism, Marxism, communalism, certain strains of democratic socialism, guild socialism, participism, and revolutionary syndicalism."

(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


==Transhumanism==

Sasha Shilina:

"Transhumanism is a philosophical and intellectual movement that explores the intersection of technology, humanity, and human enhancement. It advocates for the use of emerging technologies to enhance human capabilities and transcends biological limitations.

Transhumanist thinkers engage in the examination of emerging technologies with the aim of surpassing inherent human limitations, while also considering the ethical implications of their implementation. Within transhumanist discourse, there exists a belief that humans have the potential to enhance themselves to such a degree that they could be classified as posthuman beings, possessing significantly augmented capabilities beyond their current state.

Transhumanist thought has been here for years. According to Nick Bostrom (2005), transcendentalist impulses have been expressed at least as far back as the quest for immortality in the Epic of Gilgamesh, as well as in historical quests for the Fountain of Youth, the Elixir of Life, and other efforts to stave off aging and death.

Synergies and intersections between transhumanism and blockchain are significant, as both of these fields aim to transform and enhance human capabilities. Transhumanism seeks to transcend the limitations of the human body and mind through the use of technology, while blockchain offers a decentralized and secure platform for the exchange of information and value.

One of the key intersections between transhumanism and blockchain is the potential for blockchain technology to facilitate the integration of advanced technologies into the human body. For example, blockchain-based smart contracts could be used to ensure the safe and secure exchange of data between implanted devices and external systems. This could enable the creation of a seamless and interconnected network of human-machine interfaces, leading to unprecedented levels of efficiency and productivity.

Also, transhumanism may envision the possibility of creating authentic digital identities on-chain. Blockchain, with its decentralized and immutable nature, offers a platform for managing digital identities and personal data. By utilizing blockchain, transhumanist ideas of integrating technology with human identity can be facilitated, enabling secure and verifiable storage and management of personal information, including biometric data or digital representations of oneself.

Transhumanist endeavors often involve sensitive personal data and emerging technologies that raise concerns about privacy and security. Blockchain’s cryptographic protocols and consensus mechanisms offer enhanced security measures, protecting sensitive information and reducing the risk of data breaches. Additionally, blockchain’s decentralized nature provides individuals with more control over their data, aligning with transhumanist ideals of personal autonomy and self-determination. For example, blockchain-based authentication systems could be used to ensure that only authorized individuals have access to advanced medical implants or other enhanced technologies.

Another area of intersection is the idea of decentralized systems. Both transhumanism and blockchain seek to decentralize power and authority. Transhumanists envision a world in which individuals have more control over their own bodies and minds, using technology to enhance their physical and cognitive abilities. Blockchain, on the other hand, seeks to decentralize control over financial transactions and other forms of data by using distributed ledger technology.

Moreover, what connects transhumanism with blockchain is the idea of immutability. Transhumanists seek to enhance and extend human life through technology, with the goal of achieving immortality. Blockchain, meanwhile, uses cryptographic algorithms to create immutable records that cannot be altered or deleted, ensuring the integrity of the data being recorded.

Additionally, both transhumanism and blockchain have the potential to disrupt existing power structures. Transhumanist technologies could challenge the traditional power dynamics between individuals, governments, and corporations, while blockchain has the potential to disrupt at least the banking and financial industries.

Transhumanism often questions centralized authority and hierarchical structures. Similarly, blockchain operates on decentralized networks, allowing for peer-to-peer interactions and governance without a central intermediary. Blockchain-based DAOs can provide avenues for transhumanist projects and initiatives, enabling decentralized decision-making, resource allocation, and coordination among participants.

In addition, transhumanism embraces technological progress and innovation. Blockchain, through tokenization and decentralized funding models, provides new avenues for funding and incentivizing transhumanist research, development, and intellectual property protection. It can facilitate the DeSci movement as well as the creation of decentralized marketplaces and intellectual property management systems that enable fair compensation and attribution for transhumanist innovations.

The very notion and prospect of human enhancement and related issues arouse philosophical debates. Also, there is speculation that advancements in human enhancement techniques and emerging technologies like blockchain could enable significant progress in enhancing human abilities by the mid-XXI century. Notably, Ray Kurzweil’s book “The Singularity is Near” (2005) and Michio Kaku’s book “Physics of the Future” (2011) explore a range of human enhancement technologies and provide valuable insights into the potential impact of these technologies on the future of humanity.

All in all, the intersection of transhumanism and blockchain has the potential to enable the development of new technologies that transform the human experience in unprecedented ways. By leveraging the security and decentralization provided by blockchain technology, transhumanist visionaries can work towards creating a future where human potential is limitless."

(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


==Posthumanism==

Sasha Shilina:

"Posthumanism (meaning “after humanism” or “beyond humanism”) is a philosophical and cultural movement that challenges the traditional boundaries between human and non-human entities and explores the possibilities of enhancing or transcending human capabilities through technology.

Posthumanism encompasses different branches, including antihumanism, cultural posthumanism, philosophical posthumanism, posthuman condition, posthuman transhumanism, AI takeover, and voluntary human extinction. Antihumanism is critical of traditional humanism, while cultural posthumanism challenges assumptions about human nature and subjectivity. Philosophical posthumanism examines the ethical implications of extending subjectivities beyond the human species. Posthuman transhumanism aims to develop technologies that enhance human capacities for a “posthuman future”. The AI takeover variant argues for the eventual replacement of humans by artificial intelligence, while voluntary human extinction seeks a future without humans.

Proponents of a posthuman discourse, suggest that innovative advancements and emerging technologies have transcended the traditional model of the human, as proposed by Descartes among others associated with the philosophy of the Enlightenment period. In contrast to humanism, the discourse of posthumanism seeks to redefine the boundaries surrounding the modern philosophical understanding of the human.

Theoretically, blockchain, with its potential to create decentralized and trustless networks, may be seen by posthumanists as a tool for empowering individuals and creating new forms of social organization.

One area where posthumanism and blockchain intersect is the idea of distributed agency. Posthumanists argue that agency is not limited to human beings, but can be distributed across human and non-human entities. Similarly, blockchain technology enables distributed agency through its decentralized and autonomous network structure, where no single entity has control over the system.

Another area where posthumanism and blockchain intersect is in the idea of post-scarcity. Posthumanists argue that technological advancements can lead to a post-scarcity society, where material abundance is achieved through the efficient use of resources and automation. Blockchain technology, with its potential to create decentralized and self-executing smart contracts, has been seen as a way to automate and streamline various industries, leading to increased efficiency and potentially reduced resource consumption.

American philosopher Theodore Schatzki (2001) identifies two types of philosophical posthumanism. The first, called “objectivism,” seeks to balance the focus on human experience by recognizing the role of nonhuman agents, such as animals, plants, and technology, in shaping the world.

The second agenda prioritizes practices over individuals, suggesting that individuals are constituted by their practices. Blockchain technology enables the creation of decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs), which operate without a centralized governing authority, which resonates with the posthumanist agenda of prioritizing practices over individual subjects.

In the context of posthumanism, we can mention a prominent feminist scholar and philosopher of science Donna Haraway who is known for her work on cyborg theory (1985), which explores the relationship between humans and technology. Haraway’s work on cyborg theory also offers insights into the potential implications of blockchain for the relationship between bodies, identities, and technology. Her idea of the cyborg as a hybrid of human and machine challenges the notion of a strict divide between the natural and the technological and suggests that technology is already an integral part of human identity and experience. In this context, blockchain could be seen as a technology that has the potential to shape and transform identities and relationships in new and unforeseen ways.

In a nutshell, the intersection of posthumanism and blockchain raises important questions about the role of technology in shaping the future of society and the boundaries between human and non-human entities."

(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


==Accelerationism==

Sasha Shilina:

Accelerationism is a philosophical movement that posits the idea of deliberately accelerating or intensifying societal and technological processes in order to bring about significant transformations or outcomes. As a concept within post-Marxist thought, accelerationism aims to speed up the process of capitalism in order to bring about radical social and political change. The belief is that by accelerating the processes and dynamics inherent to capitalism — such as technological innovation, economic expansion, and social disruption — the system will reach a breaking point, rendering it unsustainable and leading to its eventual collapse and capitalism’s own destruction.

The term “accelerationism” was introduced by professor Benjamin Noys in his book The Persistence of the Negative. Noys provided a critical analysis of the concept and its various strands. He offered insights into the tensions and contradictions within accelerationism, questioning its political implications and potential pitfalls. Also, he used the term to describe a trajectory observed in certain post-structuralist thinkers who adopted unconventional Marxist and counter-Marxist perspectives on capital. This included thinkers such as Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari (Anti-Oedipus, 1972), Jean-François Lyotard (Libidinal Economy, 1974), and Jean Baudrillard (Symbolic Exchange and Death, 1976). Thus, for example, Deleuze and Guattari (1972) explored the relationship between desire, capitalism, and social structures. They propose a form of accelerationism that seeks to unleash and redirect the liberatory potential of desire, challenging established hierarchies and societal norms.

The accelerationism movement has been partially influenced by technology, and there may be some interesting connections between accelerationism and blockchain.

Firstly, accelerationism seeks to harness the transformative power of technology and social systems to bring about radical change. Blockchain technology, with its decentralized and transparent nature, has the potential to disrupt traditional systems and institutions, such as finance, governance, and supply chains. By enabling peer-to-peer transactions and eliminating intermediaries, blockchain can accelerate the decentralization of power and facilitate new economic and social arrangements.

Accelerationism explores the potential for profound societal transformations. Similarly, blockchain technology has the capacity to reshape socioeconomic structures by enabling new models of collaboration, resource distribution, and value creation. Concepts like decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) and token economies can contribute to the acceleration of alternative economic systems and organizational frameworks. Especially, it is interesting to make parallels with “left accelerationism” which advocates strengthening the processes of technological development to overcome the restrictive “framework” of the current system of capitalism by redirecting modern technologies like blockchain, based on criteria of social utility and the level of emancipatory potential, to perform more useful tasks.

Another connection between accelerationism and blockchain is the concept of decentralization. Decentralization is a core principle of blockchain technology, and it is also an idea in accelerationist thought. The idea is that by distributing power and control across a network, it is possible to create a more participatory society. Blockchain technology can potentially help to facilitate this by creating decentralized networks that enable more direct forms of social and economic organization.

English philosopher, writer, and later Dark Enlightenment commentator, a former leader of the 1990s “theory-fiction” collective Cybernetic Culture Research Unit (CCRU), Nick Land is often considered a prominent figure in accelerationist thought. He emphasizes the transformative power of technology and capitalism, advocating for a radical embrace of technological acceleration to overcome traditional boundaries and create new possibilities. In his essay “Crypto-Current: Bitcoin and Philosophy” (2018), Land explores the philosophical implications of blockchain technology, arguing that it represents a revolutionary shift away from centralized forms of power and towards a more decentralized and anarchic future. Land explores the emergence of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, particularly Bitcoin. In this essay, Land argues that blockchain and cryptocurrencies represent a paradigm shift in the way we think about money, value, and power. He also draws connections between the ideas of Friedrich Nietzsche and the concept of “hyperbitcoinization,” which refers to the potential for Bitcoin to become the dominant global currency. Basically, the essay provides a unique perspective on the relationship between technology, philosophy, and economics, and suggests that blockchain has the potential to create new forms of economic organization that are aligned with the values of accelerationism.

Other contemporary accelerationist thinkers are Mark Fisher, Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams. Mark Fisher was a British cultural theorist, engaged with accelerationism in his writings, particularly in his book “Capitalist Realism’’ (2009). He critically examines the contemporary condition shaped by neoliberal capitalism and explores the potential of accelerationism to disrupt existing systems. In his book, he argues that technological innovation has the potential to create new forms of social and economic organization. Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams are two philosophers who have written extensively about economics and technology. In their book, “Inventing the Future” (2015), they argue that technological progress is a key driver of social and political change.

However, some accelerationist thinkers have also raised concerns about the potential for blockchain to reinforce existing power structures rather than disrupt them. They argue that the current state of blockchain technology is still largely dominated by large corporations and wealthy individuals and that without significant changes, blockchain may simply entrench existing inequalities rather than create a more egalitarian society.

To conclude, the intersection of blockchain and accelerationism is a complex and multifaceted area of inquiry. While blockchain technology has the potential to challenge capitalist realism and enable new forms of social and economic organization, there are also concerns about the potential for blockchain to entrench existing power structures. Philosophers have an important role to play in critically examining these issues and helping to shape the development of blockchain technology in a way that aligns with broader social and political goals."

(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


=More information=

* [[Speculative Realism]]

[[Category:Crypto_Politics]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]