=Discussion=

Thomas Rippel:

"The versatility of blockchain means that it is widely considered as a way to
manage financial transactions, asset transfers, and regulatory obligations.
Blockchain is seen by many as the future of land registration.
Blockchain has been touted as the future of land registries because of its
myriad of benefits. The technology has the potential to significantly reduce
property fraud. Each property would be assigned a unique code and
linked to a smart key, held by the owner only.

Blockchain technology also underpins ‘smart contracts’. A programmable
contract self-executes when certain conditions are met, accelerating the
registration process of land if a blockchain registry is used. Titles could be
transferred automatically upon receipt of funds in the vendor’s account
and ledgers updated immediately, thus eliminating gaps in the registration
process and allowing greater efficiency and cost saving for land registries.
Furthermore, blockchain could reduce many of the ongoing costs and demands
for the management of land registries because property transactions
and management information would be updated automatically and
viewable in real time.

Several countries including Russia, India, Sweden, Brazil, Ukraine
and the UK are currently developing blockchain technology for their respective
national land registries."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)

[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Post-Corporate]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]