

==January 2013==

#''[[Occupy_Money]]''
#''[[New Global Revolutions]]''
#''[[Open Field]]''
#''[[Cypherpunks on Freedom and the Future of the Internet]]''
#''The [[End of the Market]]''
#''[[Coding as Aesthetic and Political Expression]]''
#''[[Open Utopia]]''
#''[[Rooftop Revolution]]''
#''[[No Local]]. Why Small-Scale Alternatives Won't Change The World. Greg Sharzer. Zero Books, 2012.''
#''[[Therapy Futures]]''
#''[[Networked: The New Social Operating System]]''

==February 2013==

#''After Capitalism: [[Economic Democracy in Action]]. Dada Maheshvarananda. Innerworld Publications, 2012''
#''[[Celebrating the Commons]]''
#''[[Uprising]]''
#'''[[Societing Reloaded]].''' Pubblici produttivi e innovazione sociale. Curated by Adam Arvidsson and Alex Giordano. EGEA, 2013
#''[[Four Phases of Team Collaboration Success From Thomas Edison's Lab]]'' (jennifer's review)
#''[[Green Governance, Human Rights, and the Commons]]''
#''[[Coding Freedom]]''
#''[[Prosperous Way Down]]''
#''[[Bankrupting Nature]]''
#''[[Building a Sustainable Economy in a World of Finite Resources]]''
#''[[Money and Sustainability]]'' (check new review!)
#[''[Global Political Economy and the Stratification of Labour Under Capitalism]]''
#''[[Commons a Model for Managing Natural Resources]]''
#''[[Cybernetic Revolutionaries]]''
#''[[Land and Resource Scarcity Under Capitalism]]''
#''Bill Tomlinson, [[Greening Through IT]]: Information Technology for Environmental Sustainability. 2010. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 210 pp.,''
#''[[Alternative Economies Resource Guide]]''

==March 2013==

#''The [[Institutional Revolution]]. Measurement and the Economic Emergence of the Modern World (Markets and Governments in Economic History. Douglas W. Allen. University Of Chicago Press, 2011.''
#''The Medieval Machine: The [[Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages]] by Jean Gimpel''
#''[[Critical Explorations on the World Social Forum]]''
#''[[Campaigning Online for Labor and Winning]]''
#''[[Swarmwise]]''
#''The [[Serendipity Machine]]. by Sebastian Olma.''
#''[[Economy of Experiences]]'' 
#''[[Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship]]''
#''Jane Mansbridge. [[Beyond Adversary Democracy]] (Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press, 1983''
#''[[On the Currency of Egalitarian Justice‎]]''
#''[[Life Without Money]]; Building Fair and Sustainable Economies. Co-edited by Anitra Nelson and Frans Timmerman.''
#''[[Biohackers]]''
#''[[Global Auction of Public Assets]]''
#''[[Democratic Reason]]: Politics, Collective Intelligence, and the Rule of the Many. By Hélène Landemore. Princeton University Press, 2012''
#''[[How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups and Societies]].'' By Scott E. Page. Princeton University Press, 2012.
#''Governing Capitalism: [[Economic Bicameralism and the Firm]].''


==June 2013==

#''[[Democratic Innovations]]. by Graham Smith. Cambridge University Press,''
#''[[Hacking Your Education]]''
#''[[Producism Manifesto]]''
#''[[Social Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives]]''
#''[[Best_of_Rhizome]]''
#''[[Essentials of Economic Sustainability]]''
#''[[Resilience]], the book with citations''
#''[[Pocket Neighborhoods]], book with interview''
#''[[How Capitalism is Turning the Internet Away from Democracy]]''
#''[[Making of the Indebted Man]]''
#''[[Digital Public Spaces]]''
#''[[Open Book]]''
#''[[Squatting in Europe]]''
#''[[City Sense]]''
#''[[Political Power of Weak Interests]]''



#''[[Problem With Interest]]''
#''[[Networked Disruption]]''
#''[[Factories Of Knowledge, Industries Of Creativity]]''
#''[[Dispatches from the Socialstructed World]]''
#''[[After the Software Wars]]''
#''[[Water Governance for 21st Century]]''
#''[[Post-Democracy]]''
#''[[Cyborg Subjects]]''
#''[[Digital Cosmopolitans in the Age of Connection]]''



==July 2013==

'''To do:'''

#''[[Who Owns the Future]]''
#''[[End of Power]]''
#''[[Off the Network]]''
#''[[What Then Must We Do]]''
# ''[[Moral Origins]]''

To Do:

# ''[[Sustaining the Commons]]''
# ''[[Reputation-Based Governance]]''

==September 2013==

#''[[Open-Source Lab]]''
#''[[Re-Thinking Social Protection]]''
#''[[Democracy Project]]''
#''Empires of Food: [[Feast, Famine and the Rise and Fall of Civilizations]]. By Evan D.G. Fraser and Andrew Rimas. Atria Books'' 
#''[[Autonomy and Horizontalism in Argentina]]''


==December 2013==

#''[[Nature for Sale]]''
#''[[Political Economy of Not Asking Permission]]''
#''[[Invasive Technification]]''
#''[[How Capitalism is Turning the Internet Against Democracy]]''
#''[[From Economism to Earth Systems Science]]''
#''[[From Ego-System to Eco-System Economies]]''
#''[[Creating Good Work]]''
#''[[Think Like a Commoner]]''
#''[[Music Piracy and the Remaking of American Copyright in the Twentieth Century]]''
#''[[Unified Architectural Theory]]''
#''[[Swarmwise]]''
#''[[Black Code]]''