
for updates, see [[P2P Blog Book of the Day]]

=2012=

==January 2012==

# ''The [[Will of the Many]]: How the Alterglobalisation Movement is Changing the Face of Democracy. Marianne Maeckelbergh. Pluto Press, 2009 - January 1, 2012''
# ''A [[Theory of Power]]. Jeff Vail. 2004 - January 3, 2012''
# ''[[NaturesScope]]. Unlocking Our Natural Empathy and Creativity. By Alan Rayner. O-Books, 2011 - January 5, 2012''
# Guy Standing, The [[Precariat]]. The new dangerous class (Bloomsbury Academic 2011), viii, 198p - January 7, 2012
# ''The [[Information Diet]]. Clay Johnson. January 14, 2012''
# ''[[Life Without Money]]; Building Fair and Sustainable Economies. Co-edited by Anitra Nelson and Frans Timmerman. - January 16, 2012''
# ''Betterness: [[Economics for Humans]]. by Umair Haque. Harvard Business Press Books, 2011 - January 18, 2012''
# ''[[People Power and Political Change]] - January 20, 2012''
# [[From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg]]
# [[Too Big to Know]]. David Weinberger
# [[Consent of the Networked]]. The Worldwide Struggle For Internet Freedom. Rebecca MacKinnon
# [[Triumph of the Commons]]
# [[Sharing_Economy_as_a_Way_Out_of_the_Crisis]]

== February 2012 ==
# ''[[Code Wars]]''
# ''[[How_to_Get_What_You_Want_Through_Community_Self-Government]]''
# ''[[Occupying Wall Street]]''
# ''[[The Leaderless Revolution]]''
# ''[[Urban Food Revolution]]''
# ''[[No Straight Lines]]''
# ''[[Digitally Enabled Social Change]]''
# ''[[Social Media Reader]]''
# ''[[The Art of Community]]''
# ''[[Life's Economic Survival Protocol]]''
# ''[[Sharing (Book)]]''
# ''[[Open Advice]]''
# ''[[Third Industrial Revolution]]''

== March 2012 ==
# <s>[[Emergence of an Economy of Communion]]</s>
# <s>[[Solidarity Networks Transforming Globalisation‎‎]]</s>
# <s>[[Collaborate - The Art of We]]</s>
# <s>[[Configuring the Networked Self]]</s>
# <s>[[Future We Deserve]]</s>
# <s>Reinventing Discovery: The [[New Era of Networked Science]]. Michael Nielsen. Princeton University Press, 2011 [http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9517.html]</s>
# <s>[[Semantic Sphere]] 1. Computation, Cognition and the Information Economy. Pierre Levy</s>

== April 2012 ==

#''  Bernard Lietaer and Stephen Belgin. [[New Money for a New World]]. 2012''
#'' [[Law of the Ecological Commons]] David Bollier.''
#'' [[Faith of the Faithless]]. Simon Critchley, How Politics is Rooted in the Spiritual''
#'' [[Occupy World Street]]''
#''Raúl Zibechi. Dispersing Power: [[Social Movements as Anti-State Forces]]. AK Press, 2010.''
#''[[After the Future]]''
#''[[Sharing for Survival]]: Restoring the Climate, the Commons and Society. Feasta, 2012''
#''[[Networks Without a Cause]], A [[Critique of Social Media]]. by Geert Lovink. Polity Press, 2012''
#''[[Doing Good Things Better]]. Brian Martin. Irene Publishing, 2011''
#''[[Future Learning Spaces]]''
#'' Richard Sennett. Together: The [[Rituals, Pleasures, and Politics of Cooperation]]. Yale University Press, 2012.''
# ''[[Foundations of a Love Economy]]''
# ''[[Networked: The New Social Operating System]]''
# ''[[The End of Leadership]]''

== May 2012 ==
# ''[[Digital Public Domain]]''
# ''[[Ethics for the Information Age (5th Edition)]]''
# ''[[Abundance - The Future Is Better Than You Think]]''
# ''[[Digital Vertigo]]''
# ''[[Misunderstanding the Internet]]''
# ''[[Open Source Intelligence in a Networked World]]. by Anthony Olcott''
#  ''The [[Neighborhood in the Internet]]: Design Research Projects in Community Informatics''


# ''[[Cloud Time]]''
# ''[[Green Governance, Human Rights, and the Commons]]''


==June 2012==

# ''[[Towards Peer Production in Public Services]]''
# ''[[Occupy This]]''
# ''[[Case for Copyright Reform]]''
# ''[[Money and Sustainability]]''
# ''[[Life Changing]]''
# ''[[Occupy Consciousness]]: Essays on the Global Insurrection. Evolver, 2012. [http://www.realitysandwich.com/occupy_consciousness_book] ''
# ''Interop: The [[Promise and Perils of Highly Interconnected Systems]]. Byh John Palfrey and Urs Gasser. Basic Books, 2012''
# ''[[Promise of Regional Currencies]]''
# ''[[Divine Right of Capital]]''
# ''[[Zapotec Science]]''
# ''[[Economic Democracy in the Network Century]]''
# ''[[Redvolution]], see also the excerpts''


==July 2012==

* ''for July 17: [[Creating Sustainable Societies]]''
''# [[Open Source Everything Manifesto]]''

==August 2012==

# ''[[Media Ecosystem]]''
# ''[[Positive Linking]]''
# ''[[Inside the Hacker World of LulzSec, Anonymous and the Global Cyber Insurgency]]''
# ''[[Intention Economy]], only: [http://p2pfoundation.net/Intention_Economy#Review]''
# ''The [[Organic Internet]]. May First / People Link. [https://mayfirst.org/organicinternet]''
# ''Paul Mason's "Why it’s Kicking Off Everywhere: The [[New Global Revolutions]]" (Verso)''
#''[[Energy and the Wealth of Nations]]''
#''[[Emergent Ownership Revolution]]''

== September 2012 ==

#''The [[P2P Mode of Production]]: An Indiano Manifesto.'' 
#''[[Cooperative Transitions to a Steady-state Economy]]''
#''[[Producism Manifesto]]''

==October 2012==
#''[[Peeragogy Handbook]]''
#''[[Promise of Regional Currencies]]''
#''[[Stuffed and Starved]]''
#''[[Contagion Theory in the Age of Networks]]''
#''[[Truth in the Age of Social Media]]''
#''[[Rebel Cities]]''
#''Tom Atlee. [[Empowering Public Wisdom]]: A Practical Vision of Citizen-Led Politics. EVOLVER EDITIONS/North Atlantic Books, 2012.''
#''Brett Frischmann. Infrastructure: [[Social Value of Shared Resources]]. Oxford University Press, 2012
#''Net Smart: [[How to Thrive Online]]. By Howard Rheingold.''
#''[[Building Fair and Sustainable Economies]]''
#''[[Future Money]]''
#''[[Makers]] (nonfiction)''
#'' The [[Shareholder Value Myth]]. Lynn Stout.''
#''[[Essays about Pirate Politics]]''
#''The [[Bubble and Beyond]]: The Road from Industrial Capitalism to Finance Capitalism and Debt Peonage. Essays on Fictitious Capital, Debt Deflation and the Global Crisis. Michael Hudson. ISLET, 2012.''
#''Spretnak, C. [[Relational Reality]]: New discoveries of Interrelatedness That Are Transforming the Modern World Topsham: Green Horizon Books, 2011''
#''[[Sharing for Survival]]''
#''Internet Success: A [[Study of Open-Source Software Commons]]. By Charles M. Schweik and Robert C. English. MIT Press, 2012.''
#''[[What Comes After Money]]''
#''[[Practicing Law in the Sharing Economy]]: Helping People Build Cooperatives, Social Enterprise, and Local Sustainable Economies. Janelle Orsi. SELC, 2012''
#''[[Digital Labor]]''
#''[[Cyberspace and the Self-Management of the Self]]''
#''[[Religion and Equality in Human Evolution]] Books: Robert Bellah. 1) Religion in Human Evolution''
#''[[Tweets and the Streets]]''

== November 2012 ==

#''[[Occupy Handbook]]''
#''[[Hierarchy in the Forest]]: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior''
#''[[Abolishing Education and Liberating Creation]]''
#''[[Cultures and Ethics of Sharing]]''
#''Steven Johnson. Future, Perfect: The [[Case for Progress in a Networked Age]]''
#''[[Globalization of Communes]]''
#''[[Interface Effect]]''
#''[[Slow Democracy]]''
# ''[[Local Dollars, Local Sense]]''
#''[[Lost Science of Money]] w/ long zarlenga speech!!''
#''The [[Relational State]]''


== December 2012==

#''[[Money and Sustainability]], review by Hazel Henderson''
#''[[Corporation 2020]]''
#''The [[Internet of People for a Post-Oil World]]. By Christian Nold and Rob van Kranenburg. Situated Technologies Pamphlets 8: Spring 2011 [http://www.situatedtechnologies.net/?q=node%2F108]''
#''[[Designing for Transformation]]: Stories, principles and practical ways in which we can innovate to a better future (No Straight Lines Project). By Alan Moore'' 
#''[[Building a Stakeholder Society as an Alternative to the Market and the State]]''