

=Discussion=

==The [[Blogosphere as a New Form of Political Organization]]==

David de Ugarte:

“After all these experiences, blogs too must be seen not
only as a distributed mode of communication, but also as a
new form of political organisation which has
spontaneously arisen within distributed information
networks. Through their blogs, individuals lead nonsegregated
lives – lives in which politics, work, and
personal matters are not categorised and
compartmentalised. Lives in which everything comes in
the same package.


This new form of organisation, based on contemporary
models of nonviolent
civil resistance, owes its success to
the diffusion and display of a lifestyle based on the
collective and individual strengthening of people as
opposed to power. This strengthening takes place through
small gestures, jokes, signboards, which in themselves are
insignificant, but which taken as a whole undermine the
implicit consensus that power relies on. Laughter, football
matches, graffiti, signs, and rock & roll are the tools
which, collectively transmitted and elaborated on the web,
blogged about on a daily basis, solidify into the activist
nuclei of the Colour Revolutions, from Serbia to the
Ukraine.


Blogs epitomise the network nature of these
revolutionary movements. The web of activist nodes is a
compendium of individual fighting methods, of
downloadable signboards, slogans, and stickers – and also,
of course, of information about the rallies instigated by
autonomous groups in their home towns. But the engine,
the spirit that moves them all, lies in the blogs and the
webpages of network members. Blogs in which, of course,
political analysis mingles with personal narratives.
As a result, the collective idea has emerged that the
Serbian activists’ motivation for clustering (as for
Ukrainian activists later on) was mostly the Zeitgeist, a
background of subversive humour and rock & roll.


New forms of organisation are best represented by a
creeper that can be embedded in blogs themselves, such as
feevy.com, rather than a webpage filled with mottoes, such
as those political parties used to maintain. Personal blogs,
associative nodes such as blogaditas.com/planet or
usfbloggers.com (also feevybased),
are collective or
individual experiments, automatically gathered in a space
which enables them to share readers and grow together as
debate and proposals increase. This is a pluriarchic
representation of activists who think of themselves as
netocrats, and who know that they can propose and
syndicate, but not command or frame. For such activists,
action is part of their daily lives, which they represent in
their blogs as a multidimensional
whole, not within a
boring, limited classic ideological axis.


By replacing dustdry
assemblies with blogs,
aggregators, and links, by substituting political rallies and
banners by rock concerts and selfprinted
signboards, the revolution is experienced as something that is joyful,
creative, fun, and fulfilling, in a prefiguration of the
lifestyle that is being fought for, and the yearnedfor
freedom to live that lifestyle. People sign up for a way of
life, they place a bet on life. As the great Serbian activist
Srdja Popovic said when looking back on what had
happened:

- And we won because we loved life more. We
decided to love life and you can't beat a life. So
this is what Otpor did. We were a group of fans of
life. And this is why we succeeded.


The point, once more, is the power that the network
gives us to create and demolish myths, to conquer the
future by telling stories. Because the revolution and the
new freedoms constitute a tale, a beautiful story about a
future that becomes real when we believe it, share it, and
start to live in it today.


Even more revealing than the forms and languages of
the Spring of the Web were the power elites’ failure to
grasp what they were coming up against. Given that their
antagonists lack a strictly hierarchical structure which
supervises and communicates, old organisations feel that
they are increasingly inapprehensible. The key to
distributed networks lies in their identity, in the existence
of a common spirit which netocrats modulate by means of
public messages.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]