

=Directory=

Compiled  by Giles Simon via [http://www.thenews.coop/article/discover-top-co-op-bloggers] :

Dame Pauline Green. The official blog of the President of the International Co-operative Alliance, as she literally travels the world meeting co-operative entrepreneurs and activists and seeing the impact they have. http://damepaulinegreen.coop/

Andrew Bibby. The well-known co-operative writer and pundit’s new blog, providing short pieces of analysis of what’s going on in the co-operative sector. Easy, informative reading. http://bibbyoncooperatives.wordpress.com/

Bob Cannell. An occasional blog from the worker co-operative activist and co-operative development worker, looking at issues related to worker ownership and the wider questions around co-operation and capitalism. http://bobcannell.blogspot.co.uk/

Dave Boyle.  Musings on co-operation, business and football from former Supporters Direct CEO turned co-operative development specialist. http://daveboyle.net/

Ed Mayo. The reflections of the Secretary General of Co-operatives UK on the power of co-operation. Ed provides updates on the interesting co-operatives he’s met and views on big issues, like Co-operative Councils and the Co-operative Bank. http://edmayo.wordpress.com/

Sara Horowitz’s dispatches. The blog on co-operation, new mutualism and the sharing economy from the excellent Sarah Horowitz, founder of the Freelancer’s Union in the US, who is brimming with great ideas. http://www.freelancersunion.org/dispatches/

P2P Foundation. An eclectic blog from Michael Bauwens who runs the P2P Foundation, blogging on co-operation, new economics, open source software, capitalism and much more besides. http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/

John McNamara. Insightful and interesting ideas from former taxi co-operative director, now researcher, writer and co-operative business development expert on his US based blog, Workers’ Paradise.  http://www.cooperativeconsult.com/blog/

Ian Snaith. A blog with considered and detailed analysis of big issues in policy and legislation from one of the UK’s experts on co-operative legal issues. http://snaithsco-oplawnews.blogspot.co.uk


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Resources]]