'''* Article: Blueprint for the Global Village. By David Sloan Wilson and Dag Olav Hessen. Cliodynamics 5: 123–157 (SOCIAL EVOLUTION FORUM).'''

URL = https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xw505xh


=Description=

"Life  consists  of  units  within  units.  In  the  biological  world,  we  have  genes,  individuals,  groups,  species,  and  ecosystems—all  nested  within  the  biosphere.  In  the  human  world,  we  have  genes,  individuals,  families,  villages  and  cities,  provinces,  and  nations—all  nested  within  the  global  village.  In  both  worlds,  a  problem  lurks  at  every  rung  of  the  ladder:  a  potential  conflict  between  the  interests  of  the  lower-level  units  and  the  welfare  of  the  higher-level  units(Wilson 2015). What’s good for me can be bad for my family. What’s good for my  family  can  be  bad  for  my  village,  and  so  on,  all  the  way  up  to  what’s  good  for my nation can be bad for the global village. For most of human existence, until a scant 10 or 15 thousand years ago, the human  ladder  was  truncated.  All  groups  were  small  groups  whose  members knew  each  other  as  individuals.  These  groups  were  loosely  organized  into  tribes  of  a  few  thousand  people,  but  cities,  provinces,  and  nations  were  unknown (Diamond 2013).   Today,  over  half  the  earth’s  population  resides  in  cities  and  the  most  populous  nations  teem  with  billions  of  people,  but  groups  the  size  of  villages  still  deserve  a  special  status.  They  are  the  social  units  that  we  are  genetically  adapted to live within and they can provide a blueprint for larger social units, including the largest of them all—the global village of nations."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xw505xh)


=Discussion=


==The [[Conflict Between Lower-Level Selfishness and Higher-Level Welfare]]==

By David Sloan Wilson and Dag Olav Hessen:

"The  conflict  between  lower-level  selfishness  and  higher-level  welfare  pervades  the biological world (Wilson and Wilson 2007). Cancer cells selfishly spread at the expense of other cells within the body, without contributing to the common good, ultimately resulting in the death of the whole organism. In many animal societies,  the  dominant  individuals  act  more  like  tyrants  than  wise  leaders,  taking  as  much  as  they  can  for  themselves  until  deposed  by  the  next  tyrant.  Single species can ravage entire ecosystems for nobody’s benefit but their own. But  goodness  has  its  own  advantages,  especially  when  those  who  behave  for   the   good   of   their   groups   are   able   to   band   together   and   avoid   the   depredations  of  the  selfish.  Punishment  is  also  a  powerful  weapon  against selfishness, although it is often costly to wield. Every once in a great while, the good   manage   to   decisively   suppress   selfishness   within   their   ranks.   Then   something    extraordinary    happens.    The    group    becomes    a    higher-level organism.  Nucleated  cells  did  not  evolve  by  small  mutational  steps  from  bacterial cells but as groups of cooperating bacteria (Margulis 1970). Likewise, multi-cellular organisms are groups of highly cooperative cells, and the insects of social insect colonies, while physically separate, coordinate their activities so well  that  they  qualify  as  super-organisms.  Life  itself  might  have  originated  as  groups  of  cooperating  molecular  reactions  (Maynard  Smith  and  Szathmary  1995, 1999).  Only   recently   have   scientists   begun   to   realize   that   human   evolution   represents  a  similar  transition.  In  most  primate  species,  members  of  groups  cooperate  to  a  degree  but  are  also  each  other’s  main  rivals.  Our  ancestors  evolved to suppress self-serving behaviors that are destructive for the group, at least  for  the  most  part,  so  that  the  main  way  to  succeed  was  as  a  group.  Teamwork became the signature adaptation of our species (Boehm 2011).    Extant  hunter-gatherer  societies  still  reflect  the  kind  of  teamwork  that  existed among our ancestors for thousands of generations. Individuals cannot achieve  high  status  by  throwing  their  weight  around,  but only by cultivating a good   reputation   among   their   peers.   Most   of   human   moral   psychology—including  its  other-oriented  elements  such  as  solidarity,  love,  trust,  empathy,  and  sympathy,  and  its  coercive  elements,  such  as  social  norms  enforced  by  punishment—can  be  understood  as  products  of  genetic  evolution  operating  among groups, favoring those that exhibited the greatest teamwork.

...

Human teamwork  also  acquired  a  mental  dimension  including  an  ability  to  transmit  learned  information  across  generations  that  surpasses  any  other  species.  This  enabled our ancestors to adapt to their environments much more quickly than by the slow process of genetic evolution. They spread over the globe, occupying all  climatic  zones  and  hundreds  of  ecological  niches  (Pagel  and  Mace  2004). The diversity of human cultures is the cultural equivalent of the major genetic adaptive   radiations   in   dinosaurs,   birds,   and   mammals.   The   invention   of   agriculture  initiated  a  positive  feedback  process  between  population  size  and  the ability to produce food leading to the mega-societies of today.  Cultural evolution differs from genetic evolution in important respects but not in the problem that lurks at every rung of the social ladder (Richerson and Boyd  2005).  Just  like  genetic  traits,  cultural  traits  can  spread  by  benefitting  lower-level units at the expense of the higher-level good—or by contributing to the  higher-level  good.  There  can  be  cultural  cancers  that  are  no  less  parasitic than physiological  cancers. For  teamwork  to  exist  at  any  given  rung  of  the  social ladder, there must be mechanisms that hold the wolves of selfishness at bay.  A nation or the global village is no different in this respect than a human village, a hunter-gatherer group, an ant colony, a multi-cellular organism, or a nucleated cell. 

...

Accomplishing teamwork at the level of a nation is hard enough, but it isn’t good  enough  because  there  is  one  more  rung  in  the  social  ladder.  Although  many nations have a long way to go before they serve their own citizens well, a nation can be as good as gold to its own citizens and still be a selfish member of  the  global  village.  In  fact,  there  are  many  examples  in  the  international  arena,  where  nations  protect  their  own  perceived  interests  at  the expense  of  the  common  global  future.

..

Moral indignation works at the scale of villages because it is backed up by an arsenal of social control mechanisms so spontaneous that we hardly know it is  there.  The  most  strongly  regulated  groups  in  the  world  are  small  groups,  thanks to countless generations of genetic and cultural evolution that make us the trusting and cooperative species that we are. The  idea  that  trust  requires  social  control  is  paradoxical  because  social  control  is  not  trusting.  Nevertheless,  social  control  creates  an  environment  in  which trust can flourish. When we know that others cannot harm us, thanks to a  strong  system  of  social  controls,  then  we  can  express  our  positive  emotions  and actions toward others to their full extent: helping because we want to, not because we are forced to. When we feel threatened by those around us, due to a lack  of  social  control,  we  withhold  our  positive  emotions  and  actions  like  a  snail withdrawing into its shell. This is why people refrain from unethical acts—to the extent that they do—in   village-sized   groups   and   why   cooperation   is   accompanied   by   positive   emotions  such  as  solidarity,  empathy,  and  trust.  The  reason  that  nations  and  other large social entities such as corporations openly engage in unethical acts is because social controls are weaker and are not sufficient to hold the wolves of selfishness at bay. This is why politicians can talk openly about national self-interest  as  if  nothing  else  matters—even  though  a  villager  who  talked  in  a  comparable fashion would be regarded as insane.

...

In  this  essay,  we  have  sketched  a  surprisingly  simple  solution  to  the  apparent  conflict between self-interest and mutual benefits at all hierarchical levels. We are   suggesting   that   the   social   dynamics   that   take   place   naturally   and   spontaneously in villages can be scaled up to prevent the ethical transgressions that  routinely  take  place  at  a  large  scale.  Why  is  such  a  simple  solution  not  more  widely  known  and  discussed?  Although  we  immediately  realize  this  solution  when  it  comes  to  cell-organism  relationships  or  individuals  within  villages, we do not realize that the same principles also hold for companies or nations.  One  reason  is  because  of  an  alternative  narrative  that  pretends  that  the only social responsibility of a company is to maximize its bottom line. Free markets  will  ensure  that  society  benefits  as  a  result.  This  narrative  makes  it  seem  reasonable  to  eliminate  social  controls—precisely  the  opposite  of  what needs to be done. Governments have been under the spell of this narrative for nearly  50  years  despite  a  flimsy  scientific  foundation  and  ample  evidence  for  its  harmful  effects.  We  can  break  the  spell  of  the  old  narrative  by  noting  something  that  will  appear  utterly  obvious  in  retrospect:  The  unregulated  pursuit  of  self-interest  is  cancerous  at  all  scales.  To  create  a  global  village,  we  must look to real villages."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xw505xh)


==[[Four Principles Behind the Success of Large-Scale Organizations]]==

Peter J. Richerson:

"Four  '''principles  seem  to  underlie  the  success  of  such  large  scale,  diverse  organizations.'''  

'''The  first  is  status  based  on  achievement'''.  Technical  and  social  competence are sources of status that culturally different people can appreciate even  though  other  sources  may  dominate  their  lives.  Competence  of  a  high  order   is   also   required   to   operate   large   scale,   diverse   institutions   and organizations.  The  leadership  of  international  scientific  enterprises  is  almost  entirely based on achieved status (which is not to say that achieved statuses in science are always or entirely acquired by excellence in scientific work). 

'''The  second  is  tolerance'''.  Individuals  differ  from  one  another  and  people  from different cultures sometimes differ rather dramatically. People tend to be strongly wedded to their cultural identities, not to mention their personalities. People  belonging  to  dominant  cultures  are  often  surprised  when  others  don’t  want  to  assimilate  to  their  obviously  superior  culture.  This  superiority  is  generally  only  obvious  to  the  dominant  culture.  Recall  Gandhi’s  quip  when  asked what he thought of Western Civilization: “That would be a good idea!” In a large, diverse organization, you can’t afford to find inevitable individual and cultural differences uncomfortable. 

'''The third principle is respect'''. You have to tolerate scalawags, incompetents, and  culturally  limited  boors  because  such  people  are  common  in  every  large  organization. But the real work is going to be done by people and groups who respect one another. At the level of contending nations and ethnic groups, it is a  myth  that  distinctive  cultural  groups  always  hate  one  another.  In  the mid-1970s,  Marilyn  Brewer  and  Donald  Campbell  studied  ingroup  and  outgroup  attitudes   among   30   East   African   ethnic   groups.   The   found   a   great   deal   variation  in  both  attitudes,  including  cases  where  individuals  in  two  groups  both  had  strong  average  positive  ingroup  regard  but  also  strong  positive  evaluations   of   each   other.   Journalists,   translators,   anthropologists,   cross-cultural   psychologists,   ecumenical   religious   folk,   and   travelers   often   get   enough   insights   into   other   cultures   to   be   able   explain   them   to   us   in   sympathetic terms. Often, getting to know another group well leads to respect. Most  people  find  it  especially  hard  to  respect  their  enemies.  Yet,  in  the  long  run,  struggles  end,  and  the  protagonists  must  make  peace.  In  the  meantime,  respecting  your  enemies  is  liable  to  make  the  real  or  metaphorical  fight  less  brutal and end sooner. Respecting enemies makes it easier to understand them and thus to avoid some fights and win the ones you can’t avoid. The US fought four  long,  brutal  wars  after  WWII  against  Communist  and  Islamicist  Third  World  forces  it  disrespected.    At  best,  it  could  only  win  stalemates  in  them.  Military  and  political  innovations  by  the  insurgents  and  governments  of  poor  countries  in  the  mid-20th  Century  allowed  them  to  impose  sufficient  costs  on  European powers, even in highly asymmetric contests, to bring the colonial era to an end. The US, the last superpower standing, has been the slowest to learn the lesson. 

'''The  fourth  is  justice'''.  People  remember  past  grievances  for  generations.  In  violent conflicts, both sides are often guilty of atrocities. The trials of German and Japanese war criminals after WWII provided a measure of justice to their victims and helped to further the re-integration of these nations into the world community. Efforts in that direction have continued with the establishment of the  International  Criminal  Court.  Those  guilty  of  injustice  typically  build  elaborate   theories   to   justify   their   misbehavior.   For   example,   former   US   President  George  Bush  famously  explained  that  Al  Qaeda  attacked  the  US  on  9/11 “because they hate our freedoms.” Bin Laden’s justification for the attack, that  Middle  Easterners  widely  detested  American  policy  in  the  region,  seems  like   a   more   plausible   explanation.   Extensive   polling   in   the   Middle   East   certainly  points  to  Bin  Laden’s  explanation.  In  recent  decades,  Truth  and  Reconciliation restorative justice projects have been conducted in a number of countries  that  have  experienced  bitter  internal  conflicts.  Often,  these  are  in  situations   where   the   parties   responsible   for   the   worst   behavior   retain   considerable political power. They do provide a forum where apologies can be aired  and  the  false  theories  used  to  justify  atrocious  behavior  can  be  de-legitimated. Thus,  I  think  we  know  the  basic  principles  we  need  to  build  a  functional  global  village."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xw505xh)

[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]