I'm new to this wiki technology (14 July 2010), please be gentle.  I'm a quick learner, I used to program in BASIC and PASCAL, that makes me feel both a little old and a little cool.

====Background====

Born in Toronto, Canada, now with dual Canadian-British nationality.  Been living in London, UK since August 1999.  I tried leaving London six times between November 2007 and May 2009 and decided to come back and stay for a while longer.  

====What I do (Areas of Work)====

I love space (of the building variety, not the astronomical variety).  I'm good with numbers and finance.  I'm a Chartered Accountant by training and CFA Charterholder.  I worked in the fields of corporate finance and real estate investment banking for about 7 years.  I'm now an independent consultant, helping make other's people's ideas happen and helping them get from point A to point B.  I do that by advising on business modelling, providing guidance on complex issues in business planning, and preparing people to be business-ready and their businesses to be investment-ready.  I'm working on a mission-driven property venture focusing on community development and asset-based projects.  Someone saw an application of P2P Networks in what I described, what I'm knowledgeable about, and what I would like to achieve and invited me to contribute to the P2P Foundation body of knowledge.

====Ideas, Musings (Current and Future Projects)====

Here are some ideas that linger and persist.
*[[Empty Homes JV Solution]]

I was once asked what I would do if time and money were unlimited.  I said:
#create a million new homes, each with at least three bedrooms, each costing no more than £100,000 
#develop a new form of public house - and indoor space where people can meet/ have conversations/ play/ learn/ share (I probably meant [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_place Third Place] at the time)
#create affordable, flexible, multi-modal workspaces with openness and excellent design principles enabling social connection, flow, and positive environmental impact.  I am inspired by [http://www.urbanspace.org/ Urban Space Property Group], the [http://www.socialinnovation.ca Centre for Social Innovation] in Toronto, the Development Trust and community assets movements.

=====External Links=====
*[http://compositionadvisory.com Composition Advisory Limited | My consultancy]
*[http://lookuplookaround.wordpress.com Look Up, Look Around | My blog]

=====Contact Information=====

On Twitter:
*[http://www.twitter.com/BonnieOWong @BonnieOWong]
*[http://www.twitter.com/CompositionAdv @CompositionAdv]
<!--Comment - this section, more info, is optional, but a good place to add additional links or to summarize those included in the text above -->
<!--Comment - Remove the first colon from :Category:Bios below (so it reads Category:Bios insures your page shows up in the directory.-->
[[Category:Bios]]