
'''= concept ([[Bottom-Up Broadband]]), research project, and paper'''

This entry focuses on the research project and links to the paper.

=Project=

'''= the bottom-up broadband mailing list''' is at https://llistes.guifi.net/sympa/arc/bub

The project is trying to particularize the general ideas of peer production and p2p infrastructures to data networks 

Related research projects:

# [[Mobile Node]]‎ A mobile streaming solution for IEEE 802.11 infrastructure and mesh networks
# [[Open Sensor Network‎]]



=Examples=

Of the [[Shared Internet Access]] model:

(the authors also distinguish the [[Open Access Networks]] model and the "Free (Libre) Networks" model (see: [[Free Libre Networks]].)

"Eduroam is an international WiFi roaming service for members
of education institutions. It is useful for visiting scholars
and for students using libraries of different universities. All of
them can use their home university credentials to access the
Internet from the premises of any other affiliated institution.
It is useful for the visitor and also for the host institution that
benefits from the visit.

ProvinciaWiFi is a WiFi service available in the province
of Rome and other regions in Italy that offers WiFi access
in public locations. Many commerces collaborate and share
their own bandwidth with ProvinciaWifi to attract and retain
customers. In this case, the commerces acquire an access
point with ProvinciWifi’s open firmware called OpenWisp, and
ProvinciaWifi takes care of the user authentication according
Italian law."
(https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true)


=Business Model=

Example:

"[[FON]] is an example of a business model built
on collaboration. Collaborating members of FON install a
FON access point to their Internet connection and share that
connection with other users. This becomes a FON hotspot. The
members can connect to any of the millions of FON hotspots
worldwide for free. Non-members can also connect, but they
have to pay. FON has partnered with large Telecom operators,
such as BT and Deutsche Telekom, that have recognized the
benefits of network sharing."
(https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true)

It is possible to go far beyond Internet sharing models such as the one of FON. There are several initiatives worldwide (e.g., freifunk, FFDN DIY-ISP, guifi.net, the Free Network Foundation) that encourage users to deploy and own their networks in a completely free P2P way.

=Paper=

'''* Article: [[Bottom-up Broadband]]: the Open Source Spirit in Networking Initiatives.'''

URL = https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true

=More Information=

* [[Shared Internet Access]]
* [[Open Access Networks]]
* [[Free Libre Networks]]


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Research]]