
= concept and paper

For the related research project, see: [[Bottom-Up Broadband Project]]


=Concept=


==Typology: [[Bottom-Up Broadband Access Models]]==

===[[Shared Internet Access]]===

"Sharing Internet access is a first step towards more open
networks. This sharing can often result in a win-win situation
for all the participants."

Example: "Eduroam is an international WiFi roaming service for members
of education institutions. It is useful for visiting scholars
and for students using libraries of different universities. All of
them can use their home university credentials to access the
Internet from the premises of any other affiliated institution.
It is useful for the visitor and also for the host institution that
benefits from the visit."


===[[Open Access Networks]]===

"Open Access Networks present a layered model in which
different service providers can share the same infrastructure.
The participating entities agree in a set of rules that govern
their collaboration. In a basic model [1], a neutral opera-
tor takes care of the infrastructure. Then, multiple service
providers offer a multiplicity of services such as TV, telephone
and Internet access over the shared open access network. The
service providers use a share of their incomes to pay to the
network operator for the common infrastructure."
((https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true) )


===[[Free Libre Networks]]===

"Free (libre) networks are the network equivalent of free
(libre) software. They are community-oriented and governed
by rules that emphasize freedom. [[Guifi]].net is an example
initiative of a free network."
((https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true) )




=Paper=

'''* Article: Bottom-up Broadband: the Open Source Spirit in Networking Initiatives.'''

URL = https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true 

Abstract: "This paper discusses open networks. The open
software and open hardware movements are relatively well
established and known. Contrastingly, there is little discussion on
open network initiatives. Software, hardware and networks are
closely knitted together and therefore it makes sense to explore
open networks by establishing parallelisms with open software.

The first part of this paper presents a classification of open
networks, according to the degree of openness. Then we study
the driving principles behind open networks to see that these
principles are not that different from those found in open
software development. The community-centered approach that
has allowed the growth and the success of open software may
as well represent the key strength of open networks. We point
out the advantages of the peer-to-peer production model found
in communities. Finally, we introduce the Bottom-up Broadband
project that has the goal to study and promote open networks."


==Excerpt: From the conclusion==

"In this paper we have discussed open networks and how
they are similar to open software. The focus is placed on
the peer-to-peer organizational models that have shown to be
at the same time flexible and effective. The clearest example
of the success of this approach is the deployment of optical
networks to interconnect farms in a rural area. In addition
to the benefits of having broadband networks, these initiatives
also offer advantages in terms of education, research and local
economy. Open networking is just a new way of building
networks that encourages collaboration instead of competition.

Bottom-up Broadband for Europe has been created to
study, document and promote open networks with the ultimate
goal of eradicating the digital divide. We are witnesses of a
transformation in which the network users take a more active
role and participate and guide the creation and development
of networks driven by social motivations."

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

=More Information=

* [[Bottom-up Broadband for Europe]]


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Articles]]