
=Description=

Ilcheong Yi, Fulvia Farinelli,band Raymond Landveld:

The example of Brazil and SSEOEs is very interesting as
Brazil has one of the most advanced solidarity economies
and ecosystems in the world. The solidarity economy and
overall movement picked up in Brazil during the late 1990s
as the country was impacted by global macroeconomic
trends and a rise in capital market volatility. The associated
negative economic impact of such economic liberalization
caused traditional and formalized business and employment
opportunities to reduce. 

Furthermore, in 2003 the Brazilian Forum on Solidarity
Economy was established, formalizing the SSEOEs movement
in Brazil, with the appointment of a National Secretary of
Solidarity Economy under President Lula. There are now more
than 120 local solidarity economy forums and 27 state forums
held on a regular basis, with working groups communicating
with the forums and the government to develop technical
plans and operational aspects of the movement.


The National Secretariat of Solidarity Economy of Brazil
defined the values of SSOEs as:

ˆ Self-management.

ˆ Democratization of the economic relations.

ˆ Co-operation instead of forced competition.

ˆ Valuing diversity. Human beings are
more important than profits.

ˆ Valuing local knowledge, constant
learning and training.

ˆ Social justice and emancipation.

ˆ Protection of the environment.


Although the federal SSE policy support has been
significantly dismantled or significantly weakened under
the Bolsonaro government, subnational/local SSE policies
have been strengthened, contributing to the growth of
SSE sector. The re-elected Lula government is expected to
support SSE again."

(https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/social_and_solidarity_economy_29_march_2023.pdf)

[[Category:Brazil]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Solidarity Economy]]