'''Article: Brokerage, Boundary Spanning, and Leadership in Open Innovation Communities. By Lee Fleming (Harvard Business School), David M. Waguespack (University of Maryland)'''

URL = http://orgsci.highwire.org/cgi/content/abstract/18/2/165

Contact via lfleming@hbs.edu And dwaguesp@rhsmith.umd.edu

=Abstract=

“What types of human and social capital identify the emergence of leaders of open innovation communities? Consistent
with the norms of an engineering culture, we find that future leaders must first make strong technical contributions.
Beyond technical contributions, they must then integrate their communities in order to mobilize volunteers and avoid the
ever-present danger of forking and balkanization. This is enabled by two correlated but distinct social positions: social
brokerage and boundary spanning between technological areas. An inherent lack of trust associated with brokerage positions
can be overcome through physical interaction. Boundary spanners do not suffer this handicap and are much more likely
than brokers to advance to leadership. The research separates the influence of human and social capital on promotion, and
highlights previously unexamined differences between brokerage- and boundary-spanning positions. Longitudinal analyses
of careers within the Internet Engineering Task Force community from 1986–2002 support the arguments.”

=Summary=

“We define an open innovation community
as a group of unpaid volunteers who work informally,
attempt to keep their processes of innovation public and
available to any qualified contributor, and seek to distribute
their work at no charge.”


==[[Open Innovation Communities]]==

The authors start by reminding us of the advantages and achievements of open innovation communities:

“They have dramatically
changed our conceptions of how innovation can
and should be managed and have prompted calls for
new theories of innovation (von Hippel and von Krogh
2003). Open community development methods appear
superior to proprietary efforts on some measures (Kogut
and Metiu 2001, Mockus et al. 2002). Open source
operating systems challenge the world’s most powerful
software firms, and proponents of community innovation
are extending the model into new contexts such
as gene transfer technology (Broothaerts et al. 2005),
medical innovation, crime solving, textbook and encyclopedia
publishing, education, space exploration (Goetz
2003), and communities in developing countries, for
which software customization in local languages remains
cost prohibitive (Economist 2003). Open communities
have spawned some of the most important technological
breakthroughs of our era, including Web browsers,
e-mail, and the Web itself. The very protocols that
enable different Internet technologies to work together
emerged from innovation within a voluntary, nonproprietary,
and open innovation community.”


==On Leadership==

==Leadership in [[Open Innovation Communities]]==

By Lee Fleming (Harvard Business School), David M. Waguespack (University of Maryland):

Rivlin (2003) illustrates how
Linus Torvalds (the original author of LINUX) realizes
that his authority is technically derived, tenuous, and
constantly in need of collective reaffirmation:


“''His hold over Linux is based more on loyalty than legalities.
He owns the rights to the name and nothing else.
Theoretically, someone could appropriate every last line
of his OS [operating system] and rename it Sally. “I
can’t afford to make too many stupid mistakes,” Torvalds
says, “because then people watching will say, hey, maybe
we can find someone better. I don’t have any authority
over Linux other than this notion that I know what I’m
doing.” He jokingly refers to himself as “Linux’s hood
ornament,” and he’s anything but an autocrat. His power
is based on nothing more than the collective respect of
his cohorts''.”


How Leaders are chosen at IETF:

“One of the principal differences between the IETF and many
other standards organizations is that the IETF is very much a
bottom-up organization. It is quite rare for the executive leaders
within the IETF, the IESG (Internet Engineering Steering
Group) or the IAB (Internet Architecture Board) members, to
create a working group on their own to work on some problem
that is felt to be an important one. Almost all working
groups are formed when a small group of interested individuals
get together on their own and then propose a working
group to an Area Director” (Bradner 1999, p. 49). 

It is much
the same with other open innovation communities. 

“''Today, an open source software development project is typically initiated
by an individual or a small group with an idea for something
interesting they themselves want for an intellectual or personal
or business reason” (von Hippel and von Krogh 2003, p. 211).
This process for Linux was described thus: “ ‘The lieutenants
get picked—but not by me,’ explains Torvalds. ‘Somebody
who gets things done, and shows good taste—people just start
sending them suggestions and patches''’ ” (Hamm 2005, p. 66).
See also Rosenkopf et al. (2001).
(http://orgsci.highwire.org/cgi/content/abstract/18/2/165)


==Brokers vs. Boundary Spanners==

Leadership is a crucial variable:

“Despite their bazaarlike, egalitarian, argumentative, unplanned,
chaotic appearance, open innovation communities rely
heavily on strong leadership to function effectively and
to resist splintering, forking, and balkanization.”

They introduce two kinds of leadership: brokers and boundary spanners:

“Brokers can span boundaries, but
not all boundary spanners broker. This unexamined difference
leaves a variety of unanswered questions. For
example, what are the different mechanisms by which
the occupants of the two positions attain leadership positions?
Burt’s early descriptions characterize brokers as
calculating and politically savvy operators, while Allen
and Tushman characterize boundary spanners as well
respected guardians who redirect crucial information,
both within and outside the firm. If these characterizations
hold any validity, then colleagues of the broker and
boundary spanner will surely hold different perceptions
about individuals in each position. Colleagues will be
less likely to trust a broker (Coleman 1988, Burt 2001b),
and this lack of trust will be exacerbated within open
innovation communities, which are inherently wary of
balkanization and cooptation by commercial interests.

The most effective strategies and behaviors of aspiring
leaders will therefore be different for brokerage- and for
boundary-spanning roles.

More generally, open innovation communities provide
an opportunity to develop theories of human and social
capital in a novel context that lacks pecuniary incentives,
hierarchical authority, and formal structure. Leadership
in such communities depends more on the trust
and mobilization of peers than on approval of superiors.
To wit, members cannot be fired or forced to participate
in any activity, nor can they be compelled to pay
attention to any other member. Ascendancy in such relationships
relies purely, to borrow a phrase from politics,
on “the power to persuade”

Their research concludes that boundary spanners are more successful:

“Individuals who broker work collaborations
are more likely to assume leadership, but the effect
is strongly contingent on physical presence within the
community, a consequence of the diminished trust inherent
in brokered social contexts. Consistent with the argument
that they must overcome lack of trust, brokers also
encounter difficulties when they attempt to span technological
boundaries within the community. Boundary
spanners, in contrast, do not suffer from a lack of trust
and are more likely than brokers to assume leadership
positions. In summary, future leaders are most likely to
be individuals that make a strong technical contribution
from a structural position that can bind the community
together.”

More details on boundary spanners:

“The boundaries within open innovation communities,
like those in private firms, usually correspond to the
interfaces between technological subsystems (Henderson
and Clark 1990). Each boundary demarcates a distinct
technological area or module. The boundaries are
defined directly by leaders’ architectural decisions and
then implemented by followers’ choices of where to
volunteer their efforts. Torvalds, for example, delegates
responsibility for different modules to a handful of
trusted lieutenants (Hamm 2005), each of whom reviews
submitted code, accepts the best, and works with Torvalds
and the other lieutenants to resolve issues that
cross technical boundaries. Bradner (1998, p. 5; 2003b)
describes how individuals who aspire to leadership in the
IETF must define their technological boundaries relative
to other community efforts as part of their BOF proposals:
“Is there a good understanding of any existing work
that is relevant to the topics that the proposed working
group is to pursue _ _ _ and, if so, is adequate liaison in
place?” Although technical and social boundaries correlate,
brokerage and boundary spanning remain distinct
roles. Nothing prevents a boundary spanner from being
the only engineer, in which case she would be a social
broker. Alternately, she could be one of the many engineers
who collaborate across a boundary, in which case
the boundary spanner is not a social broker at all.
Open innovation communities are well aware of these
issues and value individuals that can span technical
boundaries (Bradner 2004). Boundary spanners should
be more creative and able to call on more-diverse
resources, as explicitly recognized in the expectation
that leaders promote “cross-pollinating between groups”
(Davies 2003, p. 13). In addition to providing the integrating
advantages of social brokerage, boundary spanners
are in an even stronger position to control the potential
for community forking, which generally occurs when
alternative technical solutions attract dedicated coalitions
that refuse to compromise or resolve incompatibilities.”


==Conclusion:==

“Both brokering
and boundary-spanning roles greatly increase the likelihood
of leadership points to the importance of social
positions that can unite open innovation communities.
We argued that trust does not come easily to community
members who fear cooptation by commercial interests
or forking over technical disagreements. Because brokers
by definition contrive less cohesive and less trusting
contexts, the probability that they will assume leadership
roles remains highly contingent on building trust with
community members. We argue that aspiring leaders can
build trust through physical attendance and, consistent
with this argument, find a positive interaction with physical
attendance. Also consistent with our emphasis on
trust in open innovation communities, brokerage and
boundary spanning demonstrated a negative interaction,
indicating that brokers who span boundaries remain at a
disadvantage. While brokerage alone demonstrates positive
influence on becoming a leader, boundary spanning
demonstrates a much stronger effect. Finally, we did
not observe a contingent relationship between boundary
spanning and attendance. Our results emphasize the
importance of intermediary and integrating roles—for
brokers within technological boundaries, and for boundary
spanners across cohesive technological boundaries."

=More Information=

#[[Open Design Communities]]
#[[Boundary Spanners]]
#[[Leadership]]


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]