URL = http://brooklynmicrogrid.com/

=Description=

'''1.'''

Ashley Taylor:

"Most people will interact with a blockchain marketplace through an interface that looks similar to most web applications today. The Brooklyn Microgrid community is using an open energy platform, called TransActiveGrid, developed by ConsenSys and LO3 energy.

TransactiveGrid uses the Ethereum blockchain to record the production of each community members’ solar array. [[TransActive Grid]] is comprised of smart contracts (agreements between peers) that exist on the blockchain. The blockchain is a trusted ledger that all members of the community can access at any time. These particular smart contracts transform the excess produced energy into renewable credits that other community members can purchase.
These smart contracts can be verified by anyone with Internet access, ensuring the distribution of trust."
(https://medium.com/@AshTayTweets/blockchain-community-solar-the-value-of-a-renewable-energy-reputation-b3fbcfcba4a3#.vgc2mnxtg)


'''2.'''

"Brooklyn Microgrid is currently developing a community microgrid in the Gowanus and Park Slope neighborhoods of Brooklyn. Community microgrids are a new approach for grid operations that achieve a sustainable, secure, and cost-effective energy system by providing long-term, locally generated power security prioritized for the community. Microgrids, have ability to separate from the larger electric grid during extreme weather events or other emergencies, providing the backbone for resilient, sustainable and more efficient energy production of the future.


The goals of the Brooklyn Microgrid projects:

* Increase the amount of clean, renewable energy generated in the community by members of the community

* Develop a connected network of distributed energy resources which will improve electrical grid resiliency and efficiency

* Manage these distributed energy resources in times of power outages and emergencies to protect the community and local economy

* Create financial incentives and business models that encourage community investment in their energy future, creating energy and jobs that boost the local economy."

[[Category:Business_Models]]
[[Category:Crypto_Ecology]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Energy]]