
=Description=

Allen Butcher:

"There is one organization that has survived from the 1920s German youth movement. German

Christian youth were inspired to activism by the times, even though the primary sentiment was non-
Christian. This is the Bruderhof, a Christian communal group also called the Society of Brothers,
which today has about 3,000 members in about 25 communities, mostly in the United States.
Emmy Arnold, wife of the Bruderhof founder, Eberhard Arnold, wrote in the 1974 second edition of
the book Children in Community, ...

- ''In Germany after the First World War, the Youth Movement arose and was very much
alive in our Christian circles. My husband, Eberhard Arnold, and I were closely connected with
this movement for many years. We were part of a group of people who often met in our home
in Berlin in a search for a new, genuine way of life. A few of these people felt together the very
strong urge to build up a life in truthfulness, simplicity, and poverty, as opposed to the life we
saw everywhere around us. In the year 1920 this community life came into being; a very simple life in complete
sharing was begun by a little group in Sannerz, Hesse. This life in community has continued for
over fifty years. We have gone through sorrow and struggle, yet we have known deep joy and
enthusiasm. A life shared in common is a miracle. People cannot remain together for the sake of
traditions. Community must be given again and again as a new birth. (Society of Brothers, p.
173)''


The Bruderhof “genuine way of life” was of course incompatible with Nazism, and so like all the other
“new religions and occult sects whose prophets grew like mushrooms,” as Walter Laqueur wrote, the
Bruderhof was targeted for elimination. (Laqueur, quoted in de Graaf, p. 16)

Formed in 1920, the Bruderhof sect was raided in 1937 and its leaders imprisoned. They were saved
when their jailers were called to one of the Nazi Party rallies in Nuremberg with its searchlight
nighttime spectacle, enabling the remaining jailer crew to set free the Bruderhof members. All the
remaining Bruderhof members sought asylum first in England then elsewhere, yet were refused
everywhere except Paraguay, due to concerns that they may be German spies. After WWII the
Bruderhof immigrated to the U.S.A. 

...


The communal Christian Bruderhof movement survived because it managed to get out of Germany
before WWII and has since thrived in America, partly because of its centralized management structure,
and partly because religion is a strong cohesive force in community. Besides the Bruderhof there are
several successful communal religious groups in America, including: Catholic monasticism, which has
been drastically shrinking in numbers since 1970 as women have been breaking glass ceilings to find
more occupational options than housewife or cloistered nun; some of the Anabaptist Mennonites and
most of the Hutterites, both starting in 16th century Europe and immigrating to America; and the
American-grown Twelve Tribes or Messianic communities. Some Hindu communities and other

communal religious groups have also survived in North America. The only significant secular or multi-
faith communal group to survive the 1960s counterculture is the Federation of Egalitarian

Communities (FEC), which has not grown as much as have the religious groups, as they have only
about doubled in population in forty-five years. The main reasons that the FEC groups have survived is
because of their decentralized management structure, the vacation-credit, time-based, non-monetary
internal economy used in the largest communities, Twin Oaks and East Wind, and their focus upon
gender-equal partnership, all of which substitutes for the role of patriarchal religion in community."

([https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kFZ4_Gbx2ljcCxaSyctpoanQFY3Nswxc/view?)]


[[Category:Community]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]