
'''Bruno Pellegrini teaches the sociology of communications at the Università di Architettura in Rome and animates Nessuna.TV, a site for Italian videobloggers, which pioneered one of the first collective movies based on the input of videobloggers.'''


URL = http://www.futureofthebook.org/blog/archives/2006/04/an_interview_with_bruno_pelleg.html


=Interview=

Bruno Pellegrini, interviewed by the Institute of the Future of the Book:

"'''Can you describe how the project came about?'''

It was born in a very natural way, as some of the vloggers who already participated at BlogTV (the first ever TV station broadcasting user-generated content) suggested covering the election together. Then the idea of the movie came up.


'''Is this project part of a larger Italian web response to media consolidation? How widely do people share your belief that the perception that big media has failed to cover things it should be covering?'''

I do not think this project is specific to Italy. Although the situation in my country is embarrassing I believe it is only a little ahead compared to what is going on abroad. Big media has failed (sometimes deliberately) to cover things all over the world for the last decades and the web has given people a chance to re-balance the power. Whereever and whenever there are major needs for a democracy, you can be sure something is going to happen . . . With regards to people, only a small part is conscious about what is going on, and the others are not helped by mass information . . . In general there is a common sense of distrust of politics, media and power.


'''In the U.S., the 2004 elections brought out – for the first time – a huge number of political bloggers; this seemed to be the first time that the blogosphere registered in the mainstream media, and there's the perception that the U.S. blogosphere exploded at that point. Have these elections done the same thing in Italy? Or did people turn to the Internet earlier?'''

Not at all, unfortunately. The Italian blogosphere is not as mature as it is in the U.S. We still lack a common identity and, most of all, consciousness of the power of being media . . . Hopefully this will happen in the next political campaign, and I suspect it will come out not from the classic political separation (left and right) but from an increasing fight between young and old people with the latter trying to keep their undeserved priviledges . . .


'''How big is the videoblogging community in Italy? We periodically look in on it in the U.S., and while everyone loves Rocketboom, it doesn't really seem to have taken off here as much as everyone expected (although maybe things like YouTube and Google Video are changing that). Did you find people getting interested in videoblogging because of the project, or was there already a vibrant community?'''

Vibrant is not exactly the right word, maybe promising would be more appropriate. I think it is a matter of critical mass and once reached it will grow exponentially like all the network related trends.


'''The question of copyright. Watching the clips, I couldn't help but notice the music - songs by the Arctic Monkeys & Caparezza playing in the background, as well as video clips from the news and I think a couple of press photographs. In the U.S. documentary film makers increasingly have problems with clearance issues - the owners of the songs charge thousands of dollars for the rights to use even a few seconds of them. We've been covering this issue of fair use rather closely because it seems to figure in many of the things you can do with multimedia. I'm curious how much of a problem it is in Italy - is this something you worry about there?'''

So far it is not a problem at all and we can deal with the fair use regulation. I believe the majors will play harder in the future, especially with music and movies, but there are already good open access libraries and the Creative Commons movement is getting stronger in Italy too."
(http://www.futureofthebook.org/blog/archives/2006/04/an_interview_with_bruno_pelleg.html)


[[Category:Bios]]