
'''= " an open collective to gather everyone who wants to contribute to make Brussels a great city to live and work".'''

URL = http://brusselstogether.org/


=Description=


=== Introduction ===
Brussels Together is an open collective to gather everyone who wants to contribute to make Brussels a great city to live and work. Their aim is to best support initiatives in Brussels that work to make the city better for everyone. Such initiatives need visibility, as well as human, financial and material resources to projects which try to better mobility, education, the environment and more. This support is crucial as traditional systems of subsidies are inefficient and not sustainable. Brussels Together aims to explore whether they can use values of transparency, inclusiveness and experimentations to recreate a city from bottom up. They want to create system within which everyone is invited to contribute. 

=== The Hashtag ===
#BrusselsTogether is many things. It's first and foremost a hashtag that anyone can use to share interesting initiatives happening in Brussels. But it's also an open collective to support all of those initiatives. There are many needs that are common between all of those projects. We all need places to meet and work, we all need visibility, we all need to find sustainable ways to finance ourselves and we all need to find volunteers. By coming together, we can address those needs in a much more effective way without having to reinvent the wheel again and again.

=== Type of Initiative ===
Brussels Together are particularly interested in initiatives that aim at improving mobility, education and inclusiveness in Brussels.


=More Information=


=== Contact ===
More information can be found on their website: http://brusselstogether.org/

Slack: https://slack.brusselstogether.org<br />
Email: info@brusselstogether.opencollective.com<br />
Facebook group: https://facebook.com/groups/BrusselsTogether<br />
Meetup group: https://meetup.com/BrusselsTogether<br />

[[Category: Belgium]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]