
'''* Report: BUILDING RESILIENCY THROUGH GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. A Community Wealth Building Approach. By Johanna Bozuwa. Democracy Collaborative, 2019'''

URL = https://democracycollaborative.org/sites/clone.community-wealth.org/files/downloads/GreenInfrastructure_Web.pdf

"provides clear ways for cities to build better relationships with
our natural assets through green infrastructure at the same time as fostering
stronger, more resilient communities."

=Description=

"In particular, this report identifies how new, equitable business models can
help address our desperate need for the benefits of green infrastructure,
while also providing a transformative way to build local, long-term resiliency for everyone in our cities. Worker-owned cooperatives, social enterprise,
and other models that operate with the values of broad-based ownership
and equity pave a major way forward toward a more diverse workforce in
the water industry.

Drawing from enterprises and cooperatives across the United States—
from Oakland to Pittsburgh—we gain real-world strategies to deliver on
community wealth building. In order to build true resiliency, we need to
fully integrate communities into the workforce and build long-term, mission-driven jobs. We need to contemplate the relationship between green
infrastructure and affordable housing. We need to discuss the role of utilities
and other anchor institutions, like large, place-based nonprofits like hospitals or universities, in launching a new era of place-based economies."

=CONTENTS=

* Green Infrastructure
* Regulating and Paying for Green Infrastructure
* From the Field: Case Studies
* Strategies to Deepen and Expand Community
* Wealth Building Enterprises

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]