
'''* ebook: The Response: Building Collective Resilience in the Wake of Disasters. By Tom Llewellyn et al. Shareable, 2019'''

URL  = https://www.shareable.net/download-our-latest-free-ebook-the-response-building-collective-resilience-in-the-wake-of-disasters/

''interviews, articles, guides, and personal stories of community led disaster response''
 
=Description=

Tom Llewellyn:
 
“When disasters occur, the majority of news coverage teeters on the edge of “disaster porn” at best, emphasizing the sheer mass of destruction in the affected area while celebrating a few token “heroes.” At its worst, the media perpetuates harmful stereotypes, casting survivors as looters and justifying the extrajudicial murder of people of color by the police and mostly white vigilantes, like what occurred during Hurricane Katrina. 
But in both scenarios, news reporting routinely underplays how local communities come together to recover from the immediate devastation and collectively rebuild the community, often on a new foundation of sustainability and justice. It’s a good thing that people collaborate instead of competing during a crisis because all signs point towards an increase in climate change-fueled disasters in the coming years. 
This kind of collective response is worth celebrating, but there’s no better way to respond to disasters than to anticipate them happening and prepare before they strike. And there’s no better time than right now to build resilience together. While a little preparation today can save a lot of trouble tomorrow, it can also create immediate benefits like stronger community ties, increased civic capacity, and the joy that comes from  accomplishing things together. “
 
[[Category:Books]]
 
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]