
'''= second Making Worlds Forum, "Building the Institutions of the Commons", to be held October 18-20.'''

URL = http://makingworlds.wikispaces.com/ 

"We envision 3 days of workshops and conversations on how to build spaces and projects for a politics, technology, culture and an economy of, by and for the 99%."


=Description=

"Making Worlds: a Commons Coalition is a collaborative effort by OWS and other groups and individuals to explore the utility of the commons in creating a better world.


Making Worlds: a Commons Coalition brings projects working to reclaim the commons to the fore of the Occupy movement. Commons are resources that are neither private nor state-owned like air, water and soil, the internet and human culture. We need to safeguard them from the private market. Making Worlds grows out of an understanding that Occupy itself is a form of commoning, a process in which everyone can participate, every voice can contribute, an open movement that belongs to no one and to everyone. Through holding conversations in communities around the city among organizations, activists and others, we aim to create links between the Occupy movement, the Commons movement, activist organizations and people who may not consider themselves activists. This way we can become visible to each other and work together on our common problems.

We are beginning to organize our second Making Worlds Forum, "Building the Institutions of the Commons", to be held October 18-20. We envision 3 days of workshops and conversations on how to build spaces and projects for a politics, technology, culture and an economy of, by and for the 99%. Come join the conversation. Welcome to the Paradigm Shift! Everyone's invited!"


[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Conferences]]