
=Discussion=

A. Aneesh:

"In modern times, the most important analysis of authority and power came from
Max Weber (1978) in the early twentieth century. Within the framework of his
ideal type of legal-rational authority, he systematically studied the rise of modern
bureaucracy as a new form of power and governance. For Weber, bureaucracy
represents an “efficient” ideal-typical apparatus characterized by an abstract
regularity of the exercise of authority centered on formal rationality. It is marked
by authority relations that erode old modes of trust and social hierarchies of estate
(ständ) and honor, replacing them with “rational techniques” of domination.
Weber situates bureaucracy within his theory of power, domination, and
legitimacy, where domination is legitimized on the basis of “legal-rational rules”
in contrast to “tradition” or “charisma.”

One of the modes of Weber’s theory construction is to formulate purified action
orientations. In order to explain legal-rational domination, he shows how legalrational
action orientation emerged from a struggle against monarchical
absolutism in the Continental Europe, a struggle that denied the legitimacy of any
law based on precedent rather than statute (Bendix, 1960). Thus, in legal-rational
governance, people who occupy positions of authority cannot act as personal
rulers, and the people who obey legal rational authority are not “subjects;” they
are “citizens” who obey the “law” rather than the official who enforces it.
Modern bureaucracy, as opposed to earlier bureaucracies of Egypt, China and
medieval Europe, reflects the imperatives of such legal-rationality, which is
“formal” and not “substantive.” By “formal”, Weber implies a juridical
formalism, where procedures of a lawsuit emerge as a peaceful contest according
to fixed “rules of the game.” For instance, if one cannot afford an expense to
document a piece of information relevant to the lawsuit, one may be forced to 
surrender certain rights to which one is legally entitled. Purely “substantive” and
ethical considerations for justice cave in to the care for the predictability of its
“formal” procedures.

The development of modern rational bureaucracy, being dependent on formal
procedures, a money economy, the free market, and the expansion of
administration, is characterized by written rules in a hierarchy of specialized
official positions; impersonal offices that must be clearly distinguishable from
incumbents and their private life and property; and recruitment based on
qualifications, and not on personal will of the master or leader. Weber’s
discussion of bureaucracy is embedded in the dual context of legal-rational mode
of domination and technical imperatives of formal rationality that require an
efficient, methodical calculation and refinement of means to achieve an end.
Thus, according to Weber, “business management throughout rests on increasing
precision, steadiness, and, above all, speed of operations” (Weber, 1978, p. 974).
The technical imperatives of rationality such as the speed of communication
create a profound pressure for “speeding up the tempo of administrative reaction
toward various situation. The optimum of such reaction time is normally attained
only by a strictly bureaucratic organization” (p. 974).

Many scholars have questioned Weber’s idea of the technical superiority of
bureaucracy, showing how actual bureaucracies are fraught with informal
structures and conflicting interests of subgroups. They also dispute the notion
that formal rules are efficient. Bureaucratic formal rules could be dysfunctional
with unintended consequences, as the rules become ends in themselves rather than
means to ends (Merton, 1949; Selznick, 1980). Informal practices are shown to
be more efficient than rigid adherence to inflexible formal rules (Blau, 1967) and
formal rules may be employed by members of bureaucracies to pursue their own
interests in opposition to official goals (Crozier, 1967). The above kind of postWeberian
research, despite its successes, has misunderstood Weber’s approach,
reducing the wider context of what Habermas (1984) calls the “bureaucratization
of the lifeworld” to narrow concerns for organizational efficiency. In fact, the
question of “efficiency” as an object of analysis is itself made possible by
discourses of instrumental rationality, which is institutionalized in actual
bureaucracies. Weber himself acknowledges that “...the bureaucratic apparatus
also can, and indeed does, create certain definite impediments for the discharge of
business in a manner best adapted to the individuality of each case...” (Weber,
1978, 974-75). To say that Weber did not describe “real life” is to have an
impoverished notion of the real. He appeared to be more concerned with the
imperatives of formal rationality that produce a whole series of effects in the real
by acting as grids for the perception and evaluation of things. To Weber, for
instance, the discretionary acts of modern bureaucratic officials are vastly
different from the discretionary acts in earlier forms of administration, because in
modern bureaucracy, even the discretionary acts require an appeal to, and
evaluation of, impersonal ends; one cannot openly confess personal favors and
arbitrariness (Bendix, 1960). This orientation toward impersonal rules transforms 
the real world in significant ways. The question is not whether Weber’s ideal type
was accurate; rather, whether there are other modes of governance that may
compliment Weber’s diagnosis of modern organizational forms. Michel
Foucault’s (1979) notion of Panoptic forms of disciplinary power has attracted
enough scholarly attention recent years (e.g., Zuboff, 1988) to deserve a detailed
analysis as an added dimension of organizational governance."
(https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Governance]]