Panel at the Wizard of OS 2006 conference

URL = [http://www.wizards-of-os.org/en/program/panels/economy_amp_labour/business_and_the_commons.html]


Video at http://phalacrocorax.informatik.hu-berlin.de/fr/08_17h_BusinessAndTheCommons.ogg

Audio at http://phalacrocorax.informatik.hu-berlin.de/fr/08_17h_BusinessAndTheCommons_audio.ogg
(video and audio don't seem to be available anymore)

=Description=

"Since digitisation of works and channels turns information into a truely public good, business models have to be radically different. How to make money with free bits is the core question driving not only the Web 2.0 hype. Is it feasible at all to market works without any copyright enforcement? Nollywood proves that it is. The Nigerian film industry has become the third largest after Hollywood and Bollywood. How can creative people and consumers strike a fair deal without intermediaries? What if they organise as two collectives that conclude a general contract among each other? If bits, once published, can‘t be controlled, then maybe the work they encode should be paid before it gets released. The Street Performer Protocol triggered a number of systems that aim at buying works so that they can be free."
[(http://www.wizards-of-os.org/en/program/panels/economy_amp_labour/business_and_the_commons.html)]


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Commons]]