

=Description=

Bob Haugen:'''

"NRP means Network Resource Planning. Its purpose is to coordinate
economic networks.

A [[Supply Chain]] is an [[Economic Network]], with a head, which is the agent
producing end products for consumers, and a tail, which is a tree of
agents that supply them with components. A value system also includes
the demand chain, which includes all of the agents who distribute the
products from the head of the supply chain to consumers. It's shaped,
as you may imagine, like an X.

A [[Business Ecosystem]] is more complex, shaped like a directed graph. See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_ecosystem

“An economic community supported by a foundation of interacting
organizations and individuals—the organisms of the business world. The
economic community produces goods and services of value to customers,
who are themselves members of the ecosystem. The member organisms also
include suppliers, lead producers, competitors, and other
stakeholders. Over time, they coevolve their capabilities and roles,
and tend to align themselves with the directions set by one or more
central companies. Those companies holding leadership roles may change
over time, but the function of ecosystem leader is valued by the
community because it enables members to move toward shared visions to
align their investments, and to find mutually supportive roles.”

Linux, Raspberry PI, and Android are examples of business ecosystems.
Enspiral, Sensorica, and Fair Coop are examples of potential or
wannabe business-like ecosystems.

If Enspiral, Sensorica, and Fair Coop converged with the Mutual Aid
Networks, the P2P Foundation, a permaculture community, and a
small-to-medium-sized city or two, they could become an economic
network.

Capitalism is an economic network.

NRP in its present state is only able to coordinate small economic
networks. If the current convergence and refactoring project succeeds,
it will be able to coordinate larger ones. If the Value Flows project
succeeds, it will be able to coordinate economic networks of any size.

The next economic system will be an economic network."
(email, March 2017)

[[Category:Economics]]