This page is intended as a collection of sample bylaws (and articles about bylaws) for types of organizations of interest to the P2P and Commons communities. This includes, but isn't limited to, bylaws for cooperatives, foundations, B Corporations, trusts, associations, etc.

==Articles About Bylaws==

* [https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/By-law Bylaw (Wikipedia)] A bylaw, by-law (or bye-law) is a rule or law established by an organization or community to regulate itself, as allowed or provided for by some higher authority. The higher authority, generally a legislature or some other government body, establishes the degree of control that the by-laws may exercise. By-laws may be established by entities such as a business corporation, a neighborhood association, or depending on the jurisdiction, a municipality.
* [http://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/structure/organizational-structure/write-bylaws/main Writing Bylaws] by The Community Tool Box, a free, online resource for those working to build healthier communities and bring about social change. Learn about organizational bylaws – what they are, if you need them, and how and when to write them. Includes sample bylaws.
* [https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/private-foundations/private-foundation-bylaws Private Foundation Bylaws (US IRS)] Bylaws are an organization's internal operating rules. State law may require nonprofit corporations to have bylaws and nonprofit organizations generally find it advisable to have internal operating rules. Federal tax law does not require specific language in the bylaws of most organizations....
* [http://www.oss.org.uk/what-we-do/commons/by-laws-for-commons-greens-and-open-spaces/ By-Laws For Commons, Greens And Open Spaces (UK)] by the Open Spaces Society. By-laws are rules made by a local authority or certain other public bodies under an enabling Act of Parliament, for the regulation, administration or management of a specific area. They are binding on all those who come within their scope... A detailed outline of public, open space applications, resources (including sample bylaws),and specific legal information for the UK.

==Sample Bylaws==

* [https://omnicommons.org/wiki/Bylaws Bylaws of the Omni Oakland Commons], a California Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation. The purposes of this corporation are:(a) To educate the public on subjects useful to the individual and beneficial to the community including in particular history, current events, economics, sociology, political science, anthropology, education, psychology, philosophy, science, social theory and the arts by presenting public discussion groups, forums, panels, lectures, exhibits, audio and video presentations, distributing of printed and on-line materials, and other similar programs.(b) To carry on scientific research in the public interest by conducting research directed towards benefiting the public and distributing the results of said research to all members of the public on a nondiscriminatory basis.(c) To provide relief to the poor, distressed and underprivileged, to combat community deterioration and to defend human and civil rights secured by law.(d) To lease, manage, own and operate property to promote the purposes stated in (a)-(c), above.
* [https://m.wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Bylaws Wikimedia Foundation Bylaws] The [https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Foundation Wikimedia Foundation] is the legal umbrella for the Wikipedia commons. It was granted section 501(c)(3) status by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a public charity in 2005. Its National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (NTEE) code is B60 (Adult, Continuing education). The foundation's by-laws declare a statement of purpose of collecting and developing educational content and to disseminate it effectively and globally. Another main objective of the Wikimedia Foundation is political advocacy.
* [https://www.linuxfoundation.org/bylaws/ Linux Foundation Bylaws] The [https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_Foundation Linux Foundation] is an Oregon nonprofit mutual benefit corporation. It works to promote, protect, and advance Linux and collaborative development and to support the "greatest shared technology resources in history". In recent years, the Linux Foundation has expanded its services through events, training and certification, and open source projects. Projects hosted at the Linux Foundation include Hyperledger, Cloud Native Computing Foundation, and many others.
* [https://www.iasc-commons.org/bylaws/ Bylaws of the International Association for the Study of the Commons (IASC)] The [[IASC]] is a professional association dedicated to the commons. It operates on a non-profit basis and qualifies as an 501(c)(3) non-profit organization according to US Law. It is devoted to bringing together multi-disciplinary researchers, practitioners and policymakers for the purpose of improving governance and management, advancing understanding, and creating sustainable solutions for commons, common-pool resources, or any other form of shared resource. IASC aims to: encourage exchange of knowledge among diverse disciplines, areas, and resource types; foster mutual exchange of scholarship and practical experience; and promote appropriate institutional design...
* [http://www.communityforthecommons.org/testsite/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/CFTC-Bylaws.pdf Bylaws of COMMUNITY FOR THE COMMONS (PDF)] This is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization incorporated under the laws of the State of Minnesota for charitable and educational purposes. Lake Minnetonka area citizens dedicated to the long term enhancement and improvement Excelsior’s Commons for the enjoyment of residents, guests and the surrounding community. 

[[Category:P2P Law]]