
=Description=

Amber Case:

"Calm Technology™ is an effort to expand the awareness of how humans and computers can live in harmony, and how pass-through, robust technologies can help us manage emerging complexities and coordination needs in our homes and the wider world.

Designer and researcher Amber Case learned about a set of small papers about Calm Technology while writing her thesis on smartphones in 2007. This discovery led her to question why these ideas were not more widely known. Starting in 2010, she expanded on the papers by creating the Principles of Calm Technology, and in 2015, an influentual book called Calm Technology: Principles and Patterns for Non-Intrusive Design.

Now, the concept of Calm Technology and Case's principles for Calm product design have been widely adopted by companies all over the world, including Microsoft, Samsung, Google, Virgin Global and AirBNB. Calm Technology also inspired Kyoto-based Calm Technology startup Mui Lab."

(https://calmtech.com/about)


=More information=

'''* Book: Calm Technology: Principles and Patterns for Non-Intrusive Design. Amber Case.'''

URL = https://calmtech.com/book

"How can we design technology that becomes a part of a user’s life and not a distraction from it? This practical book explores the concept of calm technology, a method for smoothly capturing a user’s attention only when necessary, while calmly remaining in the background most of the time.

Author Amber Case expands on ideas first introduced by researchers at Xerox PARC in 1995 with a series of principles, patterns and examples of how they apply to our current technology landscape, especially the [[Internet of Things]]."


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Design]]