
=Discussion=

Workshop proposal by Andrea Fumagalli:

"The discussion list “Effimera:  criticism and subversion of the present”, proposes a meeting/workshop on AGAINST CRISIS, SUBVERT UNHAPPINESS . Analysis of failure and a map of existential collective escape routes in Europe -  October, 3-4,  2015, Milan (Italy)

The end of institutional Europe?

The first phase of the European integration process, begun with the Rome agreement of 1956, is over.

The economic union did not lead to greater political integration. The creation of the single currency, we now know, because of  its institutional construction, is based on a relationship of power and therefore domain. It cannot be the basis of a social policy nor can promote greater economic cohesion, based on social welfare.

We do not want to fall into the dilemma: Euro Yes  - Euro No. We do not care and it looks like a plane misleading discourse. The crisis in the Eurozone, however, can no longer be presented as inevitable and unexpected circumstance. The crisis is the product of the European institutions that continue to fuel it.

The crisis - and the misery and injustice that carries on - is the constituent data of today's Union.

Subverting unhappiness: To be happy we must be free. To be free means to choose. Not a default choice, but a choice of autonomy that  comes from our own needs and requirements. That is why  we would like to address the issue if it is possible to be free from the yoke of the of the financial and economic dictatorship, which is dominant today.

We would like to discuss the experiments already in process in the same Greece and Spain aimed to free from the constraint the debt, according to the restrictions imposed by austerity policies, and from a logic of exploitation that is based on subsumption and predation of our social cooperation potentiality.

We want to talk about alternative currencies, new financial circuits, where socially useful human activity is enhanced and must not bend to the scourge of free labor, precariousness and exploitation. We want to talk about how to build a welfare state from below, self-organized and aimed at the production of the human being for the human being.

We want to talk about us, our future and our un/happiness, our alternatives."


=More Information=

* The call: http://effimera.org/convegno_2015/

* The program: http://effimera.org/sovvertire-linfelicita-subverting-unhappiness-3-4_ottobre_2015_milano-programma/

* The FB site: https://www.facebook.com/Effimera-470765653021845/timeline/

* The event: https://www.facebook.com/events/1060900580596450/


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Politics]]