
'''* Article: CAN CAPITALISM REFORM ITSELF AND MOVE TOWARDS A P2P SOCIETY? Jean Lievens. P2P & Innovacao, 2015'''

URL = http://revista.ibict.br/index.php/p2pinovacao/article/view/2390/1949


=Abstract=

"The first Dutch book on P2P “Save the World” by Michel Bauwens had a good reception in Flanders. Even for the critics, the emerging way of ‘getting things done’ through global cooperation on “what is light” and re-localisation of “what is heavy” is making a lot of sense and is indeed the way to go. In this article, we examine two criticisms of the book: the feasibility of an unconditional basic income within the present system and the possibility to move gradually to a P2P society without “overthrowing” capitalism.  Apart from the “low road” to peer-to-peer (after an economic collapse) and “the high road to peer-to-peer” (through neo-Keynesianism) a third way could open up, based on a reformed partner state facilitating peer production. Our conclusion is that under the present circumstances, with exponentially growing bottom-up initiatives, open source alternatives and the Internet as a new means of production, value creation and distribution, past failed experiences of ‘socialism in one country’ could today have more chances of succeeding on condition that a progressive government arms itself with a commons transitional plan. Such a transitional government would undoubtedly face many difficulties, but it would at least open the horizon for a better future. And it would certainly enjoy a wave of solidarity throughout the world."
(http://revista.ibict.br/index.php/p2pinovacao/article/view/2390)

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]