

=Description=

Mike Lewis and Pat Conaty:

"The Canadian Community Investment
Network Co-operative (CCINC) is a national
network of community loan funds, social
enterprise funds, co-op funds, micro-loan
funds and financial institutions with
community financing programs. CCINC works
to strengthen the capacity of its members to
expand access to capital and support services
for social economy enterprises and
economically and socially excluded individuals
and communities across Canada.

In 2004, forty staff and board members of
micro-loan funds, community loan funds, coop
funds, financial institutions and social
investment funds from across Canada
gathered to found the network. Together they
wrote the mission and goals for the Canadian
Community Investment Network. In 2005,
CCINC was incorporated. Key sponsors for
CCINC’s start up included: Vancity; Coast
Capital Savings; Alterna Savings; the Cooperators
and Assiniboine Credit Union. Over
the years, CCINC has held national
gatherings, produced newsletters, and held
tele-learning sessions to help practitioners
share practice, and develop the sector in Canada.

CCINC has also conducted research of the
sector and produced a bi-annual scan in
partnership with the Social Investment
Organization. In 2009, CCINC completed a
more in-depth scan and with financial support
from the Communities Directorate of HRSDC,
published “Building Local Assets: Community
Investment in Canada, 2008.” Over 487
organizations provided information on their
community investment assets which indicated
that in 2008, a minimum of $1.4 billion was
managed by the sector. Organizations also
identified another $750 million of demand
projected over the next two years. The report
can be found at communityinvestment.ca. If
you’re looking for a brief article that
highlights the report’s recommendations, see
“Building Local Assets: Taking the measure of
community investment in Canada,”
, 20:2 (Summer 2009),11-15.

CCCINC Executive Director, Seth
Asimakos, also authors a blog on the types
of social and community finance at
www.socialfinance.ca. If you’re interested in
becoming a member or a sponsor, email us
at info@communityinvestment.ca. CCINC
appreciates ongoing sponsorship from Alterna
Savings and Assiniboine Credit Union."


=More Information=

* “Building Local Assets: Taking the measure of community investment in Canada,” Making Waves, 20:2 (Summer 2009),11-15.


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Canada]]