
Organization to defend music creators in Canada, who should have a distinct voice from the labels.


URL = http://www.musiccreators.ca/


=Position Statement on Copyright and Free Culture=

  
"We are a growing coalition of Canadian music creators who share the
common goal of having our voices heard about the laws and policies
that affect our livelihoods. We are the people who actually create
Canadian music. Without us, there would be no music for copyright
laws to protect.

Until now, a group of multinational record labels has done most of
the talking about what Canadian artists need out of copyright.
Record companies and music publishers are not our enemies, but let's
be clear: lobbyists for major labels are looking out for their
shareholders, and seldom speak for Canadian artists. Legislative
proposals that would facilitate lawsuits against our fans or
increase the labels' control over the enjoyment of music are made
not in our names, but on behalf of the labels' foreign parent
companies.

It is the government's responsibility to protect Canadian artists
from exploitation. This requires a firm commitment to programs that
support Canadian music talent, and a fresh approach to copyright law
reform. Canadian music creators have identified three principles
that should guide the copyright reform process.

  
'''1. Suing Our Fans is Destructive and Hypocritical'''

  
Artists do not want to sue music fans. The labels have been suing
our fans against our will, and laws enabling these suits cannot be
justified in our names. We oppose any copyright reforms that would
make it easier for record companies to do this. The government
should repeal provisions of the Copyright Act that allow labels to
unfairly punish fans who share music for non-commercial purposes
with statutory damages of $500 to $20,000 per song.

  
'''2. Digital Locks are Risky and Counterproductive'''

  
Artists do not support using digital locks to increase the labels'
control over the distribution, use and enjoyment of music or laws
that prohibit circumvention of such technological measures. The
government should not blindly implement decade-old treaties designed
to give control to major labels and take choices away from artists
and consumers. Laws should protect artists and consumers, not
restrictive technologies. Consumers should be able to transfer the
music they buy to other formats under a right of fair use, without
having to pay twice.

  
'''3. Cultural Policy Should Support Actual Canadian Artists'''


The vast majority of new Canadian music is not promoted by major
labels, which focus mostly on foreign artists. The government should
use other policy tools to support actual Canadian artists and a
thriving musical and cultural scene. The government should make a
long-term commitment to grow support mechanisms like the Canada
Music Fund and FACTOR, invest in music training and education,
create limited tax shelters for copyright royalties, protect artists
from inequalities in bargaining power and make collecting societies
more transparent."


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:IP]]