
=Discussion=

Kojin Karatani:

"What  about  mode  of  exchange  C?  As  I noted above, this  may appear at  first  glance  to be a  simple  exchange  of  material  goods, but  that  is  incorrect. Here  too an  ideational  power is  at work—and it  too arises  from  ‘exchange’ itself. Marx describes  it  the  following terms. “The exchange  of  commodities, therefore, first  begins  on the  boundaries  of  such communities, at  their points  of  contact  with other similar communities, or with members  of  the  latter.”10  In other words, exchange  takes  place  with an unknown, perhaps  dangerous  other. Hence, the  need arises for a  ‘power’ to control  the  other—a  ‘power,’ moreover, that  is  different  from  those  that  hold sway at  the  level  of  community or state. It  is, moreover, of  an  ideational/religious  nature. It  is, in fact, what  we  call  ‘credit’ or ‘trust.’ Marx called this  sort  of  power a  fetish. “Hence  the  riddle presented by money is  but  the  riddle  presented by commodities;  only it  now  strikes  us  in its  most glaring form.”11  In this  way, Marx was  trying to demonstrate  how  the  commodity fetish, in the form  of  the  money fetish and then the  capital  fetish, comes  to dominate  society as  a  whole. To repeat, what  Capital  made  clear is  that  the  capitalist  economy is  controlled not  by the  material, but  rather by the  power of  fetishism—that  is,  by  the  idiational  power. (See  figures  1, 2, and 3). From  the  above  it  should be  clear how  modes  of  exchange  A, B, and C each gives  rise  to an  ideational  ‘power’ that  compells  people. All  of  these  are  born out  of  ‘exchange’ itself."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)

=More info=
* [[Introduction To Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Evolution of the Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Historical Approach to Shifts in Modes of Exchange]]
* [[From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Kojin Karatani on Why We Should Move from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Power and Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Mode Of Production]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]