=Source=

This is sourced from the [[Capital Allocation Pattern Language]] document.

URL = [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w-ivyDmBIDoe8Ey-gPDlT2Ua0_6cEqh2O2JPLcy9RZ0/edit?]

A work in progress by Benjamin Life and associates.

=Description=


==Core Structure of Capital Allocation==

"This pattern language organizes capital allocation into three primary components, each with distinct subcategories and relationships.

===1. Allocators (Who Allocates Capital?)===

Allocators determine how resources are distributed within a system. They can be categorized based on their decision-making process:


'''A. Decision-Making Models'''

#Crowdsourced Decision-Making: Allocations determined by collective intelligence (e.g., Quadratic Funding, Participatory Budgeting, Conviction Voting).
#Algorithmic & Automated Allocation: Programmatic mechanisms govern resource flows (e.g., AutoPGF, Bonding Curves, Roundabout Production).
#Market-Driven Allocation: Uses pricing mechanisms, speculation, or risk assessments (e.g., Harberger Taxes, Investment DAOs, Social Impact Bonds).


'''B. Systemic Allocators'''

#Community-Driven Allocators: Localized funding pools managed by members (e.g., ROSCAs, Community Currencies).
#Institutional Allocators: Foundations, governments, and DAOs that deploy structured funding mechanisms.
#Hybrid Allocators: Mixes human governance with algorithmic enforcement (e.g., Investment DAOs, Quadratic Funding Operators).


===2. Allocations (How is Capital Distributed?)===

Allocations define the way capital moves through a system, classified by timing, liquidity, and flow mechanisms.

'''A. Temporal Models'''

#Preemptive Funding: Capital is deployed before work is done (e.g., Participatory Budgeting, Investment DAOs).
#Ongoing Funding: Continuous capital flow based on real-time feedback (e.g., Bounties, Streaming Payments, ROSCAs).
#Retroactive Funding: Resources are allocated after impact is demonstrated (e.g., RetroPGF, Hypercerts, Social Impact Bonds).


'''B. Liquidity & Capital Flow Models'''

#One-Time Disbursement: Lump-sum grants or bounties.
#Continuous & Streaming Payments: Auto-adjusting fund flows (e.g., AutoPGF, Revnets).
#Circular & Reinvestment Models: Funds recirculate within an ecosystem (e.g., Community Currencies, Bonding Curves).


===3. Signals (How Are Allocation Decisions Made?)===

Signals provide data points that inform allocators and guide allocation mechanisms.

'''A. Verification Models'''

#Reputation-Based: Trust networks assess eligibility (e.g., Revnets, UBI, Conviction Voting).
#Data-Driven & Attestation-Based: Impact metrics and oracle data validate claims (e.g., Hypercerts, Social Impact Bonds).
#Hybrid Verification: Combines qualitative and quantitative assessments (e.g., DAO-based grant approvals, Investment DAOs).


'''B. Output Signals'''

#Performance Metrics: Assess effectiveness of past allocations.
#Condition-Based Signals: Dynamic allocation triggers based on real-world events (e.g., climate oracles for ReFi funding).
#Network Signals: Peer validation and social capital assessments (e.g., quadratic voting weight adjustments).

=Examples=

==II. Application to Capital Allocation Mechanisms==

This pattern language can be used to break down the structure of several key capital allocation mechanisms:

'''1. Quadratic Funding'''

#Allocator Type: Crowdsourced Allocators (community-driven decision-making).
#Allocation Model: Preemptive Funding with pooled matching funds.
#Signals Used: Reputation-Based Signals (weighted community votes to determine fund distribution).


'''2. Tunable Quadratic Funding'''

#Allocator Type: Hybrid Allocators (mix of community voting and algorithmic adjustments).
#Allocation Model: Preemptive or Ongoing Funding with adjustable match weighting.
#Signals Used: Reputation-Based and Condition-Based Signals (adjusting funding weights dynamically based on predefined criteria).


'''3. AutoPGF (Automated Public Goods Funding)'''

#Allocator Type: Algorithmic Allocators (smart contract-driven disbursements).
#Allocation Model: Ongoing Funding with continuous distribution based on predefined formulas.
#Signals Used: Data-Driven Signals (onchain metrics and external data oracles trigger fund releases).


'''4. RetroPGF (Retroactive Public Goods Funding)'''

#Allocator Type: Hybrid Allocators (community reviewers + algorithmic fund allocation).
#Allocation Model: Retroactive Funding based on verified past contributions.
#Signals Used: Data-Driven & Attestation-Based Signals (Hypercerts, reputation scores, impact metrics)."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1w-ivyDmBIDoe8Ey-gPDlT2Ua0_6cEqh2O2JPLcy9RZ0/edit?])

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]