
=Description=

Unknown author:

"In contrast to the latter form, the most salient feature of Capitalist Collaborative
Production is being governed by one or several companies, having control of the platform
which enables collaboration. This third modality characterizes almost all the so-called Web
2.0 (Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, Flickr, Twitter, etc.) but also appears as a
complementary modality in pioneer sites (EBay, Amazon). An illustrative case of this
operation is Second Life, just like Ariel Vercelli studied it (2009, Chapter 5).

...

Both the commercial and recreational users depend on the guidelines set by the
company. Specifically, to contact other users, whether to make friends or to look for buyers,
the prosumers must pass through the platform ruled by Linden Lab. In fact, the
monetization of Second Life by allowing prosumers to sell the fruits of their labour
emerges from the intellectual property rules which Linden Lab establishes for its world.
The proprietary nature of the “residents” is used as an effective advertising tactic to attract
users.

...

Although the power of the company controlling the platform is all-embracing, the
productive scheme requires attracting the two other types of actors, moreover, requires that
these agents produce contents. In order to do that, companies act like benevolent dictators
which conceal their power as much as possible. Indeed, in order to keep the efficiency of
the production process, it must look like a pure peer to peer collaboration. In the eyes of
prosumers, corporate control of the platform, of the data and of the production process
itself has to be diluted in the silent usualness of the digital landscape.

Capitalist Collaborative Production has been, then, exemplified. Here, as in the
Mixed Collaborative Production, companies which take part of the production process for
profit and prosumers who have no commercial interests coexist. However, in the model that
we have been analyzing here three typical productive agents are often present - not only
two as in the case of mixed production. First, non-commercial prosumers. There is nothing
new about them. These are the same actors seen in the two previous modalities and which
show up in any collaborative production form. Secondly, commercial prosumers which
have the same status as the other prosumers in the production process. They have nearly the
same power as them and must obey the same rules. Although they look like the companies
which participated in the Mixed Collaborative Production, there is a great difference.
Following the same example, when a team of IBM got integrated to the networks of Linux
producers, this team was actually interested in what both kinds of agents collectively
produced. IBM wanted digital information flows produced by developers, paid or unpaid
ones. In contrast, commercial producers of Second Life have no interest in what users
produce in the virtual environment and companies which are advertised on Facebook have
no interest about the photos of their “friends”. These companies aim to capture flows of
attention of those non-commercial producers /users, to integrate their recognition networks,
or directly, to sell them a product. To put it simpler, in the mixed collaborative production,
the commercial producers look for interactions with non-commercial producers in order to
access to their informational goods. This is, commercial producers were interested in users
as producers. By contrast, in the capitalist collaborative production, commercial producers
are interested in other users only as consumers.

However, the key agent of this productive modality is a third kind of agent which
radically changes the organization of the production process by completely handling the
process. This is another type of capitalist enterprise which now plays a transcendent role.
First of all, the collaboration platform is controlled by it. And through the platform, it
contains all the information related to prosumers, manages digital flows which are no
available to users, owns the trademarks which bring together producers, etc. Thus, the only
way of the other two types of agents to produce in this modality is through the capitalist
enterprise. But, in order to keep functioning the collaborative production modality, the
controlling company needs to look like the silent stage, the neutral environment of the
productive theater."
(http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)




=Source=

2010 submission to the CSPP journal: [http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file'


=More Information=

* [[Collaborative Production]] see the typology with 3 other modalities


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

=Source=

2010 submission to the CSPP journal: [http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]