* Special Issue of the Commoner. Issue 15, Winter 2012

URL = http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/00-frontmatter.pdf

=Editorial=

Massimo de Angelis:

"Preface: Care Work and the Commons

It is becoming increasingly clear that the current economic,
social and environmental crises are degrading the
conditions of everyday life for a vast range of people in
many parts of the world, and are even posing apocalyptic
threats to our social and ecological reproduction. It is
also clear that the global elites’ answers to these crises
cannot provide any solutions to these problems. Indeed,
short of a dramatic paradigmatic change in their strategic
horizons, we find no hope on this front. It is not just
that governments continue to cut social spending and entitlements
to bail out the banks. As the struggles against
the policies employed to deal with the crisis of neoliberalism
intensify, we witness the rise of a post-modern form
of fascism. The brutal attacks by militarized riot police
against the occupy movements of the US and Europe, the
endless butchering of civilians whose bodies now pile up
in morgues throughout the Middle East, are all different
modulations of this trend. Yet, new social movements are
mushrooming everywhere with renewed creativity in their
organisational forms. Even the moderate media, despite
its cynicism towards the constituent powers expressed by
these movements, is beginning to acknowledge the rationality
of these popular revolts, now circulating from New
York to Athens, from Cairo to Madrid, often drawing parallels
between diverse instances, highlighting unfamiliar
alliances (such as that between army veterans, workers
and students), and beginning to acknowledge “the outrage
of the mainstream.”

In this context, there is an urgent need to construct
non-capitalistic ways to reproduce our life, other than
those provided by states and markets. From the beginning
of the history of this journal, we have referred to
these alternative as “the commons.” We were not alone in
this endeavour. Many today think of the commons as the
seeds of a radically new social system in which reproduction
stems from the direct participation of communities
of producers reclaiming, sharing, and pooling resources
of various types, driven by values fundamentally opposed
to those embedded in the capital circuits: solidarity, mutual
aid, cooperation, respect for human being and the
environment, horizontalism and direct democracy. But
what has distinguished this journal is the recognition that
the commons must exist today in a world in which the
social and ecological metabolism is dominated by capital’s
priorities and the threat they pose to social reproduction.
Thus the commons – their development, their networking,
their survival – must be conceived within fields of power
relations, and viewed not only as sites of alternative ways
of reproducing life, but as sites of struggle, as well as
potential targets of cooptation and enclosure.

This implies two things. First, the present global crisis
urges us to engage in the constitution of alternatives to
life under capitalism, and the construction of more autonomous
forms of social reproduction. As neither the
state nor the market can guarantee our survival, we need
to embark in a journey of transformation built on the
power of the commons. For this, however, we need to
go beyond the logic of "survival" – ours and that of the
ecosystem – as the social relations that we construct to
reproduce ourselves are the true source of our power vis-àvis
capital. Ultimately this journey implies a “commoning”
transforming our subjectivities.

Second, as the commons develop within a field of power
relations, the character and social space of their autonomy
are necessarily negotiated with capital. But negotiation
can only occur on the basis of of the commons’ constituted
power, which is the power of reproducing with dignity and
freedom the life and bodies of all involved in a process of
reproduction. Here is the crucial importance of this issue
of The Commoner, edited by Camille Barbagallo and Silvia
Federici. The analyses and stories it weaves together force
us to look at the power of the commons power from the
perspective of the labour required to reproduce human
beings as well as labour power: child-care, housework,
sex work and elder care, both in the form of waged and
unwaged labour. Its objective is not only “to examine how
the neo-liberal restructuring of the global economy, over
the last three decades, has reshaped the organization of
this work” transforming “our bodies and desires” and reconfiguring
“our homes, our families and social relations.”

Most importantly, this issue wants to highlight the struggles
that domestic-care workers (mostly women, but also
men) are making in response to the new conditions of reproductive
labour. For these struggles pose the need for
and invent new forms of commoning, building bridges between
and beyond roles, such as employees and employers,
clients and service providers, parents and nannies. These
forms of commoning are vital for us, not only in order to
overcome the crisis of reproduction we face, and refuse to
have those most socially vulnerable – women, children,
the elders, immigrant workers – pay the price for it, but
also to begin to mold a new society and reconstitute the
common/s. For the articles in this issue demonstrate that
the power of the common/s begins with the social powers
we deploy to materially reproduce and affectively care for
ourselves."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/00-frontmatter.pdf)


=Contents=

1. Introduction 1

2. Women and the Subversion of the Community 23

3. On The General Strike 70

4. Wages Against Housework 74

5. On Sexuality as Work 88

6. Reproduction and Emigration 95

7. Starting From the Social Wage 158

8. The Unfinished Feminist Revolution 184

9. Women’s Autonomy & Renumeration of Care Work 197

10.On Elder Care 234

11.Sex as Work & Sex Work 261

12.Is Housework Soluble in Love? 277

13.Of Feminists and Their Cleaning Ladies 286

14.Nuclear Housework 306

15.Fukushima: A Call for Female Leadership 314

16.Energy and Social Reproduction 336

17.Domestic Workers United 353

18.Interview with Priscilla Gonzalez 359

19.A Male Domestic Worker 385

20.The Regeneration Manifesto 395

21.The Triumph of the Domestic Workers 400

22.Servicio Domestíco Activo 404

23.Interview with Liliana Caballero Velasquez 412

24.Interview with Victoria Mamani 416

25.Socialist Feminist Collective 420

26.Interview with Ana Rosario Adrián Vargas 425

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Care Economy]]