'''= reforming accounting by introducing human and environmental capital'''

URL = http://www.compta-durable.com/comptabilite-environnementale-sociale/modele-care/

=More information=

* French-language presentation via file:///C:/Users/HP/Downloads/conf%20%202%20Bernardins.pdf

==French-language Bibliography==

===Bibliographie de base (ordre chronologique)===

* Pearce D (1976) The limits of cost benefit analysis as a
guide to environmental policy .Kyklos , vol 29-Fasc 1,
97-112.
* Richard J (2012) Comptabilité et développement
durable Ed Economica .
* Richard J et Plot E (2014) La gestion
environnementale . Ed La Découverte.
* Gadrey J et Lalucq (2015) « Faut il donner un prix à la
nature? » Les Petits Matins . Institut Veblen
* Rambaud A (2015) La valeur d’existence en
Comptabilité Thèse Université Paris Dauphine Dir J
Richard.
* Rambaud A et Richard J (2015) « The triple
depreciation line instead of the triple bottom line:
toward a genuine integrated reporting » CPA, Dec.187
* Rambaud A et Richard J (2015) Sustainability, Finance
and Accounting: from the today’s Fisherian model(Falsified)
Hicksian perspective to a traditional
accounting approach Working Paper. Presented at
the ACRN Oxford Session 10/6/2015
* Richard J (2015a) « Refonder l’entreprise » in Vol 19
du Centre Français de Droit Comparé (175-216)
* Richard J (2015b) « The dangerous dynamics of
capitalism : from static towards futuristic IFRS
accounting » Critical Perspectives on accounting
(CPA),30,9-34
* Pottier A (2016) comment les économistes réchauffent
la planète . Anthropocène Seuil
* Rambaud A and Richard J (2017) « the triple
depreciation line accounting model and its
application to the human capital. In S Alijani and C
Karyotis Ed: Finance and economy for Society:
integrating Sustainability. Emerald Press

===Thèses sur la comptabilité écologique en lien avec CARE===

– Altukhova Y (2013) Comptabilité agricole et
développement durable. Etude comparative de la France
et de la Russie. (Dir J.Richard) . Un Paris Dauphine
– Bicalho T (2013) Les limites de l’ACV: étude de la
soutenabilité d’un biodiesel issu de l’huile de palme
brésilienne (Dir J Richard). Un Paris Dauphine
– Feger C (2016) Nouvelles comptabilités au service des
écosystèmes (Dir L Mermet) AgroParisTech
– Ionescu C (2016) Biodiversité et stratégie des
organisations: construire des outils pour gérer des
relations multiples et inter-temporelles. (Dir M
Trommetter) Université de Grenoble Alpes.
– Morlat C (2016) Modélisation dynamique des systèmes
de coûts pour une gestion durable des territoires. (Dir S
Faucheux et K Pinto-Silva) Un Versailles Saint Quentin

• Wang XR (2016) The clash of environmentalism,
neoliberalism , and socialism: a research on
practices and ideologies in China’s sustainability
accounting for agriculture. (Dir J. Richard) Un Paris
Dauphine
• Bardy J (2018) Le concept comptable de passif
environnemental, miroir du risque environnemental
de l’entreprise . Thèse en droit. Dir G. Martin .
Université Côte d’Azur

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]