

=Bio=

"Caroline Woolard (carolinewoolard@gmail.com) is an artist and organizer based in Brooklyn, New York. Making sculptures, furniture, and events, Woolard co-creates spaces for critical exchange, forgotten histories, and plausible futures. Her practice is research-based and collaborative. In 2009, Woolard cofounded three organizations to support collaborative cultural production; three long-term infrastructure projects to support short-term artworks: a studio space, a barter network, and Trade School.

From 2008-2013, Woolard was supported by unemployment benefits, transformative organizers she met as the media coordinator for SolidarityNYC.org, a Fellowship at Eyebeam, a residency at the MacDowell Colony, Watermill, iLAND, and funding from the Rockefeller Cultural Innovation Fund. Woolard is currently an Artist in Residence at the Queens Museum, a lecturer at Cooper Union and the New School, and a member of Trade School and the Pedagogy Group.

Woolard’s research includes: the rise of the BFA-MFA-PhD, footnote systems for research-based art, socially engaged failure, compensation in the arts, and incommensurability. Forthcoming writing will focus on a project at MoMA that closed in June, as well as the implications of debt and duration for social practices. By 2018, Woolard hopes to establish a community land trust in New York City with community organizers, computer engineers, and artists who are dedicated to lifelong commoning."
(http://carolinewoolard.com/)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Art]]