Carolina Botero is a IP and [[Copyleft]] lawyer and researcher in Colombia


=Bio=

"Lately I have worked the commons idea from the communities point of view by seeking juridical protection for the creativity in comunities that are outside of market logics and by trying to identify possible structures and options for sustainable commons projects that want to interact with the market.

Últimamente he trabajado la idea del procomún desde el punto de vista de las comunidades, buscando formas de protección jurídica para la creatividad en comunidades fuera de lógicas del mercado y también identificando posibles estructuras y opciones para la sostenibilidad de proyectos basados en procomunes que quieren interactuar con el mercado.

URL = http://www.karisma.org.co/carobotero


==Publications==


Some texts on her works // Algunos textos sobre su trabajo

#http://www.karisma.org.co/carobotero/index.php/2009/12/02/pensando-en-procomun/ (castellano)
#http://www.revistaacontratiempo.com/?ediciones/revista-13/articulos/pensar-los-generos-musicales-desde-las-nuevas-prcticas-de-intercambio-sonoro.html (castellano)
#http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/ftinterface~content=a912824972~fulltext=713240928 (english)
#http://www.karisma.org.co/carobotero/index.php/2009/08/04/%C2%BFdesde-cuando-el-dominio-publico-es-un-robo/ (castellano)

other texts in // mas textos en
#http://www.karisma.org.co/carobotero/index.php/sobre-mi/publicaciones/ (castellano)

You will find more about her (spanish) // puede explorar mas sobre ella en (castellano)
#http://www,karisma.org.co/carobotero/
#http://www.twitter.com/carobotero
#http://www.equinoxio.org.co
#http://www.slideshare,com/carobotero


==P2P Research Summary==

Carolina Botero  is a Colombian Lawyer (Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, 1993), LLM on International Legal Cooperation (VUB, Brussels, 1994), Masters on Contracts (UAB, Barcelona, 2006), visiting scholar at Lecce University (Lecce, Italy, 2005-2006) and UCAL (Berkeley, spring 2006). She is currengly following the doctorate program at the UAB in Barcelona, Spain but lives and works in Bogotà.

Carolina Botero is a researcher, lecturer, writer and consultant on issues related to law and technology especially regarding openess. She has developed a special interest on the challenges that the educational sector face regarding copyright issues while working with Karisma Foundation in Bogotá but also looks at community creativity and its specific issues regarding the "commons concept". She is an active member of the Colombian Free Software community and co-leader of Creative Commons in Colombia. As a consultant she has worked for several Universities in Colombia like  the National University and Andean University. She is consultant for the Bogota Telecomunications Corporation (ETB) and the Ministry of Agriculture. She has supported the adoption of open standards in elearning projects such as the UNDP Virtual School for Latinamerica and the Caribbean, or the Virtual Sports School of Coldeportes (the Colombian sports authority).

==Resumen de Investigaciòn P2P==

Es Abogada de la Universidad del Rosario de Bogotá, con maestrías en Derecho Internacional y de la Cooperación (1994, VUB - Bélgica) y en Derecho de la Contratación (2006, UAB -España). Realizó pasantías de investigación en la Universidad de Lecce (2004-2005, Italia) y en la Universidad de California en Berkeley (Primavera 2006, EEUU).

Carolina es investigadora, consultora y conferencista  en temas de nuevas tecnologías, educación, derechos de autor con énfasis en acceso abierto, educación abierta y librecultura por su trabajo en Karisma, sin embargo, trabaja también el tema de creatividad y producción en comunidades en su relación con el concepto del "procomún". Es activista dentro de la comunidad de software libre colombiana y Co-lider para Colombia de Creative Commons. Como consultora ha trabajado con varias universidades en Colombia (como la Universidad Nacional y la Universidad de los Andes), es consultora de la Empresa de Telecomunicaciones de Bogotá (ETB), del Ministerio de Agricultura, entre otros. Ha sido coordinadora de CampusBlog de Campus Party Colombia en 2008, 2009 y 2010, actualmente es Directora del Grupo Derecho Internet y Sociedad en la Fundación Karisma,. Ha escrito de estos temas y mantiene un blog personal en el que puede profundizar esta información www.karisma.org.co/carobotero.

=More Information=

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:P2P Women]]
[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Colombia]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]