
'''* Research PhD: The development of a carrying capacity assessment model for the Australian socioenvironmental context. A THESIS SUBMITTED TO
THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING OF QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. By Murray Lane, February 2014'''

URL = https://eprints.qut.edu.au/67485/1/Murray_Lane_Thesis.pdf

=Description=

"There are clear signs that society is threatening the biophysical limits of our shared
environment and that the size, distribution and behaviour of the population is to
blame. The ongoing worsening of crises like water, food, soil and energy depletion,
climate change, biodiversity loss and environmental degradation serves to illustrate
that the current human situation is not sustainable. The seven billion-strong global
human throng is exerting such pressure on our existing societal and environmental
systems as to suggest a re-evaluation of existing approaches to the way in which land
and resources are managed and to the very structures that allow these problems to
escalate. A whole-of-system approach would see a realignment of priorities whereby
the economy is viewed as a subsystem of society and the environment provides the
backdrop to all societal systems. In order to achieve a sustainable socioenvironmental balance, society’s resources will increasingly need to be produced and accounted for, much closer to where they are to be used. New societal strategies need
to be developed in order to cope with the challenges ahead and a re-localised system
of resource usage is one potential systemic change that may facilitate more
sustainable future lifestyles. Carrying capacity assessment provides one important
tool for estimating the ability of landscapes to support the demands of local
populations. Carrying capacity assessment offers a way to assess our resource needs
and also determine how best to meet these needs in the future. This process
establishes direct causal relationships between a specific landscape, timeframe and
people, and inherently links these aspects to systems of land usage and social
function.

A key aim of this research is to highlight how society’s understanding of
constraints to the productive capacity of its resource base is vital to its long-term
survival. This was achieved through the development of an online model, the
Carrying Capacity Dashboard, which links a population to the potential biophysical
capacity of its environment. By accessing and reconfiguring existing data, this
research has developed a flexible, robust and easily-accessible carrying capacity
assessment tool. It offers user choices relating to climate, diet, land-use, agricultural 
techniques, energy consumption and nature conservation, and also provides dynamic
responses to online users. This educative feature is a valuable innovation to carrying
capacity modelling which can assist in future societal decision-making processes
relating to consumption patterns, land-use planning, population control and systems
design.

Analysis developed from the Dashboard tests the effects of various resource
consumption patterns on carrying capacity and highlights the degree to which various
regions are over or under capacity. Three scales of analysis were employed –
national, state and regional; and it was found that the most significant determinant of
carrying capacity is the proportion of cropping land within any one state or region.
Findings also reveal that Australia’s current short-term carrying capacity is estimated
to be over 40 million. However, if calculated on a regional basis, the nation’s
carrying capacity is reduced by almost half, suggesting that national resource
utilisation would currently be more efficient than at the regional scale, even though
future resource constraints may necessitate greater regional self-sufficiency. Longterm projections were also tested and carrying capacities both at a large and small scale were found to be much smaller in a future fossil-fuel depleted context.
Ultimately, this research indicates that an entire systemic change is required to place
society back on the path towards sustainability. Such changes entail a future
decentralisation of the population, agricultural and recycling practices instituted at
local or regional scales and a rapid reduction in the reliance on non-renewable
resources."


=Discussion=

The historical section seems of particular interest:

* 4.2 Historic carrying capacity assessment and maintenance ...................................64
* 4.2.1 Aboriginal Australia....................................................................................65
* 4.2.2 The Maring Tsembaga people of Papua New Guinea ................................66
* 4.2.3 Tokugawan Japan........




[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Ecology]]