=Text=

'''Carroll  Quigley's  Civilizational  Theory:  Abridgement and Critique'''

''(This text needs To be cleaned up and processed )''

David Wilkinson:

Quigley's civilizational idea, like  Wallerstein's  world-systems concepts, grow  from a consideration  of what ought  to be the basic unit of social analysis and a derivative social taxonomy. 

Of particular  note are: 

* Quigley's unique general  theory  of the "instrument of expansion"; 
* his account  of the rhythm of expansion  and crisis in the evolution  of civilizations,  and  of 
* the persistently powerful distinction of core,  periphery,  and semipcriphery; and his views on 
* the role of universal empire  and of socialism  in civilizational theory. 

'''Units  of social analysis''':  societies and civilizations. 

A society is a group whose members have more relationships  with  one another than they  do with  outsiders. As a result,  a society  forms an integrative unity and is comprehensible  (Quigley, 196 1, 28): what goes on within it can be grasped  without reference to things  outside it).  

There arc two different kinds of societies: 

(a) parasitic, wealth-decreasing (hunting, fishing  or  gleaning)  societies  and 

(b) producing  societies  (agricultural, pastoral,  etc.), which  seek to increase  the amount  of wealth  in the world. 

Among  producing  societies,  there  have been  simple producing  societies like the Zuni (with  agriculture),  or the Ma-.ai (with pa-.toral herds), and "civilizations," superficially distinguishable  by having writing and city life. As for the relative  numbers of each, we might  say that there  have  been hundreds  of thousands of parasitic societies, at least thousands of simple producing societies,  but not  more  than two  dozen civilizations. Of the two dozen civilizations, all of which existed during the last ten thousand years,  seven have been alive in recent years,  while the rest,  amounting  to approximately seventeen in number,  lived and died  long ago. 

Sixteen  civilizations arc clearly enough  demarked to be uncontroversial.  They  appear, reach  a peak of achievement culminating in a great empire, and arc destroyed  in due course  by external invaders. An inventory of civilizations. Quigley supplies a table which gives the name, approximate dates, the name of the culminating  empire  and the outside intruders w ho terminated  its existence for the  sixteen civilizations mentioned : 


'''NAME    DATES    EMPIRE    INVADERS''' 

Mesopotamian 6 000 - 300   B .c . Persian Greeks 

Egyptian 5500 - 300 B.C. Egyptian Greeks 

Indic 3500 -1500   B.C. Harappa Aryans 

Cretan 3000 -llOO B . C. Minoan Dorians 

Sinic 2000   B.C. -A.D. 400 Han Huns 

Hittite 1900 -1000 B. C . Hittite Phrygians 

Canaanite 2200 -100 B. C . Punic Romans 

Classical llOO B.C.  -A . D . 500 Roman Germans 

Mesoamerican 1000 B. C.  -A . D. 1 550 Aztec Europeans 

Andean 1500   B. C.  -A . D.16 00 Inca Europeans 

Hindu 1500   B.C .  -A .D. 1900 Mogul Europeans 

Islamic 600 -1940 Ottoman Europeans 

Chinese 400 -1930 Manchu Europeans 

Japanese 100   B.C .  -A.D. 1 950 (?) Tokugawa Europeans 

Orthodox 600 -Soviet ? Western 500 -? 

Civilizations come into existence, flourish  and grow for a while, reach  a peak of power  and prosperity, weaken  and decay and go out of existence, all by slow processes  covering d ecades or centuries. This  process  can be studied effectively by  periodizing  it, as scholars  like Vico, Danilevsky,  Flinders  Petric,  Spengler  and Toynbee have. Toynbee  has done best so  far (according  to Quigley),  but even Toynbee fails to provide  a process  and explanation  for the  stages of change. Quigley accordingly attempts  to supply process  and explanation.  

His  theory  of civilizational  change  depends intrinsically  on the notion  of an  "instrument." 


'''Instruments  and institutions.''' 

All  culture (avers Quigley)  arises  from humans' efforts to satisfy  their  needs,  and is therefore  purposive.  Humans  need security, power, wealth, companionship,  certainty  and understanding.  Social organizations  (consisting  mostly  of personal relationships)  come  into existence  to satisfy  such needs.  So long as they  fulfil their  purposes,  they  may  be called  "instruments."  But  every such  social instrument  tends to become  an  "institution."  This  means  that  it takes on  a life  and  purpose of its own, distinct  from  its cultural  purpose,  which  is therefore  achieved with decreasing effectiveness.  Every social instrument  becomes  an institution  because: every instrument divides  its labor  into  particular  duties,  and most  persons in the organization  become committed  to those  narrow  roles,  while  few or none  serve the total  purpose of the instrument;  persons  arc more than  their  roles,  prefer themselves  to their  duties,  and seek to turn the resources  of the instrument  to their  private  advantage;  persons trained  to certain  duties  find it  difficult  to change themselves  to allow  the instrument  to meet changing social  conditions, and become "vested interests"  who prevent adaptation (49 -50). 

"When instruments  become  institutions, as they  all  do, the organization  achieves its function or purpose  in society with  decreasing effectiveness, and discontent with  its performance  begins  to rise, especially  among  outsiders. These discontented suggest changes, which they  call reforms .... When these suggestions arc not accepted  or arc rejected  by the established  groups who control the criticized  organization,  conflicts  and controversies  begin, the discontented seeking  to change the organization, while  the vested interests seek to maintain  their accustomed methods  of operation."  (58-59) The strain between  the two groups Quigley  labels  the  "tension of development."  From this tension  "there may emerge any one (or combination) among three possible outcomes: reform,  circumvention or reaction. 1n the  first case, reform,  the  institution  is reorganized and its  methods of action changed so that it becomes, relatively speaking, more of an instrument and achieves its purpose with  sufficient facility  to reduce tension  to  a socially acceptable level. 1n the second case,  circumvention, the institution  is left with most of its privileges and vested interests intact, but its duties arc taken away and assigned to a n ew instrument within th e same society ... 1n the third possible outcome, reaction, the  vested interests  triumph  in the struggle,  and the people  of that  society arc doomed to ineffective achievement of their  needs on that level  for an indefinite  period. 

"When an institution  has been  reformed or circumvented, there  is once again  an instrument  on the level  in question,  and the purpose  of that level is achieved with  relative effectiveness. But,  once  again, as always happens,  the new  instrument becomes an institution,  effectiveness  decreases,  tension of development  rises and conflict  appears. If the outcome of this conflict is either reform or circumvention, effectiveness increases and tension  decreases. If the outcome is reaction,  ineffectiveness becomes chronic and tension  remains  high. "As a result of this  process of historical  development,  the development of each level appears  in history  as a pulsating  movement.  Periods  of economic prosperity  alternate with  periods  of economic stagnation;  periods of religious   or intellectual satisfaction alternate with periods of religious or intellectual frustration. Periods of political  order  or military  success  alternate with periods of political disorder or military disaster."  (59-60) 



==The [[Instrument of Expansion]]==

"The pattern  of change in civilizations  presented here consists  of seven  stages resulting from the fact that each  civilization has an instrument of expansion that  becomes  an institution. The civilization rises while this  organization is an instrument and declines a-; this organization becomes an institution." 

"By the term 'instrument of expansion' we mean that the society must be  organized  in such fashion that three  things  arc true: 

(1) the  society must be organized in such a way that  it has an incentive to invent  new ways of doing things;  

(2) it must  be organized in such a way that somewhere in the  society there is accumulation  of surplus--that is, some persons  in the society control more wealth  than  they wish  to consume  immediately ; and 

(3) it must be organized in such a way that the surplus which is being accumulated  is being used to pay for or to utilize the new inventions. 


All  three of these things  are essential  to  any civilization.  Taken  together,  we call them  an instrument of expansion. If a  producing  society has such an organization  (an  instrument  of expansion), we call it a civilization,  and it passes through the process we are about to describe. " (69-70) When  a society is organized  in such a way  that innovation is encouraged  and rewarded, that  society has powerful  incentives to invent, and it will have  what economists label "invention" (70).  When  some persons  or organizations in the society have more wealth passing through  their control than  they  wish  to use  immediately or in the "short run," there is accumulation of surplus,  or "saving" (71). When  surplus is to provide incentive to invent,  or to  utilize  new  inventions, there  is  "investment"  or "reinvestment." (71-72) Every civilization will  be found to have  an organization  that accumulates capital--creates, controls and disposes  of surplus. "In Mesopotamian Civilization it was a religious organization, the  Sumerian priesthood to which all members of the  society paid  tribute. 

In  Egyptian,  Andean  and, probably,  Minoan  civilizations  it was a political  organization,  a state  that created  surpluses  by  a process  of taxation  or tribute  collection. In Classical Civilization,  it was a kind  of social  organization,  slavery,  that  allowed  one class of  society, the  slave owners,  to claim  most  of the production  of another class in society,  the slaves.  In the early part  of Western  Civilization  it was a military  organization, feudalism,  that  allowed  a small  portion  of the  society, the  fighting  men or lords, to  collect economic  goods from the  majority of society,  the serfs; a kind of payment  for providing  political  protection  for these serfs. In the  later period  of Western Civilization the surplus-creating  instrument was an economic  organization (the price-profit  system, or capitalism,  if you wish)  that  permitted  entrepreneurs  who  organized  the factors of production  to obtain  from society  in return  for the  goods produced  by this  organization a surplus  ( called profit)  beyond  what these  factors  of production  had cost these entrepreneurs."  (73-74) There  can  be more than one  surplus-creating  organization  (e.g. private accumulation  no doubt existed during  and despite  the Sumerian  priesthood or the Inca or Russian socialist state)  in any society;  there always is; yet the variant types turn out to be incidental, small in scope, aimed  usually  at luxury  consumption  not  reinvestment,  hence not  instruments of expansion. (77) The crisis of expansion. "Like all instruments, an instrument of expansion in the course of time  becomes  an institution  and the rate of expansion slows down. This process is the same as the institutionalization of any instrument,  but appears specifically as a breakdown  of the three necessary  elements of expansion. The one that  usually  breaks down  is the third--application  of surplus  to new  ways of doing things. In modern terms we say that  the rate of investment decreases. If this decrease is not  made  up  by reform or circumvention,  the other two  elements  (invention  and accumulation of surplus) also begin to break down. This decrease in the rate  of investment occurs for many reasons, of which the chief one is that the social group controlling the  surplus ceases to apply it to new ways of doing  things  because they have a vested interest  in the old ways of doing  things. They have no  desire to change a society in which they  are the supreme group.  Moreover, by a natural  and unconscious  self-indulgence,  they  begin to apply the  surplus  they control  to nonproductive but ego-satisfying purposes such as ostentatious display,  competition  for social  honors or prestige,  construction of elaborate  residences, 
monuments, or other structures,  and other expenditures  which may distribute the surpluses  to consumption  but do not provide more effective methods of production. "When the instrument of expansion in a civilization  becomes an institution, tension incrca5cs. 1n this ca5c we call this  'tension of evolution.' The society a5 a whole ha5 become  adapted to expansion;  the ma5s of the population  expect  and desire  it. A society that ha5 an instrument of expansion exp ands for generations, even for centuries. People's minds become  adjusted  to expansion. If they arc not  'better off  each year than  they were the previous  year, or if they cannot  give their children more than  they themselves  started with,  they  become disappointed,  restless,  and perhaps bitter. At the same time  the society itself,  after generations  of expansion, is organized for expansion and undergoes acute stresses  if expansion slows up." (74-75) A crisis  will  occur  in any civilization  when  the rate of expansion dccrca5cs. "And such decrca5c is the chief result of the institutionalization  of the  instrument of expansion,  something that occurs in every civilization." (76) 


The "tension of evolution"  or crisis  of expansion may end in  

(l)  reform, 

(2) circumvention,  or 

(3) reaction. 


ln Western  Civilization, both circumvention  and reform have occurred. "As a result  Western Civilization ha5 had three periods  of expansion, the first about 970-1270, the second about 1420-1650, and the third about 1725-1929. The instrument of expansion in the first wa5 feudalism,  which  became  institutionalized into chivalry.  This wa5 circumvented  by a new  instrument of expansion that we might call commercial  capitalism.  When  this organization  became institution it transformed into mercantilism,  it wa5 reformed  into industrial capitalism, which became the instrument of expansion of the third age of expansion in the history of Western Civilization . By 1930 this  organization had become institutionalized into monopoly capitalism, and the society wa5, for the third  time, in a major era of crisis." 





==Expansion and  civilizational evolution== 

"The process  that we have described, which we shall call the institutionalization of an instrument of expansion, will help  us to understand why  civilizations  rise  and fall. By  a close example of this  process,  it becomes  possible to divide the history of any civilization into successive stages .... 

'''We shall  divide the process into  seven stages''',  since this permits us to relate  our divisions conveniently to the process of rise and fall. 


The seven stages we  shall name as follows": 

l. Mixture 

2. Gestation 

3. Expansion 

4. Age of Conflict 

5. Universal Empire 

6. Decay 

7. Invasion Origins:   mixture  at  peripheries.    

"Every civilization,  indeed every  society,  begins with  a mixture of two or more  cultures.  Such mixture of cultures is very common; in fact, it occurs at the  boundaries of all cultures  to some extent."  (78-79)  Very  rarely,  out of such mixture,  a new  producing  society with an instrument  of expansion  emerges  (79).  "Since cultural mixture  occurs on the  borders  of societies,  civilizations  rarely succeed  one another in the same geographic  area, but undergo a displacement in spaces civilizations have generally arisen on the periphery  of earlier civilizations. Canaanite,  Hittite,  and Minoan civilizations arose on the edges of Mesopotamian  Civilization. Classical  civilization was born on the shores of the Aegean  Sea, especially  the eastern shore, on what was the periphery of Minoan Civilization. Western Civilization  arose in Western Europe,  especially in France, which was a periphery of Classical Civilization.  And on other peripheries  of Classical Civilization  were  born Russian Civilization  and Islamic Civilization." (79-80) 


'''Gestation.''' 

"If the new society born  from such a mixture is a civilization, it has an instrument of expansion. This means that inventions begin  to be made, surplus begins to be accumulated,  and this  surplus begins to  be used  to utilize new inventions. Eventually, as a result of these  actions, expansion  will  begin. The interval before such  expansion becomes evident, but after the most obvious mixture  has ceased, may cover generations of time.  This  period  will  be called '''the  Stage of Gestation'''."  (80) 


'''Expansion: characteristics'''. 

"The ''Stage of Expansion'' is marked by four kinds of expansion: 

(a)  increased production of goods,  eventually  reflected in rising standards  of living; 

(b) increase  in population  of the society, generally  because of a declining  death rate; 

(c) an increase in the geographic extent  of the civilization, for this is a period of exploration  and colonization; and 

(d) and increase in knowledge .... This period of expansion is frequently a period  of democracy, of scientific  advance,  and of revolutionary political  change (as the various levels of society  become  adapted  to an expanding mode of life   from the more static mode of life prevalent  in  Stage 2 ). " (8 l ) 


'''Expansion: core and periphery.''' 

"As a result of the  geographic expansion of the  society, it comes to be  divided into two areas: the core area, which  the civilization  occupied at the end of Stage 2, and the peripheral area into which it expanded during  Stage 3. The core area of Mesopotamian  Civilization  was the lower valley of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; the peripheral  area was the highlands surrounding this valley and more remote areas like Iran, Syria, and  Anatolia. The core area of Minoan Civilization was the  island of Crete;  its peripheral  area  included  the Aegean  Islands and the Balkan coast. The  core  area of Classical Civilization was the shores of the Aegean Sea; its peripheral areas were the whole  Mediterranean seacoast and ultimately  Spain, North  Africa,  and  Gaul. The  core  area of Western  Civilization  covered northern  Italy, most  of France,  the Low  Countries,  England,  and extreme  western  Germany;  its peripheral areas included  the rest  of Europe  to Eastern Poland, North and  South America, and Australia. "When expansion begins  to slow up  in the core areas, as a result  of the  instrument of expansion  becoming  institutionalized,  and the core  area  becomes increasingly static  and legalistic, the peripheral areas continue  to expand  (by what  is essentially a pro cc ss of geographic  circumvention)  and  frequently  short-cut  many  of the  developments experienced  by the  core  area. As a  result,  by the  latter half of Stage 3, the peripheral areas arc tending  to become  wealthier  and more  powerful than  the core areas. Another way  of saying  this  is that  the core area tends  to pass from  Stage 3 to  Stage 4  earlier than  do the peripheral areas. In time  the  instrument  of expansion becomes an institution throughout the society,  investment  begins  to decrease, and  the rate of expansion begins to decline." (81-82) 



'''Age  of  Conflict''':  characteristics. "As soon as the rate of expansion in a civilization begins  to decline  noticeably,  it enters Stage 4,  the Age of Conflict. 

This  is probably the most complex, most  interesting,  and most critical  of all the  seven stages. 

It  is marked by four  chief characteristics: 

(a) it is a period  of declining  rate of expansion; 

(b) it is a period of growing tension  of evolution  and increasing class conflicts, especially in the core area;

(c) it is a period  of increasingly frequent  and increasingly  violent  imperialist wars;  and 

(d) it is a period  of growing irrationality, pessimism, superstitions, and otherworldliness. The declining rate  of expansion is caused by the institutionalization of the  instrument of expansion. The growing class conflicts  arise from the increasing tension of evolution, from the obvious  conflict  of interests  between a society  adapted to expansion  and the vested interests  controlling  the  uninvested surplus the institution of expansion  who fear social  change more  than anything else." (82) 

"'''The  Stage of Conflict''' (Stage  4) is a period  of imperialist  wars and of irrationality supported  for reasons that arc usually different in the  different social classes. The masses of the people  (who have no vested interest in the existing institution of expansion) engage in imperialist  wars because  it seems the only  way to  overcome the slowing down of  expansion.  Unable  to get ahead  by other means  (such  as economic  means),  they seek to get ahead by  political  action,  above all by taking  wealth  from  their political neighbors. At the same time  they turn  to irrationality  to compensate  for the growing insecurity of life, for the chronic  economic  depression,  for the growing  bitterness  and dangers of class struggles,  for the  growing  social disruption  and  insecurity  from  imperialist  wars. This  is generally  a period  of gambling,  use of narcotics or intoxicants, obsession  with  sex (frequently as perversion), increasing crime,  growing  numbers of neurotics  and psychotics,  growing  obsession with death  and with the  Hereafter." 

'''Age of Conflict:'''  

the  Ministries  of Love, Peace  and  Truth. "The vested  interests encourage  the growth of imperialist  wars  and irrationality  because both  serve to divert the discontent  of the mass away  from their  vested interests (the uninvested surplus). Accordingly,  some of the  defenders of vested interests  divert  a certain  part  of their surplus  to  create instruments of class oppression,  instruments of imperialist  wars  and instruments of irrationality.  Once  these  instruments  are created  and begin  to become institutions of class oppression,  of imperialist  wars,  and  of irrationality,  the chance o f the institution of expansion being  reformed  into  an instrument of expansion become  almost nil. These  three new  vested  interests  in combination with  the older vested institution of expansion are in a position  to prevent  all reform.  The last of these three, the old institution of expansion, now  begins to lose its privileges  and advantages to the three institutions  it has financed. Of these  three,  the institution of class oppression controls much of the political  power of the society; the institution of imperialist wars controls much of the military power of the society; and the institution of irrationality controls much of the intellectual life  of the society. These three (which  may be combined into only two  or one)  become dominant,  and the group  that formerly  controlled  the  institution of expansion  falls  back into  a secondary role,  its  surpluses largely absorbed by its own  creations. In this  way, in Mesopotamian  Civilization, the  Sumerian priesthood,  which had been the original instrument of expansion, fell into a secondary  role  behind the secular icings it had set up to command its armies in the imperialist wars  of its Age  of Conflict. In the  same way in Classical Civilization  the slave owning landlords who had been the original instrument of expansion were largely eclipsed by the  mercenary  army that had been created to carry on the imperialist wars of the Age  of Conflict but took on life and purposes of its own  and came to dominate Classical Civilization completely. So too  the Nazi Party, which had been  financed by some  of the  German monopoly capitalists  as an instrument of class oppression, of imperialist war, and of irrationality, took on purposes  of its own  and began to dominate the monopoly capitalists for its own ends."  (83-84)

=Source=

* Article: World-Economic Theories and Problems: Quigley vs. Wallerstein vs Central Civilization. David Wilkinson. Journal of World-Systems Research, 1996

URL = http://jwsr.pitt.edu/ojs/jwsr/article/view/63/75

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]