
=Example=

==San Francisco==

Sharon Ede:

"In 2010, the city of San Francisco amended its planning code to incentivize car sharing by
incorporating two new development approval requirements:

• Newly constructed buildings incorporating residential uses or existing buildings
being converted to residential use must provide a certain number of permanent carshare
parking spaces depending on expected numbers of residences.

• Specific nonresidential developments must also dedicate a percentage of their
parking spaces to “short-term, transient use by vehicles from certified carsharing
organizations” or similar programs.


Subsequently, and as reported by a 2014 SFGate article, the San Francisco Municipal
Transportation Agency (SFMTA) announced in 2014 that 900 of 281,000 on-street spaces
would be set aside for use by customers of car-sharing firms Zipcar, City CarShare (a local
nonprofit now merged with Getaround), and Getaround (a leader in peer-to-peer car
sharing). The policy ensures that spaces are located in all socioeconomic areas by
requiring that at least 30 percent of spaces are in the city’s periphery and by offering lower
prices for those spots.

The SFTMA’s January 2017 carsharing parking pilot evaluation report found that “placing
carshare spaces on-street increases shared vehicle access, convenience, and visibility.”

As a result of participating in car sharing, 17 percent of members who owned a car
reported selling or donating one. In addition, on-street car-share vehicles were used
dramatically more (six hours per day versus one) and by more people (19 versus two per
month) than private vehicles. Also, the data “showed that 80 percent of the on-street
carshare spaces were shared between more than 10 people monthly.”
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)


===Discussion===

Sharon Ede:

"These policy measures highlight important challenges and opportunities. For instance, city
support of car sharing through designated off-street parking must be communicated
carefully. Though only a small percentage of on-street spots were made available to carsharing
organizations – and they pay the city for spaces – a 2014 Streetsblog article noted
that the policy created a perception among some residents that public space was being
gifted to private companies. The public benefits of car sharing – and how it can be
supported by designating spaces – is an important communication challenge, especially in
cities where parking spaces are scarce. In addition, the off-street parking ordinance
permits only round-trip car-sharing organizations to use designated spaces, not one-way
car-sharing services like Car2Go, where vehicles can be left anywhere and not just at the
point of origin. Policymakers should consider supporting all modes of car sharing, including
one-way options."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)



=More Information=

* View the full policy here:
www.sfbos.org/ftp/uploadedfiles/bdsupvrs/ordinances10/o0286-10.pdf

* San Francisco’s car-sharing requirements and guidelines, including its car-share
organization certification process: http://sf-planning.org/car-share-requirements-andguidelines

* SFMTA’s 2017 car-sharing parking pilot evaluation report:
www.sfmta.com/sites/default/files/projects/2017/Carshare_eval_final.pdf

The case study excerpt is from the book:

* Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. Shareable, 2017

URL = http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf


[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Sharing Cities Book]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]