=Description=

David Hookes:

"As is well known Descartes assumed that there was a fundamental divide between
mind and matter, that is, between mental and physical processes. The material world
was thus conceived of as a machine with mechanical laws governing its behaviour,
namely, Newton’s Laws of motion of matter. The mind and its processes were
capable of understanding these laws through its own internal laws of reason. Nature
was itself also subject to mechanical laws so that all creatures in the living world were
complex machines. This paradigm remains central to the bourgeois understanding of
the relationship between individuals and society, and between humankind and nature
in general.


As Zohar and Marshall point out, using the word ‘Mechanism’ as short-hand, in
effect, for the Cartesian-Newtonian paradigm:
     
“Mechanism stresses an unbridgeable gulf between human beings and the physical world. Human consciousness has no role or place in Newton’s vast world
machine. As the French biologist Jacques Monod describes it, we live ‘like
gypsies...on the boundary of an alien world’. This sense of an alien physical
realm was extended, in association with Christian influence, to the wider world of
nature. Nature is perceived as wholly ‘other’ than ourselves, a force to be
conquered and used”

They go on to list the other characteristic features of the Cartesian-Newtonian world
of Mechanism:
   
“Mechanism stresses the absolute, the unchanging and the certain. Ambiguity is
an enemy. Newton’s absolute space-time coordinates are the framework for a
fixed, predictable and rigidly law-abiding universe. Mechanistic society stresses
the absolute centre with power radiating outwards. It stresses fixed role-playing and rigid bureaucratic organisation.
   
 
Mechanism stresses hierarchy. It structures existence according to ever
descending units of analysis. Molecules are more basic than neurones, atoms
more basic than molecules (..and so on). We structure power and authority in the
same ladder of ascending and descending authority.
    
Mechanism stresses isolated, separate and interchangeable parts. Everything in
Newton’s universe is ultimately reducible to so many individual atoms and the
forces acting between them. Atomism encourages a model of relationship based
on conflict and confrontation, on part against part. In our times Hobbes’s
mechanistic ‘war of each man against each man’ takes the form of the ultimate
conflict. ‘Most obviously’ says Princeton’s Richard Falk, ‘nuclear weapons as
instruments for struggle of part against part doom the whole....’
    
Atomism underlies the modern cult of the expert, the detached individual who is
very knowledgeable about isolated bits of information or experience but ignorant
of the whole of which these bits are a part. The parts are alienated from each
other and from the whole; and the whole is subject to fragmentation. The expert is
alienated from the situation or community in which s/he practises her/his
expertise.
    
The industrial revolution, and the mass production that followed in its wake,
extended this alienation to our understanding of human beings and the nature of
our labour. In the vast industrial machine ( or large corporate organisation) the
individual labourer becomes a’ factor of production’[ or ‘unit of resource’ to use
modern terminology-DH], an objectified unit in the standardised production
process. His/her personal and social relationships and anything we might define
as spiritual qualities are isolated from the wholly separate and rigidly
bureaucratised world of work. Mechanism’s employees are, as Marx pointed out,
alienated both from themselves as wider beings and from the products of their
own labour.

Of course the central contradiction in the Cartesian-Newtonian worldview is that it
cannot account for the origin and characteristics of human consciousness. Both
founders of this paradigm would have appealed to the metaphysical notion of a ‘God’
who was responsible for human feelings and consciousness, which would be seen as
part of God’s creation of the individual ‘soul’. Even today, when the concept of the
soul has long since been discarded as scientifically useless, the material basis of
consciousness is still a matter of keen debate.”
(http://pcwww.liv.ac.uk/~dhookes/Kingston1.pdf)

Source of the quotes: Zohar, Danah and Marshal, Ian (1994) The Quantum Society pp5-6, London,
Flamingo (HarperCollins).

MARKUS PETZ doubts this is so:

Hmnn I read the article and I disagree. Descartes - maybe he dispensed with an active God. but Newton certainly did not - in fact he wrote more on religion than pure science - "Human consciousness has no role or place in Newton’s vast world machine" but Newton's views allow for such a human consciousness. He certainly was not a reductionist to the level in the article.

WIKIPEDIA shows this in the quotes which follow:
"Newton claimed that in writing the Principia "I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity".[71] He saw evidence of design in the system of the world: "Such a wonderful uniformity in the planetary system must be allowed the effect of choice". But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of instabilities.[72] For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to move. He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion."[73] Newton's position was vigorously defended by his follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence."

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Science]]