
URL = http://casajasmina.arduino.cc/

=Description=

"“Casa Jasmina” is a two-year pilot project in the business space of domestic electronic networking, or, “the Internet of Things in the Home.” '''Our goal is to integrate traditional Italian skills in furniture and interior design with emergent skills in Italian open-source electronics'''.The project is a showplace inside the large industrial building already shared by Toolbox Co-Working, Fablab Torino and Officine Arduino.


Casa Jasmina showplace has three main functions:

* A real-world testbed for hacks, experiments and innovative IoT and digital fabrication projects.

* A curated space for public exposure of excellent artifacts and best practices.

* A guest-house for occasional visitors to Toolbox, Officine Arduino and
Fablab Torino.


Although it resembles an apartment home, Casa Jasmina is actually a combination of lab, gallery space and B&B, so it needs dynamic management. Casa Jasmina is not merely a kitchen, library, bedroom, and bathroom. It’s a public interface for a larger Internet-of-Things process of building things, acquiring installing things, removing things, repairing and maintaining things, storing things, recording and linking to things, and, last but very importantly, getting rid of things.

We are building Casa Jasmina in order to encourage industries that will create tomorrow’s living spaces.
Casa Jasmina is an incubator, and its purpose is industry-boosting in the Torino and Piemonte IoT space. The successors of the Casa Jasmina project will be real homes with real, innovative products inside."
(http://casajasmina.arduino.cc/about/)

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]