'''* Book: The Case for Degrowth. George Kallis, Susan Paulson, Giacomo D'Alisa et al. Polity Press, 2020''' 

URL = https://www.wiley.com/en-es/The+Case+for+Degrowth-p-9781509535620]

"a vision of wellbeing within planetary limits, and articulate the politics that can get us there, based on the defense and development of the commons".

=Description=

"The relentless pursuit of economic growth is the defining characteristic of contemporary societies. Yet it benefits few and demands monstrous social and ecological sacrifice. Is there a viable alternative? How can we halt the endless quest to grow global production and consumption and instead secure socio-ecological conditions that support lives worth living for all? 

In this compelling book, leading experts Giorgos Kallis, Susan Paulson, Giacomo D’Alisa and Federico Demaria make the case for degrowth - living well with less, by living differently, prioritizing wellbeing, equity and sustainability.  Drawing on emerging initiatives and enduring traditions around the world, they advance a radical degrowth vision and outline policies to shape work and care, income and investment that avoid exploitative and unsustainable practices. Degrowth, they argue, can be achieved through transformative strategies that allow societies to slow down by design, not disaster. 

Essential reading for all concerned citizens, policy-makers, and students, this book will be an important contribution to one of the thorniest and most pressing debates of our era."

[[Category:Degrowth]]
[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Degrowth]]
[[Category:Books]]