
=Directory=

Compiled by Kevin Flanagan:

Ale Fernandez - We worked a lot with Ale he is a great person to work
with and can help put you in contact with people in the CIC. In
particular I would recommend getting in touch with Jordi and Roger who
are involved in the exchange networks and alternative currencies and
visiting them in Tarragona is well worth the trip.
Phone - 00 34 615089975
ale@cooperativa.cat
http://cooperativa.cat/

It would be useful to speak with you about our experience with the CIC
before you go so lets chat soon.

Ivan Miró - is very involved with the Solidarity Economy Networks in
Catalunya we only met briefly but he would be good to meet with.
Phone - 00 34 696653223
https://twitter.com/ivan_sants/
http://www.xes.cat
https://canbatllo.wordpress.com/
https://twitter.com/CanBatllo

Susana Martin Belmonte - is connected with the new political party
Barcelona En Comun who in this weeks elections have brought Ada Calou an
anti eviction activist to become mayor of Barcelona.
Susana is also working on a complimentary currency for Catalunya with
the support of local and regional government. I only met with her
briefly but Michel had a more extended meeting.
Phone - 0034619245143
susana.martin.belmonte@gmail.com

https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/commons-conquer-barcelona-a-victory-for-david-over-goliath/2015/05/26

Mayo Fuster Morell - is an academic and activist who has been active in
social movements in Catalunya with a particular focus on the Commons. We
have worked with her on research projects and she is very engaged with
the development of an alternative political paradigm in the region.
mayo.fuster@eui.eu
http://www.onlinecreation.info
https://twitter.com/lilaroja

[[Category:Catalonia]]