'''An Index to Articles and Reports on the open/free, participatory/P2P, and Commons-related paradigms.'''


=Introduction=

This is the space to publish your articles about Peer to Peer developments. The section entitled Other Foundational Essays, is reserved for major essays who have set the terms of the debate in this field. Everything else can be published here in 'Articles'.

Main articles about P2P Theory are listed under "Main Topic", while topical article are listed in alphabetic order in enclyclopedic format. 

A good  source for related reports is the Open Co-op Project [http://open.coop/index.htm], which has a section called 'Background Documents', some of which have been indexed here.

Here is another collection of essays on open topics, mostly from activist backgrounds, at
http://www.networked-politics.info/index.php/NP_Maxim_Reader_Berlin_June_2007

=Key Peer to Peer Articles=

==From the P2P Foundation==


'''English-Language'''

[[The Political Economy of Peer Production]], CTheory, December 2005  [http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499 Orginal URL] 

Full bibliography: [[Michel Bauwens' English Language Bibliography]]


'''Dutch-Language'''

Selection of translated articles is available at [[Dutch Language#Artikels]]


'''French-Language, en francais'''

[http://p2pfoundation.net/index.php/1._Le_peer_to_peer:_nouvelle_formation_sociale Le peer to peer: nouvelle formation sociale, nouveau model civilisationnel]: Appeared in Revue du Mauss, issue 26, in a more edited version.)

More translated articles and interviews in French [http://p2pfoundation.net/Bibliographie_Francophone#Liens_r.C3.A9cents_sur_les_travaux_de_Michel_Bauwens here]



'''Greek-Language The P2P Manifesto'''

The “P2P manifesto: Creating the world we want within the confines of the world we want to transcend”, written by Vasilis Kostakis, is the first book in Greek that deals with the P2P theory. Published by Voreiodytikes Publications. Download link: http://www.openbook.gr/2012/12/Omotimomanifesto.html


'''Italian-Language Version of Peer to Peer and Human Evolution'''

P2P ed Evoluzione Umana. URL = http://www.p2pforum.it/forum/showthread.php?t=47658 , [[Intro]]



'''Portuguese-Language'''

Selection of articles is listed here: http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Portuguese


'''Thai-Language, phasaa Thai'''

Draft version of a translation by Jim Puntasen of Rasmi.org, [[Thai]]

URL = http://www.rasmi-trrm.org/index.php?lay=show&ac=article&Id=252522

==Other Sources==

On Economics:

#[[Circulation of the Common]]. Nick Dyer-Whiteford.
#[[Economy of Ideas]]. John Perry Barlow
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap3.pdf The economics of open source]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap14.pdf Open source as user innovation] – von Hippel
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap15.pdf Analysis of OS Business models]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap16.pdf Allocation of resources in OS mode]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chapm2.pdf Open source outside software] – Clay Shirky


On Society and Governance:

#[[From Intersubjectivity to Interbeing]]
#[[Remixability and Modularity]]. Lev Manovich.
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap18.pdf Open Code and Open Societies] - Lessig
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap19.pdf Legal aspects of free and open source software]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap20.pdf Nonprofit foundations and their role in community-firm software collaboration]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap24.pdf The open source paradigm shift] – O’reilly

==Other Languages==


'''Le capitalisme informationnel'''. Par Philippe Aigrain.

URL = http://temps-nouveaux.net/article.php3?id_article=149

Tres bonne introduction sur l'importance des biens communs informationnels, par l'auteur du livre clef, [[Cause Commune]]

=Articles and Reports Directory=
[[Category:P2P Multimedia Directory]]