This page lists first all Country ''Categories'' and then all Country ''Pages''.

This is one of the most important sections for navigating the wiki and so it is important that wiki contributors have a good understanding of how we categorise and organise country related pages. 

''Categories'' and ''Pages'' are different. So as not to confuse I will use ''pages'' in the general sense and ''Pages'' with a capital to distinguish from ''Categories''.

''Categories'' essentially act as directories listing all sub-categories and pages that contain country relevant tags for example [[:Category:Brazil|<nowiki>[[Category:Brazil]]</nowiki>]] will list all pages with the tag [[:Category:Brazil|<nowiki>[[Category:Brazil]]</nowiki>]] in the wiki text.

We categorise [[:Category:Brazil]] as a Country by adding the <nowiki>[[Category:Country]]</nowiki> to the [[:Category:Brazil]] page. This makes [[:Category:Brazil]] a ''Sub-Category'' of the <nowiki>[[Category:Country]]</nowiki>.

We also categorise countries by region by adding tags such as <nowiki>[[Category:South America]]</nowiki> to the [[:Category:Brazil]] page.

Category pages list both sub-categories and pages. We use country ''Pages'' for general information and discussion for example [[Brazil]]. The reason for this is that discussion on pages can be extended and would distract from directory listings if included in Category pages.

You can easily identify here that some categories are quite comprehensive and others in need of attention. As each sub-category shows the number of pages in which their tag is included.

Brazil‎ (193 P) for example has 193 Pages with the tag <nowiki>[[Category:Brazil]]</nowiki>.
 
Bosnia‎ (2 P) only has 2 pages with the tag [[:Category:Bosnia‎|<nowiki>[[Category:Bosnia‎]]</nowiki>]] and is in need of attention.

We encourage wiki users to contribute to those categories that need attention.

[[Category:Agents]]