Directory of [[Platform Cooperatives]].

See also the updated directory: [[Internet of Ownership]]


=Key Citations=

"How can we determine which projects are addressing future business models from the perspective of empowerment?


Does the project?
* centralize identity and reputation with the individual people and devices?
* give ownership/access of data to individuals?
* create an interoperable protocol for users to port their identity and reputation elsewhere?
* exist to connect trusted peers or help determine a fair rate or provide added value to the peers?


Asking these questions allows us to construct distinctly different economic models that enable collaborative production and cooperative consumption. It’s up to us to decide what we will fund, build, and support with our currencies."
(https://medium.com/@AshTayTweets/5-blockchain-iot-apps-for-collaborative-consumption-69115c34da46#.7j7w8owbd)

==Are platforms replacing corporations==

"What if the nature of the economic puzzles that corporations evolved to solve have shifted? Thanks to software, the internet and artificial intelligence, the expenses that Coase identified can now be reduced just as well with tools from outside the company as they can from within it. Finding freelance workers via online marketplaces can be less costly, less risky and quicker than recruiting full-time employees. Collaboration tools are opening up space for manager-free forms of work. And contracting costs are likely to fall markedly thanks to the advent of blockchain protocols – algorithms that replace trusted third parties, and instead automatically verify transactions using a huge digital ledger, spread across multiple computers. As a result of these innovations, a new way of working is emerging: a series of interactions that are open, skills-based and software-optimised. Where once we had the ‘corporation’, instead we are witnessing the ascendancy of the ‘platform’. The question is: should we see this as a promise, or a threat?"

- George Zarkadakis [https://aeon.co/essays/workers-of-the-world-unite-on-distributed-digital-platforms]

=Key Resources=


'''* Report: Designing positive platforms: a guide for a governance-based approach. By Ana Manzanedo and Alícia Trepat. Institute For The Future research on Positive Platforms, IFTF, May 2017'''

URL = http://www.iftf.org/fileadmin/user_upload/downloads/ppj/DesigningPositivePlatforms_for_IFTF.pdf

"A positive platform:

* a positive platform should offer its contributors the authority to make decisions about their working conditions and the right to organize themselves collectively.

* these professionals need benefits that go beyond basic financial compensation in exchange for the value they create."


==Key Articles==

* [[Guidelines for Developers of Platform Cooperatives]] ; see the article: Alternative policies for alternative Internets. By Melanie Dulong de Rosnay. Journal of Peer Production, Issue 9: Alternative Internets, 2016

* [https://medium.com/@AshTayTweets/5-blockchain-iot-apps-for-collaborative-consumption-69115c34da46#.7j7w8owbd 5 Blockchain IOT Apps for Platform Coops]. By Ashley Taylor.

* [[Law for the Platform Economy]]. By Julie E. Cohen. 51 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 133-2014 (2017) [https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/141869903.pdf]

==Key Books==

* [[Ours to Hack and to Own]]. Ed. by Trebor Scholz and Nathan Schneider, fall 2017


==Key Initiatives==

*  The [[Platform Cooperativism Consortium]] will "help to connect the practitioners in this eco system with each other and with organizations that can support their effort to change minds and bring real value and a fairer Internet to real people. For updated information in coming weeks stay tuned @platformcoop ."

* Second annual conference took place November 2016: [[Platform Cooperativism 2016]]

==Key Videos==

* strongly recommended by Trebor Scholz: [[Yochai Benkler on Advancing Towards an Open Social Economy]]

For more see our annotated video directory of the [[Platform Cooperativism 2016]] conference.

===Status Reports by Country===

* [[Darren Sharp on the Emerging Ecosystem of Platform Cooperativism in Australia]] * (Australia)
* [[Nick Green on the Policy Aspects of Platform Cooperativism in Australia]] (Australia)
* [[Jack Linchuan Qiu on Resisting and Reinventing the Gig Economy in Asia‎]] (Asia)
* [[Francesca Bria on Barcelona’s Strategy for Technological Sovereignty]] * (Barcelona)
* [[Mayo Fuster Morell on Barcelona as a Case Study on Urban Policy for Platform Cooperativism]] * (Barcelona)
* [[Thomas Dönnebrink on the Progress of Platform Cooperativism in Europe]] * (Europe)
* [[Wolfgang Kowalsky on How the European Union Is Failing To Regulate the So-Called Sharing Economy]] *
* [[Giovanni Rinaldi on the Development of Data-Based Platform Cooperatives in Italy and Globally]] * (Italy)
* [[Ulrich Genicke on the MIDATA Health Data Cooperatives in Germany]] * (MIDATA)

[[Category:Cooperatives]]