'''Books that relate to peer to peer; the open paradigm; and the Commons. Feel free to add your own reviews.'''

#Support the P2P Foundation by buying your books at our [http://astore.amazon.com/p2pfoundation-20 Bookstore]
#Check out these [[P2P Book Authors Talking about their Books]], i.e. a list of audio and video interviews with authors talking about their p2p-related work

See our recommended selections:

* [[Ten Best P2P Books of 2010]] ; [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-ten-best-p2p-books-of-2010/2011/01/04]

* [[P2P Book of the Year 2011]]

* [[P2P Book of the Year 2012]]

* [[P2P Book of the Year 2013]]

* [[P2P Book of the Year 2014]]


=The Top 20 Books on Peer to Peer=


==On [[Peer Production]] in general==

#The [[Wealth of Networks]]. Yochai Benkler.
#The [[Success of Open Source]]. Steve Weber.
#[[Democratizing Innovation]]. Erik von Hippel.
#[[Wikinomics]]. Don Tapscott.
#[[From Production to Produsage]]. Axel Bruns. (see the article on [[Produsage]])
#[[Here Comes Everybody]]. Clay Shirky.
#[[Nowtopia]]: How Pirate Programmers, Outlaw Bicyclists, and Vacant-lot Gardeners are Inventing the Future Today. Chris Carlsson. AK Press, 2008 


Also:

#The [[Pirate's Dilemma]]. Matt Mason.
#[[Capitalism 3.0]]. Peter Barnes.
#[[Hacking Capitalism]]. Johan Soderbergh
#The [[Long Tail]]. Chris Anderson.
#The [[Wisdom of Crowds]]. James Surowiecki.


===On Free and Open Source Software production and philosophy specifically===

#The [[Success of Open Source]]. Steven Weber.
#The [[Cathedral and the Bazaar]]. Eric Raymond.
#[[Open Life]]. Henrik Ingo.
#[[Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software]]. An MIT reader, 2005
#[[Hacking Capitalism]]. Johan Soderbergh.
#[[Decoding Liberation]]

==On P2P Governance and Property==

#The [[Future of the Internet]] - and how to stop it. Jonathan Zittrain on protecting a free and [[Generative Internet]]
#The [[Success of Open Source]]. Steven Weber on the governance of open source communities


===On P2P Management and Leadership===

#The [[Myth of Leadership]]. Jeffrey Nielsen.
#The [[Hacker Ethic]]. Pekka Himanen.
#The [[Play Ethic]]. Pat Kane.
#[[Cyberchiefs]]. By Mathew O'Neill. Excellent monograph with 4 case studies.
#[[Three Ways of Getting Things Done]]: modes of corporate governance

===On Peer Property and the Commons===

#[[Code]]. Ed. by Rishab Ayer Ghosh.
#The [[Rule of Property]]. Karen Coulter.
#[[Common as Air]]. Lewis Hyde. 2010

==On Political and Social Change==


#The [[Hacker Manifesto]]. McKenzie Wark.
#Massimo De Angelis: The [[Beginning of History]]. Value Struggles and Global Capital. Pluto, 2007: about the [[Commons]] as a political movement inaugurating a new era of history 
#[[Cyber Marx]]. Nick Dyer-Whiteford.
#[[Gramsci is Dead]]. Richard Day.
#[[Code 2.0]]. Lawrence Lessig.
#[[Viral Spiral]]. David Bollier. An account of the emergence of the contemporary [[Commons]] movement


On power in networks ([[Protocollary Power]]):

#[[Protocol]] and The [[Exploit]]: How Control Exists after Decentralization. Alexander Galloway et al.
#David Grewal: [[Network Power]], how standards come about in non-free ways
#[[Theory of Power]]. By Jack Vail.


On open and collaborative government:

#[[Wiki Government]]. How Technology Can Make Government Better, Democracy Stronger, and Citizens More Powerful. Beth Noveck. Brookings Institution Press, 2009: on the emergence of [[Collaborative Democracy]],i.e. soliciting expertise from self-selected peers working together in groups in open networks


On the political implications of the hacker and free software movements:

#Johan Soderbergh: [[Hacking Capitalism]]
#[[Decoding Liberation]]
#Christopher Kely. [[Two Bits]], on the strategy of [[Recursive Publics]]
#[[Abstract Activism]]. Otto von Busch and Karl Palmås.


On digital activism and the networked alterglobalization movement:

#[[Networking Futures]]. Jeffrey Juris, 'the bible of the autonomous movements'
#[[Netroots Rising]]. How a citizen army of bloggers and online activists is changing American politics. by Lowell Feld and Nate Wilcox. 2008 
#[[Digital Activism Decoded]]. Ed. by Mary Joyce. Idebate Press, 2010 [http://meta-activism.org/book/]


Also:

#The [[Coming Dark Age]]: recommended!
#[[Momentum]]. Allison H. Fine
#[[Garden World]]. Doug Carmichael.

==On P2P Business Change==
 
* Tapscott Don et al. [[Wikinomics]]


'''On [[Social Business Design]]:'''

#Brafman, Ori and Rod A. Beckstrom, The [[Starfish and the Spider]]: The Unstoppable Power of Leaderless Organizations, Portfolio, 2006. 
#Chesbrough, Henry, [[Open Innovation]] — The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology, Harvard Business School Press, 2003. 
#Li, Charlene and Josh Bernoff, Groundswell: Winning in a World Transformed by Social Technologies, Harvard Business School Press, 2008. 
#Malone, Thomas W. et al, 1) Inventing the Organizations of the 21st Century, MIT Press, 2003; 2) Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology, Erlbaum, 2001. 
#Mulholland, Andy et al, 1) Mesh Collaboration, Evolved Technologist, 2008l 2) Mashup Corporations: The End of Business as Usual, Evolved Technologist, 2008.  
#Thompson, Ken. [[Bioteams]]: on [[Bioteaming]]


'''On the Sharing Economy:'''

* The [[Mesh]]: Why the Future of Business is Sharing Lisa Gansky. Portfolio /  Penguin Group, FALL 2010 
* What's Mine is Yours: The [[Rise of Collaborative Consumption]], by Rachel Botsman and Roo Rogers (Fall, HarperCollins), 2010


'''On the new economic rules:'''

#Hayes, Tom,  Jump Point: How Network Culture is Revolutionizing Business, McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
#Howe, Jeff, [[Crowdsourcing]]: Why the Power of the Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business, Crown Business, 2008. 
#Kelly, Kevin, New Rules for the New Economy, Penguin, 1999. 


See also:

#Fingar, Peter, and Ronald Aronica, [[Dot Cloud]]. Meghan-Kiffer Press, 2009.

==On P2P Culture==

#[[Smart Mobs]]. Howard Rheingold
#The [[Play Ethic]]. By Pat Kane.
#[[Hacker Ethic]]. Pekka Himanen.
#[[Knowing Knowledge]]. George Siemens.
#[[Open Culture and the Nature of Networks]]. Ed. by Felix Stalder.
#[[Slow Living]]. Wency Parkins and Geoffrey Craig.
#[[Understanding Knowledge as a Commons]]. Eleanor Ostrom et al.
#James Boyle. The [[Public Domain]]: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind. [http://www.thepublicdomain.org/]
#[[Sharing and the Creative Economy]]: Culture in the Internet Age. Philippe Aigrain, 2010.

==On P2P Economics==

#Christian Siefkes: [[From Exchange to Contributions]]: alternative proposal for an effort-sharing/task-auctioning based system of organizing the economy


===Books Recommended by Dave Pollard on Ecological and community-based economics:===

#Herman Daly on [[Steady-State Economics]]
#Roger Douthwaite's [[Short Circuit]], a blueprint for a community-based economy
#Thomas Princen explains why we need to evolve to a [[Logic of Sufficiency]]
#Peter Brown: The [[Commonwealth of Life]]


==On P2P Education==

* '''[[Education in the Creative Economy]]: Knowledge and Learning in the Age of Innovation.''' Edited by Daniel Araya & Michael A. Peters. Peter Lang, 2010. Collection of essays with a sizeable number of '''essays concentrating on p2p thematics'''.

#[[Knowing Knowledge]]. By George Siemens. An exploration of participative learning.
#[[Everything is Miscellaneous]]. By David Weinberger. How we are changing the way we organize knowledge.
#The Edu-factory Collective (eds) (2009) [[Toward a Global Autonomous University]]. Cognitive Labor, The Production of Knowledge, and Exodus from the Education Factory. New York: Autonomedia, 2009 [http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4johnsonmeyerhoff.pdf]
#[[Wikiworld]]: Political Economy of Digital Literacy, and the Road from Social to Socialist Media. Juha Suoranta - Tere Vadén. [http://wikiworld.wordpress.com/]
#The [[Peeragogy]] Handbook, Version 3. The handbook is a pattern catalog/language created to support peer learning activities. [https://peeragogy.org Web], [https://www.amazon.com/Peeragogy-Handbook-V-No-Longer-Missing-Production/dp/0996097511 print], [http://metameso.org/~joe/docs/peeragogy-3-0-ebook.pdf PDF], [https://www.mobileread.com/forums/showthread.php?t=341503 EPUB], [https://github.com/Peeragogy/peeragogy-handbook Git]. Licensed under [https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode CC0] (Public Domain Dedication).

[[Category:Education]]

==On P2P Spirituality==

#[[Participatory Spirituality - A Farewell to Authoritarian Religion]]. By [[John Heron]].
#[[Digital Dharma]]. Steven Vedro.
# A Reenchanted World: The [[Quest For A New Kinship With Nature]] by James William Gibson. Metropolitan Books, 
#The [[Ascent of Humanity]] by [[Charles Eisenstein]].
#The [[Participatory Mind]] by Henryk Skolimowski

==On P2P Technology==

# The [[Internet of People for a Post-Oil World]]. By Christian Nold and Rob van Kranenburg. Situated Technologies Pamphlets 8: Spring 2011 [http://www.situatedtechnologies.net/?q=node%2F108]
# [[Open-Source Lab: How to Build Your Own Hardware and Reduce Research Costs]] by Joshua Pearce

==On Human Cooperation==

#The Compassionate Instinct: The [[Science of Human Goodness]], coedited by Dacher Keltner, Jason Marsh, and Jeremy Adam Smith (January, WW Norton), 2009
#[[Why We Cooperate]], by Michael Tomasello (Boston Review Books), 2009
#The [[Age of Empathy]]: Nature's Lessons for a Kinder Society, by Frans de Waal (Harmony Books), 2009

=Other Recommended Books=


==Practical How To Books==

#[[Wireless Networking in the Developing World]]



==Online Books, including books-in-progress==


[[Gamer Theory]]

[[LETSaholic Twist]]

[[Participatory Spirituality - A Farewell to Authoritarian Religion]]. By John Heron.

[[People and Participation]]

[[We Are Smarter]]

[[We Think]]. Charles Leadbeater.

[[Winning by Sharing]]


==Older Classics that are available online==

The [[Natural Economic Order]]. By Silvio Gesell.

The [[New State]]. Mary Parker Follet.


=Internet Classics by Year=

Selected via Adam Thierer [http://techliberation.com/2009/12/29/the-digital-decades-definitive-reading-list-internet-info-tech-policy-books-of-the-2000s]:

'''2000'''

* George Gilder – Telecosm: How Infinite Bandwith Will Revolutionize Our World

'''2001'''

* Cass Sunstein - Republic.com
* Lawrence Lessig – The [[Future of Ideas]]: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World
* Siva Vaidhyanathan – [[Copyrights and Copywrongs]]: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How it Threatens Creativity
* Manuel Castells – The [[Internet Galaxy]]: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society
* Paulina Borsook – [[Cyberselfish]]: A Critical Romp Through the Terribly Libertarian Culture of High Tech

2002

* David Weinberger - [[Small Pieces Loosely Joined]]: A Unified Theory of the Web
* Howard Reingold – [[Smart Mobs]]: The Next Social Revolution
* Milton L. Mueller - [[Ruling the Root]]: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace
* Richard A. Spinello - [[Regulating Cyberspace]]: The Policies and Technologies of Control
* Stan Liebowitz – Re-Thinking the Network Economy: The True Forces that Drive the Digital Marketplace
   

'''2003'''

* Adam D. Thierer & Clyde Wayne Crews (eds.) - [[Who Rules the Net]]?: Internet Governance and Jurisdiction
* Shanthi Kalathil & Taylor C. Boas - Open Networks, Closed regimes: The Impact of the Internet on Authoritarian Rule
* William Landes and Richard Posner – The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law


'''2004'''

* Lawrence Lessig - [[Free Culture]]: The Nature and Future of Creativity
* Dan Gillmor – [[We the Media]]: Grassroots Journalism By the People, For the People
* William W. Fisher – [[Promises to Keep]]: Technology, Law, and the Future of Entertainment
* Joe Trippi – The [[Revolution Will Not Be Televised]]: Democracy, The Internet, and the Overthrow of Everything
* Siva Vaidhyanathan -  The [[Anarchist in the Library]]: How the Clash between Freedom and Control is Hacking the Real World and Crashing the System
* Steven Weber - The [[Success of Open Source]]
* Alexander R. Galloway - [[Protocol]]: How Control Exists after Decentralization
    

'''2005'''

* John Battelle – The Search: How Google and its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our Culture
* Edward Castronova - [[Synthetic Worlds]]: The Business and Culture of Online Games
  
  
'''2006'''

* Yochai Benkler - The [[Wealth of Networks]]: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom
* Chris Anderson – The [[Long Tail]]: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More
* Jack Goldsmith & Tim Wu - Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World
* Henry Jenkins - [[Convergence Culture]]: Where Old and New Media Collide
* Lawrence Lessig - [[Code]]: And Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0
* Cass Sunstein – Infotopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge
* Ori Brafman & Rod A. Beckstrom – The [[Starfish and the Spider]]: The Unstoppable Power of Leaderless Organizations


'''2007'''

* Daniel Solove - The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy on the Internet
* David Weinberger - [[Everything Is Miscellaneous]]: The Power of the New Digital Disorder
* Tarleton Gillespie - Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture
* Steve Talbott - Devices of the Soul: Battling for Our Selves in an Age of Machines
* Jeff Chester - Digital Destiny: New Media and the Future of Democracy
   

'''2008'''

* Jonathan Zittrain - The [[Future of the Internet]] – And How to Stop It
* John Palfrey & Urs Gasser - Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives
* Clay Shirky – [[Here Comes Everybody]]: The Power of Organizing without Organizations
* Nick Carr – The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google
* Jeanne Pia Mifsud Bonnici - Self-Regulation in Cyberspace
* James Bessen and Michael J. Meurer – Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators at Risk
* Michele Boldrin & David K. Levine – Against Intellectual Monopoly
* Don Tapscott & Anthony D. Williams – [[Wikinomics]]: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything 
* Lee Siegel – Against the Machine: Being Human in the Age of the Electronic Mob
* Lawrence Lessig – [[Remix]]: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy
* Matt Mason – The [[Pirate’s Dilemma]]: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism
* Don Tapscott — Grown Up Digital: How the Net Generation is Changing Your World
    

'''2009'''

* Chris Anderson – [[Free]]: The Future of a Radical Price
* Dawn C. Nunziato - Virtual Freedom: Net Neutrality and Free Speech in the Internet Age
* David Bollier - [[Viral Spiral]]: How the Commoners Built a Digital Republic of Their Own
* David Post – In Search of Jefferson’s Moose: Notes on the State of Cyberspace
* Lee A. Bygrave & Jon Bing (eds) – Internet Governance: Infrastructure and Institutions
* Manuel Castells – Communication Power
* Jeff Jarvis - What Would Google Do?
* James Boyle – The [[Public Domain]]: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind
* Scott Rosenberg - Say Everything: How Blogging Began, What It’s Becoming, and Why It Matters
* Erik Brynjolfsson & Adam Saunders – Wired for Innovation: How Information Technology is Reshaping the Economy
* Matthew Scott Hindman -The Myth of Digital Democracy

=Full Directory=


'''Support the P2P Foundation by buying your books at our [http://astore.amazon.com/p2pfoundation-20 Bookstore]'''

While by no means identical to the P2P Foundation approach, this booklist on [http://stumblingandmumbling.typepad.com/stumbling_and_mumbling/2006/10/a_left_libertar.html left-libertarianism] is of interest, as it refers to traditions aiming to marry liberty and equality.

[[Category:P2P Multimedia Directory]]