'''A compilation of academic and other research projects on the peer to peer aspects of the internet and society.'''

Danah Boyd recommends: Students, '''[http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2009/02/18/licensing_your.html License your dissertation under Creative Commons]!!'''


We support:

* [[Just One Giant Lab]] (JoGL) is the first research and innovation laboratory operating as a distributed, open and massive mobilisation platform for volunteer-based, IP-free task solving. [http://jogl.io/]

* The research initiative: [[Journal of Peer Production]] 

* [[Goteo]], commons-oriented [[Crowdfunding]] platform for P2P research, from [[Platoniq]]

* The P2P facilitation and research method 'par excellence' is: [[Co-operative Inquiry]]



* Don't forget to check out our own [[P2P Lab]], based in Ioannina, northern Greece and augmented with a global research network


=What's Happening in the P2P Research Space=

* check out the entries on [[Open Review]] and [[Open Peer Review]]


* [[Call for a Joint Research Group for Peer Production]]. By Jarkko Moilanen.


Some initiatives:

==[[Review Commons]]==

"'''Journal-independent portable review''' has the potential to accelerate and streamline the process of publishing. Authors can use their peer reviews to inform their journal selection and find the best fit for their work from the start. Because the reviews carry over to any affiliate journal, it will also reduce re-reviewing at multiple journals that currently imposes a large burden of duplicated activities across the scientific community (estimated at millions of hours of reviewer time each year)."

- Veronique Kiermer [https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/09/partnering-to-streamline-review/]


==[[R2R_Research_Process_Protocol_Project]] page at the P2P Foundation Wiki==

URL = http://p2pfoundation.net/The_R2R_Research_Process_Protocol_Project

Please bear in mind that it is indeed a “Request for Comments”, as we believe that the final form of this P2P research initiative should be itself the result of a P2P production process.


==Jarkko Moilanen’s Call for Action== 

Towards a Joint research group for Peer Production    

URL = http://surveys.peerproduction.net/2012/09/joint-research-group-for-peer-production/

As described by Jarkko, this call for action aims to:


1) Find all Peer-production researchers and collect them around the same 'table'.

2) Thus create more coherent approach to (including statistical)
Peer-production research.

3) Form basis for joint research and tools to ensure future research.

==James Carlson’s research project suggestion in relation to Space Federation==


"The [[School Factory]]'s Space Federation, a US-based network of p2p spaces, would appreciate direction on this. What methods for measuring and collecting data, even a survey for spaces to assess community capacity, equipment, footage, economics, could we support? We would happily share any results we can collect and our drafts of these concepts."

==P2P Lab==

The P2P Lab, a P2P Foundation and Ragnar Nurkse School spin-off, is a media lab interested in interdisciplinary research on free/open source technologies and practices.

Its mission is to:

* strive for integrative insights on the open technologies and the peer-to-peer practices.
* provide consultancy support to organisations and institutions regarding open technologies and relevant socio-economic trends.
* produce innovative, global techno-economic solutions to local problems.
* write, edit and publish articles, reports and books in the diverse range of topics we investigate.
* organise open events for reflection and action as well as to educate people about critical and creative tools for society-changing.

More: http://www.p2plab.gr/en/

==Joe Corneli’s [[Free Technology Guild]]==

URL = http://campus.ftacademy.org/wiki/index.php/Free_Technology_Guild


J Corneli: "Part of the relevance of our project is as a new way to secure funding for research and a new way of doing research (links from the wiki-research-l, for “Research into Wikimedia content and communities”, but what’s more interesting to us is a sort of “wiki way” of doing research).

In short, we have a lot to add but our growth is necessarily slow for now. Full disclosure: we too would like to be a “project incubator”, this time mainly for technical projects that can get some benefits from working together (example projects).”




==The "[[Change Academic Research Forever]]" project.==

URL = http://www.rockethub.com/projects/10270-change-academic-research-forever

Michael Lissack writes: "We are building a one click button to help researchers find one another based on what they read and search. Find an expert instantly. We want to enable researchers to find out "who should I talk to?" with merely a click of a mouse instead of a many hour slug through keywords and Google. We have the raw ingredients but we need to build the button. It will be based on the "what should I read?" button which already exists in the ISCE Library.

The ISCE Library currently is a collection of 1000+ full text on-line books with a unique search capability -- the user can upload a draft of their research project (say 2000 words) and the system will analyze the upload and then tell them what books in the library they should read for further insight, good quotes, additional material etc. The who else to talk to functionality is the missing link.
Please help us make this dream a reality. We have built the bulk of the necessary technology (demo). We need your help to both fund the initial community of researchers and to build the social network search technology.
We are crowdfunding through RocketHub (a service which operates much like Kickstarter)."
http://www.rockethub.com/projects/10270-change-academic-research-forever

To try a demo of the service please go to http://isce-library.net
login as user: demo1@isce.eduand password is "Library"


==The [[Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship]]==

Listen to: [[Jon Wilkins on Organizing Independent Scholars with the Ronin Institute]]


==[[Hack Your PhD]]==

Célya Gruson-Daniel:

"Hack your Phd"  launched in October 2012. Brings together a diverse community of doctoral researchers, designers and social entrepreneurs around the issues of Open Science and Open Knowledge.
The goal here is to set up workshops (or "hackatons") to experiment with different initiatives of open Science while educating the public on this issue. The central idea is to use the collective intelligence of the community coming from different horizons using the new tools from science and open education. HackYourPhd wants to show that new ways of doing reseasrch exist, and can only benefit research itself as well as the relationship between science and society."


==[[Alt-Academy]]==

#Alt-Academy takes a grass-roots, bottom-up, publish-then-filter approach to community-building and networked scholarly communication.

=Citations=


"In traditional research on people, the roles of researcher and subject are mutually exclusive. The researcher only contributes the thinking that goes into the project, and the subjects only contribute the action to be studied. In co-operative inquiry these exclusive roles are replaced by a co-operative relationship of bilateral initiative and control, so that all those involved work together as co-researchers and as co-subjects. They both design, manage and draw conclusions from the inquiry, and undergo the experience and action that is being explored. This is not research on people, but research with people."


- [[John Heron]] on [[Cooperative Inquiry]]

=Call for Papers=

* [[Value and Currency in Peer Production]]: is there a place for currency -- and therefore exchange and (economic) value commons-oriented peer production? [http://peerproduction.net/value-and-currency-in-peer-production/]


=Key Resources=

#the [http://opensource.mit.edu/online_papers.php?lim=1000 Free Open Source Research Community]collects research papers on [[FLOSS]], [[Free Software]], [[Open Source Software]]
#[http://value-networks.googlegroups.com/web/Network+Research+Centers.pdf Network Research Centers]] for [[Social Network Analysis]]
#[http://www.uia.org/encyclopedia/ UIA encyclopedia of world problems and human potential]
#[http://www.helsinki.fi/science/networkedlearning/eng/ Centre for Research on Networked Learning and Knowledge Building] 
#[[Digital Resistance]] research is monitored via the [http://irevolution.wordpress.com/ iRevolution] blog
#The [[Center For Internet Research]] TCFIR is a transdisciplinary research cohort. All P2P members are invited.


==Key Articles==

* Mieke Bal: [http://mediatheoryjournal.org/mieke-bal-lets-abolish-the-peer-review-system/ Let’s Abolish the Peer-Review System]: "In this short commentary, Mieke Bal sets out her ten objections to the peer-review system in academic publishing."

==Key Institutions / Movements==

Some favourite potential informal research hubs and networks, compiled by Dante Monson:

#[http://wiki.uniteddiversity.com/tiki-index.php United Diversity]
#The [http://thetransitioner.org/ Transitioner]
#The [http://www.the-hub.net/ Hub] 
#[http://attainable-utopias.org/tiki/tiki-index.php Attainable Utopias]


===Academic Internet Research Centers===

#The [[Alexander von Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society]] [http://www.hiig.de/en/]
#The Berkman Center for Internet & Society [http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/]
#The Centre for Internet and Society Bangalore [http://cis-india.org/]
#The MIT Center for Civic Media [http://civic.mit.edu/]
#The NEXA Center for Internet & Society at Politecnico di Torino [http://nexa.polito.it/]
#The Oxford Internet Institute [http://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/]
#The Center for Technology & Society at the Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) Law School [http://direitorio.fgv.br/cts/]
#The [[International Society of Blockchain Scholars]] [https://www.blockchain.eco/]

===P2P Action Research Groups===

# [[Hackitectura‎]] ; [[Counter Cartographies Collective]]
# [[Precarias a la Deriva]]
# [[Colectivo Situaciones‎]]


===Research on Commons-Based Infrastructuring===

* [[Infra-Demos]]: [http://www.infrademos.net/] "infra-demos is an anthropological project studying the crisis in the existing infrastructural models and the emergence of new participatory ones in Greece.




==Resources By Country==

====Italy====

* Marco Giustini recommends: If you're interested in researching about ancient commons' organizations, look for terms "comuna", "comunanza agraria" and "partecipanza agraria" in Italy. Really very interesting field of research! http://www.usicivici.unitn.it/

==Key Statistics==

*  0.08% of the world population has access to that 90% of research papers (via Eugenio Battaglia)

=Key Tools=

#The [http://digitalresearchtools.pbwiki.com/ Digital Research Tools] (DiRT) collects information about tools and resources that can help scholars (particularly in the humanities and social sciences) conduct research more efficiently or creatively: software to help you manage citations, author a multimedia work, or analyze texts, etc...

# '''Zotero''' [zoh-TAIR-oh] is a free, [[open source]] easy-to-use software tool to help you collect, organize, cite, and share your research sources. It works as an add on to the free open source [[Firefox]] web-browser. Main webpage: http://www.zotero.org/

=Endorsements=

# '''The P2P Foundation is part of [[3D Living Innovation]] consortium, a [[Living Lab]] research project created on the initiative of [http://www.lafabriquedufutur.eu/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=63&Itemid=37 La Fabrique du Futur]'''