'''living in a virtual world gives us the status of citizen there, and our rights have to be recognized and enforced.'''

- Virtual Citizens Association [http://www.virtualcitizenship.org/]


=Introduction=

These pages cover metaverses, 3D worlds and trends, and immersive gaming worlds, as well as [http://www.theplayethic.com Play Ethic developments]. See Pat Kane's summary of the [[Impact of Play on Business Organization]]

To put the trend toward P2P-based virtual worlds into the context of gaming developments, please read this [[introduction]] by Gwendal Simon.

Check out the typology of [[Virtual Worlds]]; Clay Shirky argues that [[Multi-players Games and Non-gaming Metaverses are Fundamentally Different]]

We support the goals of the [[Organization for Transformative Works]]

= Resources = 


==Key Articles==

#'''[[Games as P2P Utopia]]''': Alexander Galloway on the World of [http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=507 Warcraft and Utopia]
#[http://www.lingualgamers.com/thesis '''Game Modding and Education''']: excerpts of a thesis on using entertainment for eduction, that goes beyond the failed edutainment model.
#[http://theplayethic.typepad.com/play_journal/files/power_of_play_soundings_essay.pdf '''The Power of Play''']: essay by Pat Kane for Soundings magazine. In conversation with Ephemara in [http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/7-2/7-2kane-etal.pdf Dialoguing Play]
#[[Play Struggle]], excerpts of the book [[Hacking Capitalism]] by Johan Soderbergh.
#[http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/special11_9/taylor/index.html Considering Participatory Design and Governance in Player Culture] by T.L. Taylor: Players are central productive agents in game culture and more progressive models are needed for understanding and integrating their work in these spaces. ''Drawing on the long tradition of participatory design this piece explores some alternative frameworks for understanding the designer/player relationship''.
#The [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/special11_9/malaby/index.html Governance of Virtual Worlds]. Thomas M. Malaby (focuses on [[Second Life]] as case study)
#[http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/special11_9/castronova/index.html Inequality in Synthetic Worlds]. Edward Castronova.
#[http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/special11_9/bogost/index.html Video Games for Politics, Activism and Advocacy]. Ian Bogost.
#Klang, Mathias, "[[Avatar]]: From Deity to Corporate Property - A Philosophical '''Inquiry into Digital Property in Online Games'''
#[http://www.osbr.ca/ojs/index.php/osbr/article/view/736/702 Contrasting Proprietary and Free/Open Source Game Development], Alessandro Rossi & Marco Zamarian
#Moore, Christopher. 2005. "[http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00004332/01/V3N2-4-Moore.pdf Commonising The Enclosure]: Online Games And Reforming Intellectual Property Regimes." Australian Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society 3(2): examine the potential for computer game studies to contribute to an understanding of an alternative intellectual property regime known as the commons
#Charles Leadbeater: [http://www.charlesleadbeater.net/cms/xstandard/social_software.pdf Social Software for Social Change]
#[http://playability.de/pub/drafts/precarious.pdf Virtual Worlds and their Discontents]: precarious sovereignty, governmentality, and the ideology of play. Essay by Julian Kucklich to be published in: games & culture (special issue on virtual worlds, edited by thomas malaby and dan hunter).
#[[Authorization and Governance in Virtual Worlds]]. by Dan L. Burk. [http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2967/2527]
#[[Who Owns the Mods]]? by Yong Ming Kow and Bonnie Nardi. First Monday, Volume 15, Number 5 - 3 May 2010 [http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2971/2529]
#The rewards of non–commercial production: [[Distinctions and Status in the Anime Music Video Scene]]. by Mizuko Ito. First Monday, Volume 15, Number 5 - 3 May 2010 [http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2968/2528]


Also:

#[http://blog.game-play.org.uk/?q=CORRADO_MORGANA Short intro] but with lots of links to '''critical and independent gaming culture'''.
#[http://www.gwengordonplay.com/pdf/what_is_play.pdf What is Play?]. Toward a Universal Definition. By Gwen Gordon.
#[http://www.gwengordonplay.com/pdf/integral_play.pdf Integral Play]. Developmental levels in play. By Gwen Gordon.


Some important distinctions:

#[[Zerosum vs. Non-Zerosum Games]]‎
#[[Finite vs. Infinite Games‎]]
#[[Game Communities vs. Play Communities]]
#[[Pervasive Games]] [http://users.tkk.fi/mmontola/exploringtheedge.pdf]

==Key Blogs==

#The [[Play Ethic]] [http://theplayethic.typepad.com blog] of [http://theplayethic.typepad.com Pat Kane]. Watch or listen to [[Pat Kane on the Play Ethic]]
#'''Terra Nova''' http://terranova.blogs.com/terra_nova/ is "a blog about '''virtual worlds and their implications'''." (Academic) game research and virtual worlds in general.
#'''GameTunnel''' http://www.gametunnel.com/ is "the '''web's home for independent video games'''." Other '''indie game sites linked''' at the bottom of the main page.
#The [http://secondloop.wordpress.com/ Second Loop]: on the interaction between real-life and our avatars
#[http://www.gamepolitics.com/ Game Politics]: "where politics and video games collide"; monitors conflicts between platforms and user communities

==Key Books==

#Bernie DeKoven explains [[Coliberation]] strategies in his book The [[Well-Played Game]]
#Pat Kane. The [[Play Ethic]]
#'''Pat Kane reviews''' the books '''[[Synthetic Worlds]]''' and [[Second Lives]]
#'''McKenzie Wark''', whose [[Hacker Manifesto]] is a classic for our times, has published a new draft book open for discussion, on [[Gamer Theory]]
#'''Ed Halter''''s book, '''[http://www.fromsuntzutoxbox.com/ From Sun Tzu to Xbox]''' "a definitive history of the longstanding relationship between games and military culture, from wargaming's roots in ancient civilizations, to the Cold War development of computing for battle, to a recent crop of Pentagon-funded shoot-'em-ups, big-budget commercial titles and homemade hacks".
#Barbara Ehrenreich. '''[[Dancing in the Streets]]. A history of collective joy'''
#The [[Ecology of Games]], focuses on learning effects
#[[Fan Fiction and Fan Communities in the Age of the Internet]]
#Ralph Koster: [[Theory of Fun for Game Design]]
#Ian Bogost. [[Persuasive Games]]. MIT Press, 2007. See also the article: [[Video Games for Politics, Activism, and Advocacy]]
#Greg Lastowka. Virtual Justice: The [[New Laws of Online Worlds]].


===The Classics===

* [[Homo Ludens]]. A Study of the Play Element in Culture. Johan Huizinga.

==Key Conferences==

[http://www.gamesforchange.org/fest2009 Games for Change]: May 2009, dedicated to the exciting new movement of Digital Games for Social Change

==Key Experts==

#[http://www.patkane.com Pat Kane]
#[[McKenzie Wark]]
#[http://www.gwengordonplay.com/ Gwen Gordon]
#[http://playability.de/pub/ Julian R. Kücklich]: investigating game culture
##[http://www.avantgame.com/writings.htm Writings of Jane McGonigal]: she proposes the ARG gaming model as a paradigm for participative scientific research

==Key Graphics==

#[[Shared Social Worlds Diagram]]: Gary Hayes


==Key Podcasts (audio)==

#[http://www.theplayethic.com/ludocrats/ Ludocrats]: interviews on gaming and play and its social significance, by Pat Kane


==Key Reports==

#[[Government in 3D]]: How Public Leaders Can Draw on Virtual Worlds. David C. Wyld.

==Key Resources==

* Gaming resources are maintained by Stripey on [[Disintermedia]], for example:

#[[Free Code Graphics Toolkits and Libraries‎]]
#[[Free Code Game Engines]]
#[[Authoring Platforms‎‎]]
#[[Open Source Game Operating Systems]]
#[[Open Source Virtual Worlds]]
#[[Open Game Business Models‎]]
#[[Open Source Games‎]]


See also:

#[[Fan History]] records the history of [[Fan Fiction]] and other fan communities.
#'''[http://metaverseroadmap.org/index.html Metaverse Roadmap]): Pathways to the 3D Web.'''The MVR is an extensive 10-year technology forecast and 20-year visioning survey of virtual and 3D Web technologies, markets, and applications. Video interviews on the topic at http://www.elon.edu/e-web/predictions/metaverse/
#[http://libregamewiki.org/List_of_games List of open and free games] from the [[Libre Game Wiki]]
#A wiki on [[Gaming in Education]], by John Evans




'''Journals:'''

#The [http://jvwr.org/ojs/index.php/jvwr/index Journal of Virtual Worlds Research] [http://www.jvwresearch.org/]
#[http://www.jvweducation.org/ Journal of Virtual Worlds and Education]: an academic peer-reviewed journal that will present the best writing and thinking available about Virtual Worlds and their applications and implications for the field of education

==Key Videos==

#[[Second Skin]]: how lives have been changed by Massive Multiplayer Online Games.
#[[Cory Ondrejka on User Generated Content at Second Life]]
#[[Interacting Locally and Globally through Games]]
#[[Introduction to Second Life]]
#[[Jochi Ito on MMORPGs]]
#[[Joi Ito on Commons-based Licenses and Games]]
#[[McKenzie Wark on Gaming]]
#[[My Second Life]]

Also:

#[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFywW99Uvwc Video Games & Sex] - "This is an excellent presentation by Daniel Floyd regarding the place of sex and sexuality in video games as a media genre. The video covers a brief history of sex in gaming which has been primarily exploitative and superficial. Floyd then argues, if video games are to be seen as an emerging artistic medium, the treatment of sex in video games needs to be more sophisticated and mature. (Note: this video may not be suitable for minors.)" [http://educationaltechnology.ca/couros/1480]

==Key Tags==

Delicious Tag: [http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Gaming P2P Gaming] ; [http://del.icio.us/theplayethic Play Ethic]

=Various Links=


#Wikipedia has a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_open_source_games list of open source games]
#[http://liberatedgames.org/ Liberated Games] has a list of free, legal games for download

==Known Distributed Systems==

* [https://highfidelity.io/ High Fidelity], free/open source distributed virtual worlds with a marketplace/bounty system for developers
* [http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=259451&jmp=cit&dl=GUIDE&dl=ACM NPSNET (Naval Postgraduate Scholl of Moterey)]
* [http://www.merl.com/projects/spline/ Spline (Mistsubishi Elecronic Research Laboratory)]
* [http://www.crg.cs.nott.ac.uk/research/systems/MASSIVE-3/ Massive (University of Nottingham)]
* [http://csdl2.computer.org/persagen/DLAbsToc.jsp?resourcePath=/dl/proceedings/&toc=comp/proceedings/vr/2002/1492/00/1492toc.xml&DOI=10.1109/VR.2002.996501 Continuum (France Telecom R&D)]
* [http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=987232.987236 Score (INRIA)]
* [http://metaverse.sourceforge.net/ Open Source Metaverse Project]
* [http://www.opencroquet.org/ Croquet Project]
* [http://interreality.org/ Virtual Object System]
* [http://vreng.enst.fr/ VREng: Interactive and Distributed 3D Application over the Internet using Unicast or Multicast]

==Studies on Gamers==

* [http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus/archives/02_04/Yee_Book_Chapter.pdf The Psychology of MMORPGs]
* [http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus/archives/pdf/Yee_MMORPG_Presence_Paper.pdf The Demographics, Motivations and Derived Experiences of Users of Massively-Multiuser Online Graphical Environments]


==Some Open Source 3D Tools==

* [http://www.ogre3d.org/ Ogre, open source real time 3D rendering engine]
* [http://www.openscenegraph.org/ OpenSceneGraph, open source high peformance 3D graphics toolkit]
* [http://www.blender.org/ Blender, open source software for 3D modeling and rendering]
* [http://www.greenworks.de/ Xfrog, a procedural 3d organic modeling and animation software program]
* [http://www.web3d.org/x3d/overview.html X3D, Open Standards XML-enabled 3D file format]
* [http://www.panda3d.org/ Panda 3D, a free animation system in Python, created by Disney and the Carnegie Mellon University]

= P2P Gaming Concepts =
[[Category:P2P Domains]]