New section focuses on urban commons developments, including policy and political aspects.


=Introduction=

==[[Five Basic Design Principles for the Urban Commons]]==

Christian Iaione and Sheila Foster:

"We have distilled five key design principles for the urban commons:

* Principle 1: Collective governance refers to the presence of a multi-stakeholder governance scheme whereby the community emerges as an actor and partners up with at least three different urban actors

* Principle 2: Enabling State expresses the role of the State in facilitating the creation of urban commons and supporting collective action arrangements for the management and sustainability of the urban commons.

* Principle 3: Social and Economic Pooling refers to the presence of different forms of resource pooling and cooperation between five possible actors in the urban environment

* Principle 4: Experimentalism is the presence of an adaptive and iterative approach to designing the legal processes and institutions that govern urban commons.

* Principle 5: Tech Justice highlights access to technology, the presence of digital infrastructure, and open data protocols as an enabling driver of collaboration and the creation of urban commons."

(https://www.thenatureofcities.com/2017/08/20/ostrom-city-design-principles-urban-commons/)

=Material from the P2P Foundation=

* Report: Commons Economies in Action: [[Mutualizing Urban Provisioning Systems]], By Michel Bauwens and Rok Kranjc

URL = https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Mutualizing_Urban_Provisioning_Systems

In: P2P: TOWARDS A COMMONS ECONOMICS By Michel Bauwens, Jose Ramos and Rok Kranjc, P2P Foundation, 2020, Part 3.
Reformatted for the wiki with minor corrections by Simon Grant, January 2021.



=Key Resources=

* '''* Report: Reviving the commons? A scoping [[Review of Urban and Digital Commoning]]. By James Henderson and Oliver Escobar. Edingburgh Futures Institute. Data Civics Observatory, 2024''' [https://efi.ed.ac.uk/reviving-the-commons-a-scoping-review-of-urban-and-digital-commoning/]

* Article / Chapter: [[Commons Economies in Action]]. Mutualizing Urban Provisioning Systems. Michel Bauwens, Rok Kranjc, and Jose Ramos
[https://www.academia.edu/120039141/Commons_Economies_in_Action]. From the book, [[Sacred Civics]] 


"This chapter serves as an accessible introduction to some key concepts that are used to describe contemporary urban commons and commoning and as an overview of situated experiments in public-commons cooperation and governance, that have adapted these through a variety of protocols, institutional designs, and social, technical, and ecological innovations. Drawing on the experiences of the cities of Ghent, Barcelona, and others, as well as recent developments in peer-to-peer production and value accounting, it makes a case for urban contributive democracy, and finally, cosmolocal production, a planetary mutualization strategy."


==Key Articles==

* Two articles by Jonathan Metzger, on including the non-human in our vision of the urban commons: 1) [[Rethinking the Urban Commons Beyond the Human vs Non-Human Divide]]‎ ; 2) [[Enacting the Relational Complexities of More-Than-Human Urban Commoners‎‎]]

* The commonsbrochure of the city of Amsterdam: http://heeldeaarde.net/magazine/

==Key Books==

* [[Common Space]]. '''The City as Commons.''' STAVROS STAVRIDES. University of Chicagro / Zed Books, 2016 [http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/distributed/C/bo23360613.html]

* [[Urban Commons Handbook]]. Urban Commons Research Collective. DPR, 2022 [https://dpr-barcelona.com/urban-commons-handbook/]

* Mary Dellenbaugh-Losse. '''The [[Urban Commons Cookbook]]''': " A handbook for those interested in starting and growing community-led projects which highlights eight projects from Europe, South America, and the United Kingdom". [http://urbancommonscookbook.com/]

* Book: Urban Commons: Moving Beyond State and Market. Ed. by Mary Dellenbaugh, Markus Kip et al. Bauwelt Fundamente, 2015; see: [[Moving the Urban Commons Beyond State and Market]]

==Key People==

Commons-friendly mayors:

#Renato Accorinti, mayor of the Sicilian city of Messina, Italy
#[[Ada Colau]], the mayor of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
#[[Luigi de Magistris‎]]: the mayor of Naples, Italy
#[[Eric Piolle‎‎]]: the mayor of Grenoble, France
#[[Jorge Sharp]]:‎ the Mayor of Valparaíso (Chile)


Researchers:

* Nele Aernout (VUB)Differentiated Forms of Commoning in a Rental Cooperative, http://urbanstudies.brussels/people/nele-aernouts

* Line Algoed (VUB): Re-Commoning Land in Informal Settlements as Strategies Against Dispossessions, http://www.cosmopolis.be/people/line-algoed

* Alessandra Manganelli (VUB): Food Commoning in Practice. Investigating the Hybrid Governance of Local Food Networks in Brussels, http://www.cosmopolis.be/people/alessandra-manganelli

==Key Videos==

* [[Christian Iaone on the Urban Commons Charters in Italy]]

[[Category:Commons]]