A personal category by Michel Bauwens, so this section is exceptionally not limited to p2p/commons topics, but is part of the context of the creation of the P2P Foundation, by given access to the sources which contributed to P2P Theory. When I read books, I take notes in written diaries. I started doing this more or less in 2002 and read, way to slowly nowadays, about 10-12 books a year. I also take bibliographic notes when authors and books are mentioned. This is a record of these reading notes, starting with my first diary in 2003. These booknotes are NOT meant to be high-flying intellectual critiques. The notes were just notes to myself, as a reminder of what I have read. Early on, I would write my notes after reading them, so they are short overviews. As time went on, I would start writing all the things I learned in a particular book, in more detail. So these notes will start getting longer as I proceed with the transcriptions. I expect to input at least around 500 books, and will hopefully finish by the end of 2022. Notes may included long-ish essays and special issues of magazines and journals as well.

Here are 2 bibliographies that are of special interest to p2p/commons issues:

* [[Sources of P2P Theory]]

* [[What You Should Read To Understand the Commons]]


=Status=

* First notebook, 2002-early 2004: 65 notices; done April 10, 2021

* Second notebook: 2004, started May 21, 2021

* Third notebook, Dec 2004; done August 18, 2021

* Fourth notebook, spring 2005- 2006; done December 11, 2021

* Fifth notebook; started December 12, 2021

=Recommendations=

==Articles, Magazines, Special Issues==

* [[Antaios]]: this was a French-language neo-pagan magazine, oriented towards the political right, but interesting for its serious attention to non-monotheistic traditions and their contemporary value. Treats lots of specialized mythological themes.

* [[End of Meaning]]: we can't create meaning, we fall into it, but modernity has superseded the meaning modes of magic, myth and world religions, so how do we produce meaning after this ? This great essay is also a critique of the 'personalist' turn of Jung and his tradition.

* Multitudes magazine is a French-language left magazine that represents the thoughts of the school of [[Cognitive Capitalism]], interested in the thoughts of Deleuze, Guattari, Foucault and many others. I read the first 25 issues quite systematically. Individual notices on these special issues are listed below separately.

* [[Mauss Review 26 on Alternative Democracy and Alternative Economy]]

* [[Seven Basic Epistemological Perspectives]]: seven lenses to see the world in relatively coherent fashions

* [[Will God Survive the 21st Century]] ; [[Future of God]]: what happens to God and spirituality after the 'death of God'. An evolutionary interpretation of spiritualy, consciousness and the human capacity for Enlightenment, through two excellent issues of 'What Is Enlightenment?'.


===From Multitudes magazine===


#[[Multitudes 1 on Biopolitics]]
#[[Multitudes 2 on the New Political Economy]]
#[[Multitudes 3 on Europe and Empire]]
#[[Multitudes 4 on the New Spirit of Capitalism]]
#[[Multitudes 7 on the Impact of the Alterglobalisation Moment in Genua and New York's 9/11]]
#[[Multitudes 8 on the Universal Allowance]]
#[[Multitudes 9 on the Concept of the Multitude]]
#[[Multitudes 10 on Development]]
#[[Multitudes 11 on Networked Power and Permanent Warfare]]
#[[Multitudes 11 on Social Movements]]
#[[Multitudes 13 on the Empire and Japan]]
#[[Multitudes 14 on the US-Europe Rift]]
#[[Multitudes 15 on Andre Gorz and Cognitive Capitalism]]
#[[Multitudes 15 on the Role of the Corporation Under Cognitive Capitalism]]
#[[Multitudes 17 on the New Engagement-Based Work Culture]]

==Authors==

* [[Andre Gorz on the Immaterial]]

* [[Castoriadis on Value]]

* [[Collected Interviews of Michel Foucault]]

* [[Conversations with Anthony Giddens]]: Making Sense of Modernity.

* [[Dialogues with Cornelius Castoriadis]]

* [[Eric Hobsbawn on the Challenges of the 21st Century]]

* [[Laclau and Mouffe on the Radical Democratic Imaginary]] ; [[Chantal Mouffe on Deliberative Democracy and Agonistic Pluralism]]

* [[On Kierkegaard]]

* [[Philosophy of Simondon]]

* [[Reading Hardt and Negri]]

* [[Wallerstein on Liberalism and Democracy]]

==Books==


* [[Closing of the Western Mind]]

* [[Concise History of Byzantium]]

* [[Dynamics of the West]]

* [[Empire]] /  [[Debating Empire]]  /  [[Lineages of Empire]]

* [[From Dawn to Decadence]]

* [[Future of the Spirit]]

* [[Great Chain of Being]]

* [[Imaginary Constitution of Society]]

* [[Is Brotherhood Possible]] ?

* [[Money in an Unequal Society]]

* [[New Spirit of Capitalism]]

* The [[New State]]

* [[Peak Christianity of the 13th Century]]

* [[Philosophy of the Enligthenment]]

* [[Radical Enlightenment]]

* [[Sacred Science]]

* [[Shield of Achilles]]

* [[Society Must Be Defended]]

* [[Sources of the Self]]

* [[Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value]]

* [[Traditionalism and the Secret Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century]]

* [[Unitary Thought as the Next Development of Mankind]]

* [[Universal Allocation]]

* [[World of Yesterday]]

==P2P/Commons Topics==

* [[Cognitive Capitalism vs the Economy of Knowledge]]

* [[Free Software and the Death of Proprietary Culture]] ; [[Fight for Free Software]] ; [[Information as Common Good or as Property]]

* [[Gebser and Cyberspace]]

* [[Hacker Ethic]]

* [[Noopolitik and American Strategy]]

* [[Pearly Gates of Cyberspace]]

* [[Political Economy of the Commons]] ; [[Sharing Nicely]]

* [[Revisioning Transpersonal Theory]]. A '''participatory vision of human spirituality'''. See also: [[Sacred Science]]

* [[Structures of Social Life]]

* [[Techgnosis]]

* [[Technology, Modernity, and Democracy]]