"Cosmo-local production is the twinning of our emerging global design commons with the development of localized production processes which are both equitable and sustainable. Examples include recent developments such as FarmBot, PreciousPlastic and AbilityMate (now AbilityMade), and “older” examples such as L’Atelier Paysans and FarmHack." [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IfIQiJlF_D17F25_AsZOSifdIYJoia8csAacsIhSmrY/edit]


== Introduction ==

Cosmo-Local Production is a methodology for creating value and products and services that are inspired by the following basic rules: it marries the planetary globalization of knowledge, the 'smart' localization of production, and both local and planetary mutualization, i.e. marrying distributed making and global open innovation:

1) the subsidiarity of material production: i.e. localizing production where sensible, in order to bring production closer to the places of need, support the local economy, and substantially diminish the human footprint

2) global knowledge collaboration through open and global design communities, that bring innovation to bear on all participating distributed places of production

3) the choice for 'generative' models of entreprise in terms of property and governance mechanisms, to give all producers and stakeholder communities a voice


For an extensive framing but also many detailed case studies, see:

'''* The [[Cosmo-Local Reader]]. Ed. José Ramos, Sharon Ede, Michel Bauwens and Gien Wong. P2P Foundation, 2021.'''

URL = https://clreader.net/


==[[Sacha Pignot on the Three Levels of the Cosmo-Local Fractal Sovereignty Stack]]==


Sacha Pignot identifies three levels of [[Fractal Sovereignty]]:


===[[Hyper-Localism]] (micro level)===

"The Connected Foundation:


Hyper-localism in fractal sovereignty isn’t isolation—it’s creating resilient foundation layers that can participate meaningfully in larger networks. 


This includes:

- Household production: Food preservation, craft production, repair culture, energy generation

- Community workshops: Shared tools, skill exchanges, local fabrication capabilities

- Neighborhood resource sharing: Tool libraries, community kitchens, local currency systems

- Immediate ecosystem management: Watershed stewardship, local food systems, micro-grids


The key innovation: these systems maintain full autonomy over production processes and resource allocation while accessing global knowledge networks when beneficial. A community workshop using locally sourced wood can access global design innovations while maintaining control over working conditions.


===[[Bioregionalism]] (meso level)===

The Ecological Integration level:

"Bioregionalism organizes human activity along ecological boundaries rather than political ones. Watersheds, climate zones, ecosystems, and natural resource patterns define the scale of coordination, creating economic systems that work with ecological processes rather than against them.

In fractal sovereignty, bioregions function as meso-scale networks connecting multiple hyper-local communities while respecting ecological carrying capacity. Different communities might specialize—agriculture, manufacturing, knowledge work—while sharing resources and coordinating to maintain ecological balance.

Bioregional coordination operates through network dynamics rather than hierarchical control. Communities share information about resource availability, ecological conditions, production capacity, and needs through distributed networks while maintaining local autonomy."


===[[Cosmo-Localism]] (macro level)===

The Global Knowledge, Local Control level:

Unlike linear globalism creating disconnected extremities, cosmo-localism follows an ouroboros pattern—a cycle where global knowledge flows back to enhance local capacity, which in turn contributes to global knowledge.

This creates a regenerative loop rather than extractive pipeline: local innovations get documented and shared globally, global knowledge gets adapted to local conditions, and the cycle continues with each iteration building capacity at all scales."

(https://soushi888.substack.com/p/beyond-local-vs-global)



==Discussion==

==Benjamin Life on Cosmolocalism as <the> Bioregional Network Pattern==

'The bioregional movement embodies what Michel Bauwens calls "cosmolocalism" — a development pattern where knowledge flows globally while production stays local. This framework resolves a central tension in collapse-aware organizing: how to benefit from collective learning while maintaining place-based autonomy. Rather than either isolationist localism or rootless globalism, cosmolocalism enables planetary coordination without sacrificing bioregional specificity.

In practice, this means open-source designs for rocket stoves spread globally while each bioregion builds them from local materials. Governance innovations from Rojava inform watershed councils in Cascadia, adapted to different cultural contexts. The BioFi Project's economic protocols provide templates that bioregions modify for their specific needs. Knowledge becomes a commons flowing freely across boundaries, while implementation remains grounded in place.

This pattern enables what we might call "viral regeneration"—successful practices spreading through adaptation rather than replication. Unlike franchise models that impose standardization, bioregional networks share patterns that evolve through local application. Each implementation teaches something new, feeding back into the global knowledge commons. The result is not homogenization but differentiation—thousands of experiments in regenerative living, each suited to its specific context while contributing to collective understanding.

Digital infrastructure makes this cosmolocal coordination possible at unprecedented scale. Platforms like GitHub host governance templates anyone can fork and modify. Video calls connect bioregional practitioners across continents for knowledge exchange. Blockchain protocols enable resource sharing between bioregions without central intermediaries. Yet these tools serve bioregional ends rather than replacing place-based organization. Technology enables coordination but cannot substitute for the slow work of building relationships with land and neighbors.

The cosmolocal framework also reshapes economic relationships between bioregions. Rather than competing for mobile capital or racing to the bottom on environmental standards, bioregions can develop complementary specializations. Coastal regions might excel at kelp farming and ocean restoration while mountainous areas focus on forest management and watershed protection. Trade between bioregions could follow fair trade principles, ensuring value flows support regeneration rather than extraction."

(https://omniharmonic.substack.com/p/collapse-parallel-societies-and-the)


== Quotes ==

"The present political economy is geared entirely toward "value-added" operations within a worldview of exponential growth. As you identify policies or activities that are geared toward *value-restored* or *value-replenished* operations within in a framework of logistic growth (e.g., carrying capacity), I think we may find the leverage points we are seeking."<br />

— James Quilligan [https://www.facebook.com/groups/p2p.open/permalink/3644688288908657/?]


"A cosmopolitan localist approach toward bioregionalism would catalyse a globally connected ‘coming home to place’ (Wahl 2020a). In the words of transition designer and social ecologist Gideon Kossoff, '''“we do not have to choose between our immediate, geographically proximate community and the larger community of humanity. Indeed, we cannot afford to make this choice: the fate of humanity and planetary ecosystems are inextricably intertwined at the local and global level”''' (2019, p. 52)."

- Kiran Kashyap [https://kirankashyap.medium.com/what-does-it-mean-for-societies-to-be-bioregionally-self-sufficient-5aad49f88b3e]


== Directory of Projects ==

From an upcoming book on Cosmo-Local Production, edited by Jose Ramos et al.:

{| class="wikitable"
! Dimensions 
! Strengths and Potentials  
! Key challenges / obstacles / contradictions
! Missing or needed
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | IIDEAS pools and collaboration platforms
| Underpins the entire cosmolocal process, and potentiates leapfrog technologies, distributed sustainability applications and livelihood revolution.
| Value bleed - private / corporate use of IIDEAS without reinvesting in a commons / cosmolocal economy.
| Protection from appropriation / commodification of IP.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Local manufacture / production, prototyping and documentation
| Can translate IIDEAS to application / use for communities and people.  
|
Starting community enterprises takes knowledge and effort.

How can local enterprises sustain themselves within an open source / commons model?  
| Best practice models for CL enterprise and governance; approaches to scale successful community initiatives.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Open Design Demonstration projects
| Communicates prefigurative IIDEAS powerfully, challenges core assumptions.
| Relocalizing an open design most often takes a team.
| Connecting people to translate IIDEAS to local applications.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Two sided design-to-manufacture platform
| Simple to understand and operate model for distributed design and production.
| Uses the platform capitalist model (platform is privately owned).
| Using co-ops and commons type enterprises to operate two sided platforms (e.g. platform cooperativism).
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Modular production for delivery to context
| Ability to deliver highly standardised modules that can compete with traditionally manufactured products.
| Module IP may be private. Module production is hub and spoke - still need to be transported across the world.
| Need models to have distributed production of modules that can scale distribution and circulate value to distributed module production designers.
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Contributory accounting systems
| Ability to practice distributed /  collaborative design that is equitable.
|
Hard to find “off the shelf” product / platform.

Enterprise model is opaque - hard to understand.
| Easy to use demos that show how it is done to produce basic items.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Ecosystem generation
| Connecting a number of enterprises / institutions / communities to create dynamic value exchanges .
| Chicken and egg challenge, hard to establish ecosystem when all elements are nascent.  
|
Use anchor institutions to establish ecosystems.

Create system rules to circulate value back into an ecosystem.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Governance and protection of commons
| Critical in protecting and maintaining local and global commons that underpin cosmolocal potentials.
| In direct contradiction  with capitalist ownership model, or state ownership.  
| Network of institutes and centres with expertise and resources in coordination to champion a cosmolocal world.
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Research and evaluation
| Understand the deeper issues / dynamics in cosmolocalism.
| It is very new, an emerging issue, even the definitions are nascent.  
| Broader convergence of research to develop co-learning. A series of congresses or conferences.  
|- style="vertical-align:top"
| style="font-style:italic" | Regulatory / Policy advocacy and innovation
| Pathway to create all of system frameworks that support the growth and development of cosmolocalism.
| Hegemony of the neo-liberal discourse even while neo-liberal  policies flounder.
|
Connecting cosmolocal strategies with the broader global justice movement, green new deal, climate movement, transition discourses.

Need emerging relationships with partner states willing to experiment with new policy. frameworks.  
|}

Table 3 - preliminary analysis of cosmolocal challenges and needs  