
* [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about the Commons]]

The [[Commons]] is a central concept relating to very many other topics in this Wiki.

[[Michel Bauwens]] states the P2P position thus: "A commons is 
# shared resources (i.e. there is something objective about it) 
# maintained or co-produced by a community or group of stakeholders (hence: a subjective activity and choice, 'there is no commons without commoning') and 
# it is managed according to the rules and values of that community ('autonormativity'), which makes it also an alternative governance and property regime."
(from the [[Commons]] page on this Wiki)

The [[Wikipedia:Commons|Wikipedia entry]] gives the origin of the term thus: "the Roman legal category ''res communis'', applied to things common to all to be used and enjoyed by everyone, as opposed to ''res publica'', applied to public property managed by the government."

==Key Ideas==

* "The [[Tragedy of the Commons]]" is a famous paper by Garrett Hardin, which was sometimes taken as dismissing the feasibility of commons in general. But as the author later admitted, (e.g. [https://www.garretthardinsociety.org/articles/art_extension_tragedy_commons.html]) the "tragedy" properly relates to "unmanaged" commons, not to all commons.
* [[Elinor Ostrom]] is widely cited and quoted as a key author in the field. She researched and documented several examples of commons that are effectively managed.
* See our page on [[Enclosure]] to understand the meaning and significance of enclosure in opposing the Commons. 
* [[Commons-Based Peer Production]] points to a strategy for economic activity based on the commons. The P2P Foundation specifically aims to create a commons-centric society. See the article: [[Michel Bauwens' Blueprint for P2P Society]]

==Useful Learning Resources==
===Introductory===
* Our page on [[Commons]]
* [[Quotes on the Commons]]

===Deeper Study===
* [https://www.tni.org/files/publication-downloads/commons_transition_and_p2p_primer_v9.pdf Commons Transition and P2P: A Primer] (2017) by Michel Bauwens et al. starts with some helpful basic explanation, and continues to around 50 pages of explaining related concepts including the politics of the commons, and [[Commons Transition]].
* [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about the Commons]] compiled by [[Michel Bauwens]] ''(ex category page)''

==Related Categories==
''for subcategories, see below''
* [[:Category: Collaborative Economy]] &ndash; in our view, a collaborative economy is based around the commons
* And [[:Category: Peerproduction]] is a key concept in the collaborative economy

[[Category:P2P Paradigms]]