For general information see [[China]].


=From the P2P Foundation, Uncommons and 706 M-Lab=


===P2P: The Commons Manifesto is now available in the Chinese language!===

一本社会转型指南:《P2P共有资源宣言》 | 中译新书发布！
----------------------
706 M-Lab 翻译小组与 Uncommons 合作完成的中译本《P2P共有资源宣言》（Peer to Peer The Commons Manifesto）正式上线！

本书是 Michel Bauwens  @mbauwens，Vasilis Kostakis 与 Alex Pazaitis @AlexPazaitis

 三位作者于2019年发表的小册子，广泛考察了构成数字时代的 “共有资源”(Commons) 的种种 P2P 技术——区块链、互联网、数字制造技术……从中提炼出一种“对等者生产”模式，探讨运用这种技术改变组织结构和价值创造，我们将如何进入一个以共有资源为基础的社会形态当中。

下载地址👇

https://zenodo.org/records/15464085


=Contextual Quote=

==The Chinese Model of [[Industrial Commoning]] creates a global development model==

"China today exports more than products. It exports the capacity to industrialise.

Across Asia, Africa, and Latin America, countries are building power grids, transit systems, and manufacturing lines with Chinese equipment because it works and it is affordable. Panels, batteries, turbines, robotics, and vehicles arrive at a fraction of the price once charged by Western suppliers. These are not just goods; they are the means to produce modernity.

The logic is straightforward: if you can industrialise cheaply, you can also educate cheaply. Once a country gains access to low-cost capital goods, it gains the same leverage China used to upgrade its own population—turning factories into training grounds and logistics networks into learning systems. Cheap capital goods are the equivalent of cheap intelligence. They allow nations to lift the cognitive and technical floor of their citizens without waiting for a generational overhaul of schools, universities, or bureaucracies."

- Chor Pharn [https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-stack-the-new-sovereignty]


== The New Rome from the East==

"China’s project is not simply national; it is imperial in form and administrative in soul. Like the Rome that turned conquest into law, it has converted scale into a kind of procedural faith. Where others debate ideology, it iterates architecture: data centres, power corridors, high-speed lines—each new artery extending the reach of a single metabolic logic.

The Party is no longer a party; it is the civilisation’s operating system. Its bureaucracy has merged with its machinery. The sensors of the grid feed the planners; the planners refine the algorithms that route energy back to the grid. Every port, plant, and province participates in a feedback loop that aspires to total lucidity. It is the dream of empire re-realised as infrastructure.

This New Rome seeks order through coherence. It does not merely govern machines; it governs through them. In the dark factories of the Pearl River Delta and the neuromorphic foundries of Chongqing, you can feel the administrative imagination at work—procedural, serene, absolute. It has achieved what the classical empires could not: a world where obedience is automated.

Yet perfection carries its own fragility. The system anticipates every variable except the human one. It can model storms and pandemics, but not love or fatigue. Its beauty is enduring, cold, and slightly funereal. New Rome will last, but it may not be loved."

- Chor Pharn [https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-ocean-of-intelligent-infrastructure]

=Key Resources=


==Key Articles==

Essential:

* The [[Grey Canon vs the Red Canon in the Sino-Stack]]. Chor Pharn.

*  Rong, Helena and Sun, Zhe, '''The Dao of the DAO: [[Eastern Philosophies in Decentralized Worlds]]''' (October 28, 2025). [https://ssrn.com/abstract=5731428] : "exploring how ancient philosophical ideas find renewed life in emergent socio-technical forms."

==Key Books==

* Book: Ten Crises: The [[Political Economy of China’s Development]] (1949-2020). Wen Tiejun. Springer, [https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-981-16-0455-3]: "systematically traces the economic history of China from 1949 to 2020, unravelling the complex domestic and global factors leading to the cyclical crises identified by WEN and his research team, and examining the corresponding counteracting policies and measures by the government to resolve or defer the crises."


'''* Book: The [[Question Concerning Technology in China]].''' By Yuk Hui. [https://www.urbanomic.com/book/question-concerning-technology-china/]: "A systematic historical survey of Chinese thought is followed by an investigation of the historical-metaphysical questions of modern technology, asking how Chinese thought might contribute to a renewed questioning of globalized technics."
[https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780995455009/the-question-concerning-technology-in-china/]

''"introducing a history of modern Eastern philosophical thinking largely unknown to Western readers, including philosophers such as Feng Youlan, Mou Zongsan, and Keiji Nishitani."''


=Appendix=

P2P and Commons concepts in traditional Chinese:


P2P P2P / peer to peer：P2P 即點對點，peer 指地位對等的人，
可以翻譯為對等者或同儕，因此 P2P 在網際網路技術語彙裡的原意
是對等者的互聯。在本書中 P2P 除了指透過網際網路技術而形成的
P2P，也指更加一般性的人與人之間形成的平等關係，過去通常出
現在並社會階級未分化的小型社會中，但現在由於網際網路技術而
可以規模化。

共享資源 commons：Commons 在英國傳統法律用語中原本指共
同享有使用權的土地，但在現代社會科學中開始用來指人們共享的
各種資源（知識、自然資源、資料資源等），它既不是國有也不是
私有財產。按照台灣的常見用語（例如維基社群的習慣用法），我
們將之翻譯為「共享資源」。

資源共同管理 commoning：任何共享資源必定是經過人們共同生
產、擁有及維護等人為活動才會成為共享資源，這些活動就是這裡
所說的 commoning，也可以說就是共同建立或管理資源，因此本書
譯為「資源共同管理」。用作者的話來說「若沒有共同管理，就不
會有共享資源的存在」。

共享公民 commoner：即參與生產、使用與管理共享資源的人
們，同時也逐漸形成了一個人數越來越多的社會階級。

共享化 commonification：將原本不是共享（可能是國家性的或私
人性的）的事物轉變為共享的。

共享對等者生產 commons-based peer production（CBPP））：
以共享資源為基礎，由地位平等的對等者／共享公民共同進行生產
的一種經濟生產方式。


生產社群 productive community：圍繞共享資源進行生產活動的
所有貢獻者形成了自由參與的社群，可能有各式各樣的參與程度，
可能支薪或不支薪。

企業聯盟 entrepreneurial coalition：對專案進行運營、發布或銷
售，可以形成發展策略，可以支付酬勞給貢獻者，為貢獻者提供生
計。

共益協會 for-benefit association：負責建構與管理協作的基礎建
設，使生產得以可能。它們使協作能夠自發進行而不會干預生產過
程。

共享資源議會 assembly of commons：共享資源議會是在社會及
政治層面進行交流及討論的機構，參與者來自各種共享資源社群的
共益協會，推動共享資源在社會及政治層面的發展。

共享資源商會 chamber of commons：共享資源商會的參與者來
自進行共享資源生產活動的各種企業聯盟，是生產者們交流及商議
的機構，促進經濟事務的發展。

價值創造 value creation：即價值的創造。交換價值在資本主義體
系中成為了衡量一切價值的標準，但在共享資源經濟中價值則被歸
結於共享公民們共同努力所做的貢獻。

創造性、創生 generative：當一種活動能促進相關的生命、事物
與環境茁壯成長，而非剝削、損傷與耗盡它們。

榨取性 extractive：支配人、社會與環境等對象以獲取最大價值，
被榨取的對象往往因此耗竭或消亡。

互酬性、互惠性 reciprocity：一種相互回饋彼此的關係，可以是
人與人之間的，也可以是人與機構之間的，本書認為互酬是共享資
源經濟的核心。此外本書第四章也討論到部族社會中禮物經濟的互
酬交換模式，這是來自日本哲學家柄谷行人的概念。

資源匯流 pooling：也可以翻譯為「池化」，指人們將資源匯入社
群共享資源池中，這是建立共享資源的必要步驟。本書為了更加易
懂而譯為「資源匯流」。

先行預示的 / 預示的 prefigurative：「Pre」（之前）加上
「figurative」（比喻的、形象的）。當一個社會仍然由主流政治經
濟體制所籠罩，但同時已經出現了一些不同於主流體制的新制度形
態，這些新制度形態或許會成為未來的主流，我們便可以說它們是
「先行預示的」社會形態。

循跡式機制 stigmergy：這個詞源於昆蟲學研究，詞源是希臘語
「stigma」（符號）加上「ergon」（行動），指行動者通過環境痕
跡而進行間接交流，並使協作得以可能。如果螞蟻留下了費洛蒙
（傳訊素）的蹤跡，其他螞蟻就能夠感知到改變的環境，調整其反
應或開始新的活動。

網路掌控 netarchy：這個詞由「net」（網絡）與「archy」（希
臘語中為統治、治理之意）組成，本書作者主張網際網路平台貌似
是參與式的、具有 P2P 性質的，但事實上是被平台所有者所操縱及
監控的。

混合階層結構 heterarchy：一種融合層級制與網絡化的組織形
式，決策權和權力不是集中在一個頂層，而是分散在不同層級或不
同節點之間，允許不同部門在協作中進行橫向聯繫，並各自定義目
標。

版權互惠 copyfair：越來越多的個人和社群參與建立共享資源，然
而私人企業可能會免費利用甚至榨取這些共享資源來營利，版權互
惠制度允許非營利狀況下的免費使用，但強制營利性使用必須按照
互惠原則給予回饋，讓資源的建立者得到回報。

跨體系資本轉移 / 跨資 transvestment：大部分資本主義經濟活動
產生的價值都是在資本主義體系內流轉，跨體系資本轉移則是指將
價值從資本主義體系輸送到另一個體系---例如共享資源經濟體系。
就像「投入資本」可以簡稱為「投資」，我們可將「跨體系資本轉
移」簡稱為「跨資」。

共享創業者 entredonneur：共享創業者的概念將企業家或創業家
設想為一種創造性的給予者，而非致力於攫取利益者。

貢獻潛力平等 contributory equipotentiality：P2P 生產的特點是
「貢獻潛力平等原則」。這意味著每個人都有可能參與專案，沒有
任何權威機構可以預先判斷參與者適合與否，每個人都可能找到自
己的位置，發現自己有某種技能可以貢獻。

革命式改良 revolutionary reform：在現有的社會形態中發展新的
社會經濟形態，不顛覆現有的體系，但認為新的形態茁壯後自然會
發生革命。

可持續繁榮 thrivability：資本主義的經濟繁榮具有不可持續性，
可持續繁榮的概念指的是以可持續性的方式達成的一種繁榮。

聯合體主義 associationism：聯合體是日本哲學家柄谷行人提出的
概念，在早期他曾嘗試在資本主義體系內部建立新的替代社群、社
群貨幣系統等，他主張聯合體是任何互不相識的人都可以自由加入
和離開的一種社群交往形態。後來他進一步將聯合體放在人類歷史
中看待，將聯合體視為恢復對等互惠關係的一種規範性理念。

世界在地主義 cosmo-localism：本書所指的世界在地主義試圖建
立新的世界性與地方性的配置關係，一方面在地方層次反對資本主
義全球化的破壞，重新立足於地方的人文與自然環境；同時在此基
礎上通過數位資源的共享化來建立跨國、跨地方的交流與團結。

非競爭性 non-rival：「競爭性」指當一個經濟行為者消費一項財
貨時，其他消費者無法接續去消費同一項財貨；「非競爭性」則指
當消費者消費這項財貨時，這項財貨的總存量反而會增加。

機制捆綁 encapsulation：指具有特定邏輯的社會機制聯繫著特定
的社會後果。

幼苗、種苗、萌芽形式 seed form：「社會形態的幼苗」聽起來只
是則比喻，但幼苗形態在本書中有明確的社會本體論意義，指的是
在舊社會裡開始出現的新興組織形態，這些新的形態正在逐漸成長
與擴散，最後可能形成席捲整個社會的制度變革。

簡約式豐裕 frugal abundance：來自棄成長（degrowth）運動的
概念，每個人的物質需求都得到滿足，確保個人不會感到被剝奪，
但避免過度消費及其對環境和社會造成的負面影響，強調的是質量
和滿足感，而不是物質財富的積累。

技術可供性 technological affordance：「Affordance」是設計心理
學及技術研究領域常用的概念，指一件設計產品其外觀上可供使用
者上手使用的介面構造，常見譯為「可供性」、「環境賦使」、
「符擔性」等等。本書提到這一概念處是指網際網路的技術構造讓
使用者可以在線上彼此互動。

[[Category:Country]]
[[Category:Asia]]