'''= if we are to undertake a post-material, post-growth, post-materialist shift in our economy and civilisation, we can learn from historical and contemporary non-capitalist social forms?'''

''Can these different worldviews learn from each other ?'' ([http://supercommunity.e-flux.com/texts/uncommoning-nature/  Marisol de la Cadena — Uncommoning Nature])


=Introduction=

* General context: [[Importance of Neotraditional Approaches in the Reconstructive Transmodern Era]]. Michel Bauwens
* Introduction to [[Neotraditional Economics]]



=Interesting Quotes=


"Advances which erase the past and keep no memory of the identity of the territory or its contexts, cannot be considered a winning strategy, in contrast to solutions that merge with tradition. Deep down, each tradition is itself the result of an innovation. Each innovation emerges from a community and is considered important for the community’s survival. It is then decided it should be handed down to future generations. From an evolutionary perspective, tradition and innovation represent a hand over."

-  Alex Giordano [https://www.shareable.net/synergy-not-disruption-industry-4-0-meets-traditional-wisdom-in-rural-italy/]


=Key Resources=


==Articles and Essays==

* The [[Shared Patterns of Indigenous Culture, Permaculture and Digital Commons]]. Joline Blais. Indigenous Domain: Pilgrims, Permaculture and Perl. Intelligent Agent (vol. 6, no. 2, 2006). Inter-Society for the Electronic Arts. [http://www.intelligentagent.com/archive/Vol6_No2_community_domain_blais.htm]

* '''A Buddhist-Christian Critique of Neo-Liberal Economics by John B. Cobb, Jr. Religion Online''' [https://www.religion-online.org/article/a-buddhist-christian-critique-of-neo-liberal-economics/]:  "It is incumbent on those of us who are in position to influence the thinking of faithful people to make clear that the neo-liberal economic thought that informs most current top-down development, riding roughshod over communities, and reshaping the lives and thinking of hundreds of millions of people, is based on assumptions that are antithetical to ours. We should articulately and unequivocally withdraw moral support from these practices."

* Article: Introducing [[Ulimisana Optimization Algorithm]] Based on [[Ubuntu]] Philosophy. Tshifhiwa Maumela; Fulufhelo Ṋelwamondo; Tshilidzi Marwala. IEEE Access ( Volume: 8), 2020. [https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9205897]:"In this paper we give introduction to the concepts of Ubuntu and how we used Mechanism design concepts to construct Ubuntu as an optimisation algorithm. Ubuntu philosophy is old and consists of many oral proverbs that have been documented in recent years. This work thus introduces an incentive mechanism based on Ubuntu, thus called Ubuntu Incentive, which is modelled according to Mechanism Design principles.

==Books==

* Learning from non-western economic approaches: Ronnie Lessem’s and Alexander Schieffer’s [[Integral Economics]] (Gower, 2010)

* [[Dharmanomics]] : An Indigenous and Sustainable Economic Model. Sriram Balasubramanian. Bloomsbury India,
[https://padhegaindia.in/product/dharmanomics-an-indigenious-and-sustainable-economic-model/]: "Examining Common Era empires and kingdoms ranging from the Cholas, Pallavas, Pandyas and Vijayanagara to Southeast Asian kingdoms. Balasubramanian audaciously puts forward a novel, indigenous and sustainable framework called Dharmanomics a function of Kautilyan Dharmic capitalism, of a Dharmic ecosystem driven by temples and Sreni (corporate guilds) Dharma that spans thousands of years."

* [[Indigenous Insights for Planetary Health and Sustainable Food Systems]]. Learning from International Case Studies. By Shailesh Shukla, Priscilla Settee, Noa Kekuewa Lincoln. [https://canadianscholars.ca/book/indigenous-insights-for-planetary-health-and-sustainable-food-systems/].

==Related Wiki Entries==

More on Indigenous / Traditional Knowledge

# [[Bioculture]] vs [[Biopiracy]]: [[Alternative Approaches for Protecting Indigenous Traditional Knowledge]]
# [[Imagining a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]
# [[Implementing a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]
# [[Patenting Traditional Knowledge]] 
# [[Protecting Community Traditional Knowledge Rights]]
# [[Traditional Knowledge]]
# [[Traditional Knowledge Commons]]
# [[Traditional Knowledge Commons License]]
# [[Traditional Knowledge Digital Library]]

=Citations=

"Strictly localized and we become trapped; carelessly global and we are no different from what corporations already do. But there is also a similar paradox of time. Trapping Indigenous people in their past is unacceptable; but homogenizing them as just another contemporary citizen destroys their cultural heritage."

- Ron Eglash (email, August 2019)


=Practices=

(Neo)Traditional Gifting/Sharing/Cooperative Practices:


Via [[Co-Creative Recipes]]:

#[[Ayni]]:  a term with a meaning that’s closely related to minga. It describes a system of work and family reciprocity among members.
#[[Bayanihan]]: a spirit of communal unity or effort to achieve a particular objective. of the ayllu (a community working on collective land).
#[[Córima]]: The Rarámuri people of Mexico’s Chihuahua mountains use the word “córima” to describe an act of solidarity with someone who’s having trouble.
#[[Gadugi]]:  a term used in the Cherokee language which means “working together” or “cooperative labor” within a community.
#[[Gotong-Royong]]: in parts of Indonesia and Malaysia, Gotong-royong is a cooperation among many people to attain a shared goal with ideas of reciprocity or mutual aid.
#[[Guelaguetza]]:  a cross between a potlatch and a tequio. The term describes “a reciprocal exchange of goods and services”.
#[[Harambee]]: a Kenyan tradition of community self-help events, e.g. playdraising or development activities. Harambee literally means “all pull together” in Swahili.
#[[Imece]]:  a name given for a traditional Turkish village-scale collaboration.
#[[Maloka]]:  (or maloka in Portuguese) is an indigenous communal house found in the indigenous Amazon region of Colombia and Brazil.
#[[Meitheal]]: the Irish word for a work team, gang, or party and denotes the co-operative labour system in Ireland where groups of neighbours help each other in turn with farming work.
#[[Mutirão]]: This is originally a Tupi term used in Brazil to describe collective mobilizations based on non-remunerated mutual help.
#[[Naffīr]]: an Arabic word used in parts of Sudan (including Kordofan, Darfur, parts of the Nuba mountains and Kassala) to describe particular types of communal work undertakings.
#[[Tequio]]: a very popular type of work for collective benefit in the Zapotec culture. Community members contribute materials or labor to carry out construction work for the community.