
'''Read this first: [[Simon Michaux on Why the Green transition and the Circular Economy Cannot Work As Advertised]]'''

=Context=

The concept of the circular economy is based on the idea that products can be reused, and after reuse the materials can be reclaimed to enter again into the system of production.

If all materials could be reused in this way, further extraction of raw materials would be needed only where more goods were in use.
The concept thus aligns with the aim of long term sustainability, even where raw materials are becoming scarce. 

Wikipedia defines the [[Wikipedia:Circular economy|circular economy]] as "an economic system aimed at minimizing waste and making the most of resources".

The idea is also related to reflection on the cycles of nature.

"The Circular Economy is based on the abundance of flows generated from our alignment with ecosystemic metabolisms. Put simply, we should be imitating natural cycles as closely as we possibly can.  

The Circular Economy holds the keys of positive perspectives about the future of business, the future of the environment and about our future as people. It depicts a world without waste, where unused resources will find a function in an economy that will regenerate itself while growing within our systemic boundaries"<br />

— [[Alexandre Lemille]] [https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/optimizing-circular-value-1-alexandre-lemille/]

Other people doubt the realism of this vision. For example, Kris De Decker, in [[How Circular is the Circular Economy]] (2018), gives a critical summary of the limitations of the Circular Economy, pointing out how modern manufacturing makes it difficult to imitate the recycling that nature performs.


==Quotes==

===Maintaining Natural Capital===

"‘For the management of renewable resources there are two obvious principles of sustainable development. First that harvest rates should equal regeneration rates (sustained yields). Second that waste emission rates should equal the natural assimilative capacities of the ecosystems into which the wastes are emitted. Regenerative and assimilative capacities must be treated as natural capital, and failure to maintain these capacities must be treated as capital consumption, and therefore not sustainable.’"

- Mathis Wackernagel [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/234092351_An_overview_on_ecological_footprint_and_sustainable_development_A_chat_with_Mathis_Wackernagel]


===The Limitations of the Circular Economy===

"Currently '''the Circular Economy does not account for primary mining for the vast bulk of our metal consumption'''.  I believe that there could be a way of merging mining and industrial recycling.  I am trying to bring process engineering and geometallurgical characterization experience from the Australian mining industry and is applying it to develop aspects of secondary residue valorization.   '''The key to this is understanding the relationship between what manufacturing requires and what is possible with recycling of waste streams.  I have been studying different energy generation systems and how they interrelate in terms of the Energy Return on Energy Investment ratio analysis and quantity of energy at the point of application.  Over time, I have developed an understanding of what I believe is a coming change in practice that will transform the industrial system we now have to something else''', which also implies a change in business model behind industrialization.  the Circular Economy is a gateway to this.  Thus, the current plan to replace fossil fuels is actually a steppingstone to something else."

- Simon Michaux [https://www.simonmichaux.com/current-work]

==Key Ideas==

* The key relevant concepts of the P2P Foundation are: 
*# [[Cosmo-Localization]] / [[Cosmo-Localism]],
*# i.e. [[Design Global, Manufacture Local]]. 
: See the [[Cosmolocalism Research Project]] of the [[P2P Lab]]
* Potential vital updates on the concept of Circularity:
** [[Perma-Circularity]], which stresses the necessity to avoid growth in the use of material resources
** [[Circular Economy 2.0]], which introduces the role of Humans in the [[ Circular Humansphere]]

* Related concepts:
*# The [[Blue Economy]]
*# [[Degrowth]]
*# [[Post-Growth]]

* Theoretical influences on the ideas and practices of the [[Circular Economy]]:
*# [[Cradle to Cradle]]
*# Regenerative design, as in our [[:Category: Regenerative Approaches]]
*# [[Industrial Ecology]],
*# [[Biomimicry]] and
*# Barry Commoner's [[Wikipedia:Barry Commoner#The Closing Circle|laws of ecology]], (1971);

==Useful Learning Resources==

===Introductory===

* Kris De Decker: [[How Circular is the Circular Economy]] (2018)
* [https://medium.com/circulatenews/which-country-is-leading-the-circular-economy-shift-3670467db4bb Which European country is leading the circular economy shift?]: (2018)

===Deeper Study===

* Our article on the [[Circular Economy]]
* [https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/optimizing-circular-value-1-alexandre-lemille/ Optimizing Circular Value] (2017) by [[Alexandre Lemille]]
* Against wasted politics: A [[Critique of the Circular Economy]]. By Francisco Valenzuela and Steffen Böhm. Ephemera, volume 17(1): 23-60

===Key Publications of the P2P Foundation===

* ''' [[P2P Accounting for Planetary Survival]]: Towards a P2P Infrastructure for a Socially Just Circular Society.''' By Michel Bauwens and Alex Pazaitis. Foreword by Kate Raworth. P2P Foundation, June 2019. ''How shared perma-circular supply chains, post-blockchain distributed ledgers, protocol cooperatives, and three new forms of post-capitalist accounting, could very well save the planet.''
* '''[[Thermodynamic Perspectives on Peer to Peer and the Commons as a Path Towards Transition | Peer to Peer and the Commons: a path towards transition. A matter, energy and thermodynamic perspective.]]''' Report by Céline Piques and Xavier Rizos. P2P Foundation, 2017.

==Related Categories==

* [[:Category:Regenerative Approaches|Regenerative Approaches]] : non-extractive approaches to creating value while restoring the health of the planet and its communities
* Our [[:Category:Sustainable Manufacturing|Sustainable Manufacturing]] section looks specifically at modes of material production that are sustainable for the long term
* Our [[:Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies |Thermodynamic Efficiencies]] section looks at the use of material and energy resources that respect a balanced metabolism between humans and the planet
* Our [[:Category:P2P Accounting |P2P Accounting]] section looks at measurement and accounting issues.
* Our [[:Category:Commons Economics |Commons Economics]] section looks at how to establish a sound economic approach 
* Our [[:Category: Ecology]] gives ecological approaches

[[Category:Economics]]