This category is mainly about the economics of living in intentional community.
It touches on monastic life as well as modern intentional communities.

==Key Concepts of This Category==

Note that we have a broader page about [[:Category: Community]] as a general concept, while this section is more narrowly focused on the economic life of intentional communities. It is mostly indebted to the extraordinary work of the researcher [[Allen Butcher]].

The communities covered here, could be considered as communities that manage 'closed' shared resources, i.e. commons that belong to the community itself, or the institution that represents it.

The [[:Category: Commons Economics]] covers the economics of whole societies and how they manage and regulate the commons within it, as well as considering the society as a whole as a commons.

==Useful learning resources==

===Introductory===
* [[Communal Economics]]

===Deeper Study===

* [[Allen Butcher]]'s research sites on [[Communal Economics]]: [http://www.culturemagic.org/ Culture Magic]; [https://intentioneers.net/ Intentioneers]
* Book: The [[Globalization of Communes]], Yaacov Oved. Transaction Publishers, 2012. A history of the globalization of communes, mostly after WWII.

==Related Categories==
* [[:Category: Sharing]] - communes, and to lesser extents other communities, typically share many things.
* [[:Category: Collaborative Economy]] - communities collaborate.
* [[:Category: Commons Economics]] is generally a broader category as it covers commons arrangements that are not so tightly communal.


[[Category:Economics]]