<div style="background-color:#EEFFFF;margin:2em;padding:2em;border:1px grey solid; width: 60%">

'''The significant problems we face can not be solved at the same level of thinking we were at when we created them''' 

- Einstein [http://www.laetusinpraesens.org/docs00s/stella.php]

</div>



'''This section is dedicated to monitoring P2P-influenced concepts and practices related to [[Collective Intelligence]], Knowledge Management, epistemology, etc...'''


At this state we only ported a limited number of items from our related section on [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/Category:Education P2P Learning], i.e. the relevant entries from A to H.

Related Category: [[:Category: Noosphere]]


=Introduction=

'''Please compare the characteristics of [[Holomidal Collective Intelligence]] with those of [[Pyramidal Collective Intelligence]]'''

* David Weinberger: [[Objectivity without Transparency is Arrogance]]
* Introduction by Toni Prug: We need [[Open Process Search Systems]].


=Quotes=

==Short Quotes==


'''Rule Number One is to pay attention. Rule Number Two might be: Attention is a limited resource, so pay attention to where you pay attention.'''

- Howard Rheingold [http://www.alamut.com/subj/economics/attention/attent_economy.html]


"All truth passes through three stages. First, it is ridiculed. Second, it is violently opposed. Third, it is accepted as being self-evident." 

- Arthur Schopenhauer


“The task is to see reality as it is, the method is to look through millions of eyes” 

- Nietzsche [https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/cosmo-local-coordination]


Systems thinking has a certain simplicity and elegance to it — basically, a shift from seeing the world as a machine to understanding it as a network… To deal with nonlinear systems requires a change of perspective from objects to relationships, from measuring to mapping, and this is why visual thinking becomes important.” 

~ Fritjof Capra [https://creativesystemsthinking.wordpress.com/2016/03/03/a-new-vision-of-reality-fritjof-capra/]


'''Experience has long been considered the best teacher of knowledge. Since we cannot experience everything, other people’s experiences, and hence other people, become the surrogate, of knowledge. I store my knowledge in my friends is an axiom for collecting knowledge through collecting people.'''

- Karen Stephenson [http://socialknowledge.wordpress.com/] [http://www.openp2pdesign.org/blog/archives/160]


“The intuitive mind is a sacred gift and the rational mind is a faithful servant. We have created a society
that honours the servant and has forgotten the gift. We will not solve the problems of the world from the
same level of thinking we were at when we created them. More than anything else, this new century
demands new thinking: We must change our materially based analyses of the world around us to
include broader, more multidimensional perspectives.”

~ Albert Einstein 


"In the existing sciences whenever a phenomenon is encountered that seems complex it is taken almost
for granted that the phenomenon must be the result of some underlying mechanism that is itself
complex. But my discovery that simple programs can produce great complexity makes it clear that this
is not in fact correct. Simple programs are enough to capture the essence of almost any complex system."

~ Stephen Wolfram, A New kind of Science

==Long Quotes==


"Co-intelligence is the capacity to call forth the wisdom and resources of the whole and its members to enhance the longterm vitality of the whole and its members." Collectively, a community has more - and more diverse - information, perspective, and resources than any individual has. A wise community, a wise leader, and a wise democracy will use that rich diversity creatively and interactively. The diversity will then be mutually enhancing rather than mutually problematic. The appropriate role of the state is to create enabling conditions for that to happen at all levels and in all sectors and facets of society.


- Tom Atlee [http://www.tomatleeblog.com/?p=175326930]

'''The systematic extensions of my brain is the brain of my friends. No matter how good tagging systems and wikis I have, they are neither sustainable nor scalable, when facing the tsunami of complexity waves coming at us faster and faster. The coming chaos is evolution trick’s to push us out from the comfortable but illusory thinking of the individual being the basic cognitive unit. IMHO, it’s the collective.'''

- George Por



'''To survive and thrive, human systems *need* a not just a network view, but a multi-dimensional, multi-scaled view and definition of systems. this will help us see how many, many people can operate and multiply many forms of wealth within systems that previously seemed easily depletable. Peer networks are vital to creating the multi-dimensional maps and models and views that will allow all of us to see the cornacopia of options that now exist, provided we can shift out focus from exploitation and control, to existential symbiosis with everything that is around us, on as many scales as possible.'''

- Sam Rose



"From a very early age, we are taught to break apart problems, to fragment the world. This apparently makes complex tasks and subjects more manageable, but we pay a hidden, enormous price. We can no longer see the consequences of our actions; we lose our intrinisic sense of connection to a larger whole. When we then try to ‘see the big picture,’ we try to reassemble the fragments in our minds, to list and organize all the pieces. But, as physicist David Bohm says, the task is futile–similar to trying to reassemble the fragments of a broken mirror to see a true reflection. Thus, after a while we give up trying to see the whole altogether."

- Peter Senge [http://jolocom.com/x2/files/2012-11-05-FRAGMENTEDWORLD.html]


“For a man to change the basic beliefs that determine his perception — his epistemological premises — he must first become aware that reality is not necessarily as he believes it to be. Sometimes the dissonance between reality and false beliefs reaches a point when it becomes impossible to avoid the awareness that the world no longer makes sense. Only then is it possible for the mind to consider radically different ideas and perceptions.”

- G. Bateson [https://stories.platformdesigntoolkit.com/a-new-cosmology-of-organizing-de288c0ec61a]


=== The Limitations of Science ===

 "Our understanding of the human condition, therefore, cannot be fully encapsulated by scientific inquiry alone."

"During the Covid-19 pandemic, politicians and public officials repeatedly urged the general public to follow the science when justifying their often disproportionate demands. But science, far from being an unerring beacon of truth, is a dynamic and fallible pursuit striving to unravel the complexities of the world. On very few topics is the science actually settled. It's also crucial to recognize that science is just one lens through which we explore and interpret existence. Our understanding of the human condition, therefore, cannot be fully encapsulated by scientific inquiry alone. This is an aspect that has often been glossed over in the rush to idealize science.

Historically, science has been enshrined in a somewhat mythic status, as though it were a pursuit of absolute, immutable truths. This perception is not only outdated but misleading. Science is inherently imperfect. Indeed its strength lies in its ongoing, iterative process of discovery and fine-tuning. Disparity and dissent within the scientific community are not flaws but rather fundamental features of how science progresses."

- Richard Hames [https://richarddavidhames.substack.com/p/following-the-science]


=== Intelligence has never been autonomous ===

“Intelligence has never been autonomous. Not in biology, not in civilisation, and not in the newborn technosphere. What we call “intelligence” matters only when it fuses with something else — new energy forms, new organisational scaffolds, new ways of cooperating across bodies and infrastructures. Intelligence does nothing alone. It is never the protagonist. It is always the secondary effect of a deeper metabolic realignment.
This is the quiet pattern running through evolutionary history: each major shift retains what came before and layers something new on top. Ancient geochemistry kept alive within mitochondria. Once-sovereign cells coordinating as multicellular bodies. Organisms assembling into social worlds. Cooperation and conflict braided through every step. Symbiosis, not supremacy.
Mineral intelligence — models, sensors, planetary-scale attention — fits the same pattern. It is not an alien competitor. It is another metabolic annex, another co-evolution between what exists and what becomes possible. The fantasy of AI arriving, replacing, and ruling is simply our primate status circuitry misfiring at planetary scale. Intelligence is not a monarch; it has always been a derivative of energy, organisation, and survival.
This is why the current discourse feels hollow. It keeps asking whether AI will be “more intelligent” than us, as if intelligence were a single axis and crossing some threshold would flip the world into a new regime. But the real question — the only one that matters — is what new energy systems, new coordination architectures, and new forms of collective agency become viable once intelligence becomes ubiquitous, cheap, ambient. Intelligence is not destiny; metabolism is.”


-	Chor Pharn [https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-next-transition-why-intelligence]


=== Venkatesh Rao on the co-evolutionary role of AI ===

"Language itself is a humanity-scale uncompressed networked intelligence. Now LLMs just compress, archive and backup this latent intelligence periodically, with those archival intelligences being plugged back in to living language, helping drive the next epoch of co-evolution. The “intelligence” in AI isn’t in the computers or models. It’s in the self-reproducing training data. AIs and brains alike are merely data’s way of making more data."

- Venkatesh Rao [https://contraptions.venkateshrao.com/p/every-story-is-a-degrowth-story]


=== The Context-Based Nature of the Brain === 

"Gerald Edelman: The most important thing to understand is that the brain is “context-bound.” It is not a logical system like a computer that processes only programmed information; it does not produce preordained outcomes like a clock. Rather, it is a selectional system that, through pattern recognition, puts things together in always novel ways. It is this selectional repertoire in the brain that makes each individual unique, that accounts for the ability to create poetry and music, that accounts for all the differences that arise from the same biological apparatus — the body and the brain. There is no singular mapping to create the mind; there is, rather, an unforetold plurality of possibilities. In a logical system, novelty and unforeseen variation are often considered to be noise. In a selectional system, such diversity actually provides the opportunity for favorable selection."

 - Greg Edelman [https://www.noemamag.com/who-knows-what-consciousness-is/]


=== The Human Individual Brain vs the Collective 'Brain of Brains'===

"“Between the human brain, with its milliards of interconnected nerve cells, and the apparatus of social thought, with its millions of individuals thinking collectively, there is an evident kinship which biologists of the stature of Julian Huxley have not hesitated to examine and expand on critical lines. On the one hand we have a single brain, formed of nervous nuclei, and on the other a Brain of brains. It is true that between these two organic complexes a major difference exists. Whereas in the case of the individual brain thought emerges from a system of nonthinking nervous fibers, in the case of the collective brain each separate unit is in itself an autonomous center of reflection. If the comparison is to be a just one we must, at every point of resemblance, take this difference into account.”

- Pierre Teilhard de Chardin [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=up6Pt9qL-rk]


===[[John Robb on the War over the Means of Reality Production]]===

"Over the last seven years, with the advent of social networking, there’s been an online civil war over who controls our information flow and how they get to do it. It’s been a messy, confusing fight that has touched on the following:

* What type of information is allowed amplification, and what should be de-amplified?

* What is fact or fiction? Can truth be hate speech? Is fiction harmful (conspiracy theories or unapproved theories)? Should false information and ideas be censored?

* What is disinformation (harmful fiction or spun facts designed to mislead), and how can it be suppressed (de-amplification, soft bans, hard bans, blacklists)?

Until late last year, it looked like the conflict was over, and we were on a worrisome trajectory toward disaster:

* An open-source alliance of global corporations, online political networks (networked tribes held together by their opposition to some great evil), and struggling institutions (from academia to government) had won that fight.

This alliance had established a censorship and control system growing ever more constrictive by the day (that could, given time, rival the networked authoritarianism we have seen in China). It also used the system to control political outcomes in the US and beyond.

Worse, the system showed signs of non-linear behavior — we saw this when the networked monoculture created by this system rapidly escalated Russia’s invasion of Ukraine into a sprawling global war between the West and Russia (China, etc.).

Elon’s acquisition of Twitter and use of information warfare (the Twitter files) paused this trajectory. However, it won’t last long. One reason is that nothing was done to fundamentally change the nature of our information system (digital rights and ownership); another is that a new and much more disruptive wave of technological change is on the way."

- John Robb [https://johnrobb.substack.com/p/who-will-control-reality?]


===Richard Tarnas on Participatory Knowing===

"“In this view, the essential reality of nature is not separate, self-contained, and complete in itself, so that the human mind can examine it “objectively” and register it from without. Rather, nature’s unfolding truth emerges only with the active participation of the human mind. Nature’s reality is not merely phenomenal, nor is it independent and objective; rather, it is something that comes into being through the very act of human cognition. Nature becomes intelligible to itself through the human mind. In this perspective, nature pervades everything, and the human mind in all its fullness is itself an expression of nature’s essential being.” 

— Richard Tarnas, 1996, p.434 [https://medium.com/activate-the-future/ways-of-knowing-separation-and-participation-6af7376a3346]


===We Need to Repair the bridge between rationality and meta-rationality===

David Chapman:

"Kegan describes three stages of adult development (numbered 3, 4, and 5). We could call them pre-rational, rational, and meta-rational. These stages are distinctive, internally consistent, relatively-well-functioning modes for organizing one’s thinking, one’s self, and one’s relationships. They might be described as “islands of psychological stability.” To progress from one island to the next, you must cross a heaving sea of psychological confusion, in which the previous mode no longer seems functional, but you cannot yet operate in the next mode reliably. These stage transitions are emotionally and cognitively difficult, and typically take several years, during which one may think, feel, and act inconsistently.

Ideally, a society and culture provides “bridges” of support from one stage to the next. To some extent, ours does. However, Kegan pointed out that we have allowed the bridge from stage 3 to 4 to fall into disrepair. We are not adequately teaching young adults how to be rational, systematic, or modern. This is the central theme of his In Over Our Heads: The Mental Demands of Modern Life.

This problem seems to have only gotten worse in the two decades since he wrote that. That is what makes me fear civilizational collapse. Keeping modern institutions operating requires cognitively modern, rational operators. We may be destroying the conditions necessary to produce them."
(https://meaningness.com/metablog/stem-fluidity-bridge?)

See also: [[Post-Modernism Has Destroyed the Bridge to Rationality]]


===The Next Civil War will be one over Collective Intelligence===

"The conflict of the 21st Century is about forming a Collective Intelligence that can outwit and out innovate all of its competitors. The central challenge is to innovate a way of collaborating and cohering individuals that maximally deploys their individual perspectives, capabilities, understandings and insights with each-other. Right now, the [[Trump Insurgency]] has the edge. It has discovered some key ways to tap into the power of decentralized collective intelligence and this is its principal advantage. While it is definitely not a mature version of a decentralized collective intelligence, it is substantially more so than any collective intelligence with which it is competing and unless and until a more effective decentralized collective intelligence enters the field, this advantage is enough."

- Jordan Greenhall [https://medium.com/deep-code/situational-assessment-2017-trump-edition-d189d24fc046#.u2gmok7kf]



===Individuals can't think non-linearly, only collectives can===

'''1.'''

"By yourself, you can’t think non-linearly. This isn’t your fault. Individual human beings can’t think non-linearly. Only “collective intelligences,” those agents of “inter-subjective consciousness” can. To put it more simply, we implement and do things as individuals. We innovate as tribes. And the world we live in today — the world of the 21st Century — is a world of continuous innovation. In this environment, for the first time ever in history, the ability to innovate is decisively superior to the ability to deploy power."

- Jordan Greenhall [https://medium.com/deep-code/situational-assessment-2017-trump-edition-d189d24fc046#.u2gmok7kf]


2. "'''The system observing the world is no longer the single human brain that is a result of biological evolution but instead, it is our culture as a whole''', with subsystems like science and scholarship as embedded parts of it. This larger entity is a dissipative
structure in its own right and it is the structure in which our knowledge arises. The
entity that observes the world is not a brain with ears and eyes, it is no longer the
proverbial individual philosopher sitting in his proverbial armchair, but a system
consisting of people (including philosophers in their armchairs), libraries, computers,
classrooms, conferences, the internet, telescopes, microscopes, particle accelerators,
journals, publishers etc. This entity does not have a fixed structure and has been
restructured and changed permanently in the course of history. It is producing
knowledge and it is constantly restructuring itself as needed. The development of
“higher” systems of observation and knowledge generation has already been taken
out of the hands of biological evolution. The interface of the observing system with
reality is no longer limited by our biology and has been widened by all kinds of
instruments."

- Andreas Keller [https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-andreas-keller-towards-a-history-and-pre-history-of-knowledge]


===Meta-theory as humanity’s vocabulary of self-transformation===

"[With] self-consciousness comes the possibility of transforming ourselves by adopting new vocabularies, redescribing, and so reconstructing our selves and discursive institutions. While all of us are in some sense consumers of such new vocabularies, it is the special calling of some to produce them. And among those producers some take the construction of unique, potentially transformative vocabularies as the project by commitment to which they understand and define themselves. Among that group, some seek to produce those new vocabularies precisely by trying to understated the phenomena of sapience, normativity, conceptuality, reason, freedom, expression, self-consciousness, self-constitution, and historical transformation by subversive, empowering vocabularies. Those are the philosophers. They are charged neither with simply understanding human nature (human history), nor with simply changing it, but with changing it by understanding it."

—Robert B. Brandom (2009, p. 150) [http://www.zakstein.org/meta-theory-1-the-what-and-why-of-meta-theory/]


===Raimon Panikkar on the Relation between Mythos and Logos===

“Mythos and logos go together, but their relationship is neither dialectic nor mythic; it is rather a mutually constitutive relationship. If it were logical, the spirit would be drowned in the logos. Were it mythical, the logos would be reduced to the spirit. Put another way, there is no logos without mythos – of which the logos is language – and there is no mythos without logos – of which the myth is the foundation … Only the pratîtyasamutpâda, the radical relativity of all that is, can maintain the harmony without domination between the mythos and the logos” (Intellectual autobiography”).

The reunion between mythos and logos is one that must also take place between subjectivity and objectivity, between the heart and mind, between rational thought and the spirit that flies free. This reunion is necessary so as to avoid falling either into the ancient submission to myth or into the submission of myth to logos, namely, falling into the present day logo-monism: “Reality is not given to us as logos, but rather offers itself to us as mythos, as that horizon against which we place our own idea of the world… Our world is given to us in mythos, and that world, equally ours, is discovered by the logos” (Pensamiento científico y pensamiento cristiano, Madrid 1994). Panikkar describes this double faceted reality as follows:

“Myth is not the object of discourse, but the expression of a kind of sui generis awareness. Myth and knowledge go together... A living myth does not leave room for interpretation, inasmuch as there is no need for an intermediary. The hermeneutic of a myth is in no way myth, but rather its logos … The myth is transparent like light, and the mythic story is only the form, the covering with which the myth finds itself expressed, concealed, illuminated. This does not at all mean we have to disregard, much less belittle, the value of thinking and ignore the realm and inviolable rights of the logos. I simply mean that man cannot be reduced to the logos, nor can awareness be reduced to reflexive consciousness” (Myth, Faith and Hermeneutics).

The theme of myth and its place in relation to religion and human thinking in general has greatly occupied Panikkar and has given rise to the publication of numerous works of his. He himself came to say, “It is necessary to rediscover the place and function of myth in human life and to situate rationality in the total human context.” (Blessed Simplicity).

An open dialogue between myth and logos is the foundation of his dialogical dialogue as the force for opening oneself to the other and respectfully entering into his reality."

- Raimon Panikkar [https://www.raimon-panikkar.org/english/gloss-mythos-logos.html]


===Hegel on Philosophy as Knowledge===

'The study of philosophy is as much hindered by clever argumentative method as it is by the settled position which will not engage in it, which instead bases itself on accepted truths, the possessor of which does not feel the need to re-examine them but rather to take them as fundamental, assert them and judge all things by means of them. It is in this regard especially important to make philosophizing again into a serious business. In all the sciences and arts, in all skills and crafts, the firm conviction prevails that, in order to master them, one must spend a considerable amount of effort in learning and in practice. On the other hand, as far as philosophy goes, it seems that there is a prejudice that predominates, namely that although not everyone with eyes and fingers, who acquires leather and last, is fit for making shoes, everybody nevertheless immediately knows how to philosophize and how to evaluate philosophy, simply because the standard for doing so sits in their natural reason – as if they do not likewise possess the standard for making shoes in their own feet. – It seems as if the lack of any knowledgeability or of study is what makes philosophy, and that as soon as one begins to acquire such, philosophy itself ceases. It is usually taken as a kind of formal, contentless knowing, but, what is missed by such an insight, is what is in the content of any kind of knowledge and scientific truth, namely that they deserve these names only when philosophy has been involved in their production; these other sciences may try and proceed by means of clever argumentation without philosophy when they will, but without it they are unable to have any life, spirit or truth in themselves.'

- Hegel  (The Phenomenology of Spirit, Preface, GW 46)


===Denial is central to who we are as a species===

"I used to believe denial was caused by a lack of awareness and understanding, but having made an effort to educate many people, and observing that they almost always aggressively choose not to understand, I began to look for a different explanation.

I concluded that '''denial must be an inherited behavior because every country, culture, political party, and religion is in denial. And denial must be central to who we are as a species''' because of its depth, breadth, and aggressiveness."

- Un-Denial [https://un-denial.com/2017/06/25/why-my-interest-in-denial/]


===Terraforming the Earth ?===

"The critical apparatuses of such a response include automation, (understood as an ecological principle of inter-entanglement more than a reductive autonomy); geoengineering (understood in terms of climate-scale effects more than a specific portfolio of techniques); the rotation of planetary-scale computation away from individual users and toward processes more relevant for long-term ecological viability; the deliberate self-design of sapient species toward variation, including reproductive technologies, universal medical services and synthetic gene therapies; the cultivation of artificial mathematical, linguistic and robotic intelligences with which general sapience deliberately evolves; the deployment of experimental expertise with biotechnologies, through which living matter composes living matter; the intensification of urban habitats and technologies as media for the general provision of universal and niche services; the projective migration outside the Kármán line, the boundary between Earth’s atmosphere and outer space, from where the existing and potential terrestrial planetarity comes into focus; and, finally, the aggregation of creative governing intelligences capable of architecting such mobilizations. I call this terraforming — not of another planet, but of our own."

- Benjamin Bratton [https://www.noemamag.com/planetary-sapience/]


===Consciousness and self-understanding are not epiphenomenal===

"Consciousness and self-understanding are not epiphenomenal — they are not merely supervening or reacting to a more basic bio-technological base—human consciousness and self-understanding are driving the global crisis at all levels. So it is conscious evolution from here on out: we are able to know and do too much to pretend otherwise; we must consciously orchestrate the future of the planet and the biosphere. Our generation is in an unprecedented position to take responsibility for participating in profoundly generative and destructive evolutionary crises. The question is: can we understand our crises in cosmic context, as opportunities for the emergence of the unprecedented, and as invitations into a higher form of life?   To do so we must come to see that the evolution of the universe and biological life is not a fact, it is a story. Evolution is a story about us, who we are, and what we are going through now. The universe itself is a best understood as a story, not as a mere fact. The universe is a love story. Like all true love stories (and unlike harlequin romances or romantic comedies) it has been as story of profound crisis, cataclysm, tragedy, hope, emergence, and creativity."

- Zachary Stein and Marc Gafni [https://centerforintegralwisdom.org/activist-think-tank/wp-content/uploads/sites/21/2018/10/Social-justice-and-superorganisms_FINAL-RoundTable-ZakMarc-19pg.pdf]

==Can AI LLM's Be Considered To Be Conscious ?==

"There is considerable evidence that LLMs have the capacity to develop theory of mind. From all the human-authored data they have ingested, they obtain models of human behaviors, including how to engage in turn-taking during conversations, how gender relationships work, how social hierarchies operate in various cultural contexts, and so forth. They can accurately anticipate not only how humans will perceive simple acts of deception (such as when a friend changes the location of the glasses that someone left behind) but also more complex situations, such as how a person of a specified mindset will react when confronted or criticized. They also realize that even as they are modeling us, we as their interlocutors are also modeling them, which they take into account in their models, and so on into the recursive hall of mirrors.

I cannot emphasize enough how momentous their development of theory of mind is, for a number of reasons. It represents the first time in human history that a cognitive entity has the capability to verbalize the human Umwelt in extensive and precise terms. Just as humans have collected data on myriad other species so that we can understand their Umwelten (always from the outside), so LLMs now have extensive information on the human Umwelt. In similar fashion to how humans understand hummingbirds and octopi (that is, from outside their Umwelten), so do LLMs now understand the human Umwelt from the outside. Previously, the immense corpus of commentary and analysis of the human Umwelt has always been written from the inside — that is, by humans who, regardless of whatever propensities and opinions they had, must necessarily always and ever have written as humans, that is, as participants in the Umwelt they describe and analyze. This suggests that '''LLMs can present a unique opportunity for us to understand ourselves from fresh, and hitherto unprecedented, perspectives'''."

- Katherina Hayles [https://modesofcognition.antikythera.org/]

==AI is antithetical to humanistic intelligen==

"LLMs like ChatGPT process data in order to calculate probabilistically about what word should follow the previous word, according to a human-produced algorithm and the human-produced data on which they were trained.

That’s it.

They are not understanding, intuiting, thinking, reasoning, or judging: they are processing and calculating. In the inspired phrase of a well-known article on LLMs, they are “stochastic parrots”: stochastic because they calculate probabilities, parrots because they merely mimic rather than understand. Even so-called “reasoning” models like OpenAI’s o1 and Deepseek’s R1 do nothing of the sort. They too iterate calculations from underlying human-produced data while “explaining” what they’re doing by executing human-produced algorithms. They are forcibly trained to yield “chain of thought” outputs that appear to resemble human reasoning—with undeniably impressive results—but fundamentally they are still just processing and calculating.

Anyone who confuses what AI does with human intelligence does not understand AI or human intelligence. Data is not knowledge; executing an algorithm is not reasoning.

- Kate Epstein [https://www.persuasion.community/p/we-robots]

==The New AI-Driven Cognitive Divide: Symbionts vs. Sovereigns==

"Key points:

* AI is creating two thinking styles: Symbionts who merge with AI, and Sovereigns who maintain independence.

* Each approach excels at different tasks - neither better, just different.

It's not about tech skills but cognitive choice—a new kind of mental diversity for the tech world."

- John Nosta [https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-digital-self/202501/the-new-cognitive-divide-are-you-a-symbiont-or-a-sovereign?]

=Frameworks=

'''1.'''


Dave Snowden has proposed the Cynefin framework for identifying the best match between knowledge styles and reality:

"It has five domains, characterised by the relationship between cause and effect. The first four domains are:

* '''Simple''', in which '''the relationship between cause and effect is obvious to all''', the approach is to ''Sense - Categorise - Respond'' and we can apply best practice.
    
* '''Complicated''', in which '''the relationship between cause and effect requires analysis''' or some other form of investigation and/or the application of expert knowledge, the approach is to ''Sense - Analyze - Respond'' and we can apply good practice.
    
* '''Complex''', in which '''the relationship between cause and effect can only be perceived in retrospect, but not in advance''', the approach is to ''Probe - Sense - Respond'' and we can sense emergent practice.
    
* '''Chaotic''', in which there is '''no relationship between cause and effect at systems level''', the approach is to ''Act - Sense - Respond'' and we can discover novel practice.

The fifth domain is '''Disorder''', which is '''the state of not knowing what type of causality exists''', in which state people will revert to the comfort zone in making a decision."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cynefin)

See the video: [[Shawn Callahan on the Cynefin Framework]]


'''2.'''

Framework from George Dyson in [[Darwin Among the Machines]], summarized by Kevin Kelly [http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2009/02/many_species_on.php]:

* '''One species, many minds''': The official future. We interbreed among our genetic improvements and keep our individuality distinct, and our species identity intact.

* '''One species, one mind''': Through electronic mediation, we join together to create a superorganism. A suprahuman. 

* '''Many species, many minds''': Ultimate diversity. Humans fork in their evolution to create new breeds. Some may even join machines in cyborgian partnerships.

* '''Many species, one mind''': We fork in biology but unite in the noosphere.  Millions of species share the same mind.


'''3.'''

Henry Jenkins:

"We can argue that there are a range of different models of collective intelligence shaping the digital realm at the present time. We might distinguish broadly between three different models: 

1) '''An aggregative model which assumes that we can collect data based on the autonomous and anonymous decisions of “the crowd”''' and use it to gain insights into their collective behavior. This is the model which shapes Digg and to some degree, YouTube. 

2) a curatorial model where grassroots intermediaries seek to represent their various constituencies and bring together information that they think is valuable. This is the model which shapes the blogosphere. 

3) '''a deliberative model where many different voices come together, define problems, vet information, and find solutions which would be impossible for any individual to achieve'''. This is the model shaping Wikipedia or even more powerfully alternate universe games. Of the three, the deliberative model offers the most democratic potentials, especially when it is tempered by ethical and political commitments to diversity. This is the model which Pierre Levy describes in his book, Collective Intelligence. Levy’s account stresses the affirmative value placed on diversity in such a culture. The more diverse the community, the broader range of possible information and insights can inform the deliberative process."

(http://henryjenkins.org/2009/11/reflections_on_cultural_politi_1.html)


'''4.'''

* Frank A, Grinspoon D, Walker S (2022). Intelligence as a planetary scale process. International Journal of Astrobiology 21,47–61. doi

URL = https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/5077C784D7FAC55F96072F7A7772C5E5/S147355042100029Xa.pdf/intelligence-as-a-planetary-scale-process.pdf

This article proposes a four-stage evolution, three of which have already evolved:

* a planet with a immature biosphere: no planetary intelligence
* a planet with a mature biosphere: emergence of planetary intelligence through cooperation amongst species
* a planet with a immature technosphere: humans produce technology that endangers the biosphere
 *a planet where humanity is able to manage the effects of its technosphere for long-term sustainability of the biosphere


==Canonical Definitions from the [https://www.john-uebersax.com/plato/lexicon.htm Wisdom Lexicon Project]==

* "Wisdom -- discernment and judgment; transcendant knowledge; spiritual knowledge; mental skill, agility, subtlety; discretion; mental dexterity; knowledge of best ends and means.
* Acuity (mental) -- mental sharpness; ability to resolve fine detail; quick and penetrating intelligence; mental acuteness, sharpness, keenness.
* Conscience -- knowledge of one's own thoughts or actions; the faculty, power, or inward principle which, generally, decides as to the character of one's own actions, purposes, and affections, and/or, specifically, warning against and condemning that which is wrong, and approving and prompting to that which is right. Discernment of ones motives.
* Contemplation -- the act of the mind in considering with attention; musing; meditation on or mental communion with Divinity.
* Direct apprehension to take hold of with the mind or understanding; to grasp, seize; to become cognizant of.
* Discernment -- the power or faculty of the mind by which it distinguishes one thing from another; power of viewing differences in objects, and their relations and tendencies; penetrative and discriminate mental vision; acuteness; sagacity; insight.
* Discrimination -- the act of discriminating, distinguishing, or noting and marking differences; acute discernment.
* Foresight -- the act or the power of foreseeing; prudence; wise forethought.
* Illumination, enlightenment -- to make clear to the intellect or conscience; to shed the light of truth and knowledge upon; spiritual insight.
* Insight -- a sight or view of the interior of the mind; a deep inspection or view; introspection; mental revelation.
* Intellect, Intelligence (the) -- the part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows; the capacity for higher forms of knowledge.
* Introspection -- the act or process of self-examination, or inspection of one's own thoughts and feelings; the cognition which the mind has of its own acts and states; self-consciousness; reflection.
* Intuition -- direct apprehension or cognition; immediate knowledge, as in perception or consciousness; quick or ready insight or apprehension;
* Judgment -- the operation of the mind, involving comparison and discrimination, by which a knowledge of the values and relations of things, whether of moral qualities, intellectual concepts, logical propositions, or material facts, is obtained.
* Prudence -- Sagacious in adapting means to ends; circumspect in action, or in determining any line of conduct; wise forethought."

(https://www.john-uebersax.com/plato/lexicon.htm)

=Related Wiki Sections=

* Material on "[[:Category:Participation|Participation]]"
* Examining [[:Category:Relational|the new relationality and cooperative individualism]]
* The emerging [[:Category:Sharing|sharing economy]]
* [[:Category:Cooperation|Cooperation]] and [[:Category:Cooperatives|cooperatives]]
* Material on "[[:Category:Facilitation|Facilitation]]"

=Key Resources=

Stages of consciousness development according to Integral Theorists:

* The [[Evolution of Consciousness as a Planetary Imperative]]: An Integration of Integral Views. By Jennifer Gidley. INTEGRAL REVIEW 5, 2007 [https://www.academia.edu/197841/The_Evolution_of_Consciousness_as_a_Planetary_Imperative_An_Integration_of_Integral_Views] ; for details, see for examples the passages on 

** [[Archaic Consciousness]]
** [[Magic Consciousness]]
** [[Transition from Magic to Mythical Consciousness]]
** [[Mythic Consciousness]]
** [[Transition from Mythical to Mental Consciousness]]
** [[Intellectual-Mental-Rational Consciousness]]
** [[Deficient Manifestations of Intellectual-Mental-Rational Consciousness]]
** [[Postformal-Integral-Planetary Consciousness]]


See also:

# The Social Brain Hypothesis, (2016: no longer at www.liv.ac.uk/evolpsyc/Evol_Anthrop_6.pdf ) essay where Robin Dunbar explains the cognitive limitations of his [[Dunbar Number]]
# [http://psychology.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.001.0001/acrefore-9780190236557-e-44 The Social Brain Hypothesis and Human Evolution], Robin Dunbar
# Book: [http://www.oss.net/dynamaster/file_archive/080220/e85a39f0bcddd8a1352d573626dcc63a/Complete%2d4.0%20Book%20Text%20648%20sides.pdf Collective Intelligence]: Creating a Prosperous at Peace. Ed. by Mark Tovey.



==Key Articles==

* [[Evolutionary Origins of the Social Brain]] . Merlin Donald: [https://brill.com/display/book/edcoll/9789401204491/B9789401204491-s020.xml]: 

"Human beings are cultural entities. We share mind. We construct cognitive collectivities called symbolic cultures. Raised in isolation from such collectivities, we have quite limited, nonsymbolic minds. Culturally isolated human beings are not much different from their large-brained anthropoid relatives. However, embedded in a cultural network from birth, human beings become something unique in the biological world: symbolizing intellects bonded to a community of minds."

These are probably the most important articles that describes the civilizational impasse we have reached at the moment, and how we can get out of this conundrum:

* THE PROBLEM: [https://metarationality.com/stem-fluidity-bridge A bridge to meta-rationality vs. civilizational collapse] By David Chapman at Meaningness.com.

* THE SOLUTION ? : '''[[Thought-Shapers]]. By Robert Hanna and Otto Paans. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 17, no. 1, 2021.''' [https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/923/1560]. For a more extensive treatment, see: [[Theory of Thought-Shapers]]

* WHERE WE ARE GOING: '''[[What is the Noosphere]]?''' Planetary superorganism, major evolutionary transition and emergence. By Clément Vidal. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 2024 [https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/sres.2997]


More:

* [[Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition]]: from mimetic, to mythic, to theoretic cognitive transmission between humans. See the book: [[Origins of the Modern Mind]]. By Merlin Donald. 1991
* [[Great Information Transitions in the Past and the Present]]. By René Barsalo.
* [[Evolving from Egocentric Competition via Sociocentric Collaboration to Worldcentric and Kosmocentric Collaboration]]
* [[Defining Integral Consciousness]]. Cynthia Bourgeault clarifying Jean Gebser's take.


* '''New Grounds for a Re-Union Between Science and Spirituality. By ERVIN LASZLO.''' World Futures The Journal of General Evolution 62 (1-2 / January-March 2006):3-5 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233513934_New_Grounds_for_a_Re-Union_Between_Science_and_Spirituality]: "Science is recovering its basic mission of making sense of the world. As a search for meaning it is similar to spirituality. The difference between science and spirituality is not in the end they seek, but in the way they seek it. Science uses rational thinking in analyzing and interpreting what experience and experiment discloses, whereas spirituality combines experience with the immediacy of an intuition that speaks to a reality that underlies the world conveyed by the senses."


See also:

#[[Emergence of a Global Brain‎]]. Francis Heylighen
#[[Science of Collective Intelligence‎]]. Norman L Johnson
#[[Civic Intelligence and the Public Sphere‎]]. Douglas Schuler
#[[Co-intelligence, Collective Intelligence, and Conscious Evolution]]. Tom Atlee‎
#Kingsley Dennis on The Great Acceleration: '''The [[Astounding Growth in the Psychological Evolution of the Human Self]].'''
#[[Moving from Binary to Ternary Thinking]]. John Michael Greer
#[[Collective Sense-Making as Negotiated Agreement]]. Harold Jarche 
#The [[Evolution of Cognition]]. William L. Benzon and David G. Hays. [http://asweknowit.ca/evcult/CogEvol.shtml]
#[[Understanding the Difference Between Ken Wilber's Developmental Stages and Jean Gebser's Unfolding Structures of Consciousness]]
#[[Conscious vs Real Knowledge According to the Daoist Tradition]]. By Dev Lewis.




'''Thomas Malone:'''

#Harnessing Crowds: [[Mapping the Genome of Collective Intelligence]]. By Thomas Malone, Robert Laubacher, and Chrysanthos Dellarocas. [http://cci.mit.edu/publications/CCIwp2009-01.pdf]
#[[What is Collective Intelligence]]? Thomas Malone 


'''[[George Por]]:'''

* [[Cultivating Collective Intelligence Leadership‎]]. George Pór

See also:

#Evolutionary Worldview Rising, Integral Leadership Review, http://www.integralleadershipreview.com/archives-2010/2010-06/2010-06-notes-por.php
#Collective Intelligence and Collective Leadership: Twin Paths to Beyond Chaos, University of Amsterdam, http://sprouts.aisnet.org/8-2/
#Connecting Our Conversations for Becoming Wiser Together, Kosmos Journal, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/104
#Collective Intelligence as a Field of Multi-disciplinary Study and Practice, Evolutionary Nexus, http://www.evolutionarynexus.org/node/606
#Designing for the Emergence of a Global-scale Collective Intelligence, The First Global Brain Workshop, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/106 
#Nurturing Systemic Wisdom through Knowledge Ecology, The Systems Thinker, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/98 
#Quest for Collective Intelligence, Community Building: Renewing Spirit and Learning in Business, http://www.visionnest.com/btbc/cb/chapters/quest.htm


'''Howard Rheingold:'''

* '''Report: [[Rapid Decision Making for Complex Issues]]. HOW TECHNOLOGIES OF COOPERATION CAN HELP. Andrea Saveri and Howard Rheingold. INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE, 2005.'''


'''Nova Spivack:'''

#[[Towards Healthy Virtual Selves for Collective Groups]]; From the recommended essay: [http://www.twine.com/item/11ktvpjz6-rl/how-to-build-the-global-mind How to Build the Global Mind]
#[[Harnessing the Collective Intelligence of the Web‎]]. 


'''John Stewart:''' 

#The [http://cogprints.org/5270/1/Consciousness-Evolution.pdf evolution of consciousness], rooted in complexity and cognitive sciences. See Stewart, J. E. (2007) The future evolution of consciousness, Journal of Consciousness Studies, Vol. 14, No. 8, Pp. 58-92.
#[[Evolutionary Manifesto]] ; book: [[Evolution's Arrow]]


==Key Books==

* The [[Evolution of Meaning]]. A Universal Learning Process. By Brendan Graham Dempsey. Sky Meadow Press, 2024
[https://www.skymeadowinstitute.org/press]


* We recommend the two books by Merlin Donald:

#[[Origins of the Modern Mind]]: [[Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition]]. By Merlin Donald. 1991
#Merlin Donald. A Mind So Rare: The [[Evolution of Human Consciousness]].


*  '''Bernard Lonergan. Insight: A [[Study of Human Understanding]''']. 1957: on [[Cross-Horizon Encounter]] as a condition for truth.

Others:

# [[Human Minds]]. By Margaret Donaldson. (' a remarkable book ',cfr [[From Intersubjectivity to Interbeing]] ): introduces the scientific basis for the [[Value Sensing Transcendent Mode]], i.e. the basis of religious experience.
# David Pitt & Paul R. Samson (eds.),‎ The [[Biosphere and Noosphere Reader]]: Global Environment, Society and Change (1998) [http://avalonlibrary.net/ebooks/Samson,%20Pitt%20-%20The%20Biosphere%20and%20Noosphere%20Reader%20Global%20Environment%20Society%20and%20Change.pdf download]
# George Dyson. '''[[Darwin Among the Machines]]: The Evolution Of Global Intelligence''': wonderful history of the network mind
#Otto Laske. [[Manual of Dialectical Thought Forms]].
# '''COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE: Creating a Prosperous World at Peace.''' Ed. by Mark Tovey. This book contains key essays from all major figures in the field. Full online version [http://www.oss.net/dynamaster/file_archive/080220/e85a39f0bcddd8a1352d573626dcc63a/Complete-4.0%20Book%20Text%20648%20sides.pdf]
# [[Handbook of Collective Intelligence]] By Thomas W. Malone et al.: This Handbook provides a survey of the field of collective intelligence, summarizing what is known, providing references to sources for further information, and suggesting possibilities for future research.
# Global brain as mechanism for global commons, see: [[Global Brain and Universal History]]: PhD Thesis: Global Brain Singularity:. Universal history, future evolution and humanity's dialectical horizon. By Cadell N. Last. Vrije Universiteit Brussel Faculty of Arts and Philosophy, Doctoral School of Human Sciences. [https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf]
#P.R. Sarkar, The Liberation of Intellect. Calcutta, Ananda Marga Publications, 1982. Sohail Inayatullah recommends: "Argues that we need to relocate the intellect outside of the self, race, nation, and humanism and embrace plants, animals, humans and inanimate life. Compelling series of essays." [https://www.metafuture.org/bio.htm]


=== Evolution of Human Consciousness and Intelligence ===

* Giorgio di Santillana and Hertha von Dechen. Hamlet's Mill: An Essay Investigating the Origins of Human Knowledge And Its Transmission Through Myth

* Merlin Donald. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition

* Julian Jaynes. The [[Origins of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind]]

== Key Podcasts ==

* [[Terrence Deacon on Mind’s Emergence From Matter]] [https://www.jimruttshow.com/terrence-deacon/]


== Key Statistics ==

"In considering the brain, we are talking about a population of hundreds of billions of cells that far exceeds the number of stars in the sky. The number of possible connections these cells can make exceeds the number of particles in the universe.

To give a sense of this, consider that the cortex of your brain has 30 billion neurons. It has a million billion connections, at least. If you counted one connection per second, you would not finish counting until 32 million years later."

- Gerald Edelman [https://www.noemamag.com/who-knows-what-consciousness-is/]

==Key Tags==

#[http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/Collective-Intelligence Collective Intelligence]
#[http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Learning P2P Learning]
#[http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Epistemology P2P Epistemology]

[[Category:P2P_Domains]]