This new section will monitor 'peer to peer warfare', security, cyber-crime and similar issues.


* [https://prism-break.org/ Overview of tech tools to protect your privacy and internet freedoms]


=Citations=


==Transparency IS privacy==

"Ironically, I realized long ago that the best way to keep your privacy is to act as if everything you do is in public. Only those who know you and love you and are intimate with you will realize how different you really are from that GPI profile you gave out so freely. Or, as Mikhail Naimy said long before we went digital: speech is at best an honest lie. To which I would add, the image of yourself that you project in a public space is the pathway to retaining your privacy. The Zen Koan of our freedoms: More disclosure, more privacy."

- David Lane [http://www.integralworld.net/lane54.html]

=Key Resources=

==[[Internet Security Resources]]==

#[[FLOSS Manual for Circumvention Tools‎]] ; Bypassing Internet Censorship. [http://en.flossmanuals.net/CircumventionTools/AboutThisManual]
#[[Guide to Mobile Security for Citizen Journalists‎;]] [http://mobileactive.org/mobilesecurity-citizenjournalism] 
#[[EPIC Online Guide to Practical Privacy Tools‎]] [http://epic.org/privacy/tools.html] 
#[[Anonymous Blogging with WordPress and Tor]]‎ [http://advocacy.globalvoicesonline.org/projects/guide/]
#[[Security in a Box‎]]
#[[Quick Guide to Secure Communication‎]] [http://www.digiactive.org/2009/06/26/secure-comm/]
#[[Everyone's Guide to Bypassing Internet Censorship‎]]


==Key Articles==

#[[John Robb on Cyberinfrastructure Defense]]
#The [[Power of Statelessness]]. By Jakub Grygiel: The withering appeal of the state [http://www.hoover.org/publications/policyreview/41708942.html]
#'''[http://irevolution.wordpress.com/2009/06/15/digital-security/ How To Communicate Securely in Repressive Environments].''' Patrick Meier: ''Core to effective strategic nonviolent action is the need to remain proactive and on the offensive; the rationale being that both the resistance movement and repressive regime have an equal amount of time allocated when the show-down begins. If the movement becomes idle at any point, this may give the regime the opportunity to regain the upper hand, or vice versa.''
#Athina Karatzogianni Dr. 2011. "[[Cyberconflict and the Future of Warfare]]" Hall Gardner and Oleg Kobtzeff (eds.) Ashgate Companion to War, Ashgate, forthcoming''' [http://works.bepress.com/athina_karatzogianni/8]
#Patricia Hynes: [[War and the Tragedy of the Commons‎]], 7-part series
#David Morris: The [http://www.onthecommons.org/military-and-commons Military and the Commons]


==Key Books==

*  The [[Internet Police]]: How Crime Went Online, and the Cops Followed, by Nate Anderson

"Nate Anderson is a writer for Ars Technica and has had occasion to report on many stories of crime—and investigation—online. In The Internet Police, he gets a chance to re-tell the most interesting, using those anecdotes to make points about how law enforcement reacts to technology. ... His take is always readable and informative." (https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/12/effs-reading-list-books-2013)


==Key Tags==

For updates, see the following tags:

#http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Warfare
#http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Security
#http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Crime
#http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Policing

[[Category:P2P Domains]]