This is the comprehensive list of participants, in alphabetical order by last name, of the [[ECC2013|Economics Commons Conference 2013]].

A as yet incomplete draft list of participants per country is available [http://p2pfoundation.net/ECC2013/Participants here]

For a list of organizational affiliations, see [http://p2pfoundation.net/ECC2013/Organizations here]

If your name is missing, or for any change, write to michel at p2pfoundation dot net.


== A ==

* [[Nils Aguilar]], Germany , French documentary filmmaker, transition researcher
* [[Philippe Aigrain]], France, free software, digital freedoms, commons writer, La Quadrature du Net
* [[Nicole Alix]], France , Secretary of the Board of the International Forum of Social and Solidarity Economy Entrepreneurs- Mont-Blanc Meetings
* [[Alain Ambrosi]], Canada ; documentary filmmaker [[Remix the Commons]], represents [[Communautique]]
* [[Yumin Ao]], China - USA ; Adjunct professor in Chinese language and literature at George Mason University

== B ==

* [[Saki Bailey]], Italy ; Director of “Occupying the Commons: Teatro Valle Occupato.” 
* [[Sophie Ball]], UK ; Phd thesis title: [[Reclaiming the Commons]]: a discourse for new politics
* [[Michel Bauwens]], Belgium ; [[P2P Foundation]] , [[Commons Strategies Group]]
* [[Markus Beckedahl]], Germany ; Blogger and operator of netzpolitik.org
* [[Anna Betz]], UK ; Co-founder of the School of Commoning, particular interest in protecting healthcare from enclosure
* [[Bruna Bianchi]], Italy ; Associate Professor ( History of Political Thought and Women's History) at the University Ca’Foscari of Venice 
* [[Balász Bodó]], Hungary/Netherlands ; Economist, assistant professor, researcher at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics
* [[David Bollier]], USA ; [[Commons Strategies Group]]
* [[Alexa Bradley]], USA ; Program Director at [[On The Commons]] focused on the [[Great Lakes Commons Initiative]]
* [[Michael Brie]], Germany ; Philosopher, director of the Institute for social analysis at the [[Rosa Luxemburg Foundation]]
* [[Marvin Brown]], USA ; author of ‘[[Civilising the Economy]]’
* [[Nicola Bullard]], Australia/ France/ Thailand ; [[Focus on the Global South]].
* [[Leo Burke]], USA ; Professor and Director of the [[Global Commons Initiative]]
* [[Allen Butcher]], US) ; Self-employed author focusing upon intentional community and other applications of time-based economics

== C ==

* [[Paolo Cacciari]], Italy ; Journalist,  previous council member of Venice and previous member of parliament in charge of the environment. Author of publications on degrowth and commons.
* [[Rahul Chaturverdi]], India; Senior Programme Officer at the [[Foundation for Ecological Security]] (FES)
* [[Christin Chemnitz]], Germany ; Head of Department International Agricultural Policy at the [[Heinrich Böll Foundation]] since 2007
* [[Shun-Ling Chen]], Taiwan/US ;dissertation: The Haunting Author in the Distribution of Ownership and Authority: An exploration through Collaborative Cultural Production. 
* [[Gino Cocchiaro]], Italy ; lawyer with a South African based NGO named Natural Justice
* [[Pat Conaty]], UK ; fellow of new economics foundation and a research associate of Co-operatives UK
* [[Daniel Constein]], Germany ; founding member of Förderverein Wachstumswende e.V. and member of "Netzwerk Wachstumswende" - a German network and plattform for scientistist and practitioners working towards an economy and society beyond the growth paradigm
* [[Chris Cook]], UK ; Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Security and Resilience Studies at University College London
* [[Benjamin Coriat]], France ; Professor of Economics at the University Paris 13
* [[Vladimir Cvijanović]], Croatia ; member of Group 22 (think tank dedicated to green/left progressive politics)

== D ==

* [[GiacomO D’Alisa]]; Italy/Spain , Research fellow at the  Institute of Science and Environmental Technology (ICTA) of Autonomous  University Barcelona
* [[Daniel Dahm]], Germany ; Executive Director of Ethical-Ecological Rating at Goethe-University
* [[Brian Davey]], UK ; [[Feasta]]
* [[Philipp Degens]], Germany ; Phd student and research fellow in the Department for Cooperative Studies at the University of Cologne
* [[Daniel Dietrich]], Germany ; Chairman of the German Chapter of the [[Open Knowledge Foundation]]
* [[Danijela Dolenec]], Croatia ; University of Zagreb, teaching comparative politics and social science methodology

== E ==

* [[Kai Ehlers]], Germany ;  focuses on political, economic and cultural developments in the post-soviet area.
* [[Jan Engelmann]] , Germany ; Head of Department Politics and Society at Wikimedia Deutschland e.V.

== F ==

* [[Rick Falkvinge]], Sweden ; Founder of the first Pirate Party
* [[Joshua Farley]], US ; Ecological  economist and Associate Professor in Community Development & Applied  Economics and Public Administration at  the University of Vermont
* [[Tommaso Fattori]], Italy ; leader of the [[Water Commons]] movement in Italy
* [[Helene Finidori]], France/Spain ; founding member of the Commons Abundance Network
* [[Marco Fioretti]], Italy ; free software activist and educator
* [[Tim Flitcroft]], UK ; Economics Working group in Occupy London
* [[Gary Flomenhoft]], US ; Fellow at the Gund Institute for Ecological Economics and Research Associate/Lecturer Rubenstein School for Environment and Natural Resources at the University of Vermont
* [[Juan Freire]], Spain ; Director of Innovation at Barrabés Next (consulting firm specialized in organizational transformation and  innovation)
* [[Birte Friebel]], Germany ; studying Cultural Anthropology and European Ethnology at Frankfurt University
* [[Lili Fuhr]], Germany ; Head of department Ecology and Sustainable Development at the Heinrich Böll Foundation
* [[Mayo Fuster Morell]] Spain & USA ; [http://www.IGOPnet.cc IGOPnet.cc] digital commoner and research on commons; [http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/mfustermorell Berkman center fellow]

== G ==

* [[Julia Gechter]], Germany ; Film maker, producer of the short documentary ‘Commons - the principle of sharing’.
* [[Nikolay Georgiev]], Germany/Bulgaria; Organizational developer of Open Source Ecology Germany
* [[Jonathan Gordon-Farleigh]], UK ; director of STIR, a community, co-operative, and commons-orientated magazine.
* [[Neal Gorenflo]], US ; Co-founder and publisher of  Shareable Magazine, a nonprofit online magazine about sharing. 
* [[Eli Gothill]], UK ; expert in alternative currencies
* [[Daniela Gottschlich]], Germany; political scientist at Leuphana University in Lüneburg, 
* [[Volker Grassmuck]], Germany ; Sociologist and media researcher at the Leuphana University in Lüneburg
* [[Silija Graupe]], Germany;  Assistant professor philosophy and economics at the Institute for philosophical and aesthetic education of the Alanus University of Arts and Social Sciences
* [[Bernardo Gutiérrez]], Brazil /Spain ; CEO and Founder of Futura Media, a glocal innovation network around openness  settled in São Paulo (Brazil).

== H ==

* [[Friederike Habermann]], Germany ; Economist and historian, author and self-employed scientist. She works on intersectionality, global social movements and alternative economic systems.
* [[Dorethea Haerlin]], Germany ; founding member of GiB (Gemeingut in BürgerInnenhand = Commons in citizen's hands) and member of the European Water Movement.
* [[Gwendolyn Hallsmith]], US ; Director of Planning and  Community Development for the City of Montpelier, Founder and former Executive Director of Global Community Initiatives
* [[Kevin Hansen]], US ; Independent filmmaker, environmental activist and geophysicist working on a feature documentary about the Commons
* [[Samer Hassan]], Spain/Lebanon ; Activist, researcher and Assistant Professor at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Co-founder of the Comunes.org
* [[Hermann Hatzfeldt]], Germany ; Forester, author on environmental politics and forest decline, Board member of the HKH Foundation.
* [[Johannes Heimrath]], Germany ; Editor and author of ‘Post-collapse society’ 
* [[Silke Helfrich]], Germany; co-founder of the [[Commons Strategies Group]]
* [[Wolfgang Hoeschele]], US/Germany ; Published "The Economics of Abundance" in 2010. Now engaged in the [[Commons Abundance Network]], [http://commonsabundance.net/]
* [[Santiago Hoerth]], Ecuador ;  founder and coordinator of the latinamerican collective Código Sur (www.codigosur.org).

== I ==

* Franco Iacomella, Argentina
* [[Christian Iaione]], Italy ; Editor-in-chief of Labsus.org. He has published articles in the field of public and administrative law, urban commons, urban planning and land use law

== J ==

* [[Joe Justice]], US ; Team Lead of WIKISPEED; a crowd-funded and crowd-sourced road-legal car company

== K ==

* [[Gregor Kaiser]], Germany, Activist against biopiracy and gene technology. Phd dissertation title: ‘Propriety and the Commons. Genetic resources and the quest for alternatives to intellectual propriety’.
* [[Theodoros Karyotis]], Greece ; Sociologist, translator and activist participating in social movements that promote self-management, solidarity economy and defence of the commons.
* [[Margrit Kennedy]], Germany ; author of [[Interest and Inflation Free Money]] - Creating an exchange medium that works for  everybody and protects the earth'. [http://www.margritkennedy.de]
* [[Miriam Kennet]], UK ; CEO, director and  co-founder of the Green Economics Institute. 
* [[Justin  Kenrick]], UK ; works with the Forest Peoples Programme to support Forest Peoples in Africa secure their rights, and also for local  community resilience initiative in Scotland
* [[Effrosyni Koutsouti]], Anthropologist, vice-president of the Documentation and Research Center of Ikaria and president of the Women's Cooperative of Katafygi.
* [[Brigitte Kratzwald]] Austria, Social scientist and commons activist, [http://www.commons.at commons.at]
* [[Nicolas Krausz]], France ; [[Charles Leopold Mayer Foundation]]
* [[Gaelle Krikorian]], France ; Leader of a working group on Access to Knowledge, i.e. Accès aux Savoirs, in Paris, France.

== L ==

* [[Edgardo Lander]], Venezuela
* [[Zofia Lapniewska]], Poland ; lecturer & Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Center for Transdisciplinary Gender Studies at the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. 
* [[Holger Lauinger]], Germany ; Journalist writing about urban and regional planning, articles include ‘Reclaim the Commons’, 
* [[Heike Löschmann]], Germany ; [[Heinrich Boll Foundation]] ; head of department for International Politics ; lead person for the Foundation´s programmatic work on the Commons

== M ==

* [[Jorge Machado]], Brazil ; coordinator of GPOPAI (Research Group in Public Policy on Access to Information.             
* [[Ugo Mattei]], Italy, legal scholar with commons focus
* [[David MacBryde]], USA, participatory publishing
* [[Iva Marcetic]], Croatia
* [[Tadzia Maya]], Brazil ; part of two collectives: the School of the  Rain Forest (www.escoladamataatlantica.org), where TM coordinates the Free Seeds House and also in i-Motiro, cultural association connected to  free software.   
* [[Smári McCarthy]], Iceland) ; Executive Director at Internaitonal modern Media Institute (IMMI), a co-founder of the Icelandic Digital Freedoms Society
* [[Tomislav Medak]], Croatia ; organizes theory and publishing activities for Multimedia Institute/MAMA, project lead of Creative Commons Croatia, and activist of Right to the City Zagreb
* [[Armin Medosch]], Austria ; Artist, curator and writer working in media art and network culture. He has been founding editor of the award winning international online magazine Telepolis.
* [[Nicolás Mendoza]], Colombia ; Collaborator of the P2P Foundation and co-author of the [[Synthetic Overview of the Collaborative Economy]] report. Editorial board of Bitcoin Magazine. 
* [[Stefan Meretz]], Germany, co-founder of the [http://kemiform.de/ keimform.de] blog
* [[Carl Middleton]], Thailand ; Lecturer on the International Development Studies Program, Faculty of Political Science, Chulalongkorn University ;  focus on environmental justice, the political ecology of water and energy resources, and  sharing local and trans-boundary commons. 
* [[Glyn Moody]], UK, digital rights activist
* [[Camila Moreno]], Colombia ; Creative Commons and IP legal expert
* [[Christa Müller]], Germany ; Sociologist and director of the Stiftungsgemeinschaft anstiftung & ertomis. She researches and publishes about sustainable lifestyles, urban gardening and sustainable concepts of welfare. 
*[[Tara Mulqueen]], UK ; Phd student at Birbeck University of London. Her dissertation title is: Co-operation and Social economy in Critical perspective.

== N ==

* [[Anil Naidoo]], Canada ; Founding member of Red Vida (Inter-American Network on the Defense and Right to Water) and the African Water Network.
* [[Claudia Neubauer]], France ; co-founder and director of [[Fondation Sciences Citoyennes]], a non profit organisation located in Paris that aims at democratising sciences and technologies
* [[Kim Nommesch]], Luxembourg/Germany ; Conference Assistant at the Heinrich Böll Foundation
* [[Tsewang Norbu]], Germany ; [[Heinrich Böll Foundation]]

== P ==

* [[Andrew Paterson]], Scotland / Finland ; artist-organizer, outreach & education coordinator at Pixelache, also researcher into relations between contemporary and traditional nordic-baltic commons practices
* [[Jukka Peltokoski]], Finland ; Educational producer and political researcher KSL Civic Association for Adult Learning.
* [[Walter Pengue]], Argentina ; economist.  Agricultural engineer  with focus on evaluation of environmental and socioeconomic impacts of the implementation of  new technologies.
* [[Elizabeth Peredo]], Bolivia ; Executive Director of Solon Foundation based in La Paz and works on water, economy, culture and feminist issues."
* [[George Pór]], UK ; Co-Director of the School of Commoning
* [[Denis Postle]], UK ; advocates of Psycommons, research ‘with’ people in therapy and peer2peer group structures. Participant in the Independent Practitioners Network (IPN)

==R==

* [[Eva Ressel]] ,Germany ; freelancing facilitator, consultant, process coach, action researcher of transition projects and team member of Impuls - Agency for Applied Utopia [http://www.impuls.net/]. 
* [[Nancy Roof]], US ; Founder of "Kosmos Journal: The Journal for World Citizens Creating the New Civilization" in consultative status with the United Nations. 
* [[Richard Rosen]], US ; Executive Vice-President and a founding member of [[Tellus Institute]] (research and policy organization working towards a sustainable, just, and livable global civilization).
* [[Alain Ruche]] , Belgium ; EU offical working on strategic issues with the Secretary General of the EU External Service. Concerned with actions inspired with new ideas and out of the box thinking.

== S ==

* [[Wolfgang Sachs]], Germany ; Senior Research Fellow at the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy 
* [[Hendro Sangkoyo]], Indonesia ; Based in Jakarta, Indonesia, cofounder and principal researcher at the School of Democratic Economics
* [[Angélica Schenerock]], Mexico ; Coordinator at Agua y Vida: Mujeres, Derechos y Ambiente AC. 
* [[Gerhard Scherhorn]], Germany ; Consultant at the Wuppertal Institute, former head of the   working group ‘New models of wealth’ and ‘Sustainable production and consumption’
* [[Thomas Schlechte]], Germany ; Economist. Freelancer at the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy (Research Group: Sustainable Production and Consumption)
* [[Ludwig Schuster]], Germany ; German Open Money advocate, with particular interest in Monetary Regionalisation and energy-backed currencies
* [[Siegfried Schroeder]], Germany ; Political scientist. Director of East African Regional Office of the Rosa Luxemburg Foundation, Dar es Salaam
* [[Orsan Senalp]], Netherlands / Turkey ; social movement and labour activist, promotes P2P-oriented [[Social Network Unionism]]
* [[Stefano Serafini]], Italy ; Co-founder, secretary-general, and research director at the International Society of Biourbanism. Managing editor of Journal of Biourbanism. 
* [[Anna Seravalli]], Italy ; Design researcher with a background in industrial and service design based at MEDEA Malmö Unversity where she is part of the Malmö Living Labs
* [[Christian Siefkes]], Germany ;  Freelance software engineer and author with research interest in the emancipatory potential of free software, open hardware, and other forms of commons-based peer production, Co-founder and blogger on keimform.de
* [[Anne Snick]], Belgium ; Department Coordinator in the Flora Network of Expertise on Gender, Sustainability and Interconnected Economics. Her research interests are gender, commons-based peer-production and systems thinking.
* [[Pablo Solon]], Bolivia/Thailand ; Executive Director of Focus on the Global South.
* [[Gustavo Soto]], Bolivia ; Writer and consultant  in the domain of indigenous rights, national director of Centro de Estudios  Aplicados a los Derechos Económicos, Sociales y Culturales (CEADESC) 
* [[Felix Stalder]], Switzerland ; Lecturer at the Insitute for Contemporary Art Research at the Zurich University of Arts with a focus on media economics and co-founder of Openflows (an international open source research and development network). 
* [[Ulrich Steinvorth]], Germany ; Philosopher and chair at Bilkent University in Ankara, professor of philosophy at the University of Hamburg. 
* [[Frederic Sultan]], France ; coordinator of [[Remix the Commons]]
* [[Maristella Svampa]], Argentina ; coordinator of the Group of Critical Studies of  the Development and member of collectives ‘Plataforma 2012’.
* [[Talha Syed]], US ; research focuses on political philosophy, normative analysis of copyright, commons-based approaches to resource management, and patents and alternative innovation policies for pharmaceuticals.

== T ==

* [[Jia Lyng Tang]], Germany ; Research Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS Potsdam). Coordinator in Berlin of the Young Scholars Initiative (YSI Commons)
* [[Wouter Tebbens]], Netherlands ; president of the [[Free Knowledge Institute]] and [[Free Technology Academy]] ; co-founded the [[Escuela de los Commons]] in Barcelona
* [[Hans Thie]], Germany ;Advisor on economic policy for DIE LINKE (Left Party) in the German Bundestag, specializes in renewable energy transition
* [[Benjamin Tincq]], France, co-founder and Global Connector for Ouishare
* [[Tero Toivanen]], Finland ; researcher into the political economy of the commons, co-founder of Commons.fi
* [[Alan Toner]], Israel ; IP researcher and free culture activist
* [[Antje Tönnis]], Germany ; Public relations manager at GLS Treuhand (umbrella  organisation for individuals and institutions working on giving money for the common good),
* [[Stefan Tuschen]], Germany ; researcher for Bread for the World - Protestant Development Service, sustainable Germany project

== U ==

* [[Barbara Unmüßig]], President of the Heinrich Böll Foundation

== V ==

* [[Christophe Vaillant]], Germany ; Designer and Hacktivist, Co-Initiator of Makerspace „Open Design City“ in Berlin.
* [[Filippo Valguarnera]], Sweden/Italy ; co-leader of a research  project on access to commons in the frame of the Common Core of European Private Law.
* [[Ruby Van der Wekken]], Finland ; co-founder of Stadin Aikapankki (members exchange services on the basis of time) and member of www.commons.fi.
* [[Nikola Vrdoljak]], Croatia ; member of Group 22 (think tank dedicated to green/left progressive politics).
* [[Roberto Verzola]], Philippines ; coordinates the rice farming network SRI-Pilipinas and the Philippine election watchdog Halalang Marangal, actively participates in the international CopySouth Research Group, and is currently writing a book on the political economy of abundance.

== W ==

* [[Jay Walljasper]], USA ; editor of ‘[[All That We Shar]]e A Field Guide to the  Commons’, editor of Commons Magazine
* [[Hilary Wainwright]], co-founder and chief editor of Red Pepper magazine
* [[Tom Walker]], Canada ; Instructor in the Labour Studies Program at Simon Fraser University ; Author of "Time on the Ledger: Social Accounting for the 'Good Society'" 
* [[Chris Watkins]], Australia ; Co-developer of  the wiki website appropedia.org which collects collaborative solutions in sustainability, appropriate  technology and poverty reduction. 
* [[Andreas Weber]], Germany ; a Berlin based book and mgazine writer ; proposing to understand organsims as subjects and hence the biosphere as a meaning-creating and poetic reality
* [[Gerd Wessling]], Germany , helping to bring the Transition model to Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
* [[Burns Weston]], USA ; legal scholar, Senior Scholar at the UI Center for Human Rights, Co-director of the Commons Law project, co-author of ‘Green Governance: Ecological Survival, Human Rights, and the Law of the Commons’
* [[Susan Witt]], USA ; Executive Director of the Schumacher Center for a New Economics

== Z ==

* [[Raul Zelik]], Germany ; Associated professor for Political Science at the National University of Colombia in Medellín ; author of ‘Vermessung der Utopie’ (with Elmar Altvater), ‘Nach dem Kapitalismus. Perspektiven der Emanzipation‘. [http://www.raulzelik.net]

= More Information =

* an earlier list of bios prepared for the program brochure is at  http://openetherpad.org/BioForECC-ProgramPrintedVersion

=First Name Directory=

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Conferences]]