* if you are looking for 'the' literary genre appropriate for the p2p/commons movement, look no further than [[Solarpunk]]

* The key S-F book that has inspired much of what we do at the P2P Foundation was 'The Diamond Age' by Neal Stephenson, which describes a fully networked society where the nation-states have largely withered away. The EdgeRyders recommend 'Walkaway' by Cory Doctorow, as an update. Tim Morgan recommends 'Stealing Worlds' by Karl Schroeder. Kim Stanley Robinson's Ministry of the Future also comes highly recommended by many.

* The EdgeRyder, with [[Econ SF]], coordinated by Alberto Cottica et al., are systematically reviewing contemporary S-F authors that focus on potentially new economic visions, that are in line with p2p dynamics and the commons vision: https://edgeryders.eu/t/econ-sf-a-selection-of-works-and-authors/8582?u=alberto


=Contextual Quote=

"Cyberpunk and Solarpunk are actually based on very similar tenets. Both contain the central idea that human nature doesn’t tend to change. The key difference is that Cyberpunk assumes that the worst human traits will dominate, leading greed and exploitation to win out. Consequently, Cyberpunk is full of grimdark dystopian visions and high levels of cynicism. Solarpunk in contrast assumes that the best human traits will dominate, giving more optimistic eutopian (not utopian) visions. Cyberpunk is in reaction to the shiny spacesuits and silver rockets of the 1960s. Solarpunk, in turn, is in reaction to Cyberpunk.
Where Cyberpunk is about nihilism, Solarpunk is about anti-nihilism."

- A solarpunk statement [http://solarpunks.tumblr.com/post/167515987698/a-solarpunk-statement]


=Key Resources=

#[http://theweeklyansible.tumblr.com/post/20777236577/50-sci-fi-fantasy-works-every-socialist-should 50 Sci-Fi & Fantasy Works Every Socialist Should Read, by China Mieville]
#[http://shareable.net/blog/shareable-futures Shareable Futures]: [http://shareable.net/ Shareable magazine] has a series of s-f fiction stories by Bruce Sterling and others, featuring futures based on sharing and sustainability
#Cory Doctorow: [[Technology Can Be a Force for Liberation]]. Introduction to the Persian edition of the science fiction novel Little Brother, by Cory Doctorow, London, June 2008 
#Delicious tags for updates at http://diigo.com/users/mbauwens/P2P-Fiction

=Reviews by P2P Foundation Collaborators=

* Kevin Carson reviews 

#The [[Makers]] by Cory Doctorow, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/review-cory-doctorow-the-makers/2010/02/24
#The [[Caryatids]]. Bruce Sterling, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/2065-p2p-vs-hollywood/2009/08/26


=Key P2P Fiction=

==Science Fiction==

'''* Bibliographies:'''

# http://io9.gizmodo.com/the-essential-cyberpunk-reading-list-1714180001


'''* Individual Books:'''

# Makers.  Cory Doctorow.  The second industrial revolution -- at the micro scale.
# Daemon and FreedomTM.  Daniel Suarez.  A second American revolution enabled by software.  Resilient communities.  
# Islands in the Net. Bruce Sterling. City state warfare (Singapore vs. Grenada). 
# Snow Crash.  Neal Stephenson.  Post nation-state thinking.  "Burbclave" city states vs. "Fedland"  (a bureaucratic nightmare of what's left of the gov't) vs. Criminal corporate franchises.
# The Diamond Age.  Neal Stephenson.  Nanotech warfare.  Nanotech future dissolves global social systems. People respond by recreating historical cultures to give meaning to their lives.  
(http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2010/12/books-science-fiction.html)

[[Category:P2P Multimedia Directory]]