'''A directory of social and political movements related to the P2P (participatory), open (open access to knowledge), and 'commons' paradigms.'''

Please read: 

* Overview Essay: '''[[Prophets and Advocates of Peer Production]]. By George Dafermos. Chapter 7: The Handbook of Peer Production. Wiley, 2020'''
[http://peerproduction.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Chapter-07_Prophets-and-Advocates-of-Peer-Production.pdf] 


=Introduction=

Marco Berlinguer:

"The free culture movements comprise a wide range of experiences
mainly emerging around the internet and the digital revolution.
They have generally developed independently, but they are loosely
aligned and show a mutually reinforcing dynamism – a ‘viral
spiral’, as David Bollier terms it.

All these movements emerged as practical and cultural
critiques of the aggressive attempts by corporations, aided by
Northern governments, to extend intellectual property rights
to knowledge, culture, information, communication and even
organisms and data. The process has been described as ‘the
second enclosures movement’ – the first being the enclosing of
common land and turning it into private property in late and
post-medieval England.

Following Felix Stalder, we can group these movements into
three different clusters:

* the [[Free Software Movement]], focusing on software source code;
* the [[Free Culture Movement]], focusing on cultural goods; and
* the [[Access To Knowledge]]  (A2K) movement, focusing on access to knowledge-intensive goods."

#Benjamin Mako Hill explains the [[Difference between the Free Software and Free Culture Movement]]
#[http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap22.pdf Conflicts in open source discourse]: review of idea currents in the free and open source software movement.
#David Bollier: [http://www.bollier.org/pdf/BerlinWizardsofOS3speechJune2004.pdf Is the Commons a movement?]


==Introductory Articles==

* Immanuel Wallerstein: [[Antisystemic Movements and the Future of Capitalism]]

=Sister Organizations=

The following are most similar in intent:


* [[Commons Strategies Group]]
* [[Oekonux]]
* [[Open Knowledge Foundation]]
* [[On The Commons]]
* [[Francophone Network for the Commons]]


'''We support this call: [[Towards a Federation of DIY Communities]]!'''

{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

=Citations=


==On P2P dialogue across the political spectrum==

"If anything, the Internet has allowed various decentralist traditions to cross-pollinate and reach a mainstream audience to a far larger extent than could have been imagined in the mid-90s. There are many online venues where mutualists, agrarians, distributists, Georgists, social crediters, Catholic Workers, Rothbardians and Greens compare their views, amiably for the most part, and find out how much they have in common."

- Thomas Woods [http://mutualist.blogspot.com/2005/02/thomas-woods-on-decentralist-left.html]



=Key Movements=

|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|


* Overview Essay: '''[[Prophets and Advocates of Peer Production]]. By George Dafermos. Chapter 7: The Handbook of Peer Production. Wiley, 2020'''
[http://peerproduction.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Chapter-07_Prophets-and-Advocates-of-Peer-Production.pdf] 

* [[History of the Movement for the Digital Commons]]; see:  Dulong de Rosnay, M. & Stalder, F. (2020). Digital commons. Internet Policy Review, 9(4). [http://felix.openflows.com/node/592]


==Commons for Labor and the Working Class==

===[[Jem Bendell's Strategy for a Deep Adaptationist Commons Transition]]===


1. We can’t prepare for collapse within the system that’s causing it. We must lay the foundations of a new system.

2. We’ll need to produce and distribute food and other essentials, and maintain houses, energy and water infrastructure outside of the corporate system

3. Modern social and environmental movements in the UK (and beyond) have failed to engage working-class communities.

4. The commons can lay the foundations of a new system, while providing the essentials in working-class communities.
Description

==The 'Open' Paradigm==

===Key Movements supporting the Open paradigm=== 

* [[FOSS Organizations Directory]]

* On the [[Difference between the Free Software and Free Culture Movement]]. By Benjamin Mako Hill.


====Open Education==== 

* [[David Wiley on the Open Education Movement]]

#[[Open Courseware Initiative]]
#[[Open Educational Resources]]


====Open Knowledge====

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Intellectual_property_activism Directory of IP activist movements and individuals]


* [[Melissa Hagemann on the Open Access Movement]]

#[[A2K Access to Knowledge]]
#[[Budapest Open Access Initiative]]
#[[Open Access Movement]]
#[[Open Archives Initiative]] 
#[[Open Content Alliance]]
#[[Open Knowledge Foundation]]

Public Domain:

#[[Public Domain Advocacy Organizations]]
#[[Union for the Public Domain]]

====Open Licensing====

* [[Creative Commons]]
* [[ICommons]]
* [[Science Commons]]


====Open Media====

* [[Kloschi on the Freifunk and Free Radio Movement]]

====Open Money====
* [[Open Money]]
====Open Software====

* [[Richard Stallman on the Free Software Movement and the Future of Freedom]]
* Manuel DeLanda: [[Open Source - A Movement in Search of Its Philosophy]]

#[[Free Software Foundation]]
#[[Open Source Initiative]] 
#Organizations for [http://www.gnu.org/links/links.html#FreedomOrganizations Freedom in Communication], a list maintained by the [[Free Software Foundation]]

====Open Standards====
*  [http://nyissz.hu/about Open Standards Alliance]
====Open Design and Open Manufacturing====

* [[Phil Torrone and Limor Fried on the Maker Movement]]

#[[Open Design Movement]]
#[[Open Source Hardware and Design Alliance]]


|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

==The P2P/Participative Paradigm==

===Key P2P/Participative Movements=== 
* [[Participatory Culture]]
* [[Free Culture movement]]
* [[Dignitarianism]]

===Cooperation/Collaboration===
* [[Cooperation Project]]

===Participative Political Movements===
* [[Alterglobalization Movement]] sites
* [[Association pour l'Economie Distributive]]
* [[Bien]]

===Alternative Political Economy===
* [[Access Foundation]]
* [[Complementary Currency Initiatives]]
* [[Global Income Foundation]]
* [[USBIG]]




==The Commons Paradigm==

* '''A strategy for the commons in the context of social transformation''': Massimo de Angelis, [[Crises, Movements and Commons]]. Borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012. [http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf]

#[[Bien Publics a Echelle Mondiale]]
#[[Creative Commons]]
#[[Friends of the Commons]]
#[[ICommons]]
#[[Science Commons]]
#[[Union for the Public Domain]]

==The Sharing Paradigm==

From a directory of [[Sharing Movements]] by Cat Johnson [http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-rise-of-the-sharing-communities]:

* [[Ouishare‎‎]]

===Local===

# [[Consumo Colaborativo‎]], Spain
# [[KoKonsum]], Germany
# [[People Who Share‎]], UK
# [[Unstash]], Toronto, Canada

'''USA:'''

# [[Collaborative Chats‎]], San Francisco, USA
# [[Let’s Collaborate‎]], NYC
# [[Share Exchange‎]], Santa Rosa, USA
# [[Share Tompkins‎]], Ithaca, NY
# [[Shared Squared]], NYC
# [[Sharers of San Francisco‎]]

==P2P Mass Mobilizations==

* The [[Dramatic Rise of P2P Communications within the Emancipatory Movements]]. Orsan Senalp.

#[[Alterglobalization Movement]]
#[[Occupy Wall Street]]
#[[15M Movement - Spain]]
#[[Pirate Party]]


==Approaches to Technology==

* [[Four Internet Historiographical Ideologies]]:

#[[Technolibertarianism]]
#[[Technoprogressivism]]
#[[Technoindividualism]]
#[[Technoidealism]]

|}

=Key Resources=

* 'monitoring global protest movements' through [[CrowdVoice]]

==Key Articles==

* '''A strategy for the commons in the context of social transformation''': Massimo de Angelis, [[Crises, Movements and Commons]]. Borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012. [http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf]

See also:

#David M. Berry, 2004. “The [[Contestation of Code]]: A preliminary investigation into the discourse of the free/libre and open source movement''',” Critical Discourse Studies, volume 1, number 1 (April), pp. 65–89 [http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/berry1.pdf]
#Benjamin Mako Hill, 2005. “Towards a standard of freedom: [[Creative Commons and the Free Software Movement]],” [http://mako.cc/writing/toward_a_standard_of_freedom.html]
#The [[Politics of the Libre Commons]] by David M. Berry and Giles Moss. First Monday, volume 11, number 9 [http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue11_9/berry/index.html]
#[http://www.grain.org/seedling/?id=409 On the Convergence of social movements to fight IPRs on information in various fields]: 10 contributions
#Stefan Meretz: [[Ten Theses About Global Commons Movement]]
#The [[Evolution of Social Systems]]: A summary of processes of decay and renewal by Seb Paquet

==Key Books==

* [[Blessed Unrest]]: How the Largest Movement in the World Came into Being and Why No One Saw It Coming. by Paul Hawken. Viking, 2007

[[Category:P2P Entity Type]]