The [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about the Collaborative Economy]] compiled by Michel Bauwens gives a wide selection of references, typologies, and links to other articles.

It is difficult to define the concept of the Collaborative Economy in any precise way (see: [[Collaborative Economy - Concept]]), so this section has very broad source material about the connection between economic practice and collaborative practice; the concept emerged in the years 2012-2013, and peaked in 2016.

See also our [[:Category: Sharing]] (concept: [[Sharing Economy]]) which is about more specific practices where previously idle resources are shared and exchanged over platforms.

==Useful Learning Resources==

===Introductory===
* [[Introduction to Open Source P2P Exchanges]]: Under 4 minutes video from around 2012. Exchanging goods and services through secure and trusted application without the need for currencies and intermediaries. The background to the [[Abundant Exchange]] platform. This is a really good intro to the idea of p2p exchanges. [http://vimeo.com/36041910]
* [[Shane Hughes on the Collaborative Economy]]: 12 minute TEDx talk from 2013.
* [[Joe Justice on Rapid and Agile Industrial Development at Wikispeed]]: Video of about 10 minutes from 2011. How all the pieces of the new 'p2p' puzzle go together to develop secure and sustainable manufacturing in very rapid ways. More info via [[WikiSpeed]].
* Historical record shows how intellectual property systematically slowed down innovation. Rick Falkvinge: [[Innovation Without IP - History]]
* [[Openness as a Competitive Advantage for Hardware and Manufacturing Eco-Systems]]. By Simone Cicero.

===Deeper Study===
* Work through the [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about the Collaborative Economy]].
* The four videos described in [[Four Future P2P Scenarios]] allow us to distinguish generative practices, (which add value to the community and its natural resource base), and extractrive practices.
* Report: A [[Synthetic Overview of the Collaborative Economy]]. By Michel Bauwens et al. (Orange Labs and P2P Foundation, 2012). [http://p2p.coop/files/reports/collaborative-economy-2012.pdf]
* Book: [[Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy]]. By Vasilis Kostakis and Michel Bauwens. Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. (an overview)


==Related Categories==
* The Collaborative Economy is naturally involved with the [[:Category: Commons]] and thus related to [[:Category: Commons Economics]]
* The [[:Category: EthicalEconomy|Ethical Economy]] focus on the work of scholar Adam Arviddson and more generally about economic practices that are intentionally geared towards ethical goals.
* The [[:Category: Circular Economy|Circular Economy]] which is not necessarily collaborative, aims to use the outpunt of one industrial output as resources for another, thereby minimizing waste and the use of natural resources.
* The [[:Category: Solidarity Economy|Solidarity Economy]] is a specific practice that integrates the social and political goal of human solidarity.
* The [[:Category: Sharing]] includes the [[Sharing Economy]], another overlapping but not identical concept.

For more theoretical background and understanding, see our sections on:
* [[:Category:P2P Theory|P2P Theory]]
* [[:Category:Economics|Economics]]
* [[:Category:Commons Economics|Commons Economics]]


[[Category:Economics]]