==Rationale==

This category collects learning materials and procedural pages in support of a project on ''Peer Educational Resources'' (PERs).  This project addresses a host of problems that I've observed arising in efforts to develop ''Open Educational Resources'' (OERs).

In connection with this idea, I envisioned a way organizing materials that uses the concepts of ''Focal Nodes'' and ''Peer Nodes''.

* '''Focal nodes''' serve as hubs for collections of related resources, in particular, activities and articles.

* '''Peer nodes''' are roughly parallel pages on different sites that are not necessarily identical in content &mdash; especially as they develop in time through interaction with diverse populations &mdash; but they should preserve enough information to reproduce each other, more or less, in case of damage or loss.

I'll try to articulate a more detailed rationale on this and other pages later on, but this project is somewhat more experimental than thoroughly worked out ahead of time &mdash; as I'll be looking for new ways to break out of developmental ruts that I've observed over the last decade.

==First Readings==

Though I don't recall being fully aware of it at the time &mdash; we were focused on the issues of integrative education and the potential of "transversities", not the active geometry of the Web &mdash; many of these developments were already anticipated in a paper that Susan Awbrey and I wrote for a conference on ''Re-Organizing Knowledge, Trans-Forming Institutions'' and later reworked for the journal ''Organization''.

* Awbrey, S.M., and Awbrey, J.L. (May 2001), "Conceptual Barriers to Creating Integrative Universities", ''Organization : The Interdisciplinary Journal of Organization, Theory, and Society'' 8(2), Sage Publications, London, UK, pp. 269&ndash;284.  [http://org.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/8/2/269 Abstract].

* Awbrey, S.M., and Awbrey, J.L. (September 1999), "Organizations of Learning or Learning Organizations : The Challenge of Creating Integrative Universities for the Next Century", ''Second International Conference of the Journal ''Organization'' '', ''Re-Organizing Knowledge, Trans-Forming Institutions : Knowing, Knowledge, and the University in the 21st Century'', University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA.  [http://www.cspeirce.com/menu/library/aboutcsp/awbrey/integrat.htm Online].

&mdash; [[User:Jon Awbrey|Jon Awbrey]]

==Peer Nodes==

* [http://mywikibiz.com/Category:Inquiry Category:Inquiry @ MyWikiBiz]
* [http://beta.wikiversity.org/wiki/Category:Inquiry Category:Inquiry @ Beta Wikiversity]
* [http://www.netknowledge.org/wiki/Category:Inquiry Category:Inquiry @ NetKnowledge]
* [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Inquiry Category:Inquiry @ P2P Foundation]
* [http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Category:Inquiry Category:Inquiry @ SemanticWeb]