Started in April 2024. Small section for now but we will monitor this domain.


=Quotes=

==Using Decentralized Protocols To Create Ecological Institutions==

Austin Wade-Smith:

"Decentralized protocols are systems of rules and standards that enable computers, devices, or individuals to communicate and share information without relying on a central authority or server. They enable distributed ownership of goods, and cooperative decision making around the use of those common resources. Organizations which hold resources, and record the governance related to those resources on the blockchain, are referred to as DAOs (decentralized autonomous organizations). Unlike cloud computing and conventional data storage which are authoritative and centralized, decentralized protocols uphold consensus between many different actors in a manner which is similar to ecological networks. 


This makes them well suited for applications of ownership and governance of common resources which are:

* easily accessed

* easily depleted


This includes many planetary systems like the atmosphere, water cycle, and the ozone. In short, commons. As such we feel it is important to consider how decentralized protocols might substantiate and amplify existing efforts for non-human agency.


We identify 4 domains in which decentralized protocols may further enable non-human agency and the creation of ecological institutions.

* Identity

* Ownership

* Sensing / Verification

* Governance "

(https://mirror.xyz/austinwadesmith.eth/tv9z1XXrtqQxDIxE8FygZ_W39NpkQJkVfrtjCtdbzA8)