New section, part of a collection of related sections on

* [[:Category: Crypto Governance]]

* [[:Category: Crypto Economy]]

* [[:Category: Crypto Politics]]

* [[:Category: Crypto Ecology]]

* [[:Category: Crypto Culture]]


=Key Resources=

==Articles==

'''* [[Decentralized Social Media]] (DeSco): 15 Years in the Making. Parallel Citizen.''' [https://x.com/AnalogueUSB/status/1965839088289992777]

"This essay traces the 15-year arc of decentralized social media: its failed experiments, quiet successes, and the unresolved dilemmas still haunting the vision. The goal is not to predict a single “Facebook killer,” but to map how protocols, incentives, and culture have evolved - and what that means for builders, investors, and communities exploring new digital sovereignties."

==Books==

* The [[Other Internet]], 2018-2024. Toby Shorin et al. 2025. [https://otherinternet.metalabel.com/other-internet-book?variantId=1]: 
"Documenting 6 years of research on crypto, cultural economies, and internet subcultures."

==Research==

* [[Decentralised Technologies for Self-Infrastructuring Resilience]]
** PhD Thesis: Bailey, Kelsie (2025). Decentralised Technologies: ‘Self-Infrastructuring’ Resilience. RMIT University.
[https://research-repository.rmit.edu.au/articles/thesis/Decentralised_Technologies_Self-Infrastructuring_Resilience/29614595?file=56438489]


==Technology==

'''* Introduction to [[Web5]], "a new paradigm that integrates the usability of Web2 with the decentralized values of Web3".'''