This category includes topics related to a P2P-oriented views of relations. Relationships, in the p2p tradition, are both inventive and exploratory. 

See the [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about Relational Topics]] by [[Michel Bauwens]] for a wide-ranging guide. Also of interest: [[Quotes on P2P and Commons-Based Relationality]]!


==Key Quotes==

"'''Cooperativity is fundamental ... There is no dictator in cell regulation, no first among equals, no master regulator, no top-down system of governance.'''"<br />

— Toby J. Gibson, molecular biologist [http://netfuture.org/]


"We are emerging from a long dominator era into one that demands mutuality. The dominator (hierarchical) mode appears strong, but in reality is too slow to respond to the crisis of the time. Mutualism, on the other hand, is liable to be too fragile in the face of dominator pressures: the only way to resist these, based on intricacy, "is for small circles to join hands in a collaborative network that is broader and tighter than anything domination can provide.(p 286)" The keys to doing this, which she works out through many practical examples, are "education, empowerment, infrastructure, support networks, liberation and love."<br />

— [[Sally Goerner]], from: After the Clockwork Universe: The [[Emerging Science and Culture of Integral Society]]


"The new science keeps reminding us that in this participative universe, nothing lives alone. Everything comes into form because of relationship. We are constantly called into relationship — to information, people, events, ideas, and life. Even reality is created through our participation in relationships. We chose what we notice; we relate to certain things and ignore others. Through these chosen relationships we co-create our world. If we are interested in effecting change, it is crucial to remember that we are working within webs of relations, not with machines."

— Margaret J. Wheatley (1999)[https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/scale-linking-salutogenic-design-for-resilience-1485a0005e00]


“What is the ethical specificity of the human?

It would perhaps reside in the fulfillment of this ethical capacity to the universal, in the tension towards universality, in the tendential universalism of the human species which can take the form of an altruism extended to everything. that is, to everything that exists. The human, therefore, would not be fully human when he is a specieist: on the contrary, he would never be more human than when he transcends narrow humanism, the specieist egoism that is anthropocentrism. There is in humans a tendency and a tension towards universality, towards objectivity, the absolute, the truth, which makes them perhaps and possibly the ethical species par excellence, the most ethical species. Capable of a universalism which would not be an imperialism of human reason, but also of a relativism which gives rise to a sense of perspectivism and relationalism: an ability to recognize the particularity, the singularity of each being, from each point of view, to take into account the perspective character of existence, but also the co-constitutive relations between all beings. There seem to be cognitive and emotional capacities in human beings which would enable them both to view things from a general, even universal point of view, through the point of view of the whole, and to recognize relativism. Perspectivism from every point of view - including his own. ”

Falk Van Gaver (Krisis, No. 49, 12/2018, p. 59)

==Key Concepts of This Category==

Social and economic relations have been categorised in various ways.

Alan Page Fiske in his [[Relational Model Typology - Fiske]] states that "People use just four fundamental models for organizing most aspects of sociality most of the time in all cultures. These models are:
* Communal Sharing
* Authority Ranking
* Equality Matching
* Market Pricing"

[[Grid-Group Theory]] introduces four primary ways of organizing, perceiving, and justifying social relations (usually called ‘ways of life,’ or ‘social solidarities’): ''egalitarianism'', ''hierarchy'', ''individualism'' and ''fatalism''.


==Useful learning resources==

===Introductory===

* [[Roman Krznaric on Moving from the Age of Introspection to the Age of Outrospection]]  - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BG46IwVfSu8 The Power of Outrospection] 10-minute video (2012) is a wide ranging brief talk about [[Empathy and Social Change]], illuminatingly illustrated by RSA ANIMATE.
* [[Bruce Lipton on Why Natural and Human Evolution is Communal, not Individual]] 5 minute video on Youtube
* [[P2P Interpretation of Soul as Intersubjective Reality and Spirit as Interobjective Reality]] endorsed as spiritual theory by Michel Bauwens
* [[Eric Schaezle's Introduction to Multi-Perspectival Relationalist Philosophies]] [https://pedon.blogspot.com/2021/06/relationalism.html]: Very good introduction to the various branches of relational thought, both East and West.

===Deeper Study===

* [[Collective Presencing]] (2019)
* [[Grid-Group Theory]]
* [[Relational Model Typology - Fiske]]
* Evan Thompson on the [[Primacy of Intersubjectivity]]
* Christophe Aguiton and Dominique Cardon on why [[Contemporary Individualization is Relational]]
* Chris Lucas on [http://www.calresco.org/wp/stream.htm Integral Intersubjectivity]: "I" and "It" perspectives need to be complemented by "We" perspectives. 
* Margaret Archer on [[Why Morphogenesis Implies Peer to Peer Socialization]]
* [[Paolo Virno on Collectivity and Individuality]]: Collectivity as a Precondition for Individuality
* Against [[Digital Dualism]] : the real is not separate from the virtual!!


===Material from the P2P Foundation===

* [[Peer-to-Peer Relationality]] by [[Michel Bauwens]]
* [[Introduction on Individuality, Relationality, and Collectivity]] from [[Michel Bauwens]], 2006
* [[Introduction to P2P Relationality]] 

These links and more in the [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about Relational Topics]] by [[Michel Bauwens]]

==Related Categories==
* [[:Category: Community]]: is a particular relational context relevant to P2P
* [[:Category: Ecology]]: involves relations between systems beyond the human
* [[:Category: Governance]] covers a formal dimension of relationality
* [[:Category: P2P Theory]] deals with wider issues emerging from P2P relationality
* [[:Category: Participation]] is a particular aspect of relationality
* [[:Category: Sharing]] is a mode of P2P relating outside the scope of traditional economics
* [[:Category: Spirituality]]: offers both relationality with what is beyond us, and guidance on relating to one another
* [[:Category: Synergy]] can be an outcome of particular ways of relating