In this new section we will attempt to keep track of movements related to the wave of square occupations that started on May 15, 2011 in Spain, and continued in Greece and other countries.

* [[Josep María Antentas on the Effect and Importance of the Spanish 15M Movement]]
* There is a much more complete section on the [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:OccupyWallStreet Occupy Wall Street] movement.
* Spanish-language coverage via http://wiki.15m.cc/wiki/Portada
* http://wiki.15m.cc/wiki/Lista_de_plataformas


=Introduction=

Here is some of the coverage via the P2P Foundation blog:


'''On Europe in general'''

* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/why-we-need-a-european-approach-to-the-democracy-real-mobilizations/2011/06/09


'''On Greece:'''

#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/short-history-of-the-recent-events-in-greece-and-what-they-portend/2011/06/19
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/a-report-on-the-rebirth-of-hellenic-democracy-in-athens/2011/06/18
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-meaning-of-the-greek-mobilizations-the-emergence-of-peaceful-popular-insurrections/2011/06/16
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-democracy-that-is-born-in-the-european-occupied-squares/2011/06/16
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/from-syntagma-square-athens-europeanrevolution/2011/05/30


'''On Spain:'''

#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/naomi-klein-on-camp-sols-lessons-for-true-democracy/2011/06/05
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/from-spanish-to-european-and-globalrevolution/2011/06/03
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/background-to-spanishrevolution-asambleabarrios-europeanrevolution/2011/05/30
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/spain-is-ground-zero-for-the-p2p-revolution/2011/05/29
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/constructing-participatory-democracy-in-the-spanishrevolution-camps/2011/05/23
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/analysis-of-the-may-15-movement-in-spain/2011/05/22


'''On Egypt:'''

#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/guy-fawkes-in-egypt-the-cultural-role-of-khaled-for-vendetta-movies-prior-to-the-uprising/2011/06/07


=Movement Resources=


More informations about international actions and strategies here : 

#our mail: comisiointernacional@gmail.com 
#our blog: http://acampadabcninternacional.wordpress.com/
#our tool: https://n-1.cc/pg/groups/104127/take-the-square-international/
#facebook: Acampada BCN Comision Internacional 
#twitter: @acampadabcn_int 
#Main website: http://takethesquare.net/
#Mailing-List: http://lists.takethesquare.net/mailman/listinfo/cominterm 
#Mailing-List: http://lists.takethesquare.net/mailman/listinfo/squares 
#Radio: http://radio.takethesquare.net 
#listen: http://giss.tv:8000/indignada.ogg.m3u 
#IRC Channel: /join #takethesquare on irc.freenode.net 
#Microblogging: #yeswecamp, #spanishrevolution, #worldrevolution, #globalrevolution, #takethesquare 
#Collaborative Editors: http://piratepad.net/qRwZC9Sd6k \
#Maps: http://www.thetechnoant.info/campmap/


=Associated Initiatives=

Via Bernardo Gutiérrez:

* Before everything started, there was a huge movement in networks, from Anonymous forums to some networks againts Ley Sinde (Internet law). I was created [http://red-sostenible.net/index.php/P%C3%A1gina_Principal Red Sostenible] and   [http://wiki.nolesvotes.org/wiki/Portada the wiki nolesvotes] (don´vote for them)

* The non comercial network of the revolution is N-1.cc (made with copy left)

* [http://latabacalera.net/ La Tabacalera] is an open code cultural-social center. Everything began there one year before 15M.  It is an space ruled by the commons, in the center of Madrid. There is no boss no public money. 

* In the Squares, during those weeks, they created a new model of society and everything was prepared and decided with wikis and discussions, such as [http://propongo.tomalaplaza.net/ Propongo]

* 15M was the first Hybrid Revolution. They created many tools to make the link between the street and the net. See [http://www.platoniq.net/yeswecamp Twittómetro], a tool for voting with hashtags in the same discussions they had in the squares. 

* There is a hashtag called [http://bit.ly/u5Jpmh Stopredadas], and in 20 minutes, thousands of people go to prevent evictions.  See also [http://stopdesahucios.tomalaplaza.net/ STOP Deshaucios] and 

* From the main squares everything went to the neighbourhoods ([http://tomalosbarrios.net Take the neighbourhoods]) 

* There are many experiences about changing things, works, time, functioning without money, P2P society, see at http://no-ma-des.blogspot.com/

* bookcamping.cc and videocamping.cc are collective digital libraries. From the square to the cloud. Every person can add a book, documentary

* there is a lot of critic cartography; see for example http://cartografiasinsurgentes.wordpress.com/2011/10/14/gga/

* Democracia 4.0, [http://demo4punto0.net/ demo4punto], about insuring real democratic voting

* 15m.cc is a collective book and documentary about 20 people who participated in the movement

=Citations=

Jerome Roos:

"it’s unmistakable now that  the Earth upon which they stand is trembling. Outraged at a world that perpetuates injustice and that steadily leads itself to ruin, the people are starting to make a stand. If you listen closely, you can hear their roar emanating from the streets down below. If you look hard, and you are willing to see, you will witness a powerful benevolent force rising up from below, spreading its arms like wings of fire and crying out in indignation at the out-of-touch business class above. They are ready to reclaim a long-lost childhood dream and take to the skies — breaking the laws of nature to write a new chapter in the history of mankind."
(http://roarmag.org/2011/06/diaries-of-change-when-dreams-take-flight/)


=Key Resources=


==Articles==

* Greig Charnock: [http://cnc.sagepub.com/content/36/1/3.abstract The 2011 popular protests and the limits to democracy in Spain]