This category is for P2P business models.  Articles should emphasize P2P dynamics.


=Introduction=

==Key Concepts==


===Open Business Models (in general)===

Read: [[Open vs Closed Platforms as Business Choice]].From a dialogue between Jonathan Zittrain, a professor of Internet law at Harvard Law School, and Mark VandenBrink, who leads Frog Design, conducted by Mr. Sherr and Mr. Totty. [http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204554204577023994194742720.html]

* A recent overview by Lars Zimmerman: [http://bloglz.de/business-models-for-open-source-hardware-open-design/ Business Models for Open Source Hardware & Open Design]

Concepts:

#[[Open Business]] ; [[Open Business Models]]
#[[Commons-Based Business Models]] ; [[Business Models for the Commons]]
#Online mindmap overview by Robin Good: [http://www.mindmeister.com/19055588?title=online-business-and-monetization-models Online Business and Monetization Models]


See also:

#[[Crowdfunding]]

===[[Open Culture Business Models]]===



====Seven Main Business Models for Open Culture====


1. [[Crowdfunding]]: pre-financing cultural production by fans, with commitment to keep cultural work open; ex. Kickstarter Ulule KissKissBankBank 


2. [[Crowdsourcing]]: i.e. opening up contributions to the public


3. Disintermediation strategies: shortening the supply chain between production and consumption; example BandCamp for music


4. Double diffusion: free digital works , but sale of physical works (ex. Cory Doctorow)


5. [[Freemium]]: basic version free, added-value versions for sale


6. Models based on commercial restrictions, but free to share non-commercially (CC non-commercial, [[Copyfair]], FairlyShare


7. [[Gift Economy]] models, 'pay-what-you-want'; example Humble Bundle for games


====More Information====

#[[Cultural Flatrate]]
#[[Platform-Centred_Business_Models_for_Cultural_Production]]
#[[Project-Based_Business_Models_for_Cultural_Production]]
#[[User-Generated Content - Business Models]]
#[[Open Content Business Models]]

See also this overview of [[Open Content Business Models]]:

* '''Stephen Downes, 2007: Economics in a DRM-Free World''' [http://www.downes.ca/post/53525] [http://www.downes.ca/files/FreeLearning.pdf]

* Mindmap of open art and culture business models, by Lionel Maurel, [https://www.mindmeister.com/343978973/cr-ation-et-mod-les-conomiques-du-libre in French]

===[[Open_Design_Business_Models]]===

* [http://bloglz.de/who-pays-the-designer-open-design-business-models/  Who pays the designer? Open Design Business Models]. By Lars Zimmerman, in German.

===[[Open Education Business Models]]===

See:

* [[Economic Models Around Free Educational Materials‎]] [http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf]
* [[Models for Sustainable Open Educational Resources]]. Stephen Downes [http://www.downes.ca/files/FreeLearning.pdf]


===Open Energy Business Models===

The three forms of distributed finance for distributed energy:


# Leasing, e.g. [[Solar Leasing Financial Model]]
# Community Power, e.g. [[Community Solar Financial Model]]
# Power Purchase Agreements, e.g. [[Solar Power Purchase Agreements]]


===Open Software Business Models===

See: [[Taxonomy of Open Source Business Models]]

#[[Open Core Business Model]]
#[[Open Source Business Models]]
#[[Open_Source_Software_Business_Models]]
#[[Open Source Software Service Model]]
#[[Free_Software_Business_Models]]
#[[Open Source Software - Business Aspects]]
#[[Open Source Commercialization]]
#[[Open_Source_as_Business_Strategy]]

===Open Hardware Business Models===

#[[Open Source Hardware Business Models]]
#[[Open_Hardware_Business_Models]]

===Open Media Business Models===

#[[Business Models to Support Content Commons]]
#[[Open Access Publishing Income Models]]
#[[Open Music Business Models]]
#[[Open Film Business Models]]
#[[Social_Media_Business_Models]]


===Crowdsourcing Business Models===

#[[Crowd Business Models]]

==Related Categories==

#[http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Music Crowdfunding Music Crowdfunding]
#[http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Peerfunding Peer Funding]
#[http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Peerproperty Peer Property]
#[http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Commons Commons]


== Comparative Table: The [[Logic of the Market versus the Logic of the Commons]] ==

{| width="625" border="1" cellpadding="4"
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" |
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">'''Market'''</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">'''Commons'''</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">'''Focus '''</font></span>
| width="237" |
<span><font size="small">What can I sell?</font></span><span><font size="small">Exchange value</font></span>
| width="209" |
<span><font size="small">What do we need?</font></span><span><font size="small">Use value</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">'''Core beliefs'''</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Scarcity</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Plenty</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" |
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Homo oeconomicus</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Homo cooperans</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" |
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">It's about resources (allocation)</font></span><span><font size="small">''.''</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">It's about us.</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">'''Governance '''</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Market-State</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Polycentric / Peer-to-Peer Governance </font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| rowspan="2" width="153" | <span><font size="small">Decision making </font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">hierarchical</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">horizontal</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Command (Power, Law, Violence)</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Consensus, Free Cooperation, self-organization</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">'''Social relationships'''</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Centralization of power (monopoly)</font></span>
| width="209" |
<span><font size="small">Decentralization of power</font></span><span><font size="small">(autonomy)</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" |
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Property </font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Possession </font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">Access to rival resources</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Limited by boundaries & rules defined by owner</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Limited by boundaries & rules defined by usergroups</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">Access to nonrival resources</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Made scarce (to ensure profitability)</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Open access (to ensure social equity)</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">Use rights</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Granted by owner</font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Co-decided by user groups</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">'''Dominant strategy'''</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Out-compete </font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Out-cooperate</font></span>
|-
| colspan="3" width="615" valign="TOP" | <span><font size="small">'''Results '''</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">For the resources</font></span>
| width="237" |
<span><font size="small">Erosion</font></span><span><font size="small">Enclosure</font></span>
| width="209" |
<span><font size="small">Conservation </font></span><span><font size="small">Reproduction & Multiplication</font></span>
|- valign="TOP"
| width="153" | <span><font size="small">For the people</font></span>
| width="237" | <span><font size="small">Exlusion & Participation </font></span>
| width="209" | <span><font size="small">Inclusion & Emancipation</font></span>
|}

* Source: [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2011/01/29/the-commons-year-one-of-the-global-commons-movement/ The Commons: Year One of the Global Commons Movement by Silke Helfrich (29. Januar 2011)]


=Citations=


==Open Source is Benefit-Driven, not Revenue-Driven==

"That's the bottom line. '''Open source projects are not products intended to produce revenues. It is a mistake to think of them that way. Open source software is developed in order to satisfy a need, one typically experienced by the developers themselves, and an open source project is not a commodity, it is a community.''' Yes, people need to earn money in order to live. This is true for every single person that works on open source projects. But making money from the open source product itself is very much the exception, not the rule, and depends on a lot of things falling into place."

- Stephen Downes, [http://www.downes.ca/files/FreeLearning.pdf], p. 54


==Openness requires Sharing==


"Business models that employ the word "Open" are really incomplete if
they are solely focused on what happens with revenue (even if that
focus is related to sharing of revenue).

The part of the model that is unique to each business entity or group
is: "what is shared?"

Based on the questions "what is shared?", or "what can be shared?" the
business model can evolve per business to include many types of
sharing. This is mostly limited to what the participants are *willing*
to share together as a group."

- Sam Rose, June 2010


==The Beekeeper Model==

"The Bee Keeper creates an environment that is attractive for bees: accommodation and a natural, food-rich habitat. The bees do what they do naturally and make honeycombs. The Bee Keeper sells the honey and bees-wax to his customers and uses the money to grow his bee farm."

- James Dixon [http://wiki.pentaho.com/display/BEEKEEPER/3.+The+Beekeeper+Model]

=Key Resources=


==Key Articles==

* [[From Firms to Platforms to Commons]]. By Esko Kilpi.


* The must-read trilogy with an overview of the literature and experience until 2011 is from Massimo Menichelli:

#[[Business Models for Open Hardware]]
#[[Business Models for Fab Labs]]
#[[Business Models for DIY Craft]]


* Two classic essays are:

#Frank Hecker. [[Setting Up Shop]]
#Bruno Perens. The [[Emerging Economic Paradigm of Open Source]]

Also:

# [http://www.ocri.ca/events/presentations/partnership/April1907/PeterCarbone.pdf Value Derived from Open Source is a Function of Maturity Levels]: excellent presentation with many overview tables
#[http://www.cospa-project.org/Assets/resources/daffara-OSWC2.pdf Sustainability of FLOSS-Based economic models] presentation by Carlo Daffara which focuses on the role of firms.
#[[Open Source Software and the Private-Collective Innovation Model]]. Eric von Hippel and Georg von Krogh
#[[Quantifying the Value of Open Source Hardware Development]]. Methods developed by engineer Joshua M. Pearce to calculate the value of designs that can be P2P manufactured using digital technology.


* Recommended Resources by Tony Bailetti:

#[http://blogs.the451group.com/opensource/2008/10/13/open-source-is-not-a-business-model Open Source is not a Business Model]
#[http://www.informationweek.com/blog/main/archives/2008/12/open_source_bus.html Open Source Business Model is "Broken". Really?]
#[http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/nov2008/tc20081130_276152.htm Open Source: The Model is Broken]
#[http://eco.uninsubria.it/dipeco/Quaderni/files/QF2008_6.pdf Licensing and Business Models]
#[http://www.zdnetasia.com/insight/software/0,39044822,62049928,00.htm What Vendors Really Mean by Open Source]
#[http://www.scribd.com/doc/1038389/The-theory-of-Business-Models Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present and Future of the Concept]

Report:

#[[New Economic Models, New Software Industry Economy]]. By RTNL, the French National Network for Software Technologies.

Book chapters:

#Economics of open source, at http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap3.pdf
#Open source as user innovation – von Hippel, at http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap14.pdf
#Analysis of OS Business models, at http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap15.pdf
#Allocation of resources in OS mode, http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap16.pdf
#Open Source as a Business Strategy, by Brian Behlendorf, at http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/opensources/book/brian.html


Other Research:

#[http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/dahlander2.pdf Appropriating the Commons: Firms in Open Source Software]. Linus Dahlander.
#[http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/paper_euram_2007.pdf Open Source and the software industry. How firms do business out of an open innovation paradigm]. By Andrea Bonaccorsi, Monica Merito, Cristina Rossi, Lucia Piscitello.

Cases:

#Mozilla/Apache case studies, at http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap10.pdf
#Microsoft shared source, http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262562278chap17.pdf


Financing:

#[[Venture Capital Investments in P2P Companies]]

==Key Books==

* The [[Mesh]]: Why the Future of Business is Sharing Lisa Gansky. Portfolio /  Penguin Group, FALL 2010 
* What's Mine is Yours: The [[Rise of Collaborative Consumption]], by Rachel Botsman and Roo Rogers (Fall, HarperCollins), 2010
* Philippe Aigrain. Sharing: [[Culture and the Economy in the Internet Age]]. Amsterdam Univ. Pr., 2011: "What if we consider that sharing a digitally published work in one's possession with other individuals is a fundamental right? What if we break away from the idea of compensating the entertainment right holders for supposed harms resulting from sharing? What is a reasonable reward and financing model for sustaining a many-to-all cultural society?

==Key Courses==

#[[Economic Aspects of Free Software]] : free course from the Free Technology Academy of the Free Knowledge Institute [http://ftacademy.org/materials/fsm/5#1] 


==Key People==

Owen Greaves recommends the following experts on open business models [http://blog.owengreaves.com/one-of-my-goals-for-2011]: 

1.) Gerd Leonhard – http://www.mediafuturist.com

2.) Glen Hiemstra – http://www.futurist.com

3.) Chris Brogan - http://www.chrisbrogan.com

4.) Olivier Blanchard - http://thebrandbuilder.wordpress.com

5.) Trey Pennington – http://www.treypennington.com

6.) Scott Stratten - http://www.un-marketing.com

7.) Louis Gray – http://www.louisgray.com

8.) Jeff Jarvis – http://www.buzzmachine.com

9.) Chris Anderson – http://www.thelongtail.com (Of Wired Magazine)

10.) Ross dawson – http://rossdawson.com

==Key Podcasts / Webcasts==

#[[Mark Shuttleworth on the Business Ecology of Ubuntu]]
#[[Business Models for the Commons]]: Panel at the Wizard of OS 2006 conference: Video [http://phalacrocorax.informatik.hu-berlin.de/fr/08_17h_BusinessAndTheCommons.ogg] and Audio [http://phalacrocorax.informatik.hu-berlin.de/fr/08_17h_BusinessAndTheCommons_audio.ogg]
#[[SXSW Talk on Commons-Based Business Models]]