'''= Commons-oriented, P2P-driven, open source initiatives to help combat the outbreak of Covid-19'''


=Status Update 2025=

'''* Book: COVID-19 and the Left. The Tyranny of Fear. , eds. Elena Louisa Lange, Geoff Shullenberger. Abingdon-New York: Routledge, 2024.''' See: [[COVID-19 and the Tyranny of Fear‎]].



=Introduction=

'''What is the difference between this and other directories ?''' There are many good directories on Corona solutions and initiatives out there, and they are listed here as well. However these directories are specialized by community of practice, topic or locality. This directory attempts to operate at the global meta-level, offering a fuller picture of what is happening. 

This guide focuses on: 

1) initiatives from open source communities and open hardware medical devices
2) grassroots-based mutual aid initiatives
3) the wider context of societal effects and policy proposals and reforms, from a p2p/commons point of view.

Thanks for reading this as your first article: '''The [[Rediscovery of Health as a Common Good After the Coronavirus Outbreak]], by Gael Giraud.'''


* The P2P Foundation is particular interested in the following collaborative initiatives: 

# [[Viral Solidarity]] : ''an open and collaborative wiki to map, connect and organize information channels, solidarity initiatives, innovation and social cooperation from local to global'' in response to the pandemic". [https://viralsolidarity.org/doku.php?id=wiki:for_english_speakers]
# '''THIS IS VERY IMPORTANT, AND THE SEED FOR A PUBIC-COMMONS COOPERATION PROTOCOL''' FOR THE COSMO-LOCAL PRODUCTION OF MEDICAL DEVICES, launched by the public hospitals of the Paris region: [https://covid3d.org/ 3D Covid]: "Plateforme interne d'impression haut-débit pour répondre aux besoins sanitaires urgents des soignants. '''Fédération des initiatives de conception et d’impression 3D''' pour lutter contre le COVID-19 en Île-de-France". (Assistance Publique - Hopitaux de Paris] => CONCEVOIR - VALIDER - FABRIQUER - DISTRIBUER - COMBATTRE LE VIRUS
# [[Disaster Collectivism]] as promoted by Shareable.com and the [[Long Disaster Response]] of Burners Without Borders
* [[Decentralized Radical Autonomous Search Team Investigating COVID-19]]: the team that kept researching the lab leak hypothesis when it was declared off limits



=General Context=

* [[Corona and the Commons]], a very short analysis by Michel Bauwens 

(this companion article, explains the specific moment in human history, see: '''The [[Pulsation of the Commons]]''': The temporal context for the cosmo-local transition. By Michel Bauwens, with Jose Ramos. P2P Foundation, 2020.

* '''The [[Rediscovery of Health as a Common Good After the Coronavirus Outbreak]], by Gael Giraud.'''

* The ultimate failure of the public-commons cooperation regarding the role of the maker movement in providing emergency open source hardware, the French case study [https://www.makery.info/2020/09/29/risques-et-normes-mais-a-t-on-le-droit-de-faire-ce-que-nous-faisons/]

* and here is 'THE MOTHER OF ALL CONTEXTS', by Michael Hudson:

"China is using an age-old policy used ever since Hammurabi and other Bronze Age rulers promoted economic resilience in the face of “acts of God.” Unless personal debts, rents and taxes that cannot be paid are annulled, the result will be widespread bankruptcy, impoverishment and homelessness. In contrast to America’s financialized economy, China has shown how natural it is for society simply to acknowledge that debts, rents, taxes and other carrying charges of living and doing business cannot resume until economic normalcy is able to resume." [https://michael-hudson.com/2020/08/how-an-act-of-god-pandemic-is-destroying-the-west/?]

=Contextual Quotes=

==The Collaborative Response to Covid-19 as an example of [[Awareness-Based Collective Action]]==

"We are bending the curve. How? By bending the beam of collective attention back onto ourselves, through the realization that our own behavior (e.g., social distancing) contributes to the flattening of the curve, to the well-being of all. That, in my view, is the new superpower in the making — the rise of a new pattern of collective action that operates from an awareness of the whole: Awareness-Based Collective action (ABC).

It’s a pattern of action that is familiar to most of us — for example, when we face disruptive challenges in our families or communities. What do we do? We come together. We hold each other. We jointly pay attention to what is happening. And then, once we see together, everyone simply does what needs to be done. Often without central coordination. Without formal governance. Spontaneously. Coordinated by seeing together — by a shared awareness of the whole. That’s the magic.
We often see this kind of response in local communities. We see it less often on a national level and scale. And we rarely ever see it on a global level. But occasionally we do, such as in the case of the Paris Climate Accord. The “spoon” starts to bend when we shift our mode of action from one way of operating to another — from ego-system to eco-system awareness."

- Otto Scharmer [https://medium.com/presencing-institute-blog/a-new-superpower-in-the-making-awareness-based-collective-action-83861bcb9859]


=Key insights=

* [https://www.vox.com/2020/4/10/21215494/coronavirus-plans-social-distancing-economy-recession-depression-unemployment Synthesis of Post-Corona Planning Reports]. By By Ezra Klein.

# American Enterprise Institute, 
# Center for American Progress, 
# Harvard University’s Safra Center for Ethics,

* [[How To Use Automated Decision-Making Systems To Curb the Coronavirus Outbreak]]. By [[Algorithm Watch]].


==Ecological==

"Covid-19 is not simply a dry-run for the next pandemic – it is also, as executive director of the UN Global Compact Lise Kingo has said, a ‘fire drill’ for climate catastrophe. Deforestation is among the top drivers of global heating, contributing nearly a tenth of all carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions due to tree cover loss from tropical forests. This is so large that if tropical deforestation were a country, it would rank a third in global CO2 emissions behind China and the United States."

- Nafeez Ahmed [https://theecologist.org/2020/jul/30/towards-great-forest-transition-part-1]


==Societal==

* Check out the [[Four Scenarios for the Post-Corona World]]

#a possible return to neoliberal orthodoxy
#we move towards a more authoritarian state monitoring
#a return to growth at any price (Belle Epoque)
#accelerating the ecological transition and a rapid rethinking of our growth model


* '''Another opportunity for a long-needed fundamental shift in the economic vernacular is now unfolding. COVID-19, along with climate change, could be the equivalent of the Great Depression and WWII in forcing a sea change in economic thinking and policy.''' [https://voxeu.org/article/coming-battle-covid-19-narrative]. By Samuel Bowles, Wendy Carlin.

"The COVID-19 pandemic is a blow to self-interest as a value orientation and laissez-faire as a policy paradigm, both already reeling amid mounting public concerns about climate change.  Will the pandemic change our economic narrative, expressing new everyday understandings of how the economy works and how it should work? COVID-19, for better or worse, brings into focus a third pole in the debate: call it community or civil society. In the absence of this third pole, the conventional language of economics and public policy misses the contribution of social norms and of institutions that are neither governments nor markets – like families, relationships within firms, and community organisations."


* "The specter of massive layoffs and unemployment has already led to levels of state intervention to protect citizens and businesses that were previously unthinkable. Coronavirus has already been more effective in slowing down climate breakdown and ecological collapse than all the world’s policy initiatives combined.  As supply lines break down, communities will look to local and regional producers for their daily needs." [https://patternsofmeaning.com/2020/04/02/coronavirus-spells-the-end-of-the-neoliberal-era-whats-next/?]. By Jeremy Lent.


* If you ask yourself 'what went wrong' in the response to Corona, this is '''the best article on the longer term I have read so far''' [https://medium.com/@r3dot0/whats-at-stake-flatten-the-curve-to-respect-carrying-capacity-c22cb9ce17c1]: ''our governments ignored the 'carrying capacity' of our health system, just as our socio-economic system ignores the basic 'tresholds and allocations' inherent in our planetary boundaries''.

"What’s particularly pernicious about crossing carrying capacity thresholds is the potential for amplifying feedback loops to trigger tipping points, thus exiting the relative stability of an existing state of a system in a non-linear phase shift to an altogether different (and inherently unpredictable) systemic state. Think of climate chaos as transgressing the carrying capacity threshold of temperature stability (the best science says the dividing line is 1.5C) tipping us into a hothouse earth, or the spontaneous 1960s riots against racism in the US or the more recent Arab Spring that crossed the carrying capacity of social justice. In each of these instances, there are vital resources that underpin stable systems, and if these resources are depleted, or if we fail to regenerate new resources, we risk crossing carrying capacity thresholds."


* Very good, [https://medium.com/@mnarberhaus/covid-19-might-be-the-end-of-the-beginning-de6e94381448 realistic analysis], of what will change and not change, after Corona is over, '''by Micha Narberhaus''', an analysis deeply informed by the critique of identity politics and the culture wars, by Micha Narberhaus: "I firmly believe that in order to tackle the big societal transformation towards an ecologically sustainable society and economy, we need to find solutions to polarisation and re-establish a minimum level of trust and mutual tolerance between the somewheres and the anywheres."

* [https://www.theguardian.com/news/2020/may/13/naomi-klein-how-big-tech-plans-to-profit-from-coronavirus-pandemic Naomi Klein on the Screen New Deal as Pandemic Shock Doctrine]: "It has taken some time to gel, but something resembling a coherent pandemic shock doctrine is beginning to emerge. Call it the Screen New Deal. Far more hi-tech than anything we have seen during previous disasters, the future that is being rushed into being as the bodies still pile up treats our past weeks of physical isolation not as a painful necessity to save lives, but as a living laboratory for a permanent – and highly profitable – no-touch future."


* [https://jacobinmag.com/2020/04/coronavirus-global-green-new-deal-south-postcolonial? The situation in the Global South requires a Global Green New Deal]: 

"The average North-South gap in per-capita income has grown, not shrunk, since the 1960 United Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which affirmed the right of all people to self-determination and proclaimed that colonialism should be brought to a speedy and unconditional end. Global inequality is now so high that the global Gini coefficient, which measures the level of inequality across the world, is about the same as South Africa’s — one of the most unequal societies on the planet. Global South countries are faced with a triple bind: to have the money to dole out stimulus and bailouts, many will have to take on more debt. To secure loans, they may have to impose additional “structural adjustment” policies. And those very measures will hollow out an already decrepit public sector, leaving countries ill-equipped for a mass pandemic."

This article distinguishes 3 types of countries re covid, 1) those doing well 2) those nearly there and 3) those needing stronger action. It then concludes showing a virtuous vs a vicious cycle in the approaches:
"By reading the news archives, we find the countries that are doing the best are the ones, like New Zealand, Taiwan, and Germany, which have a properly funded health system, technological edge, decisive leadership, and a strong commitment to building public trust. Many of them, as Avivah Wittenberg-Cox points out, have women leaders. They acted swiftly and decisively, with testing and contact tracing protocols across the entire country.

By contrast, some of the worst countries were plagued by delay, absence of public trust, misinformation, and incoherent prevention and mitigation protocols. Male authoritarian political figures like Bolsonaro, Trump, and Putin all fared badly. Weak and fragmented public-health infrastructure also played a role. Most sought to blame others and external factors – like China – for their ineptitude.
China also has its share of blame – for its absence of transparency and its crackdown on whistleblowers.
Thus, we see two divergent maps emerging – one – the “cycle of failure” and the its opposite, the “cycle of success” (h/t Leonard Schlesinger + James Heskett).

For this project, we called them a wicked cycle and the virtuous cycle:"
http://www.wicked7.org/mapping-covid-19-as-a-wicked-problem/?


* from the Great Transition project: After the Pandemic: Which Future? May 01, 2020, https://greattransition.org/gtn-discussions/after-the-pandemic-which-future 
 
"It is crystal clear that the class character of capitalist relations deeply contradicts with the states’ aim of protecting their citizens’ lives. When rulers around the world realize that they need to make a choice between risking either capital accumulation or human lives, they almost always opt for risking/sacrificing the latter without much hesitation.  This choice is self-evident in the hypocritical suggestions many governments make to stop such pandemic. Working class people, who cannot afford losing their jobs or their wage, are asked to not to go to work if they are sick. Yet they are not granted any paid sick leave. People are advised to immediately seek medical aid when they show symptoms of high fever and dry cough. Yet the right to universal healthcare and social security is still denied in many countries. For many precarious workers around the world who try to survive within the interstices of the informal economy, “social distancing” is not an option because it means hunger, homelessness, and starvation. What appears at the first sight as “ineffective government responses” to the Covid-19 pandemic—such as lack of extensive testing and transparency—turn out to be the most rational actions on capital’s behalf based on simple cost-benefit calculations. Proposed strategies such as “flattening the epidemic curve” by means of social distancing and slowing down our interactions are counter-productive for capital accumulation. As far as capital accumulation is concerned, it is more rational to let the disease spread and wait for it to disappear by its own dynamic than to prolong social distancing and slowing down which would eventually exacerbate the existing economic stagnation and crisis. What is widely called the “herd immunity” strategy is also a predatory accumulation strategy with genocidal tendencies targeting the elderly people. By externalizing the responsibility of “social distancing” to their citizens and by not aiding working classes to prepare for the pandemic in a socially responsible way, many governments are already following the capital’s “herd immunity” strategy without naming or intending it."
 
- Sahan Savas Karatasli [https://greattransition.org/gtn-discussions/after-the-pandemic-which-future#3215]



'''Read also:'''

* "the pandemic is a struggle waged by labour, not capital, by doctors and nurses in understaffed public health systems, by precarious workers in the vital supply chains, by those that keep basics infrastructure running during the lock-down." [https://www.viewpointmag.com/2020/03/20/against-agamben-democratic-biopolitics/]

* [https://www.facebook.com/notes/nathan-john-hagens/the-systemic-implications-of-the-coronavirus-a-brief-overview/10159503423888496/ Situational Assessment]]. By Nathan John Hagens: analysis

* Coronavirus, synchronous failure and the global phase-shift by Nafeez Ahmed. A systems analysis uncovering the light at the end of the tunnel. [https://medium.com/insurge-intelligence/coronavirus-synchronous-failure-and-the-global-phase-shift-3f00d4552940]: analysis

* The [https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-pandemic-as-a-catalyst-for-institutional-innovation/2020/05/26 Pandemic as a Catalyst for Institutional Innovation]

* [https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/opendemocracyuk/out-belly-hell-shutdown-and-humanisation-globalisation/? COVID-19 and the humanisation of globalisation]. Anthony Barnett on how the Covid-19 response could usher in a age of planetary humanisation.


'''In French:'''

* [https://usbeketrica.com/article/covid-19-les-initiatives-ouvertes-sont-en-train-de-se-construire-une-visibilite-nationale In France, makers and industry have found each other]!

==Medical==

* [https://iser.med.unsw.edu.au/blog/busting-myths-about-covid-19-herd-immunity-children-and-lives-vs-jobs Busting four myths about the pandemic]. By the NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence Integrated Systems for Epidemic Response.

The four myths are:

#Allowing some transmission is good because it will create herd immunity and protect people.
#The infection doesn’t matter in children and young people because it is mild or asymptomatic
#The choice we face is between saving lives or jobs and case fatality rate is low
#Lockdown has to remain for 6-12 months


* [https://monthlyreview.org/2020/04/01/covid-19-and-circuits-of-capital/ COVID-19 and Circuits of Capital] : Crucial article for understanding the distinction between the suppression strategies in East Asia (short term pain) from the mitigation strategies in Europe and the US (long term pain)

*  Rodrick Wallace, “Pandemic Firefighting vs. Pandemic Fire Prevention” (unpublished manuscript, March 20, 2020).  "Context counts for pandemic infection, and current political structures that allow multinational agricultural enterprises to privatize proﬁts while externalizing and socializing costs, must become subject to “code enforcement” that reinternalizes those costs if truly mass-fatal pandemic disease is to be avoided in the near future." (no URL)

*  Physical distancing only mitigates the rate of infection. Mass testing, and industrial mobilization, is the only thing that can actually really suppress it. [https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/how-we-beat-coronavirus/608389/?]

* There is a scientifical rationale for the wearing of masks: https://medium.com/@Cancerwarrior/covid-19-why-we-should-all-wear-masks-there-is-new-scientific-rationale-280e08ceee71

* [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/04/why-wear-a-mask-may-be-our-best-weapon-to-stop-coronavirus? To help stop coronavirus, everyone should be wearing face masks. The science is clear]

* [https://medium.com/@wpegden/a-call-to-honesty-in-pandemic-modeling-5c156686a64b  A call to honesty in pandemic modeling]: By Maria Chikina and Wesley Pegden: " Public health depends on public trust. If we claim now that our models show that 2 months of mitigations will cut deaths by 90%, why will anyone believe us 2 months from now when the story has to change?"

* '''Regime type isn’t correlated with outcomes''', by  STEVEN WEBER AND NILS GILMAN, Noema: "The progression of the initial outbreak in different countries followed three main patterns. Countries like Singapore and Taiwan represented Pattern A, where (despite many connections to the original source of the outbreak in China) vigilant government action effectively cut off community transmission, keeping total cases and deaths low. China and South Korea represented Pattern B: an initial uncontrolled outbreak followed by draconian government interventions that succeeded in getting at least the first wave of the outbreak under control. Pattern C is represented by countries like Italy and Iran, where waiting too long to lock down populations led to a short-term exponential growth of new cases that overwhelmed the healthcare system and resulted in a large number of deaths." [https://www.noemamag.com/the-long-shadow-of-the-future/]

* The interesting medical/societal analysis by medical anthropologist Jean-Dominique Michel:

"It is in this complicated paradox between the great harmlessness of the virus for the vast majority of people and its extreme dangerousness in some cases that we found ourselves stuck. We then adopted measures that were absolutely contrary to good practice: we stopped screening people who might be ill, pleading for the confining the population as a whole to stop the spread of the virus. These measures were actually medieval and problematic, since they only slowed down the epidemic at the risk of producing potentially even worse rebound phenomena. And too, they lock up everyone while only a small minority is affected. Conversely, all public health recommendations call for social distancing combined with detecting as many cases as possible, and confining positive cases only, until they are no longer contagious. Confinement of everyone is a poor second-best way to deal with the epidemic, one that is due to the lack of everything that would enable us to fight it effectively... Why did it come to this? Simply because we failed to set up the proper responses from the outset. The lack of tests and screening measures in particular is emblematic of this shipwreck: while Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and China made these their top priority, we were unbelievably passive in organizing such technically simple action."
[http://jdmichel.blog.tdg.ch/archive/2020/03/24/covid-19-the-game-is-over-305275.html?]

* US-based researchers looked at more than 140 viruses known to have been transmitted from animals to humans, and cross-referenced them with the IUCN's Red List of endangered species.
They found that domesticated animals, primates, bats and rats carried the most zoonotic viruses -- around 75 percent. But they also concluded that the risk of spillover from animal to human populations was highest when a species is threatened by over-consumption and habitat loss."
(https://news.yahoo.com/human-activity-blame-virus-spread-study-112905689.html)


==Technological==

* "The adoption of COVID-19 technologies has raised the real possibility of the normalisation of surveillance technology in the name of emergency response." [https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/data-justice-and-covid-19-book-launch-with-the-ada-lovelace-institute/] ; cfr. the book: [[ Data Justice and COVID-19]]

=Recommended Reading=

* [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/31/virus-neighbours-covid-19 This virus has turned us into caring neighbours]. By George Monbiot

* Robert Raymond in Shareable magazine, a beacon of sharing and collaboration in these trying times, monitoring [[Disaster Collectivism]]: [https://www.shareable.net/coronavirus-catalyzes-growing-wave-of-grassroots-action-despite-social-distancing/? Coronavirus catalyzes growing wave of grassroots action despite social distancing]
		 	
* Brian Davey: [https://www.resilience.org/stories/2020-03-18/coronavirus-degrowth-and-self-isolation/ Coronavirus, Degrowth and Self Isolation]: very good, and summarizes the research linking human social systems to disease vectors
 		 	
* [https://theecologist.org/2020/mar/16/birth-covid-19-mutual-aid The birth of Covid-19 mutual aid]; UK: '''[[Citizen-Led Mutual Aid Groups]]''' have sprung up across the country to support those suffering from the effects and threat of the Coronavirus outbreak.

* Pierre Dardot, Christian Laval: a plea for 'global commons', not state sovereignty, https://roarmag.org/essays/dardot-laval-corona-pandemic/? (see the excerpt: [[On the Differences Between State Sovereignty and Public Services]].)

* [https://horizon-magazine.eu/article/covid-19-how-unprecedented-data-sharing-has-led-faster-ever-outbreak-research.html Covid-19: How unprecedented data sharing has led to faster-than-ever outbreak research] ; [https://www.fredhutch.org/en/news/center-news/2020/02/covid19-open-science.html Coronavirus outbreak puts 'open science' under a microscope]

* Research on COVID-19 vaccine shows unique global collaboration, says Ebola vaccine scientist Gary Kobinger, https://www.pri.org/stories/2020-04-07/research-covid-19-vaccine-shows-unique-global-collaboration-says-ebola-vaccine 



In French:

* [https://usbeketrica.com/article/covid-19-les-initiatives-ouvertes-sont-en-train-de-se-construire-une-visibilite-nationale In France, makers and industry have found each other]!

=The ABC of Coronavirus Response=

* [[Awareness-Based Collective Action]] ; [[Basic Income]] ; [[Disaster Collectivism]] ; [[Jubilee]] ; [[Long Disaster Response]] ; [[Mutual Aid]] ; [[Quantitative Easing for the People]] ; [[Viral Solidarity]]


=Resources=

* The [https://acleddata.com/analysis/covid-19-disorder-tracker/? COVID-19 Disorder Tracker] (CDT) provides special coverage of the pandemic’s impact on political violence and protest around the world

* The [[Covid Social Impact Timeline]]: The European Trade Union Institute (ETUI) is monitoring the social and employment impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic in Europe. This timeline is being produced by Christophe Degryse, senior researcher at the Foresight Unit of the ETUI, and will be regularly updated.

* [[Crowdfight COVID-19]]: An initiative from the scientific community to put all available resources at the service of the fight against COVID-19

* [[LitCovid]] is a curated literature hub for tracking up-to-date scientific information about the 2019 novel Coronavirus. It is the most comprehensive resource on the subject, providing a central access to 1558 (and growing) relevant articles in PubMed.

* The [[Open Covid Pledge]]: "a simple way for universities, companies, and other holders of intellectual property rights to support the development of medicines, test kits, vaccines, and other scientific discoveries related to COVID-19 for the duration of the pandemic. The Open COVID Pledge grants the public free, temporary access to IP rights in support of solving the COVID-19 crisis." [https://creativecommons.org/2020/04/07/open-covid-pledge-removing-obstacles-to-sharing-ip-in-the-fight-against-covid-19/?]

* '''[[Viral Solidarity]] ''an open and collaborative wiki to map, connect and organize information channels, solidarity initiatives, innovation and social cooperation from local to global'' in response to the pandemic".'''


* See below in the Encyclopedia, but also:

==Apps==

Directory of contact tracing projects: [https://gdprhub.eu/index.php?title=Projects_using_personal_data_to_combat_SARS-CoV-2 Projects using personal data to combat SARS-CoV-2]. This page is meant to collect different approaches by government and private projects to use personal data to combat SARS-CoV-2. It does not include mere information apps on the corona virus.

* Covid Risk, app: "an app to collect and track risks of infection at the individual level, using Bluetooth and GPS data, while (miraculously) safeguarding privacy". [Covid19Risk.com]

* [[Moovit]]: Israeli transport app for [[Emergency Mobilization On-Demand]]

* Private Kit (MIT): Safe Paths; Privacy-by-Design Contact Tracing, http://safepaths.mit.edu/

* project: NextTrace aims to coordinate test results and contact tracing to enable public health decisions [https://nexttrace.org/]

* [[Trace Together]] (Singapore): "taps Bluetooth signals to detect other participating mobile devices in close proximity to allow them to identify those who have been in close contact when needed." [https://www.zdnet.com/article/singapore-introduces-contact-tracing-app-to-slow-coronavirus-spread/]


See also:

* [https://members.tortoisemedia.com/2020/05/14/200514-ai-and-privacy/content.html Tracking the tracers]: "We read the privacy policies of 48 contact-tracing apps for Covid-19. They’re often opaque, incomplete and impenetrable to the average reader"
 
* Report to the UK govt: [https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/our-work/covid-19/covid-19-exit-through-the-app-store/ Rapid evidence review of the technical considerations and societal implications of using technology to transition from the COVID-19 crisis]

* Recommendations from [[Algorithm Watch]]: "'''How to use automated decision-making systems (ADMS) to curb the outbreak'''. What follows is a set of possible principles and considerations on which to ground an informed, democratic and useful discussion regarding the use of ADMS in the current pandemic." [https://algorithmwatch.org/en/our-position-on-adms-and-the-fight-against-covid19/]

===Europe===

* "Automated Decision-Making Systems in the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
European Perspective." 

"It brings together research by national experts
from 16 European countries. The country-by-country analyses are
contextualized by comparing the main features of ADM-based responses
within the EU and outside of it, finding that the most repressive
systems are mainly deployed across Asia and the Middle East. But even
systems within the European Union show telltale signs of 'technological
solutionism', conceiving every social problem as a ‘bug’ in need of a
‘fix’ through technology, thus normalizing mechanisms of automated
surveillance."
(https://algorithmwatch.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/ADM-systems-in-the-Covid-19-pandemic-Report-by-AW-BSt-Sept-2020.pdf)

==Articles==

* [[Bibliography on Corona and Social Change]]

* [https://covid19syllabus.substack.com/about? Coronavirus Readings by The-Syllabus]: "We track tens of thousands of sources not only across text, video and audio but also across multiple languages"

*  COVID-19 Watch, ETUC Briefing Notes for the EU-28 Countries, labor oriented material [https://www.etuc.org/en/publication/covid-19-watch-etuc-briefing-notes]

* COVID-19 from LabourStart: News from the world's trade unions https://www.labourstart.org/covid-19.php?

* The European Journal of Psychoanalysis has put together a special section on ‘Coronivirus and philosophers’ : http://www.journal-psychoanalysis.eu/coronavirus-and-philosophers/

* [[Politics of COVID-19 Reading List]]

* [https://www.fredhutch.org/en/news/center-news/2020/03/coronavirus-latest-scientific-research.html? Science papers you should be reading about the coronavirus]

* After the Pandemic: Which Future? May 01, 2020, https://greattransition.org/gtn-discussions/after-the-pandemic-which-future

==Books==

* Pandemic Solidarity: Mutual Aid during the Covid-19 Crisis. Edited by Marina Sitrin and Colectiva Sembrar. Pluto Books, 2021 [https://www.plutobooks.com/9780745343167/pandemic-solidarity/]

* the [https://archive.org/details/nationalemergencylibrary?tab=about National Emergency Library], a collection of books that supports emergency remote teaching, research activities, independent scholarship, and intellectual stimulation while universities, schools, training centers, and libraries are closed

Some recommended reads:

* Rebecca Solnit. Paradise Built in Hell: The [[Extraordinary Communities That Arise in Disaster]]. Penguin 2010 [https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/301070/a-paradise-built-in-hell-by-rebecca-solnit/]: "how people behave collectively in the face of stunning disasters"

==Data==

* Covid Watch: Using crowdsourced data to combat the spread of COVID-19. Open source, not for profit, privacy focused. [https://www.covid-watch.org]
* [[COVID-19 Open Research Dataset]] (CORD 19)
* [https://c19observatory.mit.edu/  MIT-Worldbank Covid-19 Observatory]: GLOBAL TRACKING OF THE REAL-TIME EVOLUTION OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC BY QUANTIFYING SOCIAL DISTANCING AND ECONOMIC IMPACT 
* [https://gdprhub.eu/index.php?title=Projects_using_personal_data_to_combat_SARS-CoV-2 Projects using personal data to combat SARS-CoV-2]. This page is meant to collect different approaches by government and private projects to use personal data to combat SARS-CoV-2.
* Georgeou, N., & Hawksley, C. (2020). [https://researchdirect.westernsydney.edu.au/islandora/object/uws:56288? State Responses to COVID-19]: A Global Snapshot at 1 June 2020.


===By Country===

* UK: [https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-nhs-unveils-data-platform-to-track-beds-staff-and-ventilators-11964216? NHS unveils 'data platform' to track beds, staff and ventilators]
* USA: * [https://covidtracking.com/ COVID Tracking Project] collects information from 50 US states, the District of Columbia, and 5 other US territories to provide the most comprehensive testing data we can collect for the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. We attempt to report positive and negative results, pending tests, and total people tested for each state

====Netherlands====

* [https://www.covidradar.nl/ Covid Radar]]
* [https://www.databronnencovid19.nl/ Databronnen Covid-19]


==Licenses==

===Creative Commons===

"By licensing material under a CC BY-NC-SA license, the World Health Organization (WHO) is adopting a more conservative approach to open access that falls short of what the scientific community urgently needs in order to access and build upon critical information.
All publicly funded organizations should: 1) Adopt open access policies that require publicly funded research to be made available under an open license (e.g. CC BY 4.0) or dedicated to the public domain. In practice, this means research articles and data can be freely reused by others, thereby enhancing collaboration among scientists and accelerating the pace of discovery. 2) Ensure all educational resources (such as videos, infographics and other media tools) are also openly licensed to facilitate dissemination of reliable, practical information to the public.
The current race to find a vaccine for COVID-19 exemplifies why rapid and unrestricted access to scientific research and educational materials is vital in the most open terms possible."
[https://creativecommons.org/2020/03/19/now-is-the-time-for-open-access-policies-heres-why/?]



==Maps==

* [https://paydayreport.com/covid-19-strike-wave-interactive-map/ COVID-19 Strike Wave Interactive Map]

* Free Geospatial Resources (maps and GIS systems) by ESRI, https://www.esri.com/en-us/covid-19/overview?

* SAFECAST COVID-19 TESTING MAP, Documenting global COVID-19 testing, https://covid19map.safecast.org/views/map?

* Covid-19 '''TECH ATLAS''', by RA Capital, https://ra-capital-prod.azurewebsites.net/media/Covid-19/COVID-19_05132020_F.pdf


===By Country===

* France: Une cartographie s'est mise en place pour recenser les initiatives de solidarité locale face à l'épidémie , https://covidentraide.gogocarto.fr/annuaire?#/carte/@45.29,3.21,4z?cat=all

* Netherlands: Code for NL, map: [https://collecties.codefor.nl/cbase/corona-initiatieven-7f1b1d68b2b0a8c621f114e190c98869/usecase/coronamap-nl-243995817fe54e37bbd130a39caed594]

==Online Tools==

*  [https://nextstrain.org/ NextStrain], an online resource that uses genome data to monitor the evolution of disease-causing organisms such as viruses in real time.

==Scientific Resources==

* bioRxiv (pronounced Bio-Archive), an online server where scientists post the first drafts of papers they may or may not submit later to academic journals, https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/780627v1
* [[Crowdfight COVID-19]]: An initiative from the scientific community to put all available resources at the service of the fight against COVID-19
* [https://www.evidenceaid.org/coronavirus-covid-19-evidence-collection/ Evidence Aid]: "The COVID-19 (Coronavirus) pandemic is leading to a rapidly expanding and evolving literature. Evidence Aid is preparing summaries of relevant research which are available below as soon as each is ready."
* GISAID, an online repository where labs from all over the world post new genomic data. "Bedford's phylogenetic charts — family trees for viruses — can help guide the public health response as an epidemic unfolds"  https://www.gisaid.org/
* Just One Giant Lab, '''fully open source participatory research''' with 1k+ active members: see our entry at [[OpenCovid19 Initiative - JOGL]]
* [[LitCovid]] is a curated literature hub for tracking up-to-date scientific information about the 2019 novel Coronavirus. It is the most comprehensive resource on the subject, providing a central access to 1558 (and growing) relevant articles in PubMed.
* [[NJEM Coronavirus]]: A collection of articles and other res(ources on the Coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak, including clinical reports, management guidelines, and commentary
* [https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/ Oxford COVID-19 Evidence Service]: "The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine develops, promotes and disseminates better evidence for healthcare."

==Stories==

* Project Lockdown: How a young man survives the COVID-19 lockdown— and thrives [https://medium.com/@projectlockdown21/state-of-emergency-7897c081fbe1]


==Videos==

* [[Nate Hagens on How the Coronavirus Could Affect the Economy]]

=By Topic=

Context [[Future Scenarios for Emerging Infectious Diseases]]: Sohail Inatullah on the "predictability of the Coronavirus outbreak"


==Business and Labor Support==

* [[Government Relief Programs for Small Businesses Affected by COVID-19]]
* [https://www.futurework.org.au/catalogue_of_international_initiatives_to_support_workers_through_covid_19? Catalogue of International Initiatives to Support Workers through COVID-19]: "measures to support jobs and incomes for all workers - including those in non-standard employment - to ensure they can take necessary time away from work, and do not lose their livelihoods as a result of the virus." please forward further suggestions and links to futurework@tai.org.au
* [https://blog.stridehealth.com/post/covid-19-resource-guide-for-independent-workers COVID-19 Resource Guide for Independent Workers]
*  [[Covid Social Impact]] platform to monitor the social and employment consequences of the Covid-19 in European member states. [https://medium.com/@ETUI_org/timeline-covid-social-impact-152737983e8e]


===By country===

* USA: [https://www.billboard.com/articles/business/9337908/coronavirus-resource-guide-music-professionals-help? A State-by-State Resource Guide for Music Professionals Who Need Help During Coronavirus Crisis], from Billboard magazine.

==Education==

* [[Estonian E-Learning Tools Available for Free During Corona Period]]


==Environmental Issues==

* [https://medium.com/@ETUI_org/episode-4-en-covid19-and-the-climate-crisis-their-interconnections-and-how-we-can-learn-from-83e4d910d72a ETUI resources on COVID19 and climate change]
* [[How Pandemics and Infectious Diseases Are Linked to Ecological Disruption and Climate Change]]
* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vSIHpwWWvLY&feature=youtu.be How industrialized animal production, we also have industrialized pathogen production].

==Market and State Failures==


===Contextual Quote===

"institutional failings have hampered the response to the outbreak of the virus. For instance, Chinese authorities responded to reports of a potential SARS outbreak in early January by arresting eight people for “spreading rumors”. The World Heath Organization announced in mid-January that there was no evidence of human-to-human transmission, ignoring warnings from Taiwanese health authorities sent in December. (Taiwan, which has not had an outbreak, is not allowed to participate in the WHO due to political pressure from China, which views it as a breakaway province). In the US, the CDC prevented testing in the early stages of the outbreak while containment was still possible, and elected officials dumped millions in stock while doing nothing to mobilize resources or prepare a response."

-  HENRY DE VALENCE [https://www.zfnd.org/blog/decentralized-contact-tracing/]


"the situation in Northern Italy had deteriorated rapidly, he told me, largely due to the terrible decisions of the people in power. Even as the epidemic was exploding, the national union of restaurateurs distributed a video, with the hashtag #wewontstop, encouraging people to go out, to eat in restaurants and drink in bars. Confindustria, the association of industrialists, has repeatedly lobbied the government to keep factories and workshops open even as the armies patrol the streets and the death toll rises. On March 21, the Italian government took the unprecedented step of closing the factories, but even then Confindustria managed to lobby to keep them open for a few more days."

- Commune magazine [https://communemag.com/its-time-to-build-the-brigades/?]


===Articles===

* In France: [https://ripostecreativeterritoriale.xyz/?PagePrincipale Riposte Craative Territoriale] is a collaborative inquiry to maintain public services in times of confinement crisis

* David Harvey:: [[Anti-Capitalist Politics in the Time of COVID-19]]
* [https://www.socialeurope.eu/has-the-coronavirus-brought-back-the-nation-state? Has the coronavirus brought back the nation-state]? by Jan Zielonka
* [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/18/the-covid-19-crisis-is-a-chance-to-do-capitalism-differently Government needs to be revamped]. By Mariana Mazzucato.
* "Throughout history, pandemics have led to an expansion of the power of the state." https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/when-disease-comes-leaders-grab-more-power/608560/?

* low-wage-sector companies are now exacerbating the spread of COVID-19, insofar as they refused to pay their workers sick pay, forcing them to go to work. 
[https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/14/opinion/sunday/coronavirus-paid-sick-leave.html]




===Arguments review===

====State failures:====

* [https://www.bloomberg.com/amp/opinion/articles/2020-04-13/coronavirus-pandemic-is-wake-up-call-to-reinvent-the-state? The job of government is to protect its citizens. The pandemic reveals that key institutions in Europe and the U.S. are no longer up to the job]

* [https://thenextsystem.org/learn/stories/give-them-amtrak-treatment-growing-calls-widespread-nationalization Tracking the calls for nationalization and public ownership]: an impressive list!

Summary of the arguments:

* austerity policies destroyed public health infrastructure
* failure to plan for pandemicc
* failure to act on time to mitigate or suppress the virus
* lack of public healtn insure forces workers to continue to work
* lack of support for freelance and independent workers

====Market failure:====

Summary of the arguments:

* price gouging of medical devices
* failure to produce medical producs and devices needed for pandemics

Examples:

"* In The Netherlands, for instance, hospitals didn’t have enough test kits because Roche, the world’s largest biotech company, initially refused to hand over the recipe that is needed to perform these tests.
* In the United States, Trump’s ‘corona-minister’ Alex Azar released a statement saying that the government could not guarantee that a potential cure for Covid-19 would be affordable, because the innovation that is needed for that cure would only be spurred by high profits.
* The rush to create a vaccine was delayed for up to two or three years, because in most countries, pharmaceutical companies had sold their vaccine research facilities. And the companies that still had the capabilities to do the research had effectively scaled down their coronavirus research because there was no money to be made.
* Scientists were close to a coronavirus vaccine years ago, and then the money dried up.
* The vaccine market was even called ‘an oligopoly’ by Wall Street analysts at AB Bernstein. In fact, after countries abandoned infectious disease research, most companies also moved away from investing in this field, according to DNDi director Bernard Pecoul.
* In France, it was debated why a testing kit for coronavirus should cost 135 euro, eventhough the production costs are only 10 euros. The sub-optimal availability of tests was cited as a major reason for not testing in the fight against the pandemic in many European countries, leading many people to ask if this had economic reasons as well."
(https://www.commonsnetwork.org/uncategorized/corona-private-medicine-vs-public-health/)

==Medical Issues==

* The ethics of triage [https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsb2005114?query=featured_coronavirus NJEM]


==Mental Health Resources==

* Corona virus anxiety: "Resources for anxiety and your mental health in a global climate of uncertainty". [https://www.virusanxiety.com/]


==Mitigation Strategies==

* [https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/21/coronavirus-asia-acted-west-dithered-hong-kong-taiwan-europe Coronavirus: how Asian countries acted while the west dithered] ; [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGg9T8QLArg Asia's democracies did very well]

* [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/04/why-wear-a-mask-may-be-our-best-weapon-to-stop-coronavirus? To help stop coronavirus, everyone should be wearing face masks. The science is clear]

The successful ones so far

* China: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3gCbkeARbY fascinating review of the Chinese methodology]

* [https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/01/europe/iceland-testing-coronavirus-intl/index.html Iceland's success through voluntary mass testing]

* India (Kerala): [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/21/kerala-indian-state-flattened-coronavirus-curve? How the Indian state of Kerala flattened the coronavirus curve] ; [https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/14/the-coronavirus-slayer-how-keralas-rock-star-health-minister-helped-save-it-from-covid-19? Interview and profile of health minister]

* Korea: [https://edition.cnn.com/2020/03/16/opinions/south-korea-italy-coronavirus-survivability-sepkowitz/index.html Why South Korea has so few coronavirus deaths while Italy has so many]

* New Zealand: [https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanwpc/article/PIIS2666-6065(20)30044-4/fulltext? Potential lessons from the Taiwan and New Zealand health responses to the COVID-19 pandemic]

* Scotland: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEgy3lsH044 Scotland’s NHS using unique system to treat coronavirus] 

* Singapore: [https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2020/03/12/814522489/singapore-wins-praise-for-its-covid-19-strategy-the-u-s-does-not? Singapore Wins Praise For Its COVID-19 Strategy] [https://theconversation.com/why-singapores-coronavirus-response-worked-and-what-we-can-all-learn-134024] [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdDpmAt3lxo video documentary]

* Taiwan: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XjqD_9ScTlA Taiwan's COVID-19 Response Should Be A Model For The World] ; [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sae9AIx1wp0 How Taiwan Contained COVID-19: Early Action, Technology & Millions of Face Masks] ; [https://www.wired.com/story/how-taiwans-unlikely-digital-minister-hacked-the-pandemic/ How Taiwan’s Unlikely Digital Minister Hacked the Pandemic]


The unsuccessful ones:

* [https://www.econlib.org/sweden-is-not-the-model-taiwan-is/? Sweden had 50% more fatalities than the US when adjusted for relative population sizes] (this is no judgment on the economic and social benefits of avoiding confinement)

* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7HupV6GRPLw John Pilger on how the prior neoliberal destruction of the NHS prepared the current catastrophe in the UK]

==Mutual Aid==

* THE [https://www.shareable.net/series/the-peoples-covid-19-response/ PEOPLE'S COVID-19 RESPONSE]: A 2020 special Shareable series featuring community’s response to the COVID-19 global pandemic.
 
* Mutual Aid Disaster Relief is a grassroots disaster relief network based on the principles of solidarity, mutual aid, and autonomous direct action. https://mutualaiddisasterrelief.org/

* Next Door: "I find good ol' Next Door App to be helpful if you want to offer your own services or look for help." [https://nextdoor.com/]


===By Country===

* Canada: [https://sites.google.com/view/covid19montreal/home? COVID-19 aide communautaire Montreal]

* China: "In Wuhan, as soon as public transport was suspended, volunteer drivers created a community fleet, transporting medical workers between their homes and hospitals." [https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-health-volunteers/in-chinas-coronavirus-epicenter-volunteers-keep-stricken-city-moving-idUSKBN2080YF]

* Czechia: Students in Prague are babysitting the children of doctors and nurses. [https://denikreferendum.cz/clanek/30962-co-cech-to-dobrovolnik-nemocnicim-pomahaji-medici-seniorum-stovky-mladych---]

* India: "young people have self-organised on a massive scale to provide aid packages for “daily wagers”: people without savings or stores, who rely entirely on cash flow that has now been cut off."  [https://citizenmatters.in/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/03/HELP-INDIA-PDF.pdf]

* Ireland: "balcony bingo: the caller sits in the square between the blocks of flats with a large speaker, while the players sit on their balconies, taking down the numbers." [https://www.irishtimes.com/news/health/coronavirus/balcony-bingo-takes-off-across-dublin-for-mother-s-day-1.4209414]

* Italy: [[Volunteer Emergency Brigades - Milan]]: "Brigate Volontarie Per L’Emergenza". [https://communemag.com/its-time-to-build-the-brigades/?]

* Latin America: "a compilation of responses from community networks in the face of COVID-19, based on a dialogue held on 20 April 2020, organised by the Association for Progressive Communications (APC), as well as based on different articles published by the community networks themselves in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, the United States and Mexico". [https://www.apc.org/en/news/community-networks-and-covid-19-americas-region]

* Norway:  a group of people who have recovered from Covid-19 provide services that would be dangerous for non-immune people to offer. [https://wemunity.org/]

* Philippines: The [https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/4/24/food-pantry-for Emergence of Community Kitchens in the Philippines] ; [https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/asia/covid-19-philippines-food-pantries-manila-social-media-help-14717828]

* Serbia: In Belgrade volunteers organise virtual coffee mornings and crisis counselling. [https://antikoronazona.rs/]


====Belgium====

* [https://www.antwerpen.be/nl/info/5e6fd477fee9e6c248225fb9/antwerpen-helpt Antwerpen Helpt]: city initiative to faciliate mutual aid

* [https://www.justgoe.be/bestebuur/? Beste Buur]: neighbors helping neighbors

* [https://www.coronassist.be/nl/ Coroassist]

* #OnzeGemeenteHelpt : Gratis hulpplatform voor gemeenten en organisaties in de Corona-crisis https://www.impactdays.co/?

* [https://www.1640.store/? Rhode St. Genese Corona Solidarity]

====France====

* COVID-Entraide France - Pour partager et référencer vos initiatives de solidarité : https://t.me/joinchat/Kd5EW0kFszT96K7Q32Ohag

* [https://framaforms.org/covid-19-vous-souhaitez-vous-mobiliser-aupres-des-personnes-vulnerables-1584613217?   La Fabrique de la Solidarité]: est en lien avec les associations qui cherchent des volontaires pour assurer leurs missions essentielles."


====South Africa====

* "communities in Johannesburg have made survival packs for people in informal settlements: hand sanitiser, toilet paper, bottled water and food." [https://twitter.com/sunnyboymorgan/status/1243087204500623361]

*  "In Cape Town, a local group has GIS mapped all the district’s households, surveyed the occupants, and assembled local people with medical expertise, ready to step in if the hospitals are overwhelmed." [https://twitter.com/AdamWelz/status/1243078583947538432] [https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-government/tools-support/gis/what-is-gis]

* "Another community in the city has built washstands in the train station and is working to turn a pottery studio into a factory making sanitiser." [https://www.facebook.com/groups/CapeTownTogether/?ref=share]

* [https://form.jotform.com/200813205437042 Cape Town Together]: Community Response


====UK====

* '''[[Covid-19 Mutual Aid UK]]'''

* A mothers’ running group in Bristol have restyled themselves “drug runners”, keeping fit by delivering medicines from chemists’ shops to people who can’t leave their homes. [https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/drug-runners-keep-medicines-moving-during-lockdown-5khm9lxxj]


====USA====

* Intellihelp: "Cohesive, no-nonsense support community connecting those needing help with those who can give it."
[https://www.facebook.com/groups/1061901284171597/]

* '''[[List of Mutual Aid Pandemic Disaster Care in the US]]'''

* HospitalHero connects healthcare workers who don’t have time to meet their own needs with people who can offer meals and accommodation. [https://hospitalhero.care/]

* A group called WePals, created by an eight-year-old, sets up virtual play dates for children. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mKBpcRd7C1Y]

* A new website, schoolclosures.org, finds teaching, meals and emergency childcare for overstretched parents. [http://schoolclosures.org/]

* A network called Money During Corona texts news of job opportunities to people looking for work. [https://www.moneyduringcorona.com/]

* The #ShareMyCheck campaign: https://www.sharemycheck.org/


For particular places and communities

* Ann Arbor: the [https://www.facebook.com/kekerechildcarecollective/ Kekere Emergency Childcare Collective] has formed as a response to Coronavirus related school closures. The group is striving to organize mutual aid childcare for families

* [[New Orleans Community Fridges]]:  "a network to empower our neighbors in supporting each other through the offering of free food in Community Fridges".
[https://www.nolacommunityfridges.org/?]

* NY/NJ: invisible Hands, Free deliveries for the most at-risk community members, https://www.invisiblehandsdeliver.com/ [https://apnews.com/bda9c1ed0f8e10742ad2feabb2d52aa2]: "1,300 volunteers in 72 hours to deliver groceries and medicine to older New Yorkers and other vulnerable people" 

* Oakland: [https://www.facebook.com/disabilityjusticecultureclub  Disability Justice Culture Club]: created a [https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc7LLhYN243k6xFlmQH26lAN9EoRXgEQGrghbqL8Ttc1K8YNA/viewform Google Doc] "linking able-bodied individuals with those who have unique needs" (homeless people, etc..)

* Philadelphia: [https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScfKlHLhLMEyXyLFNwiJaegq9k3hXOtwClXJ_kTjSCwi00K9g/viewform? Neighbors Helping Neighbors: Philly Mutual Aid for folks Affected by Covid-19]

==Public Services==

* In France: [https://ripostecreativeterritoriale.xyz/?PagePrincipale Riposte Craative Territoriale] is a collaborative inquiry to maintain public services in times of confinement crisis


==Social Inequality==

* [[Jonathan Metzl on the Coronavirus and Social Inequality in America]]. Podcast via http://thechaunceydevegashow.libsyn.com/ep-278-the-coronavirus-and-social-inequality-in-america

* [https://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-pandemic-make-explosive-mix Inequality and pandemic make an explosive mix] Richard Baldwin

* Ann Pettifor: [https://tribunemag.co.uk/2020/03/coronavirus-could-unravel-globalisation? we must demand the “the internationalisation of labour” – with capital subordinated to the interests of labour]: "National self-sufficiency nested within the internationalism of labour is the very antithesis of nationalism."

* Paul Engler: How progressive and solidaristic impulses have come to the fore in response to [[Trigger Events]] [https://wagingnonviolence.org/2020/03/coronavirus-historic-trigger-event-needs-movement-response/?]

==Solidarity Economy / Social Economy / Cooperatives==

* [[Solidarity Corona Initiatives in the Social economy]]

* [http://michaelhshuman.com/?p=456 Comparative Resilience: 8 Principles for Post-COVID Reconstruction]. By Michael S. Shuman

=Policy=

* [[Building Public Capabilities Post-Covid - France]]: "a collaborative field investigation on public transformation during periods of crisis." [http://www.la27eregion.fr/en/reflexes-publics-six-pistes-prospectives-pour-batir-les-capacites-publiques-post-covid/]

"How should the building of public capabilities be adapted to the world to come based on the administrative experiments that took place during the peak of the pandemic? What task forces should be organized, collectively, to reinforce the resilience of France’s territories ? in confronting future crises?  ... The 27e Région got together with ... agencies ... to initiate last May the Reflexes Publics project."

* "Pandemic Citizenship Amidst Stateless [[Algorithmic Nations]]: Digital Rights and Technological Sovereignty at Stake – Post-Covid Europe #4". By Igor Calzada.
[https://ideasforeurope.eu/activity/paper/pandemic-citizenship-amidst-stateless-algorithmic-nations-post-covid-europe-4/]



==Policies (laws and proposals)==

Actual policies, voted in parliaments or decided by governments, or at least serious policy and legal propositions:

* Germany: [ German Economy Minister Peter Altmaier says nationalization could be one option for supporting strategically important companies]: "I can well imagine a common European project for medicine production.”
* Spain: [https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-spain-nationalises-private-hospitals-emergency-covid-19-lockdown-2020-3?r=DE&IR=T Spain has nationalized all of its private hospitals as the country goes into coronavirus lockdown]
* UK: [https://www.thirdsector.co.uk/coronavirus-new-legislation-proposes-giving-workers-paid-time-off-volunteer/management/article/1677739 New legislation proposes giving workers paid time off to volunteer]
* US: The [[Automatic Boost Act]]


===ETUI Briefing Notes for the EU-28 Countries===

Find them at https://www.etuc.org/en/publication/covid-19-watch-etuc-briefing-notes

#Short Time Work Measures Across Europe
#National measures to support households by providing different (tax) relief measures
#National measures to avoid collective/individual lay-offs (incl. granting (additional/special) leaves)
#Sick pay and social protection-related interventions: extraordinary measures to protect
workers in times of Covid19
#National measures to protect non-standard workers including workers in the platform economy
#National measures to protect self-employed workers
#Workers' Information Consultation and Participation
#Frontier workers
#Human Rights and COVID-19

== Policy (debates and interventions) ==


* The [https://kpfa.org/episode/letters-and-politics-march-10-2020/ Legal and Economics Aspects of the Coronavirus Epidemic]

* [https://transformativespaces.org/2020/03/04/demands-from-grassroots-organizers-concerning-covid-19/? Demands from Grassroots Organizers Concerning COVID-19]


===Environment:===


* The [[Covid19 Emergency Is a Green One]]: A message to European finance ministers to double down on European Green Deal as the economic response to the Corona-pandemic. By Sandrine Dixson-Declève, Hunter Lovins, Kate Raworth, Hans Joachim Schellnhuber. Club of Rome, 20/3/2020

* The [https://www.wri.org/blog/2020/03/coronavirus-economy-low-carbon-investments Economic Case for Post-Corona Low-carbon Development]: "pursuing low-carbon and climate-resilient growth is the best way to unlock lasting economic and social benefits. Bold climate action could deliver at least $26 trillion in net global economic benefits between now and 2030 compared with business-as-usual according to the New Climate Economy"

* [https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/mar/24/covid-19-economic-rescue-plans-must-be-green-say-environmentalists? Covid-19 economic rescue plans must be green, say environmentalists]

* Energy: [https://www.wri.org/blog/2020/03/coronavirus-economy-low-carbon-investments Responding to Coronavirus: Low-carbon Investments Can Help Economies Recover]

* [https://medium.com/@Guay_JG/could-coronavirus-forever-alter-the-fossil-fuel-era-d827a814d21 Could Coronavirus Forever Alter the Fossil Fuel Era?]: bailouts should be conditioned to 'Paris compliance'


===Finance and Debt===

* This is going to be inevitable, argue Prof. Steve Keen, Michael Hudson, Jordan Hall and others: [[Quantitative Easing for the Public]] aka a "Modern Debt Jubilee", as explained here by Steve Keen.

* '''[https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-companies-tax-havens-banned-denmark-poland-bailout-2020-4? Denmark and Poland are refusing to bail out companies registered in offshore tax havens]'''

===Global South and 'Development' Issues===

'''* [https://jacobinmag.com/2020/04/coronavirus-global-green-new-deal-south-postcolonial? The situation in the Global South requires a Global Green New Deal]:''' "The average North-South gap in per-capita income has grown, not shrunk, since the 1960 United Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which affirmed the right of all people to self-determination and proclaimed that colonialism should be brought to a speedy and unconditional end. Global inequality is now so high that the global Gini coefficient, which measures the level of inequality across the world, is about the same as South Africa’s — one of the most unequal societies on the planet. Global South countries are faced with a triple bind: to have the money to dole out stimulus and bailouts, many will have to take on more debt. To secure loans, they may have to impose additional “structural adjustment” policies. And those very measures will hollow out an already decrepit public sector, leaving countries ill-equipped for a mass pandemic."


===Health===

* The fight against pandemics can only be won with free, public health care | [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J1aNQZFbGUE&t=317s video by Yanis Varoufakis of DiEM25]


===Food===

* USA: Family Food Producers And Anti-Hunger Advocates Urge Support For Local Supply Chains In Next Stimulus Bill, http://rajpatel.org/2020/03/20/for-immediate-release-family-food-producers-and-anti-hunger-advocates-urge-support-for-local-supply-chains-in-next-stimulus-bill/

* UK: [https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/mar/20/farmers-call-for-land-army-to-sustain-uk-food-production-during-coronavirus-crisis? Farmers call for 'land army' to sustain UK food production during coronavirus crisis]: Leaders and unions concerned about acute labour shortage suggest retraining those put out of work


===Localization===

* [http://michaelhshuman.com/?p=456 Comparative Resilience: 8 Principles for Post-COVID Reconstruction]. By Michael S. Shuman


===Transportation===

* UK: [https://www.common-wealth.co.uk/reports/emergency-landing-how-public-stakes-can-secure-a-sustainable-future-for-aviation For a fair and smart aviation bailout]. Briefing from Common Wealth think thank.


===By Country===

* UK: Call for a [http://www.nlgn.org.uk/public/2020/a-post-pandemic-plan/ Post-Pandemic Plan]: Adam Lent argues we need to start thinking now about a post-pandemic plan focused on building stronger communities and a resilient economy.
* USA: A group of experts from academia and civil society, many of whom advised the presidential campaigns of Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, have issued a detailed call for “[https://medium.com/@green_stimulus_now/a-green-stimulus-to-rebuild-our-economy-1e7030a1d9eeA Green Stimulus To Rebuild Our Economy].” The open letter for members of Congress calls for “an ambitious Green Stimulus of at least $2 trillion” [https://thenextsystem.org/learn/stories/green-stimulus-rebuild-economy]
* [https://thenextsystem.org/learn/stories/online-roundtable-nationalization Roundtable on Nationalization], by the Next Democracy project,focusing on US history

=By Language and Country=


==Dutch-language==


===Belgium===

* [https://www.coronadenktank.be/ Corona Denktank]
* [https://padlet.com/karinwinters/cbk6nmdovyho Online Learning Tools]
* [https://paraatinmijnstraat.be/? Paraat in Mijn Straat]: "Inspelend op de bestaande dynamieken willen we mensen met tijd, daadkracht en goesting inspireren: om een attente buur te zijn, om  de hand te reiken of een solidair signaal te geven naar wie fysiek meest nabij is."

===Netherlands===

* Hack Corona [https://hackcorona.sparkboard.com/]: Dutch Hacking Health initiative

* Molecular Modelling Project Wetenschappelijk onderzoek (drug discovery corona) [https://www.elsevier.com/connect/coronavirus-information-center?]

* Project Open Air NL, https://projectopenair.nl/

* [https://www.getrevue.co/profile/martijnarets/issues/hoe-platformen-ons-door-de-corona-crisis-heen-kunnen-trekken-233618? Platforms facilating exchanges]

* Open State Foundation: ‘tracker lokale en regionale covid-19-maatregelen’ gestart: In dit openbare bestand worden maatregelen van gemeenten en veiligheidsregio’s verzameld,
https://openstate.eu/nl/2020/04/lokale-en-regionale-corona-maatregelen-op-een-rij/ [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1J0m5D8E2vGyl5K4sphBskK2pI6ToaohTqiuD1PE_jH4/edit?ts=5e7caf4c#gid=0 600+ maatregelen in GoogleDoc]

==English-language==

===Australia===

* COVID-19 PANDEMIC RESOURCES FOR PROGRESSIVES [https://australianprogress.org.au/compiled-resources-for-responding-to-covid-19/?]


===UK===

* More than 500 @CovidAidUK community support groups spring up as neighbours offer support during Coronavirus outbreak.' [https://theecologist.org/2020/mar/16/birth-covid-19-mutual-aid]

* Covid 19 Mutual Aid Groups (UK), 931 listed on google doc [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/18P898HWbdR5ouW61sAxW_iBl3yiZlgJu0nSmepn6NwM/htmlview?sle=true]

===USA===

* Covid-19 Financial Solidarity, Oakland, US:  " inspiring prototype out of Oakland that has facilitated hundreds of financial transactions to those disproportionately impacted: [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1FBEU0cdAGpScU0JrOlYFm8FrY1Bjr0_HsyW4hWOj74I/edit#gid=1858085247]

* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/18WYGoVlJuXYc3QFN1RABnARZlwDG3aLQsnNokl1KhZQ/mobilebasic? NYC United Against Coronavirus] - Resources and Information

* San Diego (county-wide) COVID-19 Mutual Aid Volunteer [https://www.reddit.com/r/CoronavirusSanDiego/comments/fiko4g/san_diego_countywide_covid19_mutual_aid_volunteer/]

* [[List of Mutual Aid Pandemic Disaster Care in the US]]

* How Can I Help? - SF Bay Area [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1gQlAmgIsXdEUdISa3gKYd5PX6eq6nc5WALdmNxQpNGw/edit#gid=0]

* [ioby.org/project/grocery-stipends serviceworkerscoalition Service Workers Coalition Grocery Stipends]:  A cash relief network for and by service workers in New York City. Email us for aid at serviceworkerscoalition@gmail

== French-language ==

* '''Lisez: [https://www.bastamag.net/confinement-isolement-entraide-covid19-epidemie-services-publics-hopital-neoliberal? Nous allons transformer l’isolement imposé en immense élan d’auto-organisation et de solidarité collective]''': « Face à la pandémie, retournons la stratégie du choc en déferlante de solidarité ! », appelle une tribune publiée par plusieurs médias indépendants, dont Basta !

''"Il n’y aura pas de « sortie de crise » sans un bouleversement majeur de l’organisation sociale et économique actuelle"''

* [https://theconversation-com.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/theconversation.com/amp/comment-le-coronavirus-a-reveille-lintelligence-collective-mondiale-135465? Comment le coronavirus a réveillé l’intelligence collective mondiale]. Par Marc Santolini, Université de Paris

===France===

* [https://covid3d.org/ 3D Covid]: "Plateforme interne d'impression haut-débit pour répondre aux besoins sanitaires urgents des soignants. '''Fédération des initiatives de conception et d’impression 3D''' pour lutter contre le COVID-19 en Île-de-France". (Assistance Publique - Hopitaux de Paris] => CONCEVOIR - VALIDER - FABRIQUER - DISTRIBUER - COMBATTRE LE VIRUS

* Code-Virus: "constitution d’un collectif de travail interdisciplinaire en sciences humaines et sociales CODE-VIRUS (Coordination interDisciplinaire pour l’Etude de l’impact sociétal du CoronaVIRUS) . Objectif : Suivre, documenter et anticiper collectivement et de manière interdisciplinaire les conséquences de la pandémie de Coronavirus sur nos modes de vie, nos organisations et nos territoires" [https://www.msh-alpes.fr/appel-collectif-shs-code-virus]. Contact : code-virus@msh-alpes.fr

* [[COVID-Entraide France]] - Pour partager et référencer vos initiatives de solidarité : https://t.me/joinchat/Kd5EW0kFszT96K7Q32Ohag ; Inscrivez votre groupe local ici : https://covidentraide.gogocarto.fr Contact : covidentraidefrance [A] riseup.net
** Une cartographie s'est mise en place pour recenser les initiatives de solidarité locale face à l'épidémie , https://covidentraide.gogocarto.fr/annuaire?#/carte/@45.29,3.21,4z?cat=all

* La plateforme [https://covid-initiatives.org/ Covid-Initiatives], soutenue par le Réseau Français des Fablabs, rassemble les initiatives de makers en France et au-delà qui proposent des équipements et solutions de fortune dans la lutte contre le Covid-19. [https://www.makery.info/2020/03/31/avec-covid-initiatives-le-reseau-francais-des-fablabs-appelle-a-coordonner-la-mobilisation-des-makers/]

* entraide-coronavirus: une app d entraide : https://www.facebook.com/groups/lesjoyeuxtransitionneurs/permalink/2782424691848812/
"entraide-coronavirus.glideapp.io"

* Entraide Maker - COVID 19. https://entraide-maker.org/ [https://discord.gg/t4ZBR4x]

* Espace d'échanges proposés par des acteurs du numérique :
** https://www.entraidecoronavirus.fr/
** https://forum.chatons.org/
** https://enpremiereligne.fr/

* [https://fabricommuns.org/ FabriCommuns]: "Pour venir en soutien des soignants et tous les travailleurs en première ligne face au Covid19, un collectif d'acteur·rices citoyen·nes s’est constitué pour faciliter la coordination"

* [https://lejourdapres.parlement-ouvert.fr/ Le Jour Apres]: "Pendant les jours qui viennent, mettons à profit le confinement pour imaginer ce que nous voulons de mieux. Soyons ambitieux et audacieux pour nous-même et pour notre planète."

* [https://www.facebook.com/groups/1120744844933688/ Makers contre le Covid] ; 

* [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1fDG5AhttT0WtGMOJVnBNw0BtAQ1UwlWPuaNp8uDTwtE/edit? Groupes Facebook de Makers] [https://www.google.com/maps/d/u/0/viewer?mid=1RMGwwBX6djxep-8XqWhAWtTWr30tNECE&ll=46.89234943681416%2C0.8801498990065966&z=6]

* OpenCOVID19-fr: Organisation informelle issue de la société civile dont l'objet est de consolider des données et de proposer des outils de visualisation concernant l'épidémie de COVID19 en France. [https://github.com/opencovid19-fr]

* La Plateforme de Microbiologie Mutualisée (P2M) est ouverte à l’ensemble des laboratoires de référence de l’Institut Pasteur, à Paris et dans le Réseau International. Dans un esprit de mutualisation technologique, P2M regroupe les demandes et permet ainsi l’utilisation en routine, jusqu’ici impossible du séquençage à haut débit multi-pathogènes (NGS par les technologies illumina et Ion Torrent). [https://research.pasteur.fr/fr/team/mutualized-platform-for-microbiology/]


Voire aussi:

* Afficher un mot dans son immeuble pour proposer un reseau d'entraide (courses et autres services) : https://www.facebook.com/groups/1426110274273709/permalink/2533499770201415/?comment_id=2533500980201294

* Une cartographie collaborative des initiatives d'entraide
** la carte https://covidentraide.gogocarto.fr/
** et le groupe FB associé : https://www.facebook.com/groups/208192820288100/

* apprendre autrement en post-presenciel, une invitation a l'innovation pedagogique par Michel Briand et al., https://www.innovation-pedagogique.fr/article6762.html?

* [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1fDG5AhttT0WtGMOJVnBNw0BtAQ1UwlWPuaNp8uDTwtE/edit#gid=0 Makers du Monde]: directory of Facebook Groups of Makers in France and French-speaking regions of the world [https://www.google.com/maps/d/u/0/viewer?mid=1RMGwwBX6djxep-8XqWhAWtTWr30tNECE Carte des groupes]

====Initiatives limitees a un lieu particulier :====

(via Pierre PP)

#Paris : https://www.facebook.com/notes/transition-paris-20/situation-epidemique-infos-et-initiatives-dans-paris/2533493596868699/
Reseaux Sociaux :
#Covid-entraide infos France a des groupes facebook et telegram : https://www.facebook.com/pg/coronavirusentraide/about/?ref=page_internal
#Dont le groupe Coronavirus - Infos pratiques : https://www.facebook.com/groups/1979446748866204/
#Marie covid 19 infos : https://www.facebook.com/groups/195816401648291/

===Canada===

* Covid-19 aide communautaire Montreal [https://www.facebook.com/pg/Covid-19-aide-communautaire-Montreal-103590561277035/about/?ref=page_internal fb] ; [Covid-19 aide communautaire Montreal [https://sites.google.com/view/covid19montreal/home?]

==Italian-langague==


===Italy===

* open data formats for corona (in Italian, for Italy ?): http://blog.ondata.it/coronavirus-abbiamo-trasformato-i-dati-ufficiali-in-formato-machine-readable-ma-chiediamo-alle-istituzioni-di-farlo-da-sole/

* Les membres de l'Assemblée nationale des Communs Émergents d'Italie ont partagé leur situation et l'état de leur mobilisation face à la crise du Covid-19 au cours de l'Appel en commun: https://wiki.remixthecommons.org/index.php/Mobilisation_des_commoners_italiens_dans_le_contexte_du_COVID-19

==Portuguese-langague==


===Brazil===

* Segura a Onda - the Brazilian version of the Spanish Frena la Curva, a collaborative guide of citizen initiatives to fight the coronavirus. Social innovation and civic resilience in times of pandemic. [https://seguraaonda.com.br/]

===Portugal===

* Achata a Curva - the Portuguese version of the Spanish Frena la Curva, a mapping of civic initiatives in the fight against COVID19. [https://achataacurva.com/]

==Spanish Language ==

* '''Frenalacurva.net''' Peer/citizen produced guides to cope with the virus. Social innovation and civic resilience for pandemic times. [https://frenalacurva.net/]

* The super-neighborhood (supervecina.com/#/yaquevas/en) app  Is working overtime during the Corona crisis in Spain and Portugal



=Tools=

See the overview maintained by Appropedia at https://www.appropedia.org/Collaborative_COVID-19_initiatives?

* [[CivicTechHub]] lists international grassroots movements, bringing together individuals, organisations and governments. We are using open data and encourage open collaboration globally [https://devpost.com/software/internationale-liste-covid-19-communities-hackathons]

* [[Corona Care Maker Initiatives]] (careables.org)

*''' [[Coronavirus Tech Handbook]]'''

* [http://covidaccelerator.com/ Covid Accelerator] is a project incubator for Corona solutions

* [https://covidbase.com/7d1a6f8ef0b9434b87e68cbe05d8a9d6?v=1d23e01e433147edb0ee7b49474734eb COVIDbase] is a work-in-progress curated list of projects, news, and data related to COVID-19

* Covid Hacks, Worldwide community hacks to fight Covid-19 pandemics, http://covidhacks.org/? [http://covidhacks.org/#projects]

* [[Helpful Engineering]]: 3k+ participants, 40+ subgroups

* [[List of Covid Engineering Groups and Projects]]

* [[Open Covid]]: [https://opencovid.care/? OpenCovid] "is an [[Open Source Pharma]] & CRI Paris initiative in the #LearningPlanet spirit: to inspire and empower learners (of all age) willing to contribute to collective problem solving".

* [[OpenCovid19 Initiative - JOGL]]

* [[Open Source COVID19 Medical Supplies]]

* [https://www.seads.network/covid19-tech? SEADS DATABASE OF COVID-19 TECHNOLOGIES]: covers a "broad range of technologies to address the many crises surrounding the pandemic"

* [[Summary of Open Source Designs and Projects To Fight the Covid-19 Outbreak]]; [[FAQ on Making Safe Medical Devices for the COVID-19 Crisis]]

* UK Govt Guidance on: '''New Small-Scale Manufacturers of COVID-19 Personal Protective Equipment''' [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/924262/Guidance-for-businesses-and-individuals-small-scale-manufacture-of-ppe-version-4.pdf pdf]




==Miscellaneous Tools==

#UV Sterilizer, https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4223034
#U-Shaped Virus Water Trap Filler, https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4222897
#Acrylic board stand for blocking droplet, https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4198078
#UV Sterilizer, https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4223034
#U-Shaped Virus Water Trap Filler https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4222897
#Acrylic board stand for blocking droplet https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4198078
#Handy Tool for Buttons (Kid), https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4220694
#Button press tool with a protective sleeve, https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4219470
#Coronavirus Covid-19 Custom Message Display Board https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4220162


==By Country==

* Belgium: [[Mitigate Corona in Belgium]]
* France: Makers on COVID19 FB Group, https://www.facebook.com/groups/1120744844933688/?hc_location=ufi
* Germany: #WirVsVirus Hackathon, https://wirvsvirushackathon.org/
* India: "The [[M19 Collective]] is a collection of makerspaces, fab labs, community organisations, foundations, industries, universities, researchers and individuals fostering a collaborative effort in open innovation and helping to combat the current COVID-19 crisis in India."
* USA: [https://apollohct.com/ Paid & Volunteer Medical Jobs]: Connect with hospitals and clinics in need of emergency staffing.

==Tech Events / Hackatons==

* #HACKCORONA  https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/hackcorona-an-online-hackathon-for-public-protection-from-covid-19-tickets-100161529832 

* [[Wuhan2020]] (Hack for Wuhan, March 6-8, 2020 https://www.bagevent.com/event/6368833)

* Der WirVsVirus Hackathon, March 20-22, 2020, https://wirvsvirushackathon.org

* Global Community Bio Summit https://www.facebook.com/groups/1679192212217747/


==3D Printing==

* [[3D Printer and Talent Crowdsourcing for COVID-19]]
* [[3D Printer Crowdsourcing for COVID-19]]


===By Country===

A lire: * [https://usbeketrica.com/article/covid-19-les-initiatives-ouvertes-sont-en-train-de-se-construire-une-visibilite-nationale In France, makers and industry have found each other]!

====France====

* [https://covid3d.org/ 3D Covid]: "Plateforme interne d'impression haut-débit pour répondre aux besoins sanitaires urgents des soignants. '''Fédération des initiatives de conception et d’impression 3D''' pour lutter contre le COVID-19 en Île-de-France". (Assistance Publique - Hopitaux de Paris] => CONCEVOIR - VALIDER - FABRIQUER - DISTRIBUER - COMBATTRE LE VIRUS

* La plateforme [https://www.makery.info/2020/03/31/avec-covid-initiatives-le-reseau-francais-des-fablabs-appelle-a-coordonner-la-mobilisation-des-makers/ Covid-Initiatives], soutenue par le Réseau Français des Fablabs, rassemble les initiatives de makers en France et au-delà qui proposent des équipements et solutions de fortune dans la lutte contre le Covid-19.

==Decontamination==

* [https://www.colorado.edu/mcdb/coronavirus-information/professor-sara-sawyers-decon-station-instructions? Professor Sara Sawyer's Decon Station Instructions]


==Door Openers==

* door opener: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4224156
* Doorknob Handle https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4224517
* Gas Pump Handle Holder https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4226249
* Handy Tool for Buttons/Handles https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4215704
* Non-contact foot-based door latch https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4226561
* Savegrabber - open door without touching the handle, press knobs without touching - an additional barrier for the coronavirus https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4192643


==Face Shields==

* Budmen Face Shields , https://makerfaire.com/maker/entry/72314/


==Handwashing==

* El Salvador: Handwashing station,  https://www.appropedia.org/Handwashing

==Hospitals (Buildings)==

* [[CURA Pods]]: CURA is an open-source design for emergency COVID-19 hospitals.


==Maps==

* [[Simple Critical Infrastructure Maps]]: "a Creative Commons licenced mapping and analysis tool for evaluating personal and social resilience"


==Masks==

* There is a '''scientifical rationale for the wearing of masks by the general public''': https://medium.com/@Cancerwarrior/covid-19-why-we-should-all-wear-masks-there-is-new-scientific-rationale-280e08ceee71 [https://www.maskssavelives.org/?]

* "If you have COVID-19 and cough on someone from 8 inches away, wearing a cotton mask will reduce the amount of virus you transmit to that person by 36 times" [https://masks4all.co/the-science-masks4all/]: overview of scientific facts about masks


===General===

* [[Protocol for 3D Printing Masks]]: K. Grammatis http://kosta.is/covid

* [[Anti-Corona DIY Mask Initiatives]]

* From the Appropedia: https://www.appropedia.org/Simple_masks? ; https://www.appropedia.org/DIY_masks?

* [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1e81ceSrVT6Bl4UaS1SxIUUUzgZAdkIstU7Hzot08Ld8/edit? Open Source Face Mask Challenge]


===Mask Designs and Projects===

* Open Source Mask, https://www.opensourcemask.com/en/

In alphabetical order:

* The [https://www.maskadam.org Adam Mask] project: "an open source reusable mask with high protection qualities to spread protection gear all over the world"

* [https://www.projectcarola.org/en/about-the-project/? Carola]: Project CAROLA, a Mobile Open Source Mask MIcrofactory, created the scalable open source protection mask production line that helps to produce respiratory masks quickly and easily. Our aim is to provide as many respiratory masks as possible to the general population.

* COVID-19 Modified Creality mask with optional Y splitter, one-way vents and HEPA filter addon https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227510

* Cotton self-protection Face Mask (cute!) https://www.cottontimemagazine.com/page/10

* Pattern Review: search sewing patterns for masks at pattern review, https://sewing.patternreview.com/cgi-bin/fuzzysearch.pl?name=forum&count=25&phrase=facemask

* Simple 3D Printed Mask, by Mark Fuller (Community Face Mask Frame Overview), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p5XY0dPUb0A

* Snorkel Mask with P3R Filter for Doctors, http://covidhacks.org/snorkel-mask-with-p3r-filter/ 

* Surgical Mask holder - desktop https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227196

* Thingiverse Mask Designs for Covid-19, https://www.thingiverse.com/SouthwesternAppliedPhysics/collections/covid-19

#Covid Coronavirus Face Mask https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4222563
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4177128
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4185367
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4223974
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4222984
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4215454
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4222567
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4225667
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4223531
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4226409
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4217534
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4164771
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4167649
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4214066
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227577
#https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227223
#mask clip: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227132 ; https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4219552
#Face mask hook: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4225191
#Faceshield: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4227278
#Full Face Mask: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4225760


====Videos====

* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Es_iY5WJdmI&feature=youtu.be Making Your Own Reusable Elastomeric Respirator For Use During Covid-19 Viral Pandemic N95 Shortage]

===By Country===

#Chile: Hack The Pandemic N95 masks, Copper3D, https://copper3d.com/hackthepandemic/
#Croatia: Face Shield, https://www.prusaprinters.org/prints/25718-face-shield
#Hong Kong: https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/health-environment/article/3052135/polytechnic-university-lab-3d-printing-face
#Ireland: Irish Medtronic [https://www.rte.ie/news/business/2020/0330/1127365-medtronic-to-share-ventilator-designs/ openly sharing the PB 560 design information]
#New Zealand: [https://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=12320501 Kiwi 3D printer owners gift face mask lifeline to desperate medical clinics]



====Belgium====

* Brussels Region: 42.200 premiers masques de l'opération Masques-coronavirus.Brussels distribués auprès des professionnels des soins en première ligne. http://action-masques.aylab.me/benevoles

* The [https://www.maskadam.org Adam Mask] project: "an open source reusable mask with high protection qualities to spread protection gear all over the world"

''ADAM is a project from Timelab, Gent in collaboration with Howest, Ugent, ZiggZagg, The Coalition of the Willing (bescherm onze helden) and a lot of individual experts from the fields of manufacturing, textiles, chemistry, plastics, communication, supply chain, policy, .. Our point of contact is Evi Swinnen: evi@timelab.org''

* '''[https://maskadam.org/contact/ Overview of initiatives in the Flemish region]''' (not only masks, covers all medical devices)

See also:

#[https://bx1.be/news/masques-une-ligne-de-production-solidaire-se-met-en-place-a-bruxelles/#.XnYuhEY0LBE.twitter Masques : une ligne de production solidaire se met en place à Bruxelles]
# [https://maakjemondmasker.be/ Maak Je Mond Masker] ; [https://faitesvotremasquebuccal.be/ Faites Votre Masque Buccal]
#[https://www.tvl.be/nieuws/makerspace-pxluhasselt-print-gezichtsmaskers-voor-zorgsector? Makerspace @ PXL/UHasselt print gezichtsmaskers voor zorgsector]


====Italy====

#Italy: Easy Covid mask, https://www.isinnova.it/easy-covid19-eng/
#the "[http://mvm.care/ Mechanical Ventilator Milano]," or MVM, a device that is "designed to be simple, cheap and easily reparable [https://www.zdnet.com/article/astrophysicists-looking-for-dark-matter-invent-dirt-cheap-open-source-ventilator-to-combat-covid-19/?]


====Spain====

#JoseLViveroPol: In Spain, there are more than 16k coronavirusmakers connected through @telegram_es So far, have produced & delivered thanks to taxi drivers more than 350k plastic masks to many undersupplied hospitals . Networked peerproduction WORKS!!! [https://elpais.com/espana/madrid/2020-03-29/madrid-dice-no-a-la-solidaridad-de-los-impresores-3d.html]
#A network of makers with 3-D printers R supplying Reina Sofia Hospital in Cordoba, Spain with masks https://coronavirusmakers.org/index.php/es/

===Research Papers===

#Oliveira, Mileny Ximenes, Capistrano, Amilton dos Reis, Rosa, Suélia de Siqueira Rodrigues Fleury, Silva, José Felício, Rocha, Adson Ferreira da, & Carvalho, Hervaldo Sampaio. (2014). Control system for continuous positive airway pressure. Revista Brasileira de Engenharia Biomédica, 30(2), 102-113. https://doi.org/10.1590/rbeb.2014.017
[http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?pid=S1517-31512014000200003&script=sci_abstract]
#Farré, R., Montserrat, J. M., Solana, G., Gozal, D., & Navajas, D. (2019). Easy-to-build and affordable continuous positive airway pressure CPAP device for adult patients in low-income countries. European Respiratory Journal, 53(5).https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02290-2018
[https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/early/2019/01/23/13993003.02290-2018.abstract]

==Medical Supplies==

See the [[FAQ on Making Safe Medical Devices for the COVID-19 Crisis]] ; [[Summary of Open Source Designs and Projects To Fight the Covid-19 Outbreak]]

* [https://gitlab.fabcloud.org/pub/project/coronavirus/tracking Coronavirus tracking project for fab lab network development and deployment]
* [[Makers Hospital Support Projects]]
* [[Open Source COVID19 Medical Supplies]]
* [[OpenCovid19 Initiative]]


===By Country===

* '''[https://maskadam.org/contact/ Overview of initiatives in the Flemish region]''' (not only masks, covers all medical devices)


==Medicines==

* [[MOOR Covid]]: "This is a Massive Online Open Research (MOOR) initiative for COVID-19, a global collaborative research effort that seeks to tap into the minds of scientists and researchers across the world to virtually screen molecules to fight the virus."

* [https://sites.google.com/ospfound.org/opensourcecovid19vaccine/home?authuser=1 Open Source COVID-19 Vaccine]


==Oxygen==

* [[Oxykit]]

==Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)==

Safety for medical personnel

* [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1txEanDkIrJ5GNfSk-zlXkTlB-bQPNRN_Y69qEwmdme8/htmlview?sle=true List of donation centers for PPE to CROWDSOURCE] (U.S.)
* Face Shield (excellent project), https://www.prusaprinters.org/prints/25857-protective-face-shield-rc1


==Testing Kits==


''ATTENTION, this is the PRIORITY now for the open source, p2p-peer production, commons-oriented movements: physical distancing is only a mitigation and flow management tactic and does not eradicate the virus; what is need for that is mass testing capabilities, as practiced successfully in several East Asian countries:

* [https://khalilavi.org/2020/03/21/covid-19-testing-is-the-bottleneck-in-managing-the-pandemic-can-we-open-source-testing/nCOVID-19 testing is the bottleneck in managing the pandemic. Can we open-source testing?]''

* Coronavirus / COVID-19 Testing For Everyone - YouTube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8wnPkC0wQU

* [https://covidtracking.com/ COVID Tracking Project] collects information from 50 US states, the District of Columbia, and 5 other US territories to provide the most comprehensive testing data we can collect for the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. We attempt to report positive and negative results, pending tests, and total people tested for each state

* [[Open-Source DIY Coronavirus Detection Test]]

* [https://helpwithcovid.com/projects/2-scale-covid-testing-with-robust-supply-chain Scale COVID testing with robust supply chain project]

* [https://www.opencell.bio/coronavirus? Testing for Covid-19 with OpenCell and OpenTrons]

* Video: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1113&v=S0XLR8uY2z0&feature=emb_logo Designing an open-source DIY Coronavirus detection test!] [JOGL 1st community call!]


===Environmental Testing===

* using BeagleBone and other open-source hardware https://blog.adafruit.com/2020/03/14/environmental-testing-for-coronavirus-using-beaglebone-and-other-open-source-hardware/


===By Country===

* India: IIT-Delhi team develops cheap COVID-19 test, https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/coronavirus-iit-delhi-team-develops-cheap-covid-19-test/article31136777.ece?
* Ireland: Rapid (15 min) COVID-19 Testing, https://www.independent.ie/world-news/coronavirus/irish-developed-kit-confirms-infection-in-15-minutes-39046582.html
* The evidence in Italy: [https://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-21/one-italian-town-is-bucking-the-countrys-coronavirus-curve/12075048? one town says its testing regime is containing the outbreak]
* UK: UK will introduce mass testing for antibodies [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BhCf3CDHB7s]
* US: [https://www.projectbaseline.com/study/covid-19/ Baseline COVID-19 testing program]: In support of community-based testing initiatives


==Vaccines==

* The "Linux Vaccine": Finnish-developed, open-source coronavirus vaccine nearly ready for testing | Yle Uutiset | yle.fi https://yle.fi/uutiset/11342151
* The [[Open Source COVID-19 Vaccine]]

==Valves==

* DIY attempts to counter COVID-19 : Vice, 17-03-2020 https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/5dm4mb/people-are-trying-to-make-diy-ventilators-to-meet-coronavirus-demand

===By Country===

* Italy: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-italy-valves/italian-start-up-3d-prints-valves-to-help-coronavirus-patients-idUSKBN2133D2

==Ventilators==

See: [[Open Source Ventilator]] ; [https://www.tyfinefurniture.com/blogs/blog/covid-19-ventilator-crowd-source-project? COVID-19 Ventilator Open Source Project]

* guidelines for ventilators : https://www.appropedia.org/Open_source_ventilator 

* many technical details and requirements in this recent google doc: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RDihfZIOEYs60kPEIVDe7gmsxdYgUosF9sr45mgFxY8/edit#]

* Ventilator Repair: https://nl.ifixit.com/Device/Ventilator?

* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gg56eBdXV_kWnQLtDLAlFE5vzht_wqmG8xAuBIISjKM/edit COVID-19 Ventilator Hackathon] [https://hackaday.com/2020/03/12/ultimate-medical-hackathon-how-fast-can-we-design-and-deploy-an-open-source-ventilator/]


===Designs===

* Design Library for DIY Ventilators https://diyventilators.com/?

* The [https://helpwithcovid.com/projects/13 1 Million Ventilators project] of the [https://helpwithcovid.com/ Help With Covid] initiative: "We need to develop a strategic reserve of 1,000,000+ emergency ventilators ASAP. The CDC Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) has only ~10,000 ventilators." See also: [[Producing and Distributing 1M Ventilators Roster]]

* 3D Printed Ventilator Manifold, https://3dprint.com/45352/3d-printed-ventilator-manifold/

* [https://github.com/AmboVent/AmboVent AmboVent]

* [https://github.com/jcl5m1/ventilator/wiki/Build-a-Low-Cost-PAPR  low-cost Powered Air Purifying Respirator (PAPR)] [https://github.com/jcl5m1/ventilator/wiki/Notes-from-chatting-with-a-pulmonologist]

* [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Suelia_Fleury_Rosa/publication/289860451_Control_system_for_continuous_positive_airway_pressure/links/5874e6b008ae6eb871c97cea/Control-system-for-continuous-positive-airway-pressure.pdf CPAP instrumented machine]

* [[Low-Cost Open-Source Ventilator Device]]

* MIT E-Vent | MIT Emergency Ventilator https://e-vent.mit.edu/ [https://medium.com/extremetech-access/mit-develops-cheap-open-source-ventilator-for-coronavirus-treatment-ebc7bf6c16a0] [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1L6O2gx3HE&feature=youtu.be&t=13s video]

* [https://gitlab.com/TrevorSmale/OSV-OpenLung OpenLung BVM Ventilator]

* OxVent: "In just one week, a group of doctors, technicians and other experts organised themselves to design a crowdsourced ventilator, the OxVent, which can be produced from widely available parts for under £1,000." [https://theface.com/life/oxvent-prototype-ventilator-health-nhs-covid-19]

* Pandemic Ventilator Project, https://panvent.blogspot.com/

* Project Open Air : https://www.projectopenair.org

* [[Specifications for Simple Open Source Mechanical Ventilator]] ; * [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FNPwrQjB1qW1330s5-S_-VB0vDHajMWKieJRjINCNeE/preview?] , via Twitter: @julianbotta

* Thingiverse, Respirator valve: [https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4189592] ; Air Filter: [https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4229193] ; Hot Water Inhaler
[https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4219164]; UV Sterilizer [https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4223034]

* [https://www.ventilaid.org/ VentilAid]: '''open-source ventilator that can be made anywhere, locally
'''
* VentilatorPAL, can be manufactured for $370 [https://freebreathing.org/]

===Awards===

* Code Life Ventilator Challenge: "To design a low-cost, simple, easy-to-use and easy-to-build ventilator that can serve the COVID patients, in an emergency timeframe."
https://www.agorize.com/en/challenges/code-life-challenge

* The goal of the CoVent-19 Challenge is to increase the capacity of hospitals to provide mechanical ventilation, https://www.coventchallenge.com/?


===By country===

* Colombia: [https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-52251286 Raspberry Pi-powered ventilator to be tested in Colombia]
* France: MUR [https://www.mur-project.org/index-en.html Minimal Universal Respirator], by 'Sandwich Reality Studio'
* India: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_92mDYfRGs&feature=youtu.be Prof. Diwakar Vaish introduces the world’s first cheapest and smallest ventilator]
* USA: [https://www.technologyreview.com/s/615374/an-mit-team-hopes-to-publish-open-source-designs-for-a-low-cost-ventilator/ An MIT team hopes to publish open-source designs for a low-cost ventilator]


====Ireland====

* [https://www.thejournal.ie/emergency-ventilators-irish-researchers-crowdfund-5061521-Mar2020/? Prototype created by Irish research team for crowd funded emergency ventilators]
* OpenSource collaborative ventilatore initiative : https://opensourceventilator.ie/register/ [https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfxvOfZptgG_mCKE8jGuXK4cb59I5WHPzt5gSh3cHh1tFgy7Q/viewform]


====Spain====

#[[Oxygen Emergency Respirator]]
#[https://www.dropbox.com/sh/0bmwa6hsevguul5/AAAm46EFt-bXzo0gUUHoXe9Ya?dl=0 Reespirator 23] (Reesistencia Team)


====UK====

# [https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/876167/RMVS001_v3.1.pdf Rapidly Manufactured Ventilator System] (RMVS): " '''Defines the minimum viable product clinically acceptable by clinicians'''; a specification of the minimally (and some preferred options) clinically acceptable ventilator to be used in UK hospitals during the current COVID-19 pandemic"
#Wales: [https://www.itv.com/news/wales/2020-03-24/welsh-doctor-designs-ventilator-that-could-save-the-lives-of-thousands-of-coronavirus-patients/? Welsh doctor designs ventilator that could save the lives of thousands of coronavirus patients]
#UK Open Air Project, http://www.openair-project.org

===Research Papers===

* Design and Prototyping of a Low-cost Portable Mechanical Ventilator. By Abdul Mohsen Al Husseini. Proceedings of the 2010 Design of Medical Devices Conference DMD2010, April 13-15, 2010, Minneapolis, MN, USA [https://web.mit.edu/2.75/projects/DMD_2010_Al_Husseini.pdf]

=Trends=

'''What is changing in post-corona times ?'''


==Introductory Quote(s)==

"Suddenly everything is happening very quickly. Within hours, such large sums are being pumped into the markets that make the ‘radical’ promises of Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders seem like pocket money in comparison. German politicians, who yesterday had gotten heated up by the intellectual musings of young socialist Kevin Kühnert, are now seriously considering the nationalisation of corporations. What was dismissed in the climate debate as the naive dreams of children is now a sad reality: global air traffic is coming to a standstill. Borders that were considered unclosable in the refugee crisis are now indeed closed. And along the way, conservative governor of Bavaria, Markus Söder has abandoned the German fetish of balanced budgets, announcing, ‘We will not be guided by accounting issues, but by what Germany needs.’ The age of neoliberalism, in terms of  the primacy of market interests over all other social interests, is coming to an end. Of course, all of these measures are due to the state of emergency. However, citizens will remember them when they soon again are told ‘There is no alternative.’ With the crisis, long-dormant sphere of politics has been set into motion. After four decades of neoliberal scepticism about the state, a long forgotten fact is coming to the light: that nation states still have enormous creative power, if only they are willing to use it."

- Marc Saxer [https://www.ips-journal.eu/regions/global/article/show/how-corona-broke-the-system-4180/]


"There are several ways that we can begin to discuss how the current form of the capitalist system has contributed to making the COVID-19 crisis. Two widely discussed key features of the viral ecology are: (1) the expansion of monoculture agricultural economies, creating ripe ecological conditions for zoonotic disease emergence, and (2) the dependency of the mortality rate of the virus on hospital capacity, causing geographic variance in COVID-19’s capacity to produce mass premature death. This second problem has been exacerbated in countries that have exercised state-led neoliberal contraction in the health sector."

- Neel Ahuja [http://stateofnatureblog.com/one-question-covid19-coronavirus-capitalism/]


==Community==

* The [[Social Recession]]. Atlantic, March 22, 2020: "A social recession is marked by growing loneliness and isolation."

* "The COVID-19 pandemic is a blow to self-interest as a value orientation and laissez-faire as a policy paradigm, both already reeling amid mounting public concerns about climate change.  Will the pandemic change our economic narrative, expressing new everyday understandings of how the economy works and how it should work? COVID-19, for better or worse, brings into focus a third pole in the debate: call it community or civil society. In the absence of this third pole, the conventional language of economics and public policy misses the contribution of social norms and of institutions that are neither governments nor markets – like families, relationships within firms, and community organisations." https://voxeu.org/article/coming-battle-covid-19-narrative]. By Samuel Bowles, Wendy Carlin.


==Economics==

* [[Why Our Economy May Be Headed for a Decade of Depression]]. By Eric Levitz, interviewing Nouriel Roubini.


==Education==

* French educators are learning from each other how to do post-presence learning and teaching [https://www.innovation-pedagogique.fr/article6762.html?]

* [https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/online-education-in-the-covid-19-crisis-its-like-coke-dealers-handing-out-free-samples? Online Education in the Covid-19 Crisis: “It’s Like Coke Dealers Handing Out Free Samples”]: interview with economist Gordon Lafer


==Food==

* the @covidfood twitter account is  tracking food security policy initiatives during #covid19 outbreak

* ‘Never Let a Good Crisis Go to Waste’: The [https://focusweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Covid19-Pandemic-Bello.pdf Covid-19 Pandemic and the Opportunity for Food Sovereignty]. By Walden Bello (FocusWeb)

* [https://civileats.com/2020/05/15/community-food-co-ops-are-thriving-during-the-pandemic/? Community Food Co-ops Are Thriving During the Pandemic]


===Specific Countries===

* [[Post-Corona Food Collectives in Indonesia]]

==Finance==

* [http://www.primeeconomics.org/articles/use-and-abuse-of-mmt Wall Street’s Financial capture of MMT to inflate asset prices, not revive the economy]. By '''Michael Hudson, Steve Keen''' et al.


==Gender and Care==

* Collaborative Feminist Degrowth: Pandemic as an Opening for a Care-Full Radical Transformation. By the Feminisms and Degrowth Alliance (FaDA), 2020
[https://www.degrowth.info/en/feminisms-and-degrowth-alliance-fada/collective-research-notebook/?]

* Race-exclusive safe spaces in Oregon country: https://justthenews.com/politics-policy/coronavirus/amid-coronavirus-crisis-oregon-county-creates-segregated-safe-space

==Institutional Innovations==


===Public-Commons Cooperation Protocols and Regulatory Frameworks are needed to smooth the path for vital innovations in the open hardware production of missing medical devices===

WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT ?

In the face of huge market and state failure which has led to many unnecessary deaths, there has been a huge compensatory mobilization by the commons-based, p2p-driven open hardware and maker movements to design and produce alternatives. HOWEVER, the public authorities have all but been ready for this, and many innovations are blocked. THIS IS WHY  we need urgently the equivlanet of the Bologna Regulation in Italy, which has mobilized 1 million people in urban commons projects.

We now need such public-commons cooperation protocols to allow the open hardware to flow safely into the medical establishements that are dealing with COVID-19.

The good news, French medical institutions are taking this regulatory framework in their own hands:

* '''le debut d'un cadre pour une regulation public-communs pour le open hardware pour COVID-19:''' Un espoir nouveau vient désormais de l’Assistance publique – Hôpitaux de Paris) et de sa plateforme Covid-3d qui, homologuera au fil de l’eau des modèles sans brevets issus de la recherche ouverte https://covid3d.org/
 |

==Labor==

===Articles===

* The Amazonification of the workforce, https://onezero.medium.com/coronavirus-is-speeding-up-the-amazonification-of-the-planet-21cb20d16372

* The Economist: [https://www.economist.com/britain/2020/05/09/what-will-be-the-new-normal-for-offices? "What will be the new normal for offices?]: "Millions of workers are toiling at home because of the pandemic. Many of them may never go back into the office."

* ILO Report: [http://www.defenddemocracy.press/immediate-danger-half-of-worlds-workforce-could-lose-livelihood-due-to-covid-19-un-agency-warns/? Half of world’s workforce could lose livelihood due to Covid-19, UN agency warns]

* [https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/30/coronavirus-disruption-automation? four in 10 companies bringing forward their plans for automation]

* [https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/04/world/europe/italy-coronavirus-antibodies.html? In Italy, Going Back to Work May Depend on Having the Right Antibodies]

===Resources===

* [https://paydayreport.com/covid-19-strike-wave-interactive-map/ COVID-19 Strike Wave Interactive Map]

* COVID-19 from LabourStart: News from the world's trade unions https://www.labourstart.org/covid-19.php?

* The [[Covid Social Impact Timeline]]: The European Trade Union Institute (ETUI) is monitoring the social and employment impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic in Europe.
This timeline is being produced by Christophe Degryse, senior researcher at the Foresight Unit of the ETUI, and will be regularly updated.

==Localization==

*  countermoves to amazonifcation: local shops coalescing in one online ordering platform, the case of Antwerp, Belgium: eshopantwerpen.be?


==Media==

* Media Consumption in the Age of COVID-19, https://www.visualcapitalist.com/media-consumption-covid-19/? : usage statistics from the Global Web Index

==Politics, Movements, Activism==

* The [https://acleddata.com/analysis/covid-19-disorder-tracker/? COVID-19 Disorder Tracker] (CDT) provides special coverage of the pandemic’s impact on political violence and protest around the world

==Supply-Chains: Disruption and/or transformation ?==

* [https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-food-explainer-idUSKBN21L0D2? Explainer: How the coronavirus crisis is affecting food supply]


==Urbanism==

* "Find and share examples of schemes that adapt space for COVID-19: [https://tactical.space/ Tactical Space] is the global, free bank of tactical and temporary infrastructure measures, to advance knowledge and accelerate progress to a better future, for professionals and communities worldwide."

* [[Rapid Response for Communities to Deal with Corona Housing Crisis]]

* topic-by-topic analysis of the impact of the pandemic in the near urban future: [https://www.citiestobe.com/covid-19-the-future-of-cities/ Cities To Be After Covid]

[[Category:Health]]