personal notepad for a research project on the collaborative economy


=Distinctions between market areas=

Distinguish between:

- the market for things / objects

- the market for labor / people / services

- the market for ideas / innovations

- the market for money

?


=Trading/exchange action typology=

- giving (to a commons)

- giving (to a person)

- renting / borrowing

- selling /buying

- swapping



=Platform ownership=


- owned by shareholders / for-profit

- ethical economy forms?

- owned by producers

- public ownership



=Funding=

- from the market


- from civil society directly

* crowdfunding
* via foundations / philanthropy


- public funding



=Sharing=

- mutualizing a collective resource (commons, but can be privately owned)

- sharing with/from each other (peer to peer, from individual to individual)



=Cultural Shifts=

- finding value in immaterial achievements

- from ownership to access

- revolt against idleness and waste

- trust in the commons

- against the neutrality of the market, repersonalizing economic ties

- desire for ethics in the market

- desire for participation and co-design

- trusting peers rather than institutions



=Technical Achievements / preconditions=

- ability for p2p communication

- ability for implementing digital commons and platforms

- trust with strangers

- transparency / holoptism

- aligning personal and collective aims and interests


Humanity has created a technology which allows individuals to communicate with each other on a peer to peer basis (one to one) on both local, intermediary and global scales, or to communicate collectively (many to many) with each other through platforms. It can do this through multiple devices, all of which can now be connected to the internet, with smart mobile phones getting the largest reach. The technology does not only allow communication, but also collective learning, the organisation and mobilization of human groups around common objectives, but also enables transactions.

This intelligence extends to objects, who can now be monitored, 'sensed' and can communicate about their condition.

The same technology allows for an architecture of transparency, and therefore, for the generalizing of trust relationships on a much wider and deeper scale.

The technology allows for the creation of platforms that enable common value creation around shared objectives in multiple fields and it allows the alignment of personal and collective interests.

Algorythmic collective learning technology allows low-cost identification of opportunities.



=Examples / Case Studies=

* crowdsourced car: [[StreetScooter]] in Germany


=Bibliography=

Betterness: [[Economics for Humans]]. by Umair Haque. Harvard Business Press Books, 2011


==Chapters==

* [[Commons-oriented Peer Production in Knowledge and Software]]