

'''Cell-Veillance = the distribution of the capacity to record events by owners of camera-enabled cell-phones.'''



=Citation=

Cell-Veillance is cited in the following article at
http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-12-05-little-brother-cell-video_x.htm


"Comedian Michael Richards (Kramer of TV's Seinfeld) launches into a racist rant at a West Los Angeles comedy club. A police officer repeatedly uses a taser gun on a student in the UCLA library. A high school teacher calls a student a homophobic name. Another yells at a student for not standing during the national anthem.

These events were captured on small digital cameras or cellphones with video cameras. All were posted on the Internet. And all drew national — even international — attention to events that in years past may have remained relatively contained or even hidden.

Welcome to the era of citizen journalism.

"Video empowers the individual against big brother," says Jeffrey Cole, director of the Center for the Digital Future at the University of Southern California.

"Little brother is now watching back," says Silicon Valley futurist Paul Saffo.

Citizens have been videotaping police and other incidents for more than a decade. One of the most notorious was the Rodney King beating in Los Angeles in 1991.

But these days it doesn't just happen piecemeal; taking videos and uploading them to the Internet is all the rage, thanks to tiny, inexpensive cameras, often embedded in cellphones, and the homemade video boom online."
(http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-12-05-little-brother-cell-video_x.htm)



=Webcasts=

The above article shows four examples at http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-12-05-little-brother-cell-video_x.htm



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]