

=History=

Discussion on 'The Rise of the Centralized Web', By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"Between 1989 and now, the World Wide Web transformed from an obscure
system for publishing technical notes to a basic infrastructure of commerce, learning
and social interaction. In celebrating the rise of the web and the ways it now provides
interpersonal connection for billions of people, we often forget that the web has
undergone dramatic organizational and infrastructural shifts. These shifts force us to
reexamine one of our most cherished hopes for the web: that it could be a space for
civic debate and social inclusion, opening previously closed conversations to a broader
set of citizens.

When Tim Berners-Lee designed and implemented the hypertext transport
protocol, he was designing a system for use by physics researchers, mostly academics
who had access to university computing resources. In pre-web days, academic
computing users had accounts on shared computers, and the social norms of the time
meant that users had a great deal of control over the computing resources they used.
By the early 90’s, the emergence of the open web helped normalize this idea of
distributed control of content. While thousands of people had published online using
FTP, Gopher, Archie and WAIS (Wide Area Information Server), the web's increased
usability meant that millions of people could then publish their own webpages.

As the web gained more widespread adoption, legal scholars and online
advocates began to conceive of it as an important new battleground for preserving core
social values, such as freedom of expression. For them, that battleground was situated
squarely in the technical underpinnings of the web itself. Particular emphasis was
placed on the​ ​structural​ ​factors​ ​that​ ​helped​ ​to​ ​preserve​ ​individual​ ​freedoms​ ​online,
particularly against the encroachment of powerful actors such as the State. This
perspective is well illustrated in the writings of early web advocates, such as John Perry
Barlow’s A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace, in which the author
proclaimed, “We are creating a world where anyone, anywhere may express his or her
beliefs, no matter how singular, without fear of being coerced into silence or conformity.

Your legal concepts of property, expression, identity, movement, and context do not
apply to us. They are all based on matter, and there is no matter here.”

Two decades after its publication, the tone of Barlow’s Declaration rings a bit
naive. The web is a far more complicated place than the egalitarian, immaterial utopia
Barlow depicts. But in the 1990’s, writing like this deeply resonated with early advocates
of cyberspace, who saw the technical architecture of the web as a powerful vehicle for
achieving transformational social change through the free exchange of ideas. According
to media historian Fred Turner, many of these ideas were an extension of left leaning
counterculture movements from the 60’s and 70’s, which sought to replace hierarchical
social structures with new models of governance based on self-sufficiency and shared
consciousness, rather than the laws of the ruling class.

Legal scholar Lawrence Lessig has perhaps most clearly articulated the idea that
code itself is a mechanism for negotiating power and control over speech online. He,
along with many other web enthusiasts, celebrated and defended the development of
open protocols such as TCP/IP, which he argued deeply impacted the “regulability” of
the Internet. TCP/IP is the protocol used to exchange data across a network, without
knowing the content of the data or who the sender and recipients are in real life.
According to Lessig, TCP/IP is a great example of how we are able to use code to build
in strong protections for important values such as freedom of speech–the easier it is to
set up point-point communication between parties, the harder it is to regulate and limit
the exchange of certain kinds of data.

Similarly, HTTP was lauded as a critical component of the web’s open and
distributed structure, because it enabled anyone with a web server to publish their own
content, which (hypothetically) anyone with a web browser could then find. There was
no need to ask permission and few possible consequences for actions taken for sharing
ideas online. In theory, one could reach the whole world through the World Wide Web.
In reality, that narrative was again oversimplified. The early web was quite chaotic and
hard for users to navigate. The organization of content was highly distributed. It was
assumed that users would be both publishers and readers, that each person would
have a homepage composed of links that she authored and used to document useful
resources and shortcuts across the web.

This distributed wayfinding architecture made it difficult to find resources online,
especially as more and more people started making their own websites. Moreover,
users needed a baseline of technical know-how in order to set up and run their own
server for publishing. This created a significant barrier to entry for new users to
participate fully in the dream of the open web.

Even​ ​though​ ​the​ ​Internet​ ​was​ ​built​ ​on​ ​distributed​ ​protocols,​ ​the​ ​web
needed​ ​to​ ​consolidate​ ​around​ ​a​ ​few​ ​curated​ ​service​ ​platforms​ ​in​ ​order​ ​to​ ​become
practical​ ​for​ ​everyday​ ​people​ ​to​ ​use.​ ​This​ ​trend​ ​towards​ ​consolidation​ ​has
serious​ ​implications​ ​for​ ​two​ ​key​ ​functions​ ​of​ ​the​ ​web–publishing​ ​and​ ​discovery
of​ ​content.

Due to improvements in usability today’s web is much easier to use and open to
vastly more people, but centers on a small number of points of control. The owners of
those points of control–primarily large, for-profit, publicly traded companies–comprise a
new class of elite power players, ones that have enormous influence on our online
interactions. And because so many of our interactions–commercial, interpersonal and
civic–are mediated online, we have inadvertently given these companies a great deal of
control over our political lives and civic discourse. This trend is reflected in the growing
number of user petitions for sites like Facebook to stop censoring content and banning
the accounts of historically marginalized voices."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

=Discussion=


==Risks Posed by the Centralized Web==

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"It’s undeniable that the rise of large publishing platforms like Facebook, Twitter
and Medium has enabled a significantly more user-friendly web. But at what cost?
Today just two websites, Facebook and Google, account for 81% of all incoming traffic
to online news sources in the U.S. Over the last two years Facebook has overtaken 10
Google as the number one source of incoming traffic, and current projections indicate
that this trend is likely to continue over the coming years. Google now processes 3.5
billion search queries per day, roughly ten times more than its nearest competitors
(Baidu, Yahoo, Microsoft, Yandex). In 2016, Facebook supported an average of over
1.2 billion active users per day. Recent surveys conducted by the Pew Research 12
Center reveal that a clear majority of Facebook and Twitter users (63% on both sites)
report using these platforms to access news on current events and other issues beyond
the sphere of family and friends.

The rise of social media as a source of news cuts across nearly all demographic
groups in the US. For Millennials, Facebook is by far the most dominant source of news
on government and politics, on par with television news consumption for the Baby
Boomer generation. In light of these trends, it is clear that a small and shrinking 14
number of online platforms will have very significant influence over what media the
public consumes on a daily basis. We can understand this influence in terms of two key
aspects of online speech: these platforms control what is possible to publish, and they
control whether others are likely to discover it. In the following section, we explore
specific risks related to the publication and discovery of online speech.


===Risk​ ​1:​ ​Top-down,​ ​Direct​ ​Censorship===

Users face an increased risk of censorship as our digital publishing ecosystem
becomes increasingly consolidated around a few popular platforms. Generally speaking,
service platforms controlled by a single company are more prone to top-down
censorship and surveillance pressures from government than decentralized alternatives.

In order to stay in business, corporate social media networks which own user data must
comply with local laws and regulations related to free speech and censorship.
Otherwise, they could face legal repercussions that make it difficult for them to operate
in certain jurisdictions. This was the case in the spring of 2016, when Facebook blocked
users in Thailand from seeing satirical pages that poked fun at the King and Thai Royal
Family. In a notice posted in lieu of the blocked content, Facebook explained that it 
took down the pages in order to comply with a local Thai law that prohibits defamation
of the Royal family. Apparently the junta government has been increasing pressure for
sites like Facebook and Line to comply with court orders to block content it deems “a
threat to peace and order” in the country. Platform companies face a complex calculus 
in these cases. If Facebook decides to block pages on the basis of lese majeste, they
will set a dangerous precedent, and may end up being forced to block more content by
subsequent governments. On the other hand, companies like Facebook could decide to
ignore local rulings and simply ensure they have no assets or personnel in those
countries so those laws cannot be enforced.

Additionally, there have been many instances in which social media platforms
like Twitter and Facebook have come under attack by national governments. This is
particularly common during politically sensitive times, such as during the 2009
presidential election in Iran and amidst the outbreak of Arab Spring protests in Tunisia
in 2011, when the government used malware to steal the passwords and take over the
accounts of users who were critical of the Tunisian government.

But these issues are not limited to far distant lands where political revolution is
bubbling up just under the surface. Just this August, a group of activists submitted a
public letter to Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, lobbying for a new “anti-censorship
policy” after it was revealed that the platform, at the request of law enforcement, had
taken down videos of a Baltimore woman who was shot and killed by the police. This 
incident was not the first time that Facebook has taken down content related to police
killings in the U.S. Earlier this year, a video capturing the police shooting death of
Philando Castile was removed from the platform in what was later described as a
“glitch.” Activist groups have contested this description, claiming that the police had a
role removing the footage from Castile’s girlfriend’s account as it began to go viral
across the Internet.

One reason these networks are susceptible to this type of surveillance and
control is because they are required to comply with the local laws and regulations of the
countries where their users reside. However, another reason is because of the way they
have chosen to architect their systems. Unlike in distributed systems like BitTorrent,
platforms like Facebook, YouTube and Twitter can delete content legal authorities
determine to be offensive. This causes two problems: First, because these companies
want to maintain good relationships with governments, and governments can make it
very difficult to access these sites from within their borders, the companies will comply
with censorship requests. Since the networks are controlled by companies with clearly
defined leadership who can potentially be prosecuted, it’s clear who to ask when
seeking to censor content.

Second, because these companies completely control the software stack of how
that content is ingested, stored, curated, and served, the companies are able to comply
with such requests. An example of a structural change that makes it nearly impossible
to comply with surveillance requests is when WhatsApp moved to using end-to-end
encryption for users’ messages–WhatsApp itself, despite being part of Facebook,
actually cannot reveal unencrypted data to anyone who might request it, because they
only store encrypted messages on their servers, and not the decryption keys. A key 2021
goal of this paper is to explore these types of structural changes.


===Risk​ ​2:​ ​Curatorial​ ​Bias​ ​/​ ​Indirect​ ​Censorship===

In recent years, questions have been raised regarding the potential for
unintentional or international biases to be embedded in the curation algorithms of major
platforms like Facebook. Building on research from Robert Epstein and Ron Robertson
that suggest Google could tip an election by optimizing its search results.

This has led to some interesting legal battles in courts that seek to pressure WhatsApp to share user
data. For example, in 2016 a Brazilian judge temporarily ordered the shutdown of the service after the
company failed to comply with a request for encrypted data. 

Zittrain notes that Facebook could influence electoral behavior by controlling what
messages different readers see.

More subtle, but no less worrisome, are the unintentional ways in which
Facebook and others tend to optimize for viral, feel-good content that will garner a large
number of “likes.” For example, in 2014 Facebook came under fire from media critics,
who pointed out that there were marked differences in the way that Facebook and
Twitter covered the outbreak of the protests in Ferguson, Missouri during the summer of
2014. Recent scholarly work has demonstrated the critical role that Twitter played in 24
bringing these protests to the national spotlight. Thanks to organic grassroots 25
conversation about what was going on the ground in Ferguson, Twitter was able to
surface breaking news from the frontlines, well before mainstream media had picked up
the story.

In contrast, on Facebook, the most prominent story found on most Americans’
newsfeeds at the time was the Ice Bucket Challenge, a fundraising campaign for
research to cure Lou Gehrig’s disease. As media scholar Zeynep Tufekçi pointed out,
the Ice Bucket Challenge was perfect for the Facebook algorithm–it was viral, feel-good
content–whereas more difficult and nuanced conversations about race and police
violence could only be found on a platform with less top-down algorithmic influence.26
The urgency of this debate has significantly heightened in recent months, as individuals
from across the political spectrum have expressed concerns about the proliferation of
“fake news,” or click-bait headlines that confirm voters’ pre-existing political preferences
and beliefs at the expense of fact-based coverage of current events.


Given the significant amount of leverage that social media platforms like
Facebook and Twitter have over the content we consume (both online and offline, via
indirect influence over mainstream media coverage), this incident has raised important
questions about how unintentional bias manifests in the curation of content on these
sites. Much of this debate centers on the need for greater transparency and
accountability for the way today’s curation algorithms are constructed. As Tufekçi points
out, “I wonder: What if Ferguson had started to bubble, but there was no Twitter to catch
on nationally? Would it ever make it through the algorithmic filtering on Facebook?
Maybe, but with no transparency to the decisions, I cannot be sure.”

Yet, the concept of transparency is not nearly as straightforward in the age of
algorithmic curation. Curation algorithms are complex, living pieces of code that evolve
over time. We are only beginning to develop the analytical frameworks necessary for
understanding how slippery concepts like “bias” and “fake news” are encoded into
algorithmic decision-making processes. We are even further from understanding how 
to translate those frameworks into practical accountability procedures.

Zittrain has advocated for greater transparency and ethical standards in how
algorithms are designed and broadly implemented on major social media sites, arguing
that “The most important fail-safe is the threat that a significant number of users,
outraged by a betrayal of trust, would adopt alternative services, hurting the responsible
company’s revenue and reputation.” Zittrain points to the potential for transparency to 
fuel competition-driven consumer protections, whereby consumers make decisions
about what platform to use based on the reputation and curation decisions made by the
site. Of course, Zittrain’s proposal requires interoperability across platforms and low
switching costs in order for it to be practical to leave on social network to join a different
one. Ultimately, Zittrain’s solutions face the same problem Rebecca MacKinnon’s
Ranking Digital Rights project struggles with: increasing transparency about platform
behavior is most impactful when users can actually switch platforms.

This emphasis on competition stands in contrast to the “benevolent monopoly”
paradigm proposed by prominent technologists such as Peter Thiel, who argues that
large companies without significant competitors can be more creative and effective in
developing new, valuable services for their customers. These two paradigms are not 30
mutually exclusive. The concept of an “information fiduciary” could be useful for
ensuring that mega-platforms are checked for blatant abuses of their immense
curatorial power, whereas competition might be the best way to fuel a healthier
ecosystem of consumer choice for those concerned about a broader set of biases in the
way that their newsfeeds are curated.

However, if competition is ever going to be a meaningful path towards resolving
these issues, we must develop practical methods for lowering the costs of switching
between different platform providers. In subsequent case studies, we will discuss the
challenges of overcoming network effects and data lock-in, as well as explore strategies
that might enable greater competition between incumbent mega-platforms and new
platform alternatives.


===Risk​ ​3:​ ​Abuse​ ​of​ ​Curatorial​ ​Power===

In recent months, Facebook has come under fire due to accusations that its
employees systematically suppress the discovery of conservative content on their
platform. These accusations were sparked by anonymous accounts from former
Facebook employees, who claimed that they routinely removed conservative-leaning
news stories from the network’s influential “Trending” news section, even when such
stories were identified as a hot topic by the platform’s curation algorithm. Facebook 
has since denied the claims, saying that the company "found no evidence that the
anonymous allegations are true."

Regardless of whether the accusations hold weight, the most important
take-away is that it would be very difficult for an outside observer to detect such
changes. The company has no legal or normative obligation to disclose how it prioritizes
content on its site. Determining how the company automatically identifies content to
remove, or how it prioritizes the display of certain content requires “algorithmic auditing”,
which is difficult to conduct and may not be possible under existing laws and
regulations.

Moreover, the influence of mega-platforms like Facebook is not limited simply to
the curation of external content. It is also perhaps the most powerful broker of social
influence and signaling online. In 2010, Facebook ran a pilot to understand the impact
of “political mobilization messages” on voter turnout for that year’s U.S. Congressional
election. Researchers found that users were .39 percent more likely to vote if they were
notified when their close friends had voted on Facebook. During the 2010 midterm 34
elections, that translated to an estimated 340,000 additional votes, a margin that could
have changed the outcome of close high-stakes elections, such as the 2000 U.S.
presidential election, especially if applied selectively (i.e. if Facebook had urged
members of one party to vote and not provided similar nudges to the other side.).
Mechanisms like this could play a significant role in influencing human behavior on an
unprecedented scale, yet we have no checks and balances in place to ensure that this
influence is not abused.

These developments have sparked growing concerns over the potential for
Facebook to intentionally influence important civic events, such as the 2016 presidential
election. In a statement released earlier this summer, the Republican party expressed
such concerns, saying “With 167 million US Facebook users reading stories highlighted
in the trending section, Facebook has the power to greatly influence the presidential
election. It is beyond disturbing to learn that this power is being used to silence
viewpoints and stories that don't fit someone else's agenda."

Historically, major media outlets have been viewed as both private entities and
public service institutions, beholden to government regulations that seek to ensure that
broadcast content serves the public interest. For example, under a law passed in 1934,
the Federal Communications Commission requires “legally qualified” political candidates
to have equal opportunities for airtime on broadcast TV and radio stations. The FCC
promised to enforce this law earlier in 2015, after long-shot political candidate Lawrence
Lessig filed several requests with NBC affiliates to speak on air after Hillary Clinton was
invited to guest star on the popular Saturday Night Live Show.

This example is quite tricky–the fairness doctrine was repealed in the 1980s
under Reagan and these prescriptions are much weaker than they used to be. As of
now, that precedent has not carried over into the digital sphere. But as more and more
of our media migrates over to digital, networked spaces one must ask whether or not
such regulations should be extended to these realms as well. Perhaps it is okay to have
just a few large platforms serve as content curators, as long as we can understand and
hold them accountable for the way they wield that curatorial influence. However, it
remains unclear how to translate concepts of public accountability to the digital sphere
of networked publishing.


===Risk​ ​4:​ ​Exclusion===

Mega-platforms like Facebook and Twitter aren’t just sites for passive
consumption of content. They also provide important civic spaces for social and political
discourse. The idea that underlies the civic media movement is that making and
disseminating media is a form of civic engagement and power. The current
opportunities to make media are unprecedented. An estimated one in four people in the
world have an active Facebook account, and hundreds of millions more are connected 37
by other large, centralized social networks.

In theory, this massive networked public sphere provides an unprecedented
opportunity for everyday people to reach a global audience and engage in
conversations with people from around the world. But the reality is not so
straightforward. As adoption of Facebook has grown, so has the complexity of
implementing effective community governance policies and user safeguards. Terms of
service and community regulation efforts have unintended consequences, which are
increasingly exacerbated the more monolithic the platform becomes. Media activist
Jillian York has highlighted a wide range of groups who have been excluded and
censored on the site, ranging from plus-sized women and LGBT groups to journalists
and indigenous communities.

In some cases, exclusion is the result of clunky terms of service–such as when
Facebook’s real name policy made it challenging for members of the transgender
community to open and maintain accounts under adopted names or pseudonyms, used
widely within the LGBT community. While the policy was intended to help minimize the 39
number of inactive and fake accounts on the platform, it inadvertently excluded
individuals with non-traditional names and those who need to use pseudonyms in order
to protect their real identity (i.e. activists living under oppressive political regimes). In
other instances, Facebook’s community governance standards have been misused to
erase people whose personal situations are in conflict with mainstream norms and
practices. This was the case when photos of topless aboriginal women and
breastfeeding mothers were mislabeled as inappropriate content by other Facebook
users because their breasts were uncovered.

But perhaps the most blatant examples of abuse of community standards stems
from intergroup conflict–when one set of users actively seeks to suppress content from
another group. This was the case in 2010 when some users formed a Facebook group
called “Facebook Pesticide,” with the expressed purpose of reporting and removing
outspoken Arab atheists and Muslim reformists from the site. To accomplish this goal, 
members of the group would coordinate reports of abuse against accounts they deemed
unacceptable. While Facebook does not make explicit exactly how they choose to take
down profiles, it seems that the platform automatically disables accounts after a certain
number of reports are submitted. Automated enforcement of terms of service amplifies
these problems of online speech. It's not feasible–or legally desirable–for Facebook to
monitor the speech of over one billion members. Instead, they rely on reports from other
users.

If several users flag content as inappropriate, it will likely be deleted. The
technique is particularly effective when used on content in languages that Facebook's
administrators don't read, such as Arabic. The platform does not inform users when
their profile has been removed, nor the reason for de-activation from the site. This
makes it challenging for users to seek recourse and reintegration back into the site.
These issues are exacerbated by the lack of alternative publishing networks with
comparable reach around the globe. Given that Facebook is the most widely used
social network in the world, those who are excluded from the site face serious
consequences.

This is not a theoretical problem. Users are blocked every day from Facebook as
part of ongoing political disputes. Israeli activists, non-government groups and
government departments frequently flag Facebook accounts of Palestinian journalists
and activists, seeking their removal from the platform. As the political climate in the US 43
grows more tense after Donald Trump’s election, some Facebook users report that they
have been flagged and suspended from the service for expressing unpopular political
opinions.

Exile from the platform not only makes it hard to engage in important civic
discourse, but it also has important implications for how Internet users are able to
access a broader range of services outside the site. In 2008, Facebook rolled out a new
service called Facebook Connect, which allows third-party sites to piggyback off of the
platform’s robust identity authentication and management system, rather than
implement their own from scratch. In many ways, this service is a win-win for both users
and websites, as it significantly lowers the costs of building out a secure identity
infrastructure for smaller sites, while also simplifying account management for end
users by minimizing the number of usernames and passwords they must remember. As
a growing number of sites adopt Facebook Connect, some have likened the service to a
kind of “driver’s license for the Internet,” the new de-facto standard for identity on the
web. But for all the benefits we gain in convenience, we must consider the equally 44
serious risks of widespread exclusion this trend poses for those who are unable to
access the Facebook platform, due to conflicts with clunky terms of service and abuse
of community governance guidelines.

As the above examples illustrate, terms of service on mega-platforms, even
when thoughtfully authored and enforced, can have far-reaching unintended
consequences. When speech and access are limited in this fashion, those speaking
have few alternatives. They can try to influence the platform owners, often by naming
and shaming, publicly decrying their ill treatment. But power asymmetries make that
prospect difficult. For example, in spite of continuous lobbying from the LGBTQ
community, in partnership with organizations like the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
Facebook has yet to implement significant changes to their real name policy. Of 45
course, members of the LGBTQ community could publish on their own, but they lose
the network effects of a system like Facebook, and they find themselves using less
user-friendly tools and reaching smaller audiences.

It remains unclear how mega-platforms like Facebook should go about balancing
the needs of marginalized groups with the broader goal of keeping the mainstream safe
on a global scale. What is clear is that these tech companies operate and own a new
sphere of influence, one which has transformed the Internet from a public commons to a
gated corporate community. As more speech moves online, the ability of Facebook and
other platforms to determine who can participate in important civic conversations
becomes deeply concerning."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

=Source=

* Report: Defending​ ​Internet​ ​Freedom​ ​through​ ​Decentralization: Back​ ​to​ ​the​ ​Future? By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman. The​ ​Center​ ​for​ ​Civic​ ​Media​ ​& The​ ​Digital​ ​Currency​ ​Initiative. MIT Media Lab, 2017

URL = http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf


=More information=

* [[Decentralization]]


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]