
URL = http://www.etui.org/Publications2/Policy-Briefs/European-Economic-Employment-and-Social-Policy/The-emergence-of-peer-production-challenges-and-opportunities-for-labour-and-unions

==The emergence of peer production: challenges and opportunities for labour and unions==

'''ETUI Policy Brief'''

'''European Economic, Employment and Social Policy'''

''N° 3/2017 ''

'''''by [[Michel Bauwens]] and [[Vasilis Niaros]]'''''

<div class="noautonum">__TOC__</div>

==Summary==

This policy brief discusses the implications for labour and trade unions of new forms of work that are organised via distributed digital networks using the internet.

The authors focus on what has been called ‘commons-based peer production’ but also address the more controversial case of ‘platform capitalism’ (such as Uber or AirBnB). These new forms of production and work pose real challenges for the trade union movement and workers. According to some research, there is evidence of a direct connection between precarious work, new unemployment and these emerging forms of production and work.

The aim of the authors of this brief is to highlight also the opportunities that the emergence of peer production offers for the labour movement and workers in the form of a new wave of cooperative organisations that can create ‘non-subordinate labour’.

==Key Points==

* '''The emergence of peer production is not a transient phenomenon but an essential part of the evolving economy since it is based on both technological capacity and social demand.'''
* '''As  this  emergence  is  accompanied  by  many  negative  social  and  environmental externalities, it is vital that the labour movement and trade unions demand strong regulatory safeguards.'''
* '''There  are  also  important  potential  advantages,  such  as  a  greater  opportunity  to choose meaningful and autonomous work, as well as other ecological benefits.'''
* '''Positive  responses  that  have  been  emerging  include  the  creation  of  generative  entrepreneurial  coalitions,  platform cooperatives and labour mutuals.'''
* ''' This policy brief recommends approaches that support a new cohort of autonomous workers and consider them as an integral part of the existing labour and union movements.'''
* '''A productive model that combines global open design communities with distributed manufacturing should be explored as a potential framework for local re-industrialisation and the creation of a substantial amount of blue-collar jobs.'''

==Text==

===1. Introduction<ref>
It should be noted that some paragraphs of this report are based on Bauwens and Kostakis (2018). 
Therefore, the authors are grateful to Vasilis Kostakis for his valuable insights. We would also like to thank our colleague from the P2P  Foundation,  Ann  Marie  Utratel,  for  her  critical  feedback  and  support with the editing. 
All errors remain the authors’ sole responsibility.
</ref>===

The aim of this policy brief is to discuss the implications for labour 
and unions of emerging forms of work that are organised via 
distributed networks. We focus on what has been called ‘commons-
based peer production’ but also address the more controversial case 
of ‘platform capitalism’. Our aim is to highlight the opportunities 
that the emergence of peer production offers for a new wave of 
cooperative organisations that can create ‘non-subordinate labour’.

Commons-based peer production (CBPP), first named by Yochai 
Benkler (2006), refers to a new means of work organisation enabled 
by distributed digital networks. The internet facilitates the creation 
of a collaborative infrastructure where systems of work coordination 
are based on ‘open input’ through contributions. This means that 
both paid and unpaid workers can contribute to the co-creation of 
shared knowledge goods, without requiring authorisation to do so.<ref>
For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  Linux  software,  75%  of  the  contributors 
are  either  paid  by  large  companies  like  IBM  and  Red  Hat  or  freelance  as 
independent  project  workers,  whereas  25%  of  the  code  is  produced  by 
unpaid volunteer contributors (APC 2010).
</ref> 

We can summarise the definition of CBPP by stating that it combines:

* an open contributory system of distributed tasks;
* forms of participatory governance of the common work and infrastructure by the involved individuals, communities and companies; and
* the creation of commons, i.e. shareable resources as outputs. 

It could be argued that this system differs from the traditional 
capitalist one that consists of paid labour producing commodities 
and freelance agencies producing for the market. Nevertheless, 
CBPP communities are already embedded in the system of capital, 
particularly as they have to create livelihoods and an economy 
around their contributory systems. 
At present, it is still very difficult 
for CBPP contributors to generate incomes outside the market system.

Commons are a shared resource, a community of users, and are 
governed according to the rules and norms of that community. More 
specifically, knowledge commons are easily replicable, cannot be 
exhausted through use (because they are non-rival), and therefore 
do not suffer as much from the ‘free rider’ <ref>
‘Free riders’ are users of open and free systems who do not contribute to the maintenance of the system, or who use its resources without reciprocating.
</ref> issue. Commons can also 
be created by fiat. For instance, a public institution decides to make 
a commons of, or ‘commonify’, a knowledge resource such as the 
geographic information from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration of the U.S.; or there may be a pooling of resources 
by companies, like the open sourcing of battery designs by Tesla. 
The knowledge that is created often remains outside the market, 
since shared knowledge that can be freely copied is abundantly 
available and outside supply and demand tensions. 

However, these knowledge commons can create vibrant commercial 
eco-systems with services and value-added products. A study of the 
fair use<ref>‘Fair  use’  is  defined  as  shareable  resources
that  are  not  protected  as intellectual property.
</ref> economy in the U.S. calculates this economy to have already 
reached one-sixth of GDP in 2008–2009, with 17 million workers 
involved (Rogers et al. 2011). Though these calculations have not been 
updated, we can expect them to have increased since that period.

Regarding the institutional structure of CBPP, it consists of: 
* the community of producers, including paid or unpaid labour; 
* an  entrepreneurial  coalition  comprised  of  companies  and entrepreneurs that engage with the market by adding value to the shared resources; and
* network management institutions, often in the legal form of foundations, which manage the infrastructures that enable the cooperation processes, but do not command the labour force.

While CBPP models are based on a core of shared knowledge 
resources, this is not the case for so-called ‘platform capitalism’. In 
this model, networked technology is not used to mutualise productive 
knowledge but to facilitate direct market exchange between supply 
and demand. This is mostly done through intermediation by privately 
owned platforms. Although this new form of economic exchange 
is of interest due to its potential to mobilise ‘idle resources’ and 
increase access to them, no actual shared resources are created. This 
absence of the ‘commons’ is evident, for example, in crowdsourcing 
sites for distributed labour, where the supply of labour is forced to 
compete and is not interconnected. The average prices and wages 
consequently go down. Additionally, while this system allows for 
external contributions, the process is entirely controlled by platforms 
or the participating companies, and the produced knowledge is 
protected through exclusionary forms of intellectual property.

===2.  What peer production means for business and capital===

The advantages of peer production for businesses and capital 
are rather obvious and explain the fairly rapid growth of both 
models: CBPP and platform capitalism. Specifically, the participating 
companies in these models:
* have access to a much wider pool of productive knowledge (it is difficult, even for large companies, to compete with networks of entrepreneurs, contributors and researchers that have pooled their knowledge in such a fashion);
* can make substantial savings (Tapscott and Williams 2006), mainly by pooling the resources needed for the development of non-core infrastructures; and
* have access to a wider pool of workers and experts, including more direct links to user communities.

The  platform  capitalism  model  in  particular  has  substantial 
advantages, as platform companies:

* do not have to invest in new infrastructures since they can organise the use of already existing resources;
* can claim that they are not employers but merely market-matching players, meaning they either do not have to pay participants or use payment mechanisms that avoid contributing to social security systems, etc.; and
* creatively use legal grey zones to avoid paying taxes and other social and public contributions.

We are not suggesting here that these models have become 
mainstream, nor that they are being adopted ‘wholesale’ by 
corporations, although a significant number of companies have 
created hybrid adaptations. While these new models can be useful 
and positive for individual businesses that successfully adapt to 
them, they can also carry risks, not only for companies that end 
up displaced or disrupted, but for the capital system as a whole.

===3.  What peer production means for labour and workers===

Peer production of immaterial resources creates an additional 
pool of unpaid ‘free labour’. The crowdsourcing platforms active in 
platform capitalism often create new mediation channels between 
supply and demand that disempower the workers and put them 
in competition with each other. A number of these platforms also 
do not recognise themselves as employers and thus escape the 
responsibilities of social security, unemployment insurance, taxation 
and other payments that classic employers face, to the detriment 
of the freelance workers. In addition, companies in the platform 
economy do not invest in traditional material infrastructures, thereby 
undercutting their traditional rivals and harming the conditions of 
workers in these legacy industries. 

Furthermore, workers in both CBPP and platform capitalism rarely 
work together in communal physical spaces. This development 
undermines the traditional organising capacity of workers and 
unions that was present in traditional industry. Indeed, the move 
from a job-based ‘division of labour’ to distributed systems of tasks 
that can be obtained via platforms disaggregates a workforce that 
was once more easily unified through its collective presence in 
factories or single corporations. 

In general, there is a strong link between the rise of precarious 
freelance workers (the ‘precariat’) and the emergence of digitally 
networked technology (Standing, 2014). This has allowed employers 
and capital to deploy workers differently, choosing precarious forms 
that cost them less and externalising the risks of entrepreneurship 
to the workers. Worst of all, the disruptive effects on traditional 
business sectors may increase the number of unemployed or even 
‘unemployable’ workers, which gives rise to social and political 
instability and the emergence of radical reactionary movements.

However, despite the litany of disadvantages, there can also, with 
the support of organised labour and the appropriate policies, be 
real advantages for workers. 

As mentioned before, CBPP is an open contributory system in 
which workers can freely associate themselves. This means that 
workers can choose their pursuits according to their own interests, 
skills and passions, and translate them into either waged labour or 
freelance activity. Joining such networks has clear benefits on an 
educational (peer learning), reputational (recognition of skills and 
contributions by peers and potential employers) and organisational 
(new types of links between workers, based on the interaction 
through platforms) level. 

Most importantly, the membership of workers and contributors 
on these platforms, when not coerced, is based on passionate 
engagement. This is one of the prime conditions for a satisfying life 
and a very important criterion for educated workers of the Millennial 
generation, many of whom are also motivated by sustainability 
concerns (Rayapura 2014). It opens the way for a vision of labour 
that is not subordinate. The collaborative practices that emerge 
in peer production create better working conditions and offer the 
satisfaction of pursuing meaningful activities that can substantially 
improve the negative externalities of traditional enterprises. 

Successful peer production projects create vibrant commons-centric 
commercial economies that can be organised not by private capital, 
but by cooperatives and other models familiar with the social and 
solidarity economy. The physical correlates of peer production, 
i.e. the emergence of mutualised places of collaboration such 
as ‘makerspaces’, create collaborative cultures and promote the 
mutualisation of the means of production and exchange. 

The massive mobilisations of 2011 (the Occupy and 15M movements) 
have shown how these networked community effects allow for rapid, 
mass organisation, which could also be used by social, labour and 
union movements. Faced with the failures and relative weakening 
of welfare state provisions, new forms of solidarity are starting 
to emerge. These have been called ‘commonfare’, forms that are 
often reiterations of the mutualisation mechanisms developed by 
the early labour movements, which in turn were the model for the 
welfare state mechanisms generalised to cover the whole population. 
Commonfare could also help in avoiding the so-called ‘value crisis’ 
(see Arvidsson and Peitersen 2013; Mason 2015; Rifkin 2015).<ref>
These  authors  agree  that  the  combined  challenges  of  automation,  zero marginal  cost  economics  and  the  commons  contribute  to  a  potential demonetisation of the capitalist economy.
</ref> This 
crisis is characterised by an increased capacity for contributors to 
co-create value as a commons that can be used by those connected 
to the networks while the income is generated by a fraction of the 
contributors connected to the marketplace.

As for platform capitalism, despite the prevalence of predatory 
practices it is not without advantages provided that the right 
conditions exist for a transformation to non-predatory formats. In 
a context of high unemployment and lower incomes, the platforms 
of this economy allow for the generation of extra income. For those 
workers who have passionate interests that do not easily translate 
into a regular source of income, activities in the platform economy 
can help navigate periods when other sources of income are not 
available. In addition, the organisation of tasks instead of jobs, 
under the relative control of the workers, can help in organising 
more flexible lifestyles.

Overall, these newly emerging practices offer great advantages 
but also come at a heavy cost to workers, especially in a neoliberal 
environment. In our view, both peer production and platform 
capitalism invite the emergence of new societal and economic 
models that could be advantageous to workers. Nevertheless, 
adequate policy and social reforms should be implemented; and 
to this end, a mobilisation of social forces, including labour and 
unions, is required. We should aim at a new alliance between the 
‘older’ ranks of the working class and the emerging ones, between 
the ‘salariat’ and the ‘precariat’, which does not prioritise the former 
over the latter.

===4.  The potential for post-capitalist forms of production and exchange===

The P2P Foundation,<ref>http://p2pfoundation.net/</ref>
a research network and observatory of 
peer production practices, has outlined a vision that places the 
emergence of digitally networked technologies and their possibilities 
for mutualisation at the heart of a sustainability transition. This 
transition deals more effectively with the negative externalities 
produced by the current system.

In this section we outline the vision that we have developed from 
the observation of actual peer production communities, and take 
this micro-economy as a base for developing a social vision on a 
macro scale.

In Section 1 we described the current institutional structure of 
CBPP communities. However, in order to highlight its attractiveness 
for the younger generations, we describe it here in its ideal form 
and condition:
* Workers have access to a wide variety of open and contributory commons, which are also self-managed productive communities. Therefore, they can follow their passions, learn through working with others, be schooled in democracy and self-governance, and gain reputations that can help them to find jobs.
* Workers create their own generative enterprises which create value-added products and services for the marketplace, or other forms of economic production and exchange. These enterprises contribute to the well-being and support of the participating workers and wider community and the maintenance of the shared goods they are co-dependent on. In the sphere of distributed exchange, these entities take the form of platform cooperatives.
* Workers democratically participate in the for-benefit associations that manage and maintain the infrastructure of cooperation. Thus, democracy and self-governance is directly introduced into the sphere of work.

Looking at this micro-economy from a macro perspective, a wider, 
societal vision can also be developed:

* Civil society is considered productive because citizens contribute to these commons for the benefit of society. Productive capacity and recognition is no longer confined to those that provide subordinate labour to corporations or those that have the capital to organise this work. The civic sphere therefore becomes the core sphere of society, and the commons the core sphere of the economy. In this sense, CBPP represents a true revolution in value creation and distribution, challenging the supremacy of market value.
* The economic entities of the commons recognise both negative andpositive externalities, taking appropriate actions to manage them, create livelihoods for those that contribute to these commons, and help in generating, maintaining and expanding them. The economic sphere therefore becomes generative rather than ‘extractive’ vis-à-vis human and natural resources. This tendency represents a return to the moral markets and economies that were abolished through Smithian capitalism and the absence of which has only been partially remedied through ‘external’ state regulation.
* Following the model of the for-benefit associations, public and state authorities become enabling and empowering institutions that promote citizens’ individual and social autonomy and guarantee their ‘equipotentiality’.<ref> The equal capacity of citizens to contribute to the commons in the way that best fits their interests and skills.</ref>  The state provides welfare (or ‘commonfare’) services that serve the needs of all workers, salaried and autonomous, in order to eliminate the precarity often associated with autonomous work.

===5.  New solutions for the labour movement===

Our analysis suggests that peer production is creating a post-factory 
environment and a new form of entrepreneurialism based on a more 
autonomous form of labour, which fundamentally challenges the 
older strategies of trade unions. 

Such  strategies  were  premised  both  on  the  solidarity  and 
mobilisation capacities of workers gathered in factories and on the 
universality of the salaried status. The combination of the relative 
deindustrialisation of the West, the diversification of labour statutes 
to the detriment of wage labour, and the de-territorialisation of 
much of contemporary work, has weakened the efficacy of such 
strategies. In our opinion, it is of great importance to: 
* overcome the division between statutes for different workers, and recognise the validity of autonomous work; 
* adapt tactics to the networked nature of a great proportion of modern work; and 
* propose policies for the reindustrialisation of work based on distributed manufacturing. 

The following examples outline some steps that could be taken 
in this direction.

====5.1. Generative entrepreneurial coalitions====

Generative entrepreneurial coalitions are forms of enterprises that 
participate in co-creating commons while creating livelihoods for the 
contributors. These enterprise models can take the form of cooperatives, 
social and solidarity economy organisations, B-Corporations,<ref>
‘B-Corporations’ are a novel type of entity that allows the combination of for-profit and not-for-profit practices.
</ref> social enterprises, and non-profit and not-for profit entities.

Marjorie Kelly, in her book on these emerging forms of 
post-corporate governance and property, provides a list of the following 
characteristics:

{| class="wikitable"
|+
Table 1  '''The design of economic power: the architecture of ownership'''
|-
!Extractive ownership
!Generative ownership
|-
|1. ''Financial Purpose:'' maximizing profits in the short term
|1. ''Living Purpose:'' creating the conditions for life over the long term
|-
|2. ''Absentee Membership:'' ownership disconnected from the life of the enterprise
|2. ''Rooted Membership:'' ownership in human hands
|-
|3. ''Governance by Markets:'' control by capital markets on autopilot
|3. ''Mission-Controlled Governance:'' control by those dedicated to social mission 
|-
|4. ''Casino Finance:'' capital as master
|4. ''Stakeholder Finance:'' capital as friend
|-
|5. ''Commodity Networks:'' trading focused solely on price and profits
|5. ''Ethical Networks:'' collective support for ecological and social norms
|}
''Source: Kelly (2012).''

====5.2. Platform cooperatives====

The corporate-owned platforms are playing an immensely negative 
role with regard to the social conditions of labour, extracting 
huge profits simply by controlling the flows between supply and 
demand. However, they could be transformed into multi-stakeholder 
or membership-owned platforms that perform the same function, 
without the additional ‘extraction’ of value from these ‘peer to peer’ 
exchanges. The second Platform Cooperativism conference,<ref>
http://platformcoop.net/2016 </ref> held in 
New York in November 2016, showed the huge progress that this 
concept and practice has made in a rather short time. The directory 
The Internet of Ownership<ref>
https://ioo.coop/</ref> lists more than 300 such platforms, 
while there are also platforms ‘under construction’ for nurses, cleaners 
and others.

====5.3. Union co-ops====

In view of the challenge that platform capitalism represents to 
trade union organising, unions have started to directly finance 
alternative cooperative platforms. In Not Alone, a landmark report 
on how unions are responding to the needs of precarious workers, 
Conaty et al. (2016) argue:
<blockquote>
‘We explored how to bring together co-operative approaches 
with the additional clout of trade union power. What we 
found is that such a mission to integrate trade union and co-
operative provision is gaining traction in the US with a range 
of emerging “union co-op” models. The union co-ops concept 
has been co-developed under a joint agreement between the 
US Steelworkers and the Spanish co-op, Mondragon. Today, 
union co-ops are being set up in a range of industries and cities 
from Pittsburgh to Los Angeles. In Cincinnati, Ohio, seven union 
co-ops are either established or under development including 
a food hub, a railway manufacturer, a “green laundry” and a 
jewellery manufacturer. Crucially, we are seeing union co-ops 
beating the opposition at its own game.’
</blockquote>
What is of interest in the context of this paper is that the union co-
op model is now being applied to platform cooperative initiatives. 
For instance, Conaty et al. (2016) mention ‘Green Taxis’ as an 
alternative to Uber: 
<blockquote>
‘Green Taxis co-op in Denver has expanded its membership in 
partnership with the Communication Workers of America. This 
union co-op strategy has led to the development of a highly 
efficient mobile app. Through the partnership Green Taxis has 
grown to 800 members, secured 37% of the market in Denver 
and has rapidly become the largest taxi co-op in the US.’ 
</blockquote>
Another example presented at the recent Platform Cooperativism 
conference is NursesCan,<ref>
https://livestream.com/internetsociety/platformcoop2016/videos/141639935 
</ref> a healthcare workers’ cooperative 
platform founded in 2016 with the support of the Service Employees 
International Union – United Healthcare Workers West.

====5.4. Labour mutuals====

Labour mutuals, another name for what are legally called ‘Business 
and Employment Cooperatives’, represent a way to bridge the gap 
between freelance and salaried workers. These co-ops can provide 
the following services:
* The creation of mutual guarantee funds allows them to rapidly pay the invoices of freelance workers and undertake the ‘factoring’ on behalf of their worker-clients. This can greatly ease the cash-flow issues that are a huge negative factor in the income flow of freelance workers.
* Enabling the transformation of irregular payments into a ‘regular’, self-funded salary.
* Enabling workers, once a certain income and average salary threshold has been reached, to self-employ in the cooperative as legally ‘salaried’ workers, which creates the possibility for membership in social security and welfare schemes that usually benefit only salaried workers.
* The creation of a new legal category of ‘non-subordinate but salaried’ workers combines the social demand for autonomy with the protections of the salaried status.

Examples of such labour mutuals are the fast-growing 
SMart,<ref>http://smartbe.be</ref> a 
European cooperative structure founded in Belgium, now active in 
eight countries and counting 75,000 members, and 
Coopaname<ref>http://www.coopaname.coop/</ref> in France. 
There is also Bigre, a European association of such 
labour mutuals (Conaty ''et al.'' 2016).

====5.5.  Re-localising work and re-dynamising local economies====

The potential of linking up global open design communities with 
specialised networks of micro-factories in cities (such as the Fab 
Lab global network, ImpactHub, etc.), creates an opportunity for 
bringing certain activities back to the local level (re-localisation). 
Cities like Barcelona (originator of the 
Fab City<ref>http://fab.city/</ref> project), 
Amsterdam 
(successfully relocating the crafts industry inside the city) and 
others are experimenting with this model. 

Tentatively called ‘Design Global, Manufacture Local’ (Kostakis 
et al. 2015), this model also has substantial ecological benefits:
* overcomes planned obsolescence (open design communities do not design for planned obsolescence);
* reduces transportation costs through re-localised production (and thus also the consumption of declining material and energy resources); and
* creates possibilities for a much more rapid and efficient adoption of an open source circular economy, which is much harder to achieve under intellectual property scenarios. 

In addition to this, the French rural project Terre des Liens has 
calculated that their model of 100% organic food would need 
12% of the workers in rural areas, as compared to 2% today. It has 
proposed using a ‘circular finance’ model, where public authorities 
re-invest part of their gains. This model of financing is of particular 
interest in a period dominated by austerity policy, as civic and labour 
forces can argue that such job creation is in fact not spending more 
of the budget but actually eliminating expenditures so that they 
can be re-invested elsewhere.

In the current context of social and political instability, with the 
rise of right-wing populism propelled by the despair of blue-collar 
workers (Ramos 2014), this alternative model could be the basis 
for progressive political programs that would re-create local blue-
collar jobs without resorting to protectionist measures. 

===6. Conclusions===

In conclusion, both CBPP and platform capitalism have positive and 
negative aspects. Given the interconnectedness of their emergence 
with current technological capacities, we propose that the labour 
movement and trade unions craft a policy response that: 
* strongly regulates against negative externalities that affect workers (e.g. the regulation of Uber and AirBnB);
* strongly promotes the positive aspects by making a link between the new models and those corporate entities that take into account social justice and distribution; in other words, supports generative  businesses  that  create  livelihoods  around  peer production and member-owned or multi-stakeholder-managed ‘platform cooperatives’;
* supports autonomous work, creates solidarity mechanisms that insert these workers into systems of social protection, and attempts to bridge the divide between the precariat and the salariat, without reducing autonomous work to a subordinate status;
* supports the convergence of cooperative models with those of the social and solidarity economy around the commons and the ‘sharing’ economy; and
* supports the creation of business incubators and the prototyping of policies that re-create local jobs with a view to promoting potential re-industrialisation through distributed manufacturing models.

==References==

APC (2010) 75% of Linux code now written by paid developers, 20 
January 2010. ([http://apcmag.com/linux-now-75-corporate.htm/ link to article])

Arvidsson  A.  and  Peitersen  N.  (2013)  The  ethical  economy: 
rebuilding value after the crisis, New York, Columbia University Press.

Bauwens M. and Kostakis V. (2018 forthcoming) Peer-to-peer: a 
manifesto for commons transition, in Wright E.O. and Barrett P. (eds.) 
Envisioning real utopias II, New York, Verso. [English version of: 
Bauwens M. and Kostakis V. (2017) Vers une société des communs : 
manifeste pour une économie collaborative, Paris, Charles Léopold 
Mayer.]

Conaty P., Bird A. and Ross P. (2016) Not alone: trade union and 
co-operative solutions for self-employed workers, Manchester, Co-operatives UK. 
([http://www.uk.coop/sites/default/files/uploads/attachments/not_alone_-_trade_union_and_co-operative_solutions_for_self-employed_workers_3.pdf link to PDF])

Kelly M. (2012) Owning our future: the emerging ownership 
revolution, San Francisco, Berrett-Koehler Publishers. 

Kostakis V., Niaros V., Dafermos G. and Bauwens M. (2015) Design 
global, manufacture local: exploring the contours of an emerging 
productive model, Futures, 73, 126-135.

Mason P. (2015) Postcapitalism: a guide to our future, London, 
Allen Lane.

Ramos J. (2014) The future of work, STIR Magazine, 14. 
([https://www.stirtoaction.com/article/the-future-of-work link to article])

Rayapura A. (2014) Millennials most sustainability-conscious 
generation yet, but don’t call them ‘environmentalists’, Sustainable 
Brands, 11 March 2014. 
([http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/stakeholder_trends_insights/aarthi_rayapura/millennials_most_sustainability_conscious link to article])

Rifkin J. (2015) The zero marginal cost society: the internet of 
things, the collaborative commons, and the eclipse of capitalism, 
New York, Palgrave Macmillan.

Rogers  T.  and  Szamosszegi  A.  (2011)  Fair  use  in  the  U.  S. 
economy: economic contribution of industries relying on fair use, 
Washington, Computer & Communications Industry Association. 
([http://cdn.ccianet.org/wp-content/uploads/library/CCIA-FairUseintheUSEconomy-2011.pdf link to PDF])

Standing G. (2014) A precariat charter: from denizens to citizens, 
London, Bloomsbury.

Tapscott  D.  and  Williams  A.  (2006)  Wikinomics:  how  mass 
collaboration changes everything, New York, Portfolio.

Benkler Y. (2006) The wealth of networks: how social production 
transforms markets and freedom, New Haven, Yale University Press.

==Endnotes==
<references />


''All links were checked on 23 February 2017.''


----

==More Information==
* See the same article formatted differently [http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/The_Emergence_of_Peer_Production:_Challenges_and_Opportunities_for_Labour_and_Unions on the Commons Transition wiki]


<div style="font-size:smaller; background-color:#d0f8f0">
The views expressed in ETUI Policy Briefs are those of the respective author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the ETUI.<br />
The ETUI Policy Brief series is edited jointly by Jan Drahokoupil, Philippe Pochet, Aída Ponce Del Castillo, Sotiria Theodoropoulou and Kurt Vandaele. <br />
The editor responsible for this issue is Kurt Vandaele, kurtvandaele@etui.org<br />
This electronic publication, as well as previous issues of the ETUI Policy Briefs, is available at [http://www.etui.org/publications www.etui.org/publications]. 
You may find further information on the ETUI at [http://www.etui.org/ www.etui.org].<br />
© ETUI aisbl, Brussels, March 2017<br />
All rights reserved. ISSN 2031-8782<br />

The ETUI is financially supported by the European Union.  <br />
The European Union is not responsible for any use made of the information contained in this publication. 
</div>

[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]
[[Category:Labor]]