
'''* Do-it-yourself biology: Challenges and Promises for an Open Science and Technology Movement. By Thomas Landrain, Remi Sussan et al. Systems and Synthetic Biology, Vol 7., No. 1-2'''

URL = http://www.lapaillasse.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Landrain_DIYbio_SSBJ_2013.pdf

=Abstract= 

"The do-it-yourself biology (DIYbio) community is emerging as a movement that fosters open access to
resources permitting modern molecular biology, and synthetic biology among others. It promises in particular to be a source of cheaper and simpler solutions for environmental monitoring, personal diagnostic and the use of
biomaterials. The successful growth of a global community
of DIYbio practitioners will depend largely on enabling
safe access to state-of-the-art molecular biology tools and
resources. In this paper we analyze the rise of DIYbio, its
community, its material resources and its applications. We
look at the current projects developed for the international
genetically engineered machine competition in order to get
a sense of what amateur biologists can potentially create in
their community laboratories over the coming years. We
also show why and how the DIYbio community, in the
context of a global governance development, is putting in
place a safety/ethical framework for guarantying the pursuit of its activity. And ﬁnally we argue that the global spread of DIY biology potentially reconﬁgures and opens
up access to biological information and laboratory equipment and that, therefore, it can foster new practices and transversal collaborations between professional scientists and amateurs."


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Articles]]