
URL = http://www.rockethub.com/projects/10270-change-academic-research-forever

=Description=

Michael Lissack writes: "We are building a one click button to help researchers find one another based on what they read and search. Find an expert instantly. We want to enable researchers to find out "who should I talk to?" with merely a click of a mouse instead of a many hour slug through keywords and Google. We have the raw ingredients but we need to build the button. It will be based on the "what should I read?" button which already exists in the ISCE Library.

The ISCE Library currently is a collection of 1000+ full text on-line books with a unique search capability -- the user can upload a draft of their research project (say 2000 words) and the system will analyze the upload and then tell them what books in the library they should read for further insight, good quotes, additional material etc. The who else to talk to functionality is the missing link. Please help us make this dream a reality. We have built the bulk of the necessary technology (demo). We need your help to both fund the initial community of researchers and to build the social network search technology. We are crowdfunding through RocketHub (a service which operates much like Kickstarter)." 
(http://www.rockethub.com/projects/10270-change-academic-research-forever)

=More Information=

To try a demo of the service please go to http://isce-library.net login as user: demo1@isce.eduand password is "Library"


[[Category:Research]]