'''= participant in [[Europe Commons Deep Dive]] workshop'''

== Bio ==

"Charlotte Hess is Associate Dean for Research, Collections and Scholarly Communication at Syracuse University Library.  Before coming to Syracuse, New York in August 2008, Hess was at the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis, Indiana University where she was a researcher and the director of the [[Digital Library of the Commons]] (1999-2008).  Hess served on the Executive Council of the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]] as the Information Officer 1997-2009. Hess has written and lectured extensively on knowledge, cultural, and new commons. She was co-editor with Elinor Ostrom of their book Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice, MIT Press, which has been translated into Italian and Korean. Hess and Ostrom also co-authored a number of articles.  Recent works by Hess include: “The [[Unfolding of the Knowledge Commons]].” 2012. St. Anthony’s International Review 8(1) (May) 13-24; and «La notion de biens communs et ses applications dans le domaine de la connaissance.» 2011. In [[Libres Savoirs]]: Les biens communs de la connaissance. Edited by Hervé Le Crosnier. Caen, France: C&F Éditions." (2013)

== Publications ==

Hess has written and lectured extensively on knowledge, cultural, and new commons. 

* She was co-editor with Elinor Ostrom of their book Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice, MIT Press, which has been translated into Italian and Korean. Hess and Ostrom also co-authored a number of articles.  

Recent (in 2013) works by Hess include: 

* “The Unfolding of the Knowledge Commons.” 2012. St. Anthony’s International Review 8(1) (May) 13-24; and 
* «La notion de biens communs et ses applications dans le domaine de la connaissance.» 2011. In Libres Savoirs: Les biens communs de la connaissance. Edited by Hervé Le Crosnier. Caen, France: C&F Éditions.  


=== Peer-reviewed and Invited Publications ===
(revised to 2013)
* “Constructing a New Research Agenda for Cultural Commons.” 2012. In: Cultural Commons: A New Perspective on the Production and Evolution of Cultures. Edited by Walter Santagata and Enrico Bertacchini. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
* “The Unfolding of the Knowledge Commons.” 2012. St. Anthony’s International Review 8(1) (May)13-24. http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/stair/stair/2012/00000008/00000001
* “Institutional Design and Governance in the Microbial Research Commons.” 2011. In: Designing the Microbial Research Commons: Proceedings of an International Symposium. Washington, DC: National Research Council of the National Academies.
* «La notion de biens communs et ses applications dans le domaine de la connaissance.» 2011. In Libres Savoirs: Les biens communs de la connaissance. Edited by Hervé Le Crosnier. Caen, France: C&F Éditions.
* “Private and Common Property Rights.” 2010. With Elinor Ostrom as first author. In Property Law and Economics, Edited by Boudewijn Bouckaert. Northampton, MA. (Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, 2nd ed.)
* “The Calculus of Commitment: The Ostroms, The Workshop, and The Commons.” 2010. The Commons Digest no. 9 (Spring):1-5.   http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/all/Digest/cd09.pdf
* Korean Language edition, 2010. Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice. 2007 With Co-Editor Elinor Ostrom. Seoul: Time Books.
* La conoscenza come bene commune: Dalla teoria alla pratica. 2009 a cura di Charlotte Hess e Elinor Ostrom. Italian Edition of Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice, a cura di Paolo Ferri. Bologna, Italy: Bruno Mondadori.
* “Author Response.” 2009. With Elinor Ostrom. Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies Book Reviews Series, University of San Francisco. http://rccs.usfca.edu/bookinfo.asp?AuthorID=178&BookID=443
* “Mapping New Commons.” 2008. Presented at the Twelfth Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of the Commons, Cheltenham, UK, 14-18 July.  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1356835
* “Private and Common Property Rights.” 2008. With Elinor Ostrom.  Encyclopedia of Law & Economics. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1304699
* “A Framework for Analyzing the Microbiological Commons.”  With Elinor Ostrom.  2007. International Social Science Journal 58(188):336-349. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/toc/issj/58/188
* “The Name Change; or, What Happened to the P?” With Ruth Meinzen-Dick. 2007.
* The Commons Digest 2:1-4. http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/default/files/cd02.pdf
* [[Understanding Knowledge as a Commons]]: From Theory to Practice. 2007. With Co-Editor Elinor Ostrom. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11012
* “An [[Overview of the Knowledge Commons]].” 2007. With Elinor Ostrom. Pp. 3-26 in: [[Understanding Knowledge as a Commons]]: From Theory to Practice. 2007. Edited by Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom. Cambridge: MIT Press. http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262083574intro1.pdf
* “A [[Framework for Analyzing the Knowledge Commons]].” 2007. With Elinor Ostrom as first author. In: [[Understanding Knowledge as a Commons]]: From Theory to Practice. Edited by Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
* “Knowledge Commons Glossary.” 2007. With Elinor Ostrom. In: [[Understanding Knowledge as a Commons]]: From Theory to Practice. Edited by Hess and Ostrom. Cambridge: MIT Press.  http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262083574chapm1.pdf
* “Knowledge as a Commons: Scholarly Communication, Resource, Sharing and the Potential of Digital Libraries.” 2005. In Universities: Taking a Leading Role in ICT Enabled Human Development. Eds., F.F. Tusubira and N.K. Mulira. Kampala, Uganda: Makerere University.	
* “A Resource Guide for Authors: Open Access, Copyright, and the Digital Commons.” 2005. CPR Digest No. 72 (March) http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/all/Digest/cpr72.pdf
* “Report From the Field: The Information Commons.” 2004. Polycentric Circles 11:1 (December). http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/publications/materials/newsletter/vol111no1.pdf
* “Why the IASCP Mission Statement Should Be Changed.” 2003 The Common Property Resource Digest  67:1-3 (December) http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/all/Digest/cpr67.pdf
* “The Information Commons and IASCP.” 2003. The Common Property Resource Digest 65:4-5 (June). http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/all/Digest/cpr65.pdf
* “Ideas, Facilities, and Artifacts: Information as a Common-Pool Resource.” With Elinor Ostrom. 2003. Law and Contemporary Problems 66(1-2):111-146. http://www.law.duke.edu/shell/cite.pl?66+Law+&+Contemp.+Probs.+111+(WinterSpring+2003)
* “The Digital Library of the Commons.” 2002.  In Proceedings of the Indiana University Forum on Digital Libraries.  G. Bernbom, ed. Bloomington, IN: Office of the Vice President for Information Technology, Indiana University.
* “Artifacts, Facilities, and Content: Information as a Common-Pool Resource.” 2001.  With Elinor Ostrom. Invited paper, Conference on the Public Domain, Duke University Law School, Durham, NC, Nov. 9-11. http://www.law.duke.edu/pd
* “Tracking the IASCP: Crafting an Organization.” 1999. Polycentric Circles 6(1) (December): 1-2. http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/publications/newsletter/polycentric_vol6n1.html
* A Comprehensive Bibliography of Common Pool Resources.  (CD-ROM) 1999.  Bloomington: Indiana University, Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis.
* “Capturing the Campus Commons.” 1998. The Common Property Resource Digest 46:9-11. http://www.iasc-commons.org/sites/all/Digest/cpr46.pdf
* “Dilemmas of Building a Sustainable, Equitable Information Resource.” 1998.  Proceedings of the seventh annual conference of the International Association for the Study of Common Property, Vancouver, British Columbia, June 10-14.       http://www.indiana.edu/~iascp/iascp98.htm
* “In the Stacks in Kampala.” 1997. Polycentric Circles 4(1), December. http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/publications/newsletter/polycentric_vol4n1.html
* “Recent Publications.” 1997-2007. The Commons Digest (formerlyThe Common Property Resource Digest).  http://www.indiana.edu/~iascp/e-cpr.html “Freedom of Access: Highlights of the Intellectual Freedom Program.” 1997. College and Research Libraries News.  58:8.
* “Bibliography of Private and Common Property Rights.” 1997. With Elinor Ostrom.  Encyclopedia of Law & Economics. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
* Common Pool Resources and Collective Action: A Bibliography. Volume 3. 1996. Bloomington: Indiana University, Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis. 454pp.  ISBN:1-889740-00-4
* Forestry Resources and Institutions: A Bibliography. 1996.  Bloomington: Indiana University, Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis. 327pp.  ISBN 1-889740-01-2
* “Untangling the Web: The Internet as a Commons.” 1995.  Presented at the Workshop “Reinventing the Commons,” Transnational Institute, Bonn, Germany, November 4-5. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/327
* “The Interconnectedness of Local and Global Processes” 1995.  College & Research Libraries News, 56(6) (June) 386-87.
* “INforum: A Library/IT Collaboration in Professional Development at Indiana University.” 1994. With Gerald Bernbom.  CAUSE/EFFECT 17(3) (Fall): 13-18.  http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/text/cem9434.txt
* “INforum: An Experiment in Professional Development Collaboration.” 1994.  With Gerald Bernbom. College and Research Libraries News, 55(9) (October): 560-63.
* “Investigating the Police.” 1994.  Research and Creative Activity  XVI(3) (January): 9. http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/rescreat.html	
* “A Common Thread.” 1994.  Research and Creative Activity  XVI(3) (January):26. http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/rescreat.html	
* “When Worlds Combine.” 1993.  College and Research Libraries News 54(9) (October): 514-15.

=== Online Papers and Documents ===

* Communication Policy Research Network (CPRN). 2012. “Critical Information Needs and Open Access” section of FCC Critical Information Needs: Metrics and Methods: Annotated Bibliography. Jul. http://transition.fcc.gov/bureaus/ocbo/Final_Annotated_Bibliography.pdf
* A Comprehensive Bibliography of the Commons.  2008. Online edition with 57,885 citations and 16,740 abstracts .  http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/cpr/index.php
* A Guide for Research on Commons, Common-pool Resources, and Common Property.” 2006. Digital Library of the Commons http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/contentguidelines
* “Studying Scholarly Communication: Can Commons Research and the IAD Framework Help Illuminate Complex Dilemmas?” 2004. With Elinor Ostrom. Presented at the Tenth Conference of the International Association for the Study of Common Property, Oaxaca, Mexico, August 9-13. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00001411/	
* Keyword Thesaurus on the Commons, Common Pool Resources and Common Property. 2001.  http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/thesaurus/thesaurus.html
* “Information, Knowledge, and Common-Pool Resources.” 1999. In Proceedings of the Symposium “Reflections on Common Property Theory and Research,” held at Indiana University, Bloomington, June 7. http://www.iasc-commons.org/conferences/regional/1999-bloomington
* “Useful Definitions for the Study of Common Property Theory.” 1999  With Bonnie McCay, Louise Fortmann, Fikret Berkes, Meg McKean, and Antonio Diegues.  http://www.iasc-commons.org/conferences/regional/1999-mozambique/Useful%20definitions
* “Is There Anything New Under the Sun? A Discussion and Survey of Studies on New Commons and the Internet.” 2000.  Presented at the eighth biennial conference of the International Association for the Study of Common Property, Bloomington, IN, May 31-June 4. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/384
* “The Virtual CPR: The Internet as a Local and Global Common Pool Resource.”  1995.  Presented at the fifth annual conference of the International Association for the Study of Common Property, Bodø, Norway, May 24-28. http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/handle/10535/234

== More Information ==

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]
[[Category:USA]]
[[Category:Knowledge Commons]]