

=Description=

Timour Kosters:

"Founded: 1874, Chautauqua, New York, by Lewis Miller and John Heyl Vincent.

Notable Participants: Speakers included Mark Twain, Susan B. Anthony, and William Jennings Bryan.

Description: Initially a lakeside retreat, it evolved into a national movement blending education, arts, and recreation. Local communities hosted traveling Chautauqua events that brought lectures, music, and discussions to rural areas.

Ideas/Technology: Pioneered participatory education and broadened access to cultural and intellectual resources.

In 1874, a small group gathered on the shores of Chautauqua Lake for what was supposed to be a one-time summer retreat. Soon, “Chautauquas” spread across the country, creating traveling circuits that brought education, music, and debate to towns across the US. These events were temporary public learning festivals, giving people across the country access to intellectual and cultural opportunities they couldn’t find elsewhere. Notable figures like Mark Twain and Susan B. Anthony spoke at these gatherings.

What’s interesting about Chautauqua is how it scaled—what began as a single event in upstate New York turned into a decentralized network of gatherings that persisted for decades. This is a clear parallel to what is happening with popup cities, which started as temporary gatherings and are now going global. Our collaborator on Edge Esmeralda, Devon Zuegel, has written beautifully about her experience of Chautauqua as ‘an idea embedded in a place.’ "

(https://attheedges.timour.xyz/p/prototyping-the-future-at-the-edges)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Network Nations]]