
=Discussion=

Philip Clayton:

"The Chinese contributions to process thought over the last two decades have been very significant. Although it has supporters in many parts of the world, process philosophy has grown more quickly in China than any other nation. More than twenty research centers focusing on Constructive Postmodernism and process thought have been established at Chinese universities, including Zhejiang University, Peking Normal University, and Harbin Institute of Technology. According to Professor Fubin Yang’s research, as of 2010 “no other school of contemporary Western philosophy, such as analytical philosophy or phenomenology, has yet established so many special centers of study in China.”[xxii]

The founder of Open Horizons, Jay McDaniel, has frequently taught process philosophy in China. In an important post on JJB, Jay listed ten important comparisons between Chinese thought and process thought.[xxiii] Please click here. We know of no list of parallels that is as insightful and helpful as Prof. McDaniel’s list. Before you read any further, you should click on the link and read his 10 points.

In the ten points that Jay explains in his post, he reveals deep insight into process philosophy, traditional Chinese thought, and Marxist thought. We agree with Jay that deep organic connections exist between these three schools of thought. It is indeed possible to graft them together into a single living whole—not merely as an abstract philosophy, but as a new form of eco-praxis."

(https://www.openhorizons.org/8203organic-marxism-process-philosophy-and-chinese-thought.html)

[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Movements]]