=Discussion=

==The [[John Stuart Mill and the Socialist Origins of the Limited Liability Modern Enterprise System ]]==

Cui Zhiyuan:

"Few have noticed that [[Petit-Bourgeois Socialism]] was at the heart of the genealogy of the “modern
enterprise system.” In fact, a petty bourgeoisie socialist J.S. Mill was the key figure
to bring one of the main features of the “modern enterprise system” – limited
liability for shareholders – into existence.

It was due to the concern for the development of workers’ cooperatives of his
time that John Stuart Mill started to study the issue of limited liability. He first
analyzed the so-called “en commandites” form of partnership. This special form
of partnership had many proponents in England, the Christian Socialists perhaps
being the most prominent among them. In this form of organization the “active”
partners were subject to unlimited liability, staying with the idea of tying liability
to responsibility, while the “sleeping” partners were subjected to limited liability,
since they were not responsible for running the business. John Stuart Mill
advocated this form of partnership because it would have allowed workers to form
associations to “carry on the business [with] which they were acquainted” and
also allow the “rich to lend to the poor.” 

Mill argued:

- No man can consistently condemn these partnerships without being prepared
to maintain that it is desirable that no one should carry on business with
borrowed capital. In other words, that the profits of the business should
be wholly monopolized by those who have had time to accumulate, or the
good fortune to inherit capital, a proposition, in the present state of commerce
and industry, evidently absurd.

In 1850, Mill testified before the Select Committee on Investments for the
Savings of the Middle and Working Classes of the British Parliament. He proposed
to establish the corporate regime with generalized limited liability for shareholders,
because it would induce the wealthy to lend more freely in support of projects
by the poor. The poor would also benefit by having the opportunity to invest their
savings in producers’ or consumers’ cooperatives. As a result of the efforts of
Mill and others, the British Parliament passed the 1855 Act of general limited
liability for corporations.

This genealogy of limited liability has been almost forgotten by the contemporary economists. The point of retelling this forgotten chapter of economic
history is to highlight that the “modern enterprise system” is not necessarily
capitalist. If shareholders have only “limited liability”, it implies that they are not
taking the full risks as “private owners” are supposed to do; therefore they should
not enjoy all the profits of the enterprises.8 In other words, the shareholders are
not the only risk-bearing group. The employee’s firm-specific human capital also
runs at a risk. Moreover, shareholders can diversify their shareholding through
a portfolio of different firms’ shares, but a single worker cannot work for several
firms all at the same time. In this light, it may be argued that employees’ human
capital runs a higher risk due to the lack of diversification. This opened the door
to our understanding of the widespread institutional innovation in China’s rural
industry – a “shareholding-cooperative system.”

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


==The [[Origin of China's Shareholding-Cooperative Enterprise Property System in the Liberal Socialism of James Meade]]==

Cui Zhiyuan on James Meade and the Chinese “shareholding-cooperative system:

"James E. Meade, the 1977 Nobel Laureate in Economics, is one of the founders
of modern GNP accounting. As a student of Keynes, Meade was inspired by the
tradition of petty bourgeoisie socialism.9 He always calls his program “liberal
socialism.” Meade’s program aims to combine the best features of liberalism and
socialism. 

It has two main components in its institutional design: “labor–capital
partnerships,” and “social dividend.”

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


===[[James Meade's Proposals for Labor–Capital Partnership]]===

Cui Zhiyuan:

"In Meade’s design, outside shareholders own capital share certificates and inside
workers own labor share certificates. The operational mechanism of the program
is roughly as follows:

* the Labour–Capital Partnership, whereby the workers and those who provide
risk capital jointly manage the concern as partners. The capitalists own Capital
Shares in the business, which are comparable to Ordinary Shares in a Capitalist
Company. The worker partners own Labour Shares in the partnership; these
Labour Shares are entitled to the same rate of dividend as the Capital Shares,
but they are attached to each individual worker partner and are cancelled
when he or she leaves the partnership. If any part of the partnership’s income
is not distributed in dividends but is used to develop the business, new Capital
Shares, equal in value to their sacrificed dividends, are issued to all existing
holders of Labour as well as of Capital Shares. These partnership arrangements
greatly reduce the areas of conflict of interest between workers and capitalists,
since any decision which will improve the situation of one group by raising
the rate of dividend on its shares will automatically raise the rate of dividend
on the shares of the other group. (Meade 1993, 85–86)


In addition to this benefit of aligning interests of outside shareholders and insider
workers, Meade’s labor–capital partnership has an added main advantage of
introducing flexibility into the labor market. The current social democracy in the
Western European style suffers from a major problem: the high wage of workers
on the job is maintained at the cost of rigidity of the labor market, thus implying
an inefficient reduction of output and a level of employment below the potential
full employment. When the labour–capital partnership uses a labor share certificate
to replace a fixed wage arrangement, a degree of flexibility is introduced into the
labor market which is formerly characterized by downward rigidity of wages.

'''It is important for the “progressive” forces in China and other post-communist countries not to imitate social-democratic policies pursued in Western Europe.'''

There, the social-democratic parties had long lost their radical inspiration. Instead
of challenging and reforming the institutions of the existing forms of market
economy and representative democracy, the social-democratic program merely
seeks to moderate the social consequences of structural divisions and hierarchies.
We need more radical institutional innovations like the labor–capital partnership
to make up for the deficiencies of conventional social-democratic policies. The
flexibility in the labor market is just one case which illustrates this general point."

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


===[[James Meade's Proposals for a Social Dividend]]===

Cui Zhiyuan:

The second feature of Meade’s program of “liberal socialism” is “social dividend:

”every citizen is paid a tax-free Social Dividend according to the citizen’s age and
family status but without any other conditions. Two basic reasons for instituting
social dividend are: 

(1) promotion of equality by providing everyone with the same
basic unconditional income; 

(2) the reduction of risks by providing some part
of income that is unaffected by variations required by flexibility in the labor market.



The intuitive core of the idea of social dividend lies in the attempt to replace the
demand for job tenure by an enhancement of the resources and capabilities of the
individual citizen.

One of the advantages of social dividend over the conventional socialdemocratic policy of “conditional benefit” is that the former improves the
incentives of recipients of low-earning jobs. This may appear counter-intuitive at
first sight, because “unconditional social dividend” seems to reduce the incentive
to accept low-paid jobs more than conditional benefit (based on unemployment or
illness). However, intuition is wrong in this case. 


Meade argues against intuition
with the following simple example:

- a recipient of a Social Dividend of 80 supplemented by a Conditional Benefit
of 20 will have an incentive to take outside earnings so long as those earnings
after deduction of Income Tax are greater than 20; but if he or she had relied
for the whole 100 on a Conditional Benefit, there would be no incentive to
accept any outside earnings less than 100."

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


==The [[Shareholding–Cooperative System in China]]==

Cui Zhiyuan:

In their effort to create a proper ownership form for rural enterprises, the Chinese
“peasant-workers” and their community governments have designed an ingenious
one: a “shareholding–cooperative system (SCS).”11 It is similar to James Meade’s
“labor–capital partnership” in that both systems have a labor share and a capital
share;12 however, the Chinese SCS is distinct in that the capital share itself is mainly
collective in the sense of belonging to the representative of the community – the
township and village governments. Thus the SCS in China’s rural industry may
serve to harmonize the interests of inside workers and outside members of the same
community. To give a sense of its working mechanism, I now describe briefly
one of the earlier experiments with the SCS in rural China.

In one locality where I conducted preliminary field research in the summer
of 1993, Zhoucun District of Zibo (Shangdong Province), the SCS was invented
in 1982 as a response to the difficulties of dismantling the collective properties of
the People’s Commune. The peasants found some collective properties (other than
land) to be simply physically indivisible. They decided to issue shares to each
“peasant-worker” on equal terms, instead of destroying the collective property
(such as trucks) to sell them in pieces (which had happened in many other regions).

Soon after, they realized (or conceded) that they should not divide up all collective
properties into individual shares to distribute to the current workforce, because the
older generation of “peasant-workers” had left the enterprises and the local government had made prior investments. Thus they decided to keep some proportion of
“collective shares” which would not go into individual labor shares. These
collective shares are designed to be held by outside corporate bodies, such as
local governmental agencies, other firms in and out of the locality, banks, and even
universities and scientific research institutions. 


The following figures show the
flow of profits of SCS in Zhoucun District:

* 10 per cent: Workers’ welfare fund
* After-tax profits of SCS firm – 30 per cent: Firm development fund
* 60 per cent: Share fund (collective and individual shares)


Clearly, the development of SCS is the joint product of two factors: 

(1) accumulated change of Chinese rural institutions (such as the dissolution of the
commune), and 

(2) accidental solutions to the indivisibility of People’s Commune’s
property. 

Therefore, the SCS has created an attitude of ambiguity among the
Chinese practitioners and scholars on China as to how to evaluate the potential of
this new form of property. As Karl Polanyi once said: “the contemporaries did
not comprehend the order for which they were preparing the way.”

As for James Meade’s “social dividend,” there is so far no Chinese experiment
in a similar spirit. However, it is my belief that China can benefit from considering
seriously Meade’s program of “social dividend” in establishing her own social
welfare system."

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


=Source=

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]

[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Open Company Formats]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]