'''Chris Anderson on the [[Long Tail]]'''


Chris Anderson, editor-in-chief of Wired, is the author of the book on how the internet is enabling a new kind of economy based on niche markets.


=Podcasts=

#Econtalk: http://www.econtalk.org/archives/2006/08/chris_anderson.html
#Instapundit: http://instapundit.com/archives/031380.php
#How the [[Long Tail]] applies to nonprofits and associations, at http://www.principledinnovation.com/blog/2006/07/02/pi-podcast-july-2-2006/
#Celia Hirschman hosts a conversation with Christopher Anderson on the Long Tail, August 8, 2006, at http://www.kcrw.com/cgi-bin/db/kcrw.pl?show_code=pc&air_date=8/8/06&tmplt_type=show

=Webcast=


A seminar with in addition Will Hearst, organized by the Long Now Foundation.

The webcast of the seminar will be available through the Long Now Seminar page at
http://www.longnow.org/projects/seminars/



==Review by Stewart Brand==

(source: Long Now Foundation's mailing list)

"You know something is up when an audience member is taking cell phone
photos of the presenter's slides for instant transmittal to a
business partner.

Chris Anderson does have killer slides, full of exuberant detail,
defining the exact shape of the still emerging opportunity space for
finding and selling formerly infindable and unsellable items of every
imaginable description.  The 25 million music tracks in the world.
All the TV ever broadcast.  Every single amateur video.  All that is
old, arcane, micro-niche, against-the-grain, undefinable, or remote
is suddenly as accessible as the top of the pops.

"The power law is the shape of our age," Anderson asserted, showing
the classic ski-jump curve of popularity--- a few things sell in vast
quantity, while a great many things sell in small quantity.  It's the
natural product of variety, inequality, and network effect sifting,
which amplifies the inequality.

"Everything is measurable now," said Anderson, comparing charts of
sales over time of a hit music album with a niche album.  The hit
declined steeply, the niche album kept its legs.  The "long tail" of
innumerable tiny-sellers is populated by old hits as well as new and
old niche items.  That's the time dimension.  For the first time in
history, archives have a business model.  Old stuff is more
profitable because the acquisition cost is lower and customer
satisfaction is higher.  Infinite-inventory Netflix occupies the
sweet spot for movie distribution, while Blockbuster is saddled with
the tyranny of the new.

Anderson explained that we are leaving an age where distribution was
ruled by channel scarcity--- 3 TV networks, only so many movie
theater screens, limited shelf space for books.  "Those scarcity
effects make a bottleneck that distorts the market and distorts our
culture.  Infinite shelf space changes everything."  Books are freed
up by print-on-demand (already a large and profitable service at
Amazon), movies freed by cheap DVDs, old broadcast TV by classics
collections, new videos by Google Videos and You Tube online.  Even
the newest game machines are now designed to be able to emulate their
earlier incarnations, so you can play the original "Super Mario
Bros." if so inclined--- and many are.

"I'm an editor of a Conde-Nast magazine [Wired] AND I'm a blogger,"
said Anderson.  In other words, he works both in the fading world of
"pre-filters" and the emerging world of "post-filters."
Pre-filtering is ruled by editors, A&R guys ("artist and repetoire,"
the talent-finders in the music biz), studio execs, and capital-B
Buyers.  Post-filtering is driven by readers, recommenders, word of
mouth, and buyers.

Will Hearst joined Anderson on the stage and noted that social
networking software has automated word of mouth, and that's what has
"unchoked the long tail of sheer obscure quantity in the vast backlog
of old movies, for example."  Anderson agreed, "The marketing power
of customer recommendations is the main driver for Netflix, and it is
zero-cost marketing."

"By democratizing the tools of distribution, we're seeing a
Renaissance in culture.  We're starting to find out just how rich our
society is in terms of creativity," Anderson said.  But isn't there a
danger, he was asked from the audience, of our culture falling apart
with all this super-empowered diversity?  Anderson agreed that we
collect strongly and narrowly around our passions now, rather than
just weakly and widely around broadcast hits, but the net gain of
overall creativity is the main effect, and a positive one.

Questions remain, though.  "Digital rights is the elephant in the
room of freeing the long tail."  Clearing copyright on old material
is a profoundly wedged process at present, with no solution in sight.
Will Hearst fretted that we may be becoming an "opinionocracy,"
swayed by TV bloviators and online bloggers, losing the grounding of
objective reporting.  Anderson observed that maybe the two-party
system is a pre-long-tail scarcity effect that suppresses the
diversity we're now embracing.  Much of how we run our culture has
yet to catch up with the long tail."
(Stewart Brand)


=More Information=

The Long Tail, http://www.thelongtail.com/

The Long Now, http://www.longnow.org

More Seminars and webcasts at http://www.longnow.org/projects/seminars/


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Business]]