
Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3Z2cXK5mhc


=Description=

"The "[[Common Welfare Economy]]" comprises the basic elements of an alternative economic framework. It employs three approaches:

1. Market values and social values should no longer oppose each other. The same values that contribute to fulfilling interpersonal relationships should be awarded in the economy.

2. Conformity with the constitution. The economy should function in accordance with the values and objectives established by the constitutions of western democracies, which is currently not the case.

3. Economic success should no longer be measured with monetary indicators (financial profit, GDP), but by what is really important, i.e. utility values (basic needs, quality of life, communal values)
Market values and social values should no longer oppose each other."

=Characteristics=


"The first draft of this model, including the Common Welfare Balance Sheet, was developed between 2009 and 2010 by a dozen entrepreneurs from Austria. 


'''Practical Implementation'''

In the fiscal year 2011, 60 companies in three countries created the Common Welfare Balance Sheet. They were supported and advised by Common Welfare Consultants; auditors reviewed the Common Welfare Balance Sheet. Towards the end of 2011, the number of pioneers has risen to 150; over 500 companies from 13 countries support the overall process of the Common Welfare Economy.


'''Overall Process'''

Increasingly, different working parties are forming around the model and the pioneer companies. Editors, scientists, speakers, ambassadors, ... numerous people offer their skills and knowledge in order to contribute to the joint development of the Common Welfare Economy.


'''Energy Fields and Communities'''

In eight countries: Austria, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Spain, Argentina and Honduras -- Energy Fields (regional support groups) have emerged. They surround supporting companies and communicate the idea in their local area. There have been the first requests by communities to become a Common Welfare Community.


'''Open Process'''

The model of the Common Welfare Economy is based on two core elements: the Common Welfare Balance Sheet and the 20 Cornerstones. By constantly integrating feedback, we have continually readjusted the model and will do so in the years to come. At the end of this process, economic conventions need to take place, first on a communal level, then on a nationwide level. By popular vote, parts of the model shall be anchored in the constitution."


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]