
URL = http://www.thechristianleft.org/

=Description=

[[The Christian Left]] is a social movement away from the colonial, consumer, conversion model propagated by apostate members of the First Century Church since Christ's First Advent. Modern educated believers generally do not subscribe to the tactics and strategies of the past that used religious fear, coercion and dogma to dominate the cultures of the Mediterranean Region, Europe and subsequently the whole planet. The effects of the falling away from Jesus' teachings misled and subverted whole communities as was even predicted by the original Apostles. To this day, large sections of societies are persistently attempting to push a convoluted Gospel into the forefront of thinking about 'religion' that is completely irrelevant to [[What Jesus Actually Taught]]. The "battle lines" in "spiritual warfare" outlined in the [[wikipedia:New Testament|New Testament]] are simply between the Apostles and the Apostasy (Christ and Antichrist).


=Discussion=

== Relativity and Religion ==
Answering for our misdeeds inexorably connects actions to consequences for both believers and unbelievers. The whole concept of "judgement" is as universal as it is controversial. Jesus and the Apostles warned of "judging others" by ''any'' standards that one does not apply to one's own life. The Golden Rule in it's simplicity makes that statement as logical as it is universal. Ascribing "blame" for the world's evils has become an International Pastime for atheists and theists alike. The variations in logic along 'religious lines' are so myriad that the unity among atheistic circles is putting mainstream Christianity to shame. Christ's prayer in John 17 for [[unity]] among his believers seems to have found an answer more among the atheistic than the theistic circles of civic and academic thought. The world over, we are experiencing the effects of partial understandings of all classes of the Religions of the World: Baha'i, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Jainism, Judaism, Shinto, Sikhism, Taoism, and Zoroastrianism. [[The Christian Left]] acknowledges the others and is working on clarifying the distinctions between doctrine, tradition and dogma. We understand that Faith of ''any'' kind is virtual in nature and '''warfare''' in the material, physical sense is a [[logical absurdity]] whether one believes in God or not.  

== The Same Game of Blame and Shame ==
<small>game code under construction</small>
 
== External links ==
[[The Christian Left]] - [http://www.thechristianleft.org/ main site]
*[https://www.facebook.com/TheChristianLeft?pnref=story The Christian Left - Facebook]
*...expanding...


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]