
'''* Article: Prevalence of Prejudice-Denoting Words in News Media Discourse: A Chronological Analysis. By David Rozado, Musa Al-Gharbi, Jamin Halberstadt. July 2021. [https://doi.org/10.1177/08944393211031452]'''

URL = https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/08944393211031452?journalCode=ssce

=Abstract=

"This work analyzes the prevalence of words denoting prejudice in 27 million news and opinion articles written between 1970 and 2019 and published in 47 of the most popular news media outlets in the United States. Our results show that the frequency of words that denote specific prejudice types related to ethnicity, gender, sexual, and religious orientation has markedly increased within the 2010–2019 decade across most news media outlets. This phenomenon starts prior to, but appears to accelerate after, 2015. The frequency of prejudice-denoting words in news articles is not synchronous across all outlets, with the yearly prevalence of such words in some influential news media outlets being predictive of those words’ usage frequency in other outlets the following year. Increasing prevalence of prejudice-denoting words in news media discourse is often substantially correlated with U.S. public opinion survey data on growing perceptions of minorities’ mistreatment. Granger tests suggest that the prevalence of prejudice-denoting terms in news outlets might be predictive of shifts in public perceptions of prejudice severity in society for some, but not all, types of prejudice."

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Statistics]]
[[Category:Media]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Articles]]