
The Conversation podcast via 

The Conversation podcast via https://soundcloud.com/theconversation-1/the-conversation-35-chuck


=Description=

"Chuck Collins directs the Institute of Policy Studies Program on Inequality and the Common Good. He has also co-founder of United for a Fair Economy and Wealth for the Common Good, a network of wealthy individuals who embrace fair taxation to support the broader good. He is also the author of 99 to 1: How Wealth Inequality is Wrecking the World and What We Can Do About It and has joined Bill Gates, Sr. to co-author Wealth and Our Commonwealth: Why America Should Tax Accumulated Fortunes. I learned about Chuck through David Korten, only to realize that I already had Resilience Circles—another project Chuck is affiliated with—on my list of potential episode themes.

At this point you have probably guessed that Chuck and I spent a lot of time talking about wealth and class, but it’s hard to cover those issues without digging into assumptions about human nature. Are we individualistic and selfish? Social and communal? All of the above? Chuck gives us a glimpse into how he pitches economic equality to the 1%, a pitch that involves the importance of the social and ecological commons while recognizing the importance of individual determination. Education makes an appearance and Chuck stresses that, in addition to the social/civic education Lawrence Torcello discussed, we need to remember that we are embedded in an ecological system. Resilience Circles make a brief appearance and new economies come up towards the end of the conversation."
(http://www.findtheconversation.com/episode-35-chuck-collins/)

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]