
* Report. Open Design. Creative Industries Styria. CIS 04, 


=Description=

Gerin Trautenberger:

'With regard to its content this publication can be divided
into two separate fundamental strands. On the
one hand it presents examples, applications, tools and
models and, on the other, it introduces theoretical approaches
and information on open design. The new design
of the CIS.doc publication also aims at fulfilling the
requirements of additional presentation formats such as
iPad and Internet. Beside a theoretical part this reader
also provides an overview of the present debate on the
subject of open design. In addition to this it also contains
a practical part, a cross-section of all current trends and
projects using the open design method in their day-today
work.

Moreover, our open design publication consists of four
thematic blocks. The first block of articles (Manovich,
Faßler, Walter, Russegger, Benkler) aims at ex-plaining
altered processes with regard to authorship and the
paradigm shifts related to this. Collaboration on the
Internet requires new skills from all participants and
entails clear consequences with respect to authorship,
rights of use and sharing of works. Open source software
and Creative Commons are attempts to simplify
communication among creative people and to respond
to present-day requirements by means of technological
and socio-cultural changes. These multifaceted aspects
are examined in the second block of articles. The contributions
written by Medosch, Troxler, Trautenberger,
Fluid Forms, Beckedahl/Götzke describe ideas and the
use of open design at work as well as the newly cre-ated
aesthetical forms of expression for designers. Open design
and open source are not only tools and methods but
have brought forth a clear and recognizable aesthetics,
which is expressed by one‘s choice of the tools and materials.

Last but not least, we could win over Cory Doctorow
to allow us to publish his essay “Love the Machine,
Hate the Factory” in German language.

The third block, with contributions by Frauenfelder,
Kadushin, White Elephant and presentations of wienett,
garmz (fashion), crowdsourcing as a business model, Ponoko
and Bre Pettis from Makerbot, and Evan’s graphic
work, deals with projects and the tools and methods
employed in open design, and introduces select Good
Practice examples. These examples illustrate the bandwidth
of the topic with contributions ranging from concrete
application examples to business cases and discussions
of various other aspects of open design. The fourth
Part shows two examples where open design is used by
designers. The Hackchair by Ronen Kadushin and the
Balloon-lamp by White-Elephant are published under
creative commence license (cc-by-sa) and can be used
free by everyone.

This publication is meant to be the description of and
a starting point for a new development which is still in
its infancy today. The examples, theories and projects
described herein still have to be negotiated and do not
claim to be exhaustive or finalized. For these reasons we
placed a great deal of value on inclusiveness when we selected
authors, examples and projects and thus avoided
exclusion."

=Excerpts=

==[[What is Open Design]]?==

Armin Medosch:

"This term has no fixed meaning yet.

Open design is a concept, a proposal.
On the analogy of open source software
this could mean: Give us insight
into building plans and construction
principles so that a new collaborative
design culture can emerge.

Moreover, open source also means removing
the barrier between consumers
and producers. What motivates
open source programmers is the fact
that they use the jointly created programs
themselves too. Thus the product
“software” turns into a process
shared by many – the programmers but
also the testers, the authors of bug reports
and manuals, in short, the entire
lively community. In line with this
open design might mean to free oneself
from the notion of the product as an
already finalized thing and to see design
as an open-ended process. Already
and 1968, such basic approaches to a
new design culture were developed at
the Ulm School of Design. Initially,
the Ulm School adhered to the Bauhaus
principle of the “Gute Form” (i.e.
good form or good design), which expresses
an object’s function. Yet from
1957 a new team under the direction
of Tomás Maldonado from Argentina
pursued a more modern and more radical
program. As Maldonado’s colleague
Gui Bonsiepe analyzed in a book
which was published a few years ago,
artistic creativity was not supposed
to simply accept the existing world of
products uncritically but to keep an
eye on the bigger picture. What was
called for was “social imagination”. Industrially
produced objects are a product
of social relationships and create
themselves social relationships again.

Instead of modifying the outward appearance
of a given product design can
contain a social outline. Defined like
this, open design questions the context
a product is embedded in. Which raw
materials are required? Which working
procedures with which machines,
which hierarchies and chains of command?
How are the people involved in
the process? And how do we eventually
get rid of the produced things without
any negative environmental impact? Of
course, it would mean to overtax them
to make the designers alone responsible
for all these considerations. Maldonado
and Bonsiepe saw them as team
workers who moderate the processes.

Their dictum was not to put up with
what was given but to “create unrest”.
In this sense open design is a commitment
to change the world. Back then
the Ulm School of Design failed due to
the narrow-mindedness of the funding
authorities. Today both the technological
and the social framework are much
more favorable for the
realization of
such a program."

See also: [thenextlayer.org/blog/2]


=More Information=

Book: [[Open Design Now]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Articles]]