
=Discussion=

BY CLAUDIA CHWALISZ:

"While the Parisian Citizens’ Assembly stands out for the extent of its competencies, it is not the only example of citizen representation and deliberation being institutionalized. In my recent OECD policy paper, I have outlined eight models of institutionalization, with examples spanning the globe and levels of government, from Bogotá to Toronto, Oregon to Brussels, Vorarlberg to New South Wales, Victoria, and more. Reflections in more places are taking place.

Paris was inspired by the world’s first permanent Citizens’ Council in Ostbelgien, Belgium’s German-speaking community. This region of some 80,000 inhabitants has become an international inspiration for democratic innovation. Its parliament was the first to pass a decree in 2019 embedding a permanent body of citizen representation with agenda-setting power to initiate one-off citizens’ juries to work alongside the elected parliament. So far they have addressed improving the working conditions of health care workers (a topic that was chosen pre-COVID), inclusive education and creating sustainable and affordable housing for all.

Beyond the approach of combining a permanent citizens’ assembly with one-off citizens’ juries, like in Paris and Ostbelgien, institutionalization has taken many forms. For example, in Brussels, Belgium, the regional Parliaments have connected representative citizen deliberation to parliamentary committees in the form of mixed deliberative committees, where parliamentarians and citizens work directly together to address an issue across party lines. These committees are comprised of 15 members of the corresponding thematic permanent committee and 45 Brussels residents chosen by civic lottery. Thus far, they have addressed the issues of rolling out 5G, homelessness, citizen participation in times of crisis and protecting biodiversity in the city. The New South Wales Parliament in Australia is considering similar proposals."

(https://www.noemamag.com/a-movement-thats-quietly-reshaping-democracy-for-the-better/?)

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Belgium]]