=Introduction=
==== [http://thecitizensmedia.com The Citizens Media® (CM)] is a Global Investment Co-operative connecting and supporting people and communities in the design and distribution of tools that increase their livelihoods. ====

As [https://thecitizensmedia.com/invest/start members], how it invests and evolves is up to you. '''Together we can change the world!'''

'''Videos:''' 
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivFzA_DZyNg Introduction] 
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ypyYWr-E5c Extended]

''
'''Note:''' CM adheres to the [[Why_We_Need_a_New_Kind_of_Open_Cooperativism_for_the_P2P_Age|practices]] managed and maintained through it's partner organization, '''The P2P Foundation'''.''

== '''Why We Began''' ==
==== We're living in a world where working together is hard to do. ====

Why is this? Our [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/blog/kiss-ii-the-humane-economy?id=2477 economy] depends on systems where the more you have the easier it is to get ahead, which makes reducing the wealth-gap impossible to do. As a result 8 out of every 10 of us live on less than $5,000 a year; 2.7 billion on less and $2 a day, which is more than the world's population just 60 years ago.

The good news is these systems haven't been in place all that long, and since they began, a whole host of alternatives have stepped up. What's more, most of today’s economy came about by designing solutions for the wealthiest 10% of us, leaving the rest of us underserved. This is a huge opportunity.

What can we do? What if we use this market to replace old ways of doing business with new ways of working that mean the more we come together, the more we can do, be and create?

'''Video:''' [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFFUVGpwxdE Why We Began]

<h2>
	<strong>How It Works</strong></h2>
CM invites people throughout the world to invest in [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/question/whats-a-sustainable-solution?id=99 sustainable solutions] that us the means to increase our own livelihoods. Minimum contribution $10.
<p>
	<strong>Our method incorporates:</strong></p>
<ol>
	<li>
		<strong>Communication</strong><br />
		To serve the underserved, we need to connect. Yet only one in three are online, and the platforms we use vary throughout the world. Then there’s language, resource and literacy skills. It's time to bridge the gap.</li>
	<li>
		<strong>Collaborative Investments</strong><br />
		By making investments a co-operative effort, united interest in businesses we support will increase discussion on issues that relate to their success. We’ll make progress because co-operation and competition work hand in hand.</li>
	<li>
		<strong>Local Engagement</strong><br />
		Most world aid goes to large scale solutions that fail to address the people so don't work. If we are to reduce the wealth gap, we need to invest in sustainable solutions that give people the tools they need to help themselves.</li>
	<li>
		<strong>Mobile Exchange</strong><br />
		Only half the world's adults have a bank account, and their control on the marketplace means we need the ability to transact without.</li>
</ol>
<p>
	<strong>All profits made go to those who invest.</strong></p>

==== [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/building-solutions?id=1170 Learn More] ====




[http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/reasons-to-invest?id=1163 Reasons To Invest]

'''The Coop:''' [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/cm-business?id=1074 Governance + Operations]

[http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/the-platform?id=1119 About The Platform]

[http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/video-tutorials?id=1121 Platform Tutorials]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]