
'''* Report: Cities Building Community Wealth. By [[Marjorie Kelly]] and Sarah McKinley. Democracy Collaborative, November 2015.'''

URL = http://democracycollaborative.org/cities [http://democracycollaborative.org/sites/clone.community-wealth.org/files/downloads/CitiesBuildingCommunityWealth-Web.pdf pdf]


=Description=

"In cities across the nation, a few enjoy rising affluence while many struggle to get by. This situation is created in part by the practices of traditional economic development. Current trends threaten to worsen, unless we can answer the design challenge before us. Can we create an economic system—beginning at the local level—that builds the wealth and prosperity of everyone?

The cities profiled in this new Democracy Collaborative report show the way forward. Economic development professionals and mayors are working in partnership with foundations, anchor institutions, unions, community organizations, progressive business networks, workers, and community residents. What’s emerging is a systems approach to creating an inclusive, sustainable economy where all can thrive. The work is place-based, fed by the power of anchor institutions, and built on locally rooted and broadly held ownership. It’s about building community wealth."
(http://democracycollaborative.org/cities)

=More Information=

* Executive Summary: http://democracycollaborative.org/content/cities-building-community-wealth-executive-summary

* Building the Inclusive City, Marjorie Kelly [http://democracycollaborative.org/cities]

* More Cities Get Serious About Community Wealth-Building, Anne Field [http://democracycollaborative.org/content/more-cities-get-serious-about-community-wealth-building]

* 7 Paths to Development That Bring Neighborhoods Wealth, Not Gentrification. Marjorie Kelly and Sarah McKinley. [http://democracycollaborative.org/cities]



[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Policy]]