
'''* Report: Vesnic-Alujevic, L., Stoermer, E., Rudkin, J., Scapolo, F., Kimbell, L. The Future of Government 2030+: A Citizen-Centric Perspective on New Government Models. EUR 29664 EN. Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2019.''' 

URL = http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC115008/futurgov_web_lq_v2.pdf

=Description=

"The Future of Government 2030+: A Citizen Centric Perspective on New Government Models project brings citizens to the centre of the scene. The objective of this project is to explore the emerging societal challenges, analyse trends in a rapidly changing digital world and launch an EU-wide debate on the possible
future government models. To address this, citizen engagement, foresight and design are combined, with recent literature from the field of digital politics and media as a framework. The main research question of
the project is: How will citizens, together with other actors, shape governments, policies and democracy in
2030 and beyond? Throughout the highly participatory process, more than 150 citizens, together with CSO, think tank, business and public sector representatives, as well as 100 design students participated in the
creation of future scenarios and concepts. Four scenarios have been created using the 20 stories emerged from citizen workshops. They served as an inspiration for design students to develop 40 FuturGov concepts.

Through the FuturGov Engagement Game, the project’s ambition is to trigger and launch a debate with citizens, businesses, civil society organizations, policy-makers and civil servants in Europe."

=Contents=

The report presents 4 scenarios:

"Four scenarios have been created: DIY
Democracy (characterised by decentralisation
of power and self-organized communities),
Private Algocracy (giant digital companies
hold the power over citizens and governments),
Super Collaborative Government (with
high collaboration and co-creation between
citizens, governments and other stakeholders)
and Over Regulatocracy (characterised by
over-protection by the government through
the creation of too many regulations with the
help of technology). These scenarios, along
with the design concepts of new interactions
with government produced by design students,
are used as tools for reflection, to explore
new possibilities and challenge preconceived
ideas about government today. This allows us
to assess the redistribution of power relations between societal actors and political
institutions."


FOUR SCENARIOS OF THE FUTURE OF GOVERNMENT 31

#Scenario 1: DIY Democracy 32
#Scenario 2: Private Algocracy 38
#Scenario 3: Super Collaborative Government 44
#Scenario 4: Over-Regulatocracy 50
 

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Futures]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]