

=Description=

Practitioners’ Lab chaired by Ana Méndez de Andés: Becoming-common. City administrations as practitioners of the commons in Europe

This is more or less the same group of people that we brought together for ‘Innovative Citymakers meeting’ during ECF’s 2017 Idea Camp in Madrid past March: http://www.culturalfoundation.eu/idea-camp-2017/
 
This Practitioners Lab presents different practices developed by local governments in the production and management of public resources that are understood as commons. By looking at projects that incorporate the active involvement of the city inhabitants in the definition and management of public resources such as cultural spaces, city budgeting or administrative structures, we would like to start a deliberation about the role the public administrations as pro-active practitioners of the commons. We aim, at the same time, to illustrate how this becoming-common of the public requires a paradigm shift and the incorporation of a new set of social and administrative practices.

Our Practitioner's Lab has been scheduled for Friday July 14, 14:00-15:30, Academiegebouw, Belle van Zuylenzaal (ground floor) [Session 13-N]


=Participants=

Chair

• Ana Méndez de Andés (architect and urban planner, M129/Ahora Madrid, Spain) Ahora Madrid is a municipalist citizen-led platform inspired by the 15M and formed in 2014
to run in the 2015 local elections.


Contributions by

• Fabio Pascapé (director of the Servizio Patrimonio artistico e beni culturali, Naples City Council, Italy).
The city of Naples has recognized the commons as legal concept in its Charter and, more practically, in the designation of seven spaces in the city as urban commons.
• Giuseppe Micciarelli (PhD in Public Law, Department of political, social and communication sciences, University of Salerno, Italy)
• Claudia Delso Carreira (A Coruña city councillor for Participation and Democratic Innovation, Spain).
A Coruña is a city in the Northwest coast of Spain, currently governed by the municipalist platform Marea Atlántica.
• Alejandra Barciero (expert in participation Medialab-Prado, Madrid, Spain). Medialab-Prado is a citizen laboratory of production, research, and broadcasting of cultural
projects that explores the forms of experimentation and collaborative learning that have emerged from digital networks, part of Madrid City Council.
• Victor Lutenco (Chisinau city councilor; member Institute for European Policies and Reforms (IPRE), Moldova).
The IPRE is an independent, non-partizan, and non-profit think-tank that aims to promote participatory democracy, strengthening the role of citizens in decision-making processes.
• Nicola Mullenger (programme officer) and Olga Alexeeva (output coordinator European Cultural Foundation (ECF), Netherlands).
The ECF bridges people and democratic institutions by connecting local cultural changemakers and communities across Europe, striving towards an open, democratic and inclusive Europe in which culture is a valued and key contributor





[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]