

=Discussion=

On the Commons on 'Homegrown Commons' and the example of Homegrown Minneapolis:

"On the Commons co-director
Julie Ristau co-chaired Homegrown
Minneapolis, a local food
program launched by the City
of Minneapolis. In this role, she
partnered with the city to create
authentic partnerships with
citizens and community groups.


This innovative process drew
on a commons framework to
distill the principles often identified
by the community in this
process – equity, collaboration,
relationships with each other and
our food, celebration, cultural
distinctiveness, sufficiency, local,
and empowerment. The commons
framework, along with the
kindred frameworks of resiliency
and permaculture were also used
by Ristau and the Homegrown
Minneapolis Implementation
Task Force to innovate a new vision
and operating guidelines for
the newly created Minneapolis Food Council.

This initiative began by researching
existing Food Policy Councils
across the US. Several reports
have pointed out that Food
Policy Councils can become bureaucratic,
quasi-governmental
entities that can dwindle in
excitement and momentum.
Representative-based membership
can diminish efforts for
cross-collaboration and stewardship
of the whole system.

Meetings often held in downtown
locations during daytime
hours limits participation. An
exclusive focus on policy fails to
engage the hearts and minds of
the community members who
have been growing and creating
local food and local economies.

The Homegrown Minneapolis
Blueprint describes the approach
and thinking involved in
creating the Minneapolis Food
Council as a commons-based
structure. Based on the information
and insights gathered,
the Homegrown Minneapolis
Food Council uses a hybrid
structure: one that is neither
fully owned nor independent of
the city, and one that is neither
held exclusively by nor without
the co-equal investment of the
community. Rather, the hybrid
structure might best be understood
as a footbridge connecting
the city and the community into
their rightful relationship—one
of mutual trust, benefit, and
shared vision."
(http://onthecommons.org/sites/default/files/OTC_Update.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]