
Documentary and UK political project aimed to promote blogging by politicians and civil servants

URL = http://civicsurf.org.uk/what-is-the-civicsurf/


=Description=

"Can you imagine a public meeting taking place without the local councillor attending? It’s happening every day up and down the country online. Public meetings, conversations and information sharing happen 24/7 online and the majority of councillors are not taking part because they don’t appreciate the benefits nor possess the skills to do so.

What is the CivicSurf project?

Councillor on the doorstepThe CivicSurf project aims to inspire and inform civic leaders about the benefits of blogging. '''We’ve filmed 3 Norfolk County Councillors as they’ve learnt the basics of blogging and used their sites to initiate conversations in and around their communities.''' The eight minute film also includes the views from expert bloggers such as Tom Watson MP, Steve Webb MP and Cllr Mary Reid. It will be distributed on DVD to 1,000 public bodies including councils, emergency services and NHS Trusts along with copies of a 32pp booklet that informs readers of the basics of blogging.

The film will be premièred at the May evoice conference being organised in Norwich by Tim Anderson and we are then taking it on the road around the country. All public bodies will be invited to host an event but we are looking for 10 regional events where a prominent local blogger will be invited to host a question and answer session."
(http://civicsurf.org.uk/what-is-the-civicsurf/)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]