

=Typology of [[Crowdsourcing]]=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: [http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf]


"In literature two basic approaches to classify crowdsourcing can be identified: 

1) based on the type of task that is crowdsourced. A representative classification in
this context is the classification provided by Howe (2008), and 

2) based on the initiator of crowdsourcing. A representative classification according to this
criterion is given by (Gassmann et. al. 2009). Both classifications are summarized
below."


==Classification based on task==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The classification of Howe will be taken as starting point to relate also
classification of other authors. By applying the criteria, type of task outsourced to
the crowd, Howe (2008) classifies crowdsourcing in three main categories:

===[[Crowdsourcing Idea Game]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· The first category is '''the idea game''' which is essentially just a massive call
for ideas. 

Example: A broadly published example of an idea market is the IBM Jam
(for a detailed description see (Bjelland & Wood 2008). In 2006 IBM
initiated a global idea jam related to the question how to best use and
efficiently commercialize existing technological developments in the
company. The global ‘Innovation Jam’ took place in two three-day phases
in 2006. It involved 150,000 IBM employees, family members, business
partners, clients (from 67 companies) and university researchers.
Participants from 104 countries jammed and conversations continued 24
hours a day. In its press releases IBM described the Innovation Jam as “the
largest online brainstorming session ever”. The discussion and sourcing for
ideas was pre-structured in six major categories of emerging technologies
and each of the categories comprised several subtopics. The task of the
crowd was to brainstorm about potential new ways how technology
developed at IBM might be applied by IBM to enhance existing or develop
new products. More than 46,000 ideas were posted. Phase Two of the
Innovation Jam was devoted to ‘refining’ ideas from the first phase. The
Innovation Jam uncovered and mobilized support for substantial new
ways of using IBM technology.

This kind of crowdsourcing is considered as ‘[[Selective Crowdsourcing]]’ by
(Schenk & Guittard 2011). The company initiating the process of
crowdsourcing has to choose one solution from all solutions provided by
the crowd. Selective crowdsourcing in general implies a winner takes it all
mechanism where only the creator of the winning solution is rewarded."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


===[[Crowdsourced Problem Solving]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· "The second form is the problem solving or [[Crowd Casting Network]] in which
someone with the problem broadcasts it to a large undefined network of
potential solvers. 

For example, the shoe company ‘Fluevog’ is
crowdsourcing designs for new shoes. 

Another example is the online
platform InnoCentive on which companies can source for solutions for
scientific problems. 

These two crowdsourcing examples are also [[Selective Crowdsourcing]]. However, according to (Schenk & Guittard 2011), this type
of crowdsourcing can also be ‘integrative’ or consolidating crowdsourcing.

The goal of [[Integrative Crowdsourcing]] is to create a complete solution by
integrating complementary contributions from the crowd. An important
aspect of integrative crowdsourcing is the definition of clear interfaces
among single complementary contributions."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)

===[[Prediction Markets]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· "The third category is the prediction market or information market in which
investors from the crowd buy and sell futures related to some expected
outcome such as the presidential election or the Oscar for the best picture
(Howe, 2006). The prediction market is applied for questions related to
assessment of future scenarios (for an extensive literature review on
prediction markets see also Tziralis and Tatsiopoulos, 2007). 

One example
of a prediction market is the Hollywood Stock Exchange (HSX). HSX is an
online simulation, where registered users can trade in movie stocks.
“Participants start with a total of 2 million so-called Hollywood dollars, and can
manage their portfolio by strategically buying and selling stocks” (Elberse &
Jehoshua Eliashberg 2003). HSX participants trade in movie stocks based
on their information about the star power, trailers or other advertising
products (e.g. press releases) in the prerelease period. Single movie stocks
and ranking lists of price changes on the HSX are an explicit aggregation of
the opinions of the involved HSX participants and opinion leaders. The
HSX ranking lists are an important predictor of the first weekend and
overall box-office sales of a movie."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


==Crowdsourcing typology by initiator==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

The second representative classification of crowdsourcing approaches is provided
by (Gassmann et. al. 2010) and is based on potential initiators as classification
criteria of the crowdsourcing activities. According to these criteria, the authors
identify five different crowdsourcing approaches:

===1. Crowdsourcing initiated and supported by intermediary platforms.===

(Gassmann et. al. 2010) further divide this category of crowdsourcing in the
following subcategories: intermediary platforms for research and
development, for marketing and design, for freelancers and for idea-generation.


===2. User initiated crowdsourcing===

which is further subdivided in user websites
and open source software communities.


===3. Company initiated platforms===

which are platforms that are created and
maintained by companies. Such platforms are typically integrated within
the companies’ online activities. They are further divided in the following
subcategories: product ideas and problem solutions as well as branding
and design.


===4. Idea market places===

An example for this type of crowdsourcing is the
company Spreadshirt which allows users to design their own spreadshirt
designs and produces only those spreadshirts that are mostly liked by the
participating customers. Other such similar examples are Threadless or
CafePress.


===5. Public crowdsourcing initiatives===

that means initiatives that are similar to the
previously mentioned ones but which are initiated by public authorities.
One example mentioned by the authors (Gassmann et. al. 2010) is the ideageneration
campaign, which was initiated by the Irish government in order
to collect ideas from the population regarding the question how to achieve
higher economic growth."


[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Business Models]]
[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]