[http://www.clear-village.org  Homepage]

===='''CLEAR Village is a collaborative design initiative working to''':====

+ Bring together leading figures from a variety of disciplines to co-draft an adaptive masterplan strategy for sustainable villages. <br>
+ Find a host community to implement a masterplan and build a vibrant place beneficial to the local economy and region.<br>
+ Analyse, gather and share further knowledge to be a catalyst for other neighbourhoods to emerge.<br>


===='''Point of Departure'''====

+ The vast majority of sustainable villages and neighbourhoods today tend to be isolated or personality-driven and hardly define a vision that the greater number will embrace.<br>
+ Few of the ambitious real estate projects that have tried to solve the equation of intensive urbanisation and environmental concern have been community-centred.<br>
+ '''Most often, the notion of proper scale for holistic and systemic solution development has not been the starting point'''.<br>
+ '''Rural, peri-urban and other economically marginalised areas struggle to find their path into the twenty-first century'''.<br>
+ '''Retrofitting of existing locations with partial new builds is repeatedly overlooked;'''<br>
+ '''Collaborative tools and information technology for complex planning are underutilised'''.<br>

CLEAR Village wants to fill some of these gaps and take a fresh look at a possible urban renaissance.

===='''Why a village?'''====

The CLEAR Village Foundation believes that the village scale is optimal for tackling issues of sustainability systemically, developing innovation clusters to achieve lasting solutions faster. The village would be a tangible environment in which to experience the future of living, a community of sustainable wealth created through open collaboration, collective intelligence and inspired design.

===='''Goals of the CLEAR Village Foundation'''====

1. Develop and share complete solutions by bringing together leading figures from a variety of disciplines, through a process in a tangible location.<br>
2. Co-design a replicable masterplan strategy with global experts to reboot rural & peri-urban areas.<br>
3. Construct a real-life CLEAR Village, as well as offering new benchmarks and advising communities on how they can achieve best-practice.<br>
4. Combine low-tech romantic ideals with 21st century high-tech solutions and offer alternative paths to non-sensical new builds.<br>
5. Develop an aspirational future for living in the midst of financial and ecological crisis.<br>


===='''Process'''====

The project will be unveiled at the CLEAR Village Launch on Tuesday, 1 September 2009, during the Copenhagen Design Week at DAC,the Danish Architecture Centre.

The CLEAR Village Labs are immersive, collaborative design events and the CLEAR Village Foundation’s first step towards co-creating a groundbreaking sustainable village. A ‘dream team’ of up to 100 professionals from complementary industries will be assembled in a collective intelligence group, working together to produce a replicable blueprint for a village.

Successive CLEAR Village Labs will produce and execute a masterplan to realise the first CLEAR Village. We have planned the Labs to run for five consecutive years, where the work will transform the intangible issues of a village into tangible strategies, moving towards building phase 1 of the village.

The [http://www.clear-village.org/lab|first CLEAR Village Lab] will be held at the Institute for Advanced Architecture of Catalonia in Barcelona on the 5-7 November 2009.

The [http://clearvillage.ning.com | CLEAR Village NING Community] is inviting contributors.

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Villages]]