'''* Book: The Climate of History in a Planetary Age. Dipesh Chakrabarty. University of Chicago Press, 2021'''

URL = https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/C/bo8642262.html


=Description=

From the publisher:

"For the past decade, historian Dipesh Chakrabarty has been one of the most influential scholars addressing the meaning of climate change. Climate change, he argues, upends long-standing ideas of history, modernity, and globalization. The burden of The Climate of History in a Planetary Age is to grapple with what this means and to confront humanities scholars with ideas they have been reluctant to reconsider—from the changed nature of human agency to a new acceptance of universals.

Chakrabarty argues that we must see ourselves from two perspectives at once: the planetary and the global. This distinction is central to Chakrabarty’s work—the globe is a human-centric construction, while a planetary perspective intentionally decenters the human. Featuring wide-ranging excursions into historical and philosophical literatures, The Climate of History in a Planetary Age boldly considers how to frame the human condition in troubled times. As we open ourselves to the implications of the Anthropocene, few writers are as likely as Chakrabarty to shape our understanding of the best way forward."

(https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/C/bo8642262.html)


[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Books]]