
=Discussion=

==The 2015 Strategy Discussion for Paris2015: the dual strategy of Alternatiba and Blockadia==

Maxime Combes, Attac France:

"The  evaluation  carried  out  by  the  Climate  Justice Action  and  Climate  Justice  Now!  already identified  that  the  construction  of  a  global  climate justice movement should not depend on the agenda of the global summits: after the success of the non-violent civil disobedience action Reclaim Power on 16th  December  2009,  there  was  commitment  to decentralise  and  disseminate  the  organisation  of peoples’  assemblies  at  local  and  regional  levels.The aim is to fight projects that damage climate and implement direct solutions through translocal forms of  solidarity  -  solidarity  between  struggles  or alternatives that are anchored in local initiatives – as a vector of the construction of a global movement. This is a huge challenge and is ever-present: how can we  relocalise  and  anchor  our  imagination  and mobilisation in the experience and concrete realities,including  of  our  daily  lives,  in  a  perspective  of rediscovering  the  power  of  acting  together?  Th0 power  of  these  acts  will  be  all  the  stronger  and greater if we are able to move beyond the logic of awareness-building  and  citizens’  mobilisations  that are undoubtedly too linked to an heuristic analysis of science  and  expertise;  it’s  not  enough  to  be  aware that  climate  change  exists  to  actually  take  action. Although  the  many  experts’  reports  do  not mechanically  imply  implementing  measures  and policies that rise to the challenge, they have not led to generalised citizens’ mobilisations either. On the contrary, they have probably led to incredulity more than to commitment to act. Two citizens’ dynamics appear to us to contribute to the  process  of  relocalisation  of  struggles  and imagination; they also include the perspective of a global climate justice movement, as they confront the structural  causes  of  global  warming.  The  first  is grounded in the “frontline struggles” that aim to halt the extractive industry from expanding (from shale oil  and  gas  to  new  mining  projects),  and  the construction  of  new  useless  infrastructure  that  is imposed and ill-adapted (airports, motorways, dams,stadia etc). As a result of the powerful mobilisations in North America against building new pipelines for exporting tar sands oil from Alberta in Canada; '''this new dynamic of international mobilisation is called Blockadia'''. '''The flip side of this coin is the dynamic of  innovation,  development,  strengthening  and highlighting  of  concrete  alternative  experiences''',  be they local or regional or global – that all aim to effect deep change in our production models as well as the consumption  patterns  that  have  thus  far  proven unsustainable. By using the name coined in October 2013 in Bayonne (in the French Basque country) byBizi!  And  dozens  of  Basque,  Spanish  and  French organisations  '''we  could,  by  extension  call  the citizens’  movement  that  is  up  and  running Alternatiba'''; it is now taking various forms in the four corners of our planet.

These  two  dynamics  clearly  represent  '''an  eco-territorial change in social struggles, to use the term coined  by  the  Argentinian  sociologist  Maristella Svampa to characterise the rise in struggles in Latin America that combine the language of ecologists and the practice of resistance and alternatives grounded in territories'''. 

Territory is not understood in this sense as  confetti  to  be  saved  from  the  damage  of productivism,  industrialisation  or  neo-liberal globalisation.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  space  for building resistance and alternatives; in other words the  place  for  imagining  and  experimenting  how  toreach  beyond  existing,  unsustainable  economic, financial and technological models. Here there is no space for selfish attitudes like “not in my back yard”. Preservation,  promotion  and  resilience  of  all territories  make  up  the  overall  picture.  To  some extent, the mobilisation against shale gas in France and  many  other  countries  that  are  calling  for “Neither here nor anywhere”, especially when they are  combined  with  the  demands  for  radical  energy transition, are all part and parcel of the same logic."
(https://france.attac.org/IMG/pdf/Towards_Paris2015-climate%20justice.pdf)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Politics]]