
=Description=

'Along with evaluating each country's expected economic impact from climate risks, Swiss Re Institute also ranked each country on its vulnerability to extreme dry and wet weather conditions. In addition, it looked at the country's capacity to cope with the effects of climate change. Put together, these findings generate a ranking of countries' resilience to the impacts of climate change.

The ranking displays a similar view to the GDP impact analysis: Countries most negatively impacted are often the ones with fewest resources to adapt to and mitigate the effects of rising global temperatures. The most vulnerable countries in this context are Malaysia, Thailand, India, the Philippines and Indonesia. Advanced economies in the northern hemisphere are the least vulnerable, including the US, Canada, Switzerland and Germany.'

(https://www.xprimm.com/Major-economies-could-lose-roughly-10-of-GDP-in-30-years-reveals-Swiss-Re-Institute-s-stress-test-analysis-articol-117,8-17164.htm)


=Discussion=

"Swiss Re Institute has issued the Climate Economics Index a stress-tests analysis on how climate risks will impact 48 countries representing 90% of the world economy and ranks their overall climate resilience. It shows all countries will be affected, but some are more vulnerable than others.


Expected global GDP impact by 2050 under different scenarios compared to a world without climate change:

-18% if no mitigating actions are taken (3.2 degrees C increase);
-14% if some mitigating actions are taken (2.6 degrees C increase);
-11% if further mitigating actions are taken (2 degrees C increase);
-4% if Paris Agreement targets are met (below 2 degrees C increase)


* Economies in Asia would be hardest hit, with China at risk of losing nearly 24% of its GDP in a severe scenario, while the world's biggest economy, the US, stands to lose close to 10%, and Europe almost 11%

Climate change poses the biggest long-term threat to the global economy. If no mitigating action is taken, global temperatures could rise by more than 3 degrees C and the world economy could shrink by 18% in the next 30 years. But the impact can be lessened if decisive action is taken to meet the targets set in the Paris Agreement, Swiss Re Institute's new Climate Economics Index shows. This will require more than what is pledged today; public and private sectors will play a crucial role in accelerating the transition to net zero.

Swiss Re Institute has conducted a stress test to examine how 48 economies would be impacted by the ongoing effects of climate change under four different temperature increase scenarios. As global warming makes the impact of weather-related natural disasters more severe, it can lead to substantial income and productivity losses over time. For example, rising sea levels result in loss of land that could have otherwise been used productively and heat stress can lead to crop failures. Emerging economies in equatorial regions would be most affected by rising temperatures."

(https://www.xprimm.com/Major-economies-could-lose-roughly-10-of-GDP-in-30-years-reveals-Swiss-Re-Institute-s-stress-test-analysis-articol-117,8-17164.htm)

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Statistics]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]