
=Description=

* Randers, J & Gilding, P (2010). The one degree war plan. Journal of Global
Responsibility, Vol. 1 No. 1 pp 170.
https://paulgilding.files.wordpress.com/2015/01/one-degree-warplan-emerald-version.pdf

* Silk, E (2016) The Climate Mobilization Victory Plan. Published by The Climate
Mobilization August 2016, revised March 2019.
https://www.theclimatemobilization.org/victory-plan

* Roberts, D (2018). What genuine, no bullshit ambition on climate change would look like
– how to hit the most stringent targets, with no loopholes. Published by www.vox.com.
Updated Oct 8 2018.
https://www.vox.com/energy-andenvironment/2018/5/7/17306008/climate-change-global-war
mingscenarios-ambition

* Jacobson, M.Z. & Delucchi, M.A. (2009). A path to sustainable energy by 2030. Scientific American Magazine. Nov, pp. 39, 42-43.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-path-to-sustainableenergy-by-2030/

* IRENA (2018). Global Energy Transformation: A roadmap to 2050. International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. www.irena.org/publications.

* Hawken, P (2017). Drawdown: The most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse
global warming. www.drawdown.org, Summary of solutions by overall rank.
https://www.drawdown.org/solutionssummary-by-rank

* Ecofys/Navigant (2018). Energy transition within 1.5°C – A disruptive approach to 100%
decarbonisation of the global energy system by 2050. White Paper.
https://www.navigant.com/-/media/www/site/downloads/energy/2018/navigant2018energytran
sitionwithin15c.pdf

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Policy]]