'''Report: Cottam, H., Leadbeater, C., 2004a.  Health. Co-creating Services. Design Council – RED unit, London, UK. ''' 

URL = http://www.hilarycottam.com/html/RED_Paper 01 Health_Co-creating_services.pdf

Also available via http://www.designcouncil.info/mt/RED/health/

=Descrition=

"Open Health shifts the focus from delivering treatment to engaging people in their own healthcare, supporting self-management and enabling healthy lifestyles. This means that the biggest untapped resource in the NHS is people themselves: how can we harness the power and expertise of patients and their families to co-create better health outcomes? 

Systems like ebay, wikipedia, the Grameen Bank and youtube rely on ordinary people generating the content themselves. Their participation shapes the nature of the service: it is co-created. We set out to see whether we could apply the principles behind these 'open' systems - distributed tools, collaboration between people and professionals - to healthcare systems in order to engage people in their own healthcare. We call this approach co-creation, and seeds of it can already be seen in the health sector. Read more about communities of co-creation, and how they could create health services that are strengthened by participation rather than burdened by demand, in RED Paper 01 Health: Co-creating services."
(http://www.designcouncil.info/mt/RED/health/)

=More Information=

#The RED [[Open Health]] report

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Health]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]