'''= a publication of LabGov.'''

URL = http://labgov.city/co-city-protocol/the-co-cities-open-book/?

The P2P Foundation, i.e. [[Michel Bauwens]] and Vasilis Niaros, participated in the production of the first report.

== Description ==

Christian Iaione:

"The Co-Cities Open Book is the result of years of research and experimentations on the field to investigate new forms of collaborative city-making that are pushing urban areas towards new frontiers of participatory urban governance, inclusive economic growth and social innovation.

This open book has roots in our conceptualization of the ‘City as a Commons,’ the emerging academic field of urban commons studies, and the work developed in 5 years of remarkable urban experimentations in Italy and around the world. Structured around three main pillars, the Co-Cities open book will first provide scholars, practitioners and policy-makers with an overview of the theory and methodology of the Co-City with the “Co-Cities Protocol”.

The open book also presents the “Co-Cities report”, the results of an extensive research project in which we extracted from, and measured the existence of, Co-City design principles in a database of 400+ case studies in 130+ cities around the world. Ultimately, thanks to the Co-cities report we were able to create the first index able to measure how cities are implementing the right to the city through co-governance. Thus, the Co-Cities index serves as a fundamental tool for the international community in order to measure the implementation of some of the objectives that have been set by the New Urban Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals.

The last section of the book presents an appendix of articles of some of the most important researchers and practitioners studying the urban commons. These essays were conceived and offered as part of “The City as a Commons” conference, the first IASC ([[International Association for the Study of the Commons]]) conference on urban commons, co-chaired by Christian Iaione and Sheila Foster, that took place in Bologna on November 6 and 7, 2015."


== More information ==

* For Part 1, see [[Co-Cities Report on the Urban Commons Transitions]]
* For Part 2, see: [[Building a Co-Cities Index To Measure the Implementation of the EU and UN Urban Agenda]]‎

[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]
[[Category:Urban_Commons]]