
'''= "a free/libre library documenting unusual meeting and gathering formats to inspire the design of more creative meetings".''' [http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/tag/commons/]

URL = http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/

=Examples=

* [[Counter-Mapping Party]]
* [[Edit-A-Thon]]
* [[Hackathon]]
* [[LaboLex]]
* [[Mapping Parties]]
* [[PARK(ing) Day]]
* [[Public Domain Remix]]
* [[Urban Accessibility Mapping Party]]


==[[Neo-Traditional Cooperative Forms]]==

#[[Ayni]]:  a term with a meaning that’s closely related to minga. It describes a system of work and family reciprocity among members. 
#[[Bayanihan]]: a Filipino term taken from the word bayan, referring to a nation, country, town or community. The whole term bayanihan refers to a spirit of communal unity or effort to achieve a particular objective. of the ayllu (a community working on collective land).
#[[Córima]]: The Rarámuri people of Mexico’s Chihuahua mountains use the word “córima” to describe an act of solidarity with someone who’s having trouble.
#[[Gadugi]]:  a term used in the Cherokee language which means “working together” or “cooperative labor” within a community.
#[[Gotong-Royong]]: in parts of Indonesia and Malaysia, Gotong-royong is a cooperation among many people to attain a shared goal with ideas of reciprocity or mutual aid.
#[[Guelaguetza]]:  a cross between a potlatch and a tequio. The term describes “a reciprocal exchange of goods and services”.
#[[Harambee]]: a Kenyan tradition of community self-help events, e.g. playdraising or development activities. Harambee literally means “all pull together” in Swahili.
#[[Imece]]:  a name given for a traditional Turkish village-scale collaboration.
#[[Maloka]]:  (or maloka in Portuguese) is an indigenous communal house found in the indigenous Amazon region of Colombia and Brazil.
#[[Meitheal]]: the Irish word for a work team, gang, or party and denotes the co-operative labour system in Ireland where groups of neighbours help each other in turn with farming work.
#[[Mutirão]]: This is originally a Tupi term used in Brazil to describe collective mobilizations based on non-remunerated mutual help.
#[[Naffīr]]: an Arabic word used in parts of Sudan (including Kordofan, Darfur, parts of the Nuba mountains and Kassala) to describe particular types of communal work undertakings.
#[[Tequio]]: a very popular type of work for collective benefit in the Zapotec culture. Community members contribute materials or labor to carry out construction work for the community.


[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]