
= directory maintained by [[User:Lilian Ricaud|Lilian Ricaud (@lilious)]]

A free/libre library documenting participatory and facilitation methods under a CC-BY-SA licence:

[http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/explore/all-tags/ http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/]

=Directory=

Some sample entries:

* [[Backchannel Feedback]]: A backchannel is a real-time online conversation using networked computers that takes place alongside live spoken remarks.

* [[BookCrossing]] flashmob: The BookCrossing principle is to label the book and drop it in a public space, and go away so the next person just finds a book. The book's travel can be followed via the Bookcrossing.com website that provide label. A bookcrossing flash mob is a large scale gathering of Bookcrossers releasing books simultaneously.  But BookCrossers being booklovers most hang around to see books other people left so it becomes a meeting place. [http://euroradio.fm/en/report/several-dozen-people-take-part-book-crossing-flash-mob-photo-118069]

* BrainHack: "Brainhack is a 3 days event that builds from the concepts of an unconference and hackathon with Participants interested in neuroimaging from any discipline (e.g., mathematics, computer science, engineering, neuroscience, psychology, psychiatry, neurology, medicine, art, etc…).  Each of the next three days begins with an “Ignite Session” in which distinguished neuroscience researchers give 15 minute talks that address wide questions in neuroscience that would benefit from open, interdisciplinary collaborations. The “Ignite Session” is followed by a “hack session” and a dynamic set of talks organized by attendees. During the “hack sessions”, participants are encouraged to work together in small groups on relevant neuroscience projects. The workshop culminate on the last day, when participants have the opportunity to present a brief overview of their project." [http://www.brainhack.org/]

* [[Civic Hacking]] Brigade Meetup: "Civic hacking is the growing phenomenon of citizens contributing technology skills toward tangible benefits in their communities. A Brigade Meetup is a local collaboration that organizes citizens to engage through the development and use of civic technologies." [http://hackforchange.org/page/eventmodels]

* [[Coding Party]]: an event in which computer programmers and others in the field of software development, like graphic designers, interface designers and project managers, collaborate on software projects. Similar to hackathon but lighter and more about making it a fun event. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Installfest ]

=Pattern language=

This is part of a larger effort to document pattern language for group co-creation:

URL = https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AvjAaLhwfefxdF9Ka3hBekl3ajBiU2NFTndtV3hULVE#gid=19

[[Category:Facilitation]]


[[Category:Conferences]]