
'''* Book: Ed. by Vincenzo Mario Bruno Giorgino, Zack Walsh. Co-Designing Economies in Transition: Radical Approaches in Dialogue with Contemplative Social Sciences. Palgrave Macmillan, 2018'''

URL = https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-66592-4

=Description=

'''1.'''

"This transdisciplinary volume puts forward proposals for wiser, socially just and sustainable socio-economic systems in transition. There is growing support for the view that the end of capitalism is around the corner, but on which conceptual and ethical basis can we interpret these times? With investigations into feminist economics, post-growth environmentalism, socio-technical digital design, collaborative and commons economics, the editors create a dialogue between radical knowledge/practices and contemplative social sciences to transgress disciplinary boundaries and implement new visions of reality. This important book challenges our ways of thinking and outlines a pathway for new research."


'''2.'''

"We are entering an era characterized by new social and economic forms beyond our understanding. In this introduction to Co-Designing Economies in Transition, we introduce the transdisciplinary vision intended to understand such changes, and we summarize each of the chapters that help map the Great Transition that is already underway. In particular, we explain why it is important to create dialogue between radical knowledge-practices and contemplative social sciences to meet the great challenges of the twenty-first century. As a new emerging paradigm, contemplative social sciences are based on systematic efforts to integrate the wisdom traditions with the social sciences. They are intended to help us develop a more open-minded approach to understanding social interactions within a participatory, but not pre-classificatory, scheme. As such, we contend that the transdisciplinary vision and methodologies offered by this book suggest avenues for new ways of thinking about and co-designing a socially just and sustainable future."


=Contents=

==Part I: Transdisciplinary Foundations for Contemporary Social and Economic Transformation==

* In Search of a New Compass in the Great Transition: Toward Co-designing the Urban Space We Care About Vincenzo Mario Bruno Giorgino, Pages 15-41
* Navigating the Great Transition Via Post-capitalism and Contemplative Social Sciences
Zack Walsh, Pages 43-61
* Having, Being, and the Commons
Ugo Mattei, Pages 63-71
* '''Par Cum Pari: Notes on the Horizontality of Peer-to-Peer Relationships in the Context of the Verticality of a Hierarchy of Values''' Michel Bauwens, Pages 73-88
* Economics Beyond the Self
Laszlo Zsolnai, Pages 89-97
* The Koan of the Market
Julie A. Nelson, Pages 99-107
* Epistemology of Feminist Economics
Zofia Łapniewska, Pages 109-133
* How to Make What Really Matters Count in Economic Decision-Making: Care, Domestic Violence, Gender-Responsive Budgeting, Macroeconomic Policies and Human Rights/ Margunn Bjørnholt, Pages 135-159
* Contemplative Economy and Contemplative Economics: Definitions, Branches and Methodologies
Xabier Renteria-Uriarte, Pages 161-187

'''Descriptive summary by V.M.B. Giorgino and Z. Walsh:'''

In Part I, we examine the “Transdisciplinary Foundations for Contemporary Social and Economic Transformation.” 

Vincenzo M. B. Giorgino leads off the discussion '''in the first part of Chap. 2 by specifically
addressing the disruptive potential of distributed ledger technologies'''
toward our social and economic relationships. Some of these
technologies’ possible architectures can enhance our lives, while others
may cause many challenges and enact certain prejudices in their support
of collective well-being. Along these lines, the tokenization of nonmaterial
values is the most intriguing area for its unexplored potentialities.

'''In the second part of his chapter''', Giorgino maintains that it is
important to pay attention to the forms of divisive thinking with which
we interpret social relations and orient our social action so as to allow that
kind of urban co-design that favors the joy of living and purposive action.
He concludes, in the third part, by emphasizing the centrality of an enactive
approach.

'''Then in Chap. 3''', Zack Walsh continues the discussion by mapping the
conditions under which a socially just and sustainable global future could
emerge from large-scale structural transformations to contemporary society.

First, he considers how the global political economy is undergoing
world-historical changes, in response to the pressures of mounting
inequality, climate crisis, and the growing illegitimacy of neoliberal capitalism.
Then, he examines how current political, economic, social, and
technological changes could positively and negatively shape the construction
of a new world system beyond capitalism. And, finally, he outlines
possible avenues for exploring these world-historical changes by developing
new fields of inquiry in the emerging transdisciplinary field of contemplative
social sciences.

''After the editor’s introductory chapters, Ugo Mattei and Michel Bauwens propose values frameworks for commons-based economics.'' 

'''In Chap. 4''', Ugo Mattei approaches the positivistic distinction between subjects
and objects as derived from Cartesianism and as historically developed
and currently applied in private law. From early modern times, the
institution of property has been constructed as the relationship between
a free subject and a legal “object.” Progressively abstracting from primitive
relationships of material possession, private law has served as the
main pillar in the foundations of capitalist extraction within current
financial forms. Rethinking property as “being in common,” thus, constitutes
the foundation of building a “generative” legal system.

'''In Chap. 5''', Michel Bauwens offers an ethical evaluation of the emerging
mode of commons-based peer production, and its associated governance
and property regimes, in order to see how it stacks up as an implicit
or explicit expression of a number of ethical values. In particular, he
examines whether the peer to peer logic represents an opportunity for a
more complete realization of the aims of the social doctrine of the
Catholic Church, which shares the vision of the centrality of civil society,
with the market and the state function having a service orientation toward
civil society. He concludes that there is a correspondence between the two
value systems.

'''Chapters 6 and 7 present two different perspectives on Buddhist economics.'''

'''In Chap. 6''', Laszlo Zsolnai argues that wisdom traditions of
humankind require self-transcendence of the person to achieve a
meaningful and ethical life. His chapter uses the example of Buddhism to
show how “going beyond the self” can be realized in economic and social
contexts. It is argued that Buddhist economics represents a strategy which
helps Buddhist and non-Buddhist people alike to reduce the suffering of
human and non-human beings by practicing non-violence, caring, and
generosity.

Whereas Laszlo compares the major tenets of Buddhist and Western
economics as two opposing frameworks, '''Julie Nelson argues in Chap. 7'''
that capitalism has no essential nature and that we should take a more
pragmatic, less ideological approach to economics grounded in our own
experience. Her agnostic view invites us to consider the adage “If you
meet the Buddha kill him.” Nelson challenges the reader to consider the
question “What is a market?” as a koan—an invitation for investigation.
Many advocates for social justice, including many followers of wisdom
traditions, call for an economy that is defined in opposition to what is
assumed to be the essence of our current economic system. Believing that
current economies are based on competition and globalization, for example,
critics claim that the alternative must be defined by cooperation and
local initiatives. But are these beliefs correct? Opening up to a recognition
of the interdependent co-arising of economic relations reveals new
avenues for advocating social justice.

'''Chapters 8 and 9 both give overviews of feminist economics.''' 

Feminist economics broadly refers to the application of a feminist lens to both the
discipline and subject of economics. It is explicitly interdisciplinary and
encompasses debates about the narrow range of mainstream economic
methods and researched areas, including questions on how economics
values the reproductive sector and examinations of economic epistemology
and methodology. 

'''In Chap. 8, Zofia Łapniewska''' provides a brief
overview of how feminist economics critiques established theory, methodology,
and policy approaches and how it aims to produce gender aware
theory, especially in defining economic activity. She argues for a reality
check on how people actually live their lives as relational, vulnerable, and
interdependent beings and emphasizes the urgency of rethinking mainstream
economic approaches.

Then, '''in Chap. 9, Margunn Bjørnholt''' delves deeper into the development
of feminist economics. She offers a reflection on 25 years of feminist
economics providing illustrative examples of how feminist academic critique,
within and outside of academia, in combination with civil engagement,
has evolved, promoting change toward better economics, better
policies, and well-being for all. Mirroring the widening scope over time
of feminist economics, Bjørnholt discusses the following: the exclusion of
care and other life-sustaining, unpaid work from systems of national
accounts and efforts to make them count; efforts to achieve gender justice
through gender responsive budgeting; the effort to bring society’s attention
to the extent of domestic violence and its consequences; and understanding
economics as social provisioning, which considers the
responsibility to care for everything, including human rights and our
shared living space (Earth), when assessing the consequences of macroeconomic
policy.

'''Finally, Xabier Renteria-Uriarte concludes part I by outlining the
foundations of contemplative economics.''' He examines the economy and
economics from the perspective of contemplative knowledge. He argues
that the economy is a manifestation of deep consciousness, and economic
agents choose between alternatives by connecting or disconnecting their
consciousness from it—that is, acting ignorantly as homo economicus,
with more awareness as homo socioeconomicus and eticoeconomicus, or with
full realization as homo deepeconomicus. Contemplation helps agents act
according to wu-wei, karmayogi, and appamada actions, and in “flow” or
“optimal experience”—states which cultivate absorption in tasks and
remove the ego and its related rational cost–benefit analysis. This allows
them to know the economy as it really is: a space of abundance without
the illusion of scarcity, where self-realization, rewarding work, and constructive
human relationships arise, accompanied by simplified consumption,
equitable incomes, and stable prices.



== Part II: Collective Awareness, the Self, and Digital Technologies==

* From Smart Cities to Experimental Cities?
Igor Calzada, Pages 191-217
* FirstLife: From Maps to Social Networks and Back. Alessio Antonini, Guido Boella, Alessia Calafiore, Vincenzo Mario Bruno Giorgino, Pages 219-233
'''* The Organic Internet: Building Communications Networks from the Grassroots
Panayotis Antoniadis Pages 235-272 [https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-66592-4_13.pdf]'''
* Technocratic Automation and Contemplative Overlays in Artificially Intelligent Criminal Sentencing
Philip Butler, Pages 273-296
* One Bright Byte: Dōgen and the Re-embodiment of Digital Technologies
David Casacuberta, Pages 297-315


'''Descriptive summary by V.M.B. Giorgino and Z. Walsh:'''

"In Part II, we examine “Collective Awareness, the Self, and Digital Technologies.” 

The first three chapters focus on how the application of
technology in cities and communities affects social and economic transformation.

'''In Chap. 11, Igor Calzada''' illustrates that the same technical
ovations developed in smart systems can be used to enhance democracy
or technocracy. He examines the ways in which the hegemonic
approach to the “smart city” is evolving into a new intervention category,
called the “experimental city.” While this evolution presents some innovations,
mainly regarding how smart citizens will be increasingly considered
more as decision makers than data providers, likewise, some
underlying issues arise, concerning the hidden side and ethical implications
of the techno-politics of data and the urban commons. These issues
engage with multi-stakeholders, particularly with the specific Penta Helix
framework that brings together private sector, public sector, academia,
civic society, and entrepreneurs. These innovations in urban life and its
governance will inevitably bring us into debate about new potential models
of business and society, concerning, for instance, the particular urban
co-operative scheme employed.

'''Chapter 12''' is coauthored by Alessia Calafiore, Alessio Antonini, Guido
Boella, and Vincenzo M.B. Giorgino. It shows how social network and
Web-sharing sites represent a novel and ever-growing source of information
that usually contains geographical information. They first present
FirstLife, which is a specific social platform that has been recently awarded
a prize from the national-level competition in the “Smart Cities and
Social Communities” context. FirstLife aims to foster co-production (in
the sense articulated by Nobel Prize winner Elinor Ostrom) and Do It
Yourself initiatives, providing a virtual place connected via maps to concrete
reality. Thus, the platform by itself is intended to involve different
actors in developing new services, from institutions to associations, from
citizens to enterprises. In conclusion, the authors propose a set of methodologies
to face such complexity in terms of data management, integration,
and smart functionalities, as well as social innovations that develop
soft skills and life skills in workshops designed to ground smart
Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) on a wiser approach
to human interactions with living beings and things.

Then, '''in Chap. 13, Panayotis Antoniadis''' describes the dual potential
for corporate versus autonomous control in new ICT infrastructure.
Popular Internet platforms that currently mediate our everyday communications
become more and more efficient in managing vast amounts of
information, rendering their users more and more addicted and dependent
on them. Alternative, more organic options like community networks do
exist and they can empower citizens to build their own local networks
from the bottom-up. This chapter explores such technological options
together with the adoption of a healthier Internet diet in the context of a
wider vision of sustainable living in an energy-limited world.

''The final two chapters articulate ethical and philosophical issues in the development of technology and digital devices in a post-human era.'' 

In '''Chap. 14, Philip Butler''' explores potential realities of technocratic automation
at the intersection of criminal sentencing, artificial intelligence,
and race. The chapter begins with a synopsis of the role automation plays
in technocratic electronic governance. It then moves to demonstrate how
the implementation of automation has adversely affected Black communities.
Butler then illustrates how artificial intelligence is currently outpacing
human performance, implying that soon, in the realm of criminal
sentencing, artificially intelligent judges will emerge, outperforming and
eventually replacing human judges. Next, he applies the lens of race to
outline how current concepts of artificial cognitive architectures merely
reiterate oppressive racial biases. The chapter concludes by imagining
how contemplative overlays might be applied to artificial cognitive architectures
to allow for more mindful and just sentencing.

Finally, '''in Chap. 15, David Casacuberta''' discusses the potential outcomes
of designing technologies with respect to the mind–body relation.
He argues that key functions of digital apps are based on the disembodied
nature of our selves, which is not compatible with our human nature.
The solution is not just to redesign those digital apps—a proposal that
blindly accepts the premises of technological determinism—but to reconsider
the whole concept of what it means to be human. He concludes by
giving a brief sketch of the practical philosophy and metaphysics of the
thirteenth-century Japanese philosopher Eihei Dōgen to present another
view of what it means to be human, in order to conceptualize a reembodied
self in the World Wide Web.

Taken as a whole, this book is a call for repurposing structures, technologies,
and fragments, not of the past, but of possible futures—futures
characterized by resiliency, hope, and flourishing. We think that the time
is ripe for a systematic dialogue between the radical perspectives, which
this book provides. Furthermore, we expect that this book will be a step
forward in our understanding of social suffering and in our pursuit of
individual and collective well-being. Alfred North Whitehead (1968)
said the job of philosophy is “to maintain an active novelty of fundamental
ideas illuminating the social system” (p. 174), and it is our hope that
this book provides new ideas for envisioning a socially just and ecologically
sustainable system. We hope you agree that the dialogue between a
contemplative approach to social sciences and radical knowledge-practices
has great potential, and we sincerely hope that the ideas we sketch may
inspire a broader community of researchers to develop this field in a
richer, more substantive way."

=Discussion=

Vincenzo Giorgino:

"All economic interactions are a kind of specific set of relationships, belonging to the more general type of social relationships. 

In other words, all kinds of economies are based on relational work. From the capitalist economy to that of the commons, no form excludes human interaction and all the components that characterize it: cognitive, emotional and sensorial.

The secularized contemplative knowledge and practices of our traditions of wisdom can inspire actions oriented towards the alleviation of social and economic suffering and to forms of provisioning for oneself and others that sustain the flourishing of life in general.

The secular translation of contemplative knowledge/practices as a commons is a pathway worth of exploration and experimentation  ([https://www.loomio.org/g/oVUOrcTq/contemplative-commons]).
 
Beyond Zelizer’s focus on interaction (only) between actors, I sustain that what happens at individual level – inner/action - is of the utmost importance. 

Individuals, even if taken alone, are never isolated atoms, as assumed in mainstream sociology, but living beings who are able to influence the world as such (and, obviously, the other way round). 

Said this, in social sciences we should not only concentrate on finding patterns but recognize the chaotic processes beyond their emergence. At the roots of our knowledge there is one’s own personal experience, that is deeply interactional (M. Polanyi). On this epistemological level, the secular contemplative approach contributes to the emerging enactive paradigm in the social sciences. As I do not believe in rigid disciplinary boundaries, I am oriented to a transdisciplinary approach, ie an approach that transcends not only the barriers between academic disciplines but also between academic, professional and the personal knowledge of non-experts.

Pragmatically, we, as sentient beings, can know intellectually that our life is finite, but our awarenesss of it grounds on some existential work we do, systematically or not, during our existence, especially in specific painful situations. This existential work, if based on systematic set of practices usually coming from the traditions of wisdom, is called contemplative work and contributes to the cultivation of life skills (Giorgino and McCown 2018 [http://peerproduction.net/editsuite/issues/issue-11-city/experimental-format/life-skills-for-peer-production-walking-together-through-a-space-of-not-knowing/]). 

A fully secular perspective is, in my view, a contemporary social need, especially after the remarkable success of the movement of mindfulness, so much so that it has become a respected strand of academic research and an industry that only in the US is worth of $2B annually. A critique to these developments cannot legitimate a deterministic view according to which these and related phenomena, are interpreted as the “commodification of the soul”. In my view, they are reductionist and fail to focus of what matters most. They are the outcomes of the dominance of a divisive thinking in those who wish to transform our society."
(email september 2018)



=Excerpts=

Available in open access:

* The Organic Internet: Building Communications Networks from the Grassroots. By Panayotis Antoniadis, Pages 235-272 [https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-66592-4_13.pdf]

==From the Foreword: Toward Contemplative Social Science==

Sander Tideman:

"Thanks to discoveries in many scientific disciplines, most
notably in social psychology and neuroscience, there is a new worldview
emerging that is more suitable to the modern context. It is a view in
which people, business, economy, environment and society are no longer
separate worlds that meet tangentially, but are deeply interconnected and
mutually interdependent. This matches with the view of sociologist
Norbert Elias (2000) who said that humanity should see itself as homines
aperti, in which people are in open connection with each other and their
environment, being formed by and dependent on others and nature.
For example, Daniel Kahneman (1979), who received the 2003 Nobel
Prize in Economics for his studies on intuitive judgment and decision-
making, has explored the intersection of neuro-science, psychology and
real economic behavior. The significance of this work lies in its ability—
for the first time in the history of economics—to describe the neurobiological
basis of economic behavior. This work is bridging the heretofore
distinct disciplines of psychology and economics.

These insights are revelatory because they provide empirical evidence
derived from a physical-biological basis for the notion that human nature
is not driven by greed, materialism, extrinsic motivation and egoism
alone; at least equally important are pro-social motives, such as inclination
to cooperation, moral fairness, altruism and psychological wellbeing.
This not only uproots the classical model of homo economicus but
also challenges the deep-felt belief that only external gratification through
money and consumption can meet our needs.

The financial crisis that erupted in 2008 and the increasing impact of
social technology has made it clear that this interconnected worldview is
not merely academic: it best describes the reality of global society, business
and finance, which functions as a tightly interwoven web of human
relationships and interaction. This web extends into our global climate
and ecosystems, which has been recently recognized by the global community
as evidenced by UN Global Sustainable Development Goals.

They are built on the scientifically determined notion that in order for
our economies to function and societies to survive, we need to respect
planetary boundaries and ecological laws (Rockstrom et al., 2009). In the
new reality “business as usual” or “politics as usual” is no longer an option
from a long-term survival viewpoint. Indeed, leading companies have
recognized the new reality—which is generally labeled as “sustainability”—as
the next business “Megatrend”, just like IT, Globalization and
the Internet did earlier, determining their long-term viability. Or in the
words of management scholar, Frank Horwitz (2010): “The only business
of business is sustainable business”.

The shift toward sustainability implies a departure from the simplistic
three-pronged production-consumption financing model 
xiv Foreword: Toward Contemplative Social Science
economy to the real economy, not only in a macroeconomic sense but
also in terms of understanding the real drivers of economical value and
sustainable performance.

Matching real needs and resources entails a focus on the way we think
and relate to each other. Given the central role of human thinking and
interacting in the new economic paradigm, we should shift our perception
of markets as anonymous transactional trading places to a community
operating in an interdependent economical and ecological context.
The members of the community are all interrelated stakeholders who are
engaged in a continuous complex inter-dependent process of co-creation
of value, while fulfilling needs, both short and long term. These needs go
beyond merely material economic needs, but also include emotional,
social and ecological needs. Therefore, the rules of the new economic
game should no longer be to maximize return on invested capital, but to
create optimum resilience of the system by enhancing well-being, shared
value creation and performance of all participants within the system. This
presents a major shift in economic thinking indeed!


The leading management thinker Gary Hamel (2007) described this
shift as follows:

- The biggest barrier to the transformation of capitalism cannot be found
within the observable realm of org charts, strategic plans and quarterly
reports, but rather within the human mind itself […..]. The true enemy of
our times is a matrix of deeply held beliefs about what business [and economics]
is actually for, who it serves and how it creates value.

The reinstatement of the mind as a prime driver in economic value creation
and the revolutionary insights into the mind’s pro-social nature are
giving rise to a new economic science. It is here that one can find the
exciting intersection with [[Contemplative Science]]. "

=More information=

* Bauwens M. (2018) [[Par Cum Pari]]: Notes on the Horizontality of Peer-to-Peer Relationships in the Context of the Verticality of a Hierarchy of Values. In: Giorgino V., Walsh Z. (eds) Co-Designing Economies in Transition. Palgrave Macmillan, 2018

URL = http://www.pass.va/content/dam/scienzesociali/pdf/acta14/acta14-bauwens.pdf


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]