
'''Co-intelligence = a shared integrated form of intelligence'''


=Definition=

Co-Intelligence is defined differently from collective intelligence by Tom Atlee:

"Tom Atlee is founder of The Co-Intelligence Institute coined the term '''co-intelligence''', which he usually defines as meaning '''what intelligence looks like when we take seriously the wholeness, co-creativity and interconnectedness of life. Collective intelligence is only one manifestation of co-intelligence'''. Others include multi-modal intelligence, collaborative intelligence, wisdom, resonant intelligence and universal intelligence."


=Expanded Definition=

Tom Atlee: "Co-intelligence shows up whenever we pool our personal intelligences to produce results that are more insightful and powerful than the sum of our individual perspectives. Sometimes this happens when we simply listen well to each other. Most of us have noticed welcome examples of this effect in our families, groups and communities -- and sometimes in organizations. But we have also seen more than enough co-stupidity. We've seen people (including ourselves) acting less intelligently together than we are individually. It doesn't have to be that way. There are many ways to become more co-intelligent, some of which are described in this site.

Significantly, co-intelligence is a capacity we all have, individually and collectively. It is not a method that can be sold by The Co-Intelligence Institute or anyone else. There is no one way to be co-intelligent. Almost all of us have already used co-intelligence at some time to improve work and family relationships, to support our communities, and to help make a better world. We could use a lot more. The Co-Intelligence Institute and this site exist to help us do that -- to point out useful paths in our shared journey. The more we can study this phenomena together, share stories of our experiences with it, develop positive guidelines and methods for enhancing it, the more co-intelligence we can bring to our lives."
(http://co-intelligence.org/CIWhatsCI.html)


=More Information=

For more information: http://www.co-intelligence.org

Basic essay by Tom Attlee, at http://co-intelligence.org/I-compactCIvision.html 

See the Wikipedia article for the six basic premises of Co-intelligence, at [[Wikipedia:Co-intelligence]].

Related entry: [[Collective Intelligence]]



=Key Books to Read=


'''The Tao of Democracy. Using Co-Intelligence to Create a World that Works for All. By Tom Atlee. The Writers' Collective.'''

Information and sample chapter: http://www.taoofdemocracy.com/


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]