
'''= "a prototype of an institutionalizing process to run the city as a collaborative commons and therefore as a "co-city".'''


URL = http://www.labgov.it/co-mantova-co-cities/

=Description=

Christian Ianone:

"Co-Mantua is a prototype of an institutionalizing process to run the city as a collaborative
commons and therefore as a "co-city". A co-city should be based on collaborative
governance of the commons whereby urban, environmental, cultural, knowledge and digital
commons are co-managed by the five actors of the collaborative governance - social
innovators (i.e. active citizens, makers, digital innovators, urban regenerators, rurban
innovators, etc.), public authorities, businesses, civil society organizations, knowledge
institutions (i.e. schools, universities, cultural academies, etc.) - through an
institutionalized public-private-people/community partnership. This partnership will
give birth to a local p2p physical, digital and institutional platform with three main aims:
living together (collaborative services), growing together (co-ventures), making together
(co-production). The project is supported by the local Chamber of Commerce, the City, the
Province, local ONGs, SMEs and knowledge institutions, such as the Mantua University
Foundation and some local schools."

=Principles=

From a draft document:

- Mutual trust: based on the public prerogatives regarding supervision, planning and
control, the Administration and the active citizens shape their relationships to the																																																				mutual trust and they presuppose that the respective will of collaboration is oriented
to the pursuit of purposes of general interest.

- Publicity and transparency: the Administration guarantees the largest knowledge of
the partnership opportunities, of the proposals received, of the forms of aid assigned,
of the decisions taken, of the results and of the valuations made. It recognizes in the
transparency the main tool to ensure fairness in the relationship with the active
citizens and verifiability of the actions made and the results obtained.

- Responsibility: the Administration values its responsibility and the citizens'
responsibility as a key factor in the relationship with the citizens, as well as a
necessary prerequisite in order for the partnership to be effectively oriented to the
production of useful and measurable outcomes.

- Inclusiveness and openness: the interventions of care and regeneration of the
commons must be organised in order to allow any interested citizens to join the
activities at any time.

- Sustainability: the Administration, in the exercise of discretion in making decisions,
verifies that the collaboration with citizens does not cause greater costs than benefits,
and that it does not determine negative consequences on the environmental
equilibrium.

- Proportionality: the Administration ensure that the administrative requirements, the
guarantees and the quality standards required for the proposal, the preliminary
investigation and the execution of the collaborative interventions, are commensurate
with the real needs of protection of the public interests involved.4

- Adequacy and differentiation: the forms of collaboration among citizens and the
Administration are adequate to the needs of care and regeneration of the urban
commons and they are differentiated depending on the type or on the nature of the
urban common and on the people whose well-being it is functional to.

- Informality: the Administration demands that the partnership with the citizens takes
place in accordance with the requested formalities only when it is provided for by
law. In the rest of the cases it ensures flexibility and simplicity in the relationship, as
long as it is possible to guarantee the respect of the public ethic, as it is regulated by
the code of conduct of the public sector employees, and the respect of the principles
of impartiality, efficiency, transparency and judicial certainty.

- Local democracy: the pact guarantees equality between parties and subscribers and
the attribution of reciprocal rights and duties. The pact pursues the improvement of
the quality of local democracy;

- Public autonomy: the pact signatories act as "public actors", holding the ability to
take care of the general interest;

- Horizontal subsidiarity: the pact was made possible thanks to the participation of all
the parties, which got activated in a collaborative and mutually supportive way, even
delegating specific functions if acquitted by others more effectively, in the pursuit of
the common good. According to this principle the care of collective needs and the
activities of general interest are provided directly by private citizens (both as
individuals and as members) and the entities involved in 'subsidiary' function,
programming, coordinating and possibly managing.5

- Legality: the compliance with the principles and rules dictated or accepted in the
legal system is the cornerstone on which the entry and stay in the pact is based. The
law is intended not only as a means of guarantee for civil coexistence within and
outside of the pact, but also as a fundamental tool of cultivation of social cohesion
and competitiveness of the territory."


=Details=


==Internal and external governance==

The actors of Co-Mantua are divided in three groups; social innovators, the technical unit, and the collaboration community. The collaboration toolkit of Co-Mantua is a fundamental instrument to shape the collaborative process among the actors. Some of the contents of the collaboration toolkit are, for instance, methods and rules to shape collaboration among social innovators (coordination group, technical trustee, working groups, collaboration jams, citizens’ activations, new members scouting, personalised pacts), rules for the use of Co-Mantua as a physical, economic and collaborative services platform, rules of collaboration for partners, service providers and other external entities.

==Sustainability plan==

One of the outputs of the co-design process is the sustainability plan, realized in order to ensure to the platform Co-Mantua a long-term financial and economic sustainability. From a first analysis of data we can say that even the Mantua area is affected by the same peculiarities of the Italian system, in the presence of a high number of SMEs, but unlike the Italian trend, these SMEs, account for a larger proportion of working population. On the one hand, this could make it more vulnerable to the business system of Mantua, because the population involved in the instability of these companies is representative of a greater number of people than the national average. On the other hand this morphology of the business system is a feature that could be maximized through networking and collaboration tools, such as the initiative to CO-Mantua aims to do.


=Conference=

"The local Chamber of Commerce, the City of Mantua, the Province, local ONGs, SMEs and knowledge institutions, such as the Mantua University Foundation and some local schools are glad to support the two days event that will take place in Mantua.

The main objective of the  Festival will concerns the conception of a prototype of an institutionalizing process to run the city as a collaborative commons and therefore as a “co-city”. A co-city should be based on  international collaborative governance of the commons whereby urban, environmental, cultural, knowledge and digital commons are co-managed by the five actors of the collaborative governance – social innovators, public authorities, businesses, civil society organizations, knowledge institutions through an institutionalized public-private-people/community partnership. This partnership will give birth to a local p2p physical, digital and institutional platform with three main aims: living together , growing together, making together. The cooperative model endorsed by “Tavolo della Cooperazione e dell’Economia Civile” is based on the innovative features of open dialogue, cooperative system design and mutual sharing. Thanks to the effort of Labsus – Laboratory for subsidiarity the city of Mantua was able to produce a concrete institutional experiment based on the principle of co-working. The call for ideas “Culture as a Commons (La Cultura come bene Comune), launched by the initiative of the city of Mantua, Fondazione Cariplo and Chamber of Commerce of Mantua, gathered a series of brilliant ideas and prospects for the cultivation of a long lasting project: install a permanent structure for a model of collaborative governance. The underlying conviction is that such renewed institutional framework could activate and liberate the positive energies of the urban circuit, including the talents and resources of citizens, associations, administrations and social innovators. The new model for collaborative governance is the technological content that the current society needs for promoting growth and sustainability, both in economic terms and as social determinants.

Among the participants during the two-days event, there will be Sheila Foster, Michel Bauwens and Neal Gorenflo, which represent all together the legitimized source for the ignition of an international debate.

Professor [[Christian Iaione]] will moderate the debate during the second day."
(http://www.labgov.it/co-mantua-international-collaborative-governance-model-for-the-commons/)

Further info from 
[http://www.promoimpresaonline.it/default.asp?idtema=1&idtemacat=1&page=news&action=read&idnews=195  Brochure festival]


[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]