
=Bibliography=

Compiled by Victor Pestoff:


Alford, J. (2002). Why do public sector clients co-produce? Towards a contingency theory. Administration & Society, v.34(1). 32-56.

Alford, J. (2009). Engaging public sector clients. From service delivery to co-production. Houndmills, Hamps., UK & New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillian.

Bauwens, M. (2005). The political economy of peer production. In Arthur & Marilouise Kroker (eds.), 1000 Days of Theory. Retrieved from http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=449 (accessed May 31).

Bauwens, M. (2012). Evolving towards a partner state in an ethical economy. In this volume.

Bovaird, T. (2007). Beyond engagement & participation: User & community co-production of public services, Public Administration Review, 846-860.

Brandsen, T. (2004). Quasi-market governance: An anatomy of innovation. Utretch: Lemma Publications.

Brandsen, T. & Pestoff, V. (2008 & 2009). Co-production, the third sector and the delivery of public services: An introduction. In V. Pestoff & T. Brandsen (eds.), Co-production. The third sector and the delivery of public services. London & New York: Routledge.

Evers, A. & Laville J-L. (eds.) (2005). The third sector in Europe. Cheltenham, UK & Northampton, MA, USA: Edgar Elger.

Fung, A. (2004). Empowered participation. Reinventing urban democracy. Princeton & Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Hartley, J. (2005). Innovation in governance and public services: past and present. Public Money & Management, pp. 27-34.

HM Government. (2010). Mutual benefit. Giving people power over public services. Retrieved from http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk (accessed May 31, 2012).

Horne, M. & Shirley T. (2009). Co-production in public services: a new partnership with citizens; Cabinet Office, the Strategy Unit. London: HM Government. 

Hustinx, L. (2010). New forms of volunteering in Europe: Toward a late modern re-construction of a dwindling phenomenon. Istanbul: ISTR Conference paper.

Meijer, A. (2012). Co-production in an information age. In V. Pestoff, T. Brandsen & B. Verschuere (eds.), New public governance, the third sector & co-production. London & New York: Routledge.

Olsen, M. (1965 & 1971). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press.

Osborne, S. (2006). The new public governance. Public Management Review, 8/3: 377-387.

Osborne, S. (ed.) (2009). The new public governance? Emerging perspectives on the theory and practice of public governance. London & New York: Routledge. 

Osborne, S. & McLaughlin, K. (2004). The cross-cutting review of the voluntary sector: What next for local government voluntary sector relationships. Regional Studies, v.38/5. 573-82.

Ostrom, E. (1999). Crossing the great divide: Co-production, synergy, and development. In M. D. McGinnis (ed.), Polycentric governance and development: Readings from the workshop in political theory and policy analysis. Ann Arbor, MI: Univ. of Michigan Press.

Ostrom, E. (2000). Collective action and the evolution of social norms. Journal of Economic Perspectives, v. 14/3:137-58.

Parks, R. B., et al. (1981 & 1999). Consumers as co-producers of public services: Some economic and institutional considerations, Policy Studies Journal. v.9:1001-1011, reprinted 1999 in M. D. McGinnis (ed.), Polycentric governance and development: Readings from the workshop in political theory and policy analysis. Ann Arbor, MI: Univ. of Michigan Press.

Pestoff, V. (1998 & 2005). Beyond the market and state: Civil democracy & social enterprises in a welfare society; Aldershot, Brookfield: Ashgate.

Pestoff, V. (2006, 2008 & 2009). Citizens as co-producers of welfare services: Preschool services in eight European countries, Public Management Review; vol. 8/4: 503-520 and reprinted in V. Pestoff, T. Brandsen & B. Verschuere (eds.), New public governance, the third sector & co-production. London & New York: Routledge.

Pestoff, V. (2008). A democratic architecture for the welfare state: Promoting citizen participation, the third sector and co-production. London & New York: Routledge.

Pestoff, V. (2009) Towards a paradigm of democratic participation: Citizen participation and co-production of personal social services in Sweden. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, v. 80/2. 197-224.

Pestoff, V. 2010; The role of volunteering and co-production in the provision of social services in Europe. Istanbul: ISTR Conference paper.

Pestoff, V. (2012). Co-production and third sector social services in Europe: Some crucial conceptual issues. In V. Pestoff, T. Brandsen & B. Verschuere (eds.), New public governance, the third sector & co-production. London & New York: Routledge.

Pestoff, V.,Brandsen, T. & Verschuere, B. (eds.) (2012). New public governance, the third sector & co-production; London & New York: Routledge.

Skocpol, T. (2002). United States: From membership to advocacy. Democracies in flux: Evolution of social captial in contemporary society.  Oxford & New York: Oxford Univ. Press.

Vamstad, J. (2007). Governing welfare: The third sector and the challenges to the Swedish welfare state. Östersund: Ph.D. Thesis, No. 37.
Wikipedia, Retrieved from http://www.wikipedia.org (accessed May 30).


[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

.