==Description==

Cobudgeting is a methodology for collaborative decision-making around money. [http://cobudget.co Cobudget] is an open source app that '''makes it easy for organizations and groups to allocate funds collaboratively and transparently'''.

Originally developed within the [[Enspiral]] network, the app is currently being developed further by a venture from the Enspiral ecosystem called [http://greaterthan.works Greaterthan].

Josef Davies-Coates:

"Cobudget works like this: each month contributions to collective funds are published. Everyone can see who contributed what and how much money is in the budget. Basic core expenses (previously collectively agreed on [[Loomio]]) are subtracted and what’s left is the discretionary budget. Each person or company retains the right to allocate their part of discretionary funds and anyone in the network can start a “bucket” ­— a proposal to do work that requires funding. They write up a proposal making their case for why the work they want to do will benefit everyone and why they are the right person to deliver the project. Everyone then considers the buckets and decides which ones to “fill” with their portion of the discretionary budget. If people collectively feel like a project is a good use of resources, it will get funded. If there are critical budgeting priorities taking precedence, “nice to have” projects won’t get any funds that round. Funders can split up their allocations as they like, or put it all in one bucket. In aggregate, the result is a budget that reflects the collective priorities of the group, determined in proportion to real stakeholding and in the context of the big picture goals. The entire process takes place transparently." (http://stirtoaction.com/open-co-ops-inspiration-legal-structures-and-tools/)

==More Information==
* [http://cobudget.co Cobudget Website]
* [https://guide.cobudget.co Guide to Cobudgeting]
* [https://medium.com/greaterthanworks/tagged/cobudget Examples of organizations who are Cobudgeting]
* [[Enspiral Collaborative Funding]]
* [[Alanna Krause]]
* [[Mix Irving on Cobudget]]
* [[Open App]]

[[Category:P2P Economic Networks]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]