
'''Book. Code 2.0. Lawrence Lessig. Basic Books, 2006'''


URL = http://codev2.cc/


First revision wiki at http://codebook.jot.com/WikiHome

New revision wiki at http://www.socialtext.net/codev2/index.cgi?code_2_0


=Description=

"Since its original publication 1999, this foundational book
has become a classic in its field. This second edition, Code
Version 2.0, updates the work and was prepared in part
through a wiki, a web site allowing readers to edit the text,
making this the first reader-revision of a popular book.

Code counters the common belief that cyberspace cannot be
controlled or censored. To the contrary, under the influence
of commerce, cyberspace is becoming a highly regulable world
where behaviour will be much more tightly controlled than in
real space.

We can -- we must -- choose what kind of cyberspace we want
and what freedoms it will guarantee. These choices are all
about architecture: what kind of code will govern cyberspace,
and who will control it.

In this realm, code is th emost significant form of law an
dit is up to lawyers, policymakers, an despecially average
citizens to decide what values that code embodies.

Lawrence Lessig is the C Wendell and Edith M Carlsmith
Professor of Law at Stanford Law School and founder of the
school's Centre for the Internet and Society. After clerking
for Judge Richard Posner on the Seventh Circuit Court of
Appeals and for Justice Antonin Scalia on the US Supreme
Court, he taught at The University of Chicago, Yale Law
Schol, and Harvard Law School before moving to Stanford. His
other books are Free Culture and The Future of Ideas. In 2002
he was named one of Scientific American's Top 50 Visionaries.
He lives in San Francisco, California."


=Table of Contents=

* Preface to the Second Edition

* Preface to the First Edition

Chapter 1: Code is Law

Chapter 2: Four Puzzles from Cyberspace

PART 1: "REGULABILITY"

Chapter 3: Is-Ism: Is the Way It is the Way it Must be?

Chapter 4: Architectures of Control

Chapter 5: Regulating Code

PART II: REGULATION BY CODE

Chapter 6: Cyberspaces

Chapter 7: What Things Regulate

Chapter 8: The Limits in Open Code

PART III: LATENT AMBIGUITIES

Chapter 9: Translation

Chapter 10: Intellectual Property

Chapter 11: Privacy

Chapter 12: Free Speech

Chapter 13: Interlude

PART IV: COMPETING SOVEREIGNS

Chapter 14: Sovereignty

Chapter 15: Competition Among Sovereigns

Chapter 16: The Problems We Face

Chapter 17: Responses

Chapter 18: What Declan Doesn't Get

Appendix, notes and index.


=More Information=

http://www.lessig.org

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Governance]]