
'''* Report: Collective Power. Changing the way we consume energy. By Robbie Erbmann, Hugh Goulbourne & Piya Malik. the co-operative party, May 2009.'''

URL = http://www.party.coop/files/2011/07/Collective-Power-pamphlet-low-res.pdf


=Description=

Executive Summary:

"Rising and volatile energy costs have been a major source of difficulty for 
many households and small to medium sized businesses. Dwindling oil 
and gas supplies mean that the UK is increasingly reliant on foreign energy 
imports. And then there is the problem of climate change. We all know that 
the long-term future of our planet is at stake, and that if we do not control 
future levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases then we are 
heading for a global climate catastrophe.

While there is an important role for Government in waging the energy 
revolution, its capacity to do so on its own is limited. As Ed Miliband, the 
Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, has stated, protecting the 
future of our planet ‘requires actions by individuals, but nobody believes 
that a wind turbine on your roof alone is going to solve the climate crisis on 
its own. These things are not worth doing unless everybody does them, so it 
requires us to come together collectively and act.’

What has been missing up until now has been the question of ‘how?’ What 
sort of structure can provide a vehicle through which communities up and 
down the country can both reduce and meet their energy needs? How can 
we ensure that all people, not just the few, will be able to share in the gains 
of the new energy infrastructure that is created?

The answer is that we need consumer ownership. Through collectively 
pooling their purchasing power, residents, local businesses and public 
sector organisations can all come together to save money and help 
tackle the threat of climate change. Banding together in this way, energy 
co-operatives are able to purchase their own energy on the wholesale 
markets and negotiate affordable deals for state of the art smart 
metering technology. This should allow households to realise savings of 
10% - 20% on average.

While these organisations may begin as a practical expression of self-help, 
they have the capacity to revolutionise the way in which we purchase and 
produce energy. Once established, the co-operative forms a framework 
through which ordinary people can build and own an infrastructure that 
will reduce their long-term energy costs and manage the reduction of their 
carbon emissions. 

The Government’s role in this is crucial. While state action cannot create 
social movements, it can create the conditions under which they can 
thrive. The opportunity exists to create a new social movement that can 
ensure that we are all able to make the change to the low-carbon lifestyle. 
There has never been a better time to ensure that this opportunity is 
brought into reality."


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:UK]]