

=Description=

DIANA FILIPPOVA:

"A collaborative society is a community that has the power to rule itself (city, state, territory, country, etc.) where people are encouraged to cooperate rather than compete with and/or command each other, both on individual and collective levels, under a strict respect of one’s freedom and civic liberties. 


A collaborative society is based on a human economy. More specifically:

* People’s contributions to the community are valued in a fair way (what fair means having been agreed upon by the community) and in such a way that they are not prevented from acting for collective utility (see homo reciprocans)

* Such a society strives to reduce the inequality of capabilities (this approach encompasses economic inequalities and inequalities of opportunities)

* The political system is organised in such a way that people are able to rule for themselves and therefore strive on a plurality of social and economic models and roles


Are the collaborative models we observe today all in line with these principles? Certainly not. They look like imperfect, partial, small scale, unregulated, dirty laboratories where experiments have a bunch of unintended consequences that at first sight, one tends to ignore. But these side effect, sometimes brilliant, sometimes flawed, offer something that could help us to engage in a transition to such a society. To understand what that is, one needs to consider them from a non-economic point of view. To return again to the useful analogy with technology, only a non technocentric standpoint could shed light on the deepest impact of technological shift of our societies. It’s the same with economy."
(http://magazine.ouishare.net/2014/11/the-power-of-side-effects-towards-a-collaborative-society/)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]