'''= "Collectif pour une société des communs": French policy-oriented group to support the commons politically and through democratic governance'''

URL = https://societedescommuns.com/


=Description=

"The society of the commons is in its infancy. It is developing but remains fragile, even as commons-based modes of action daily demonstrate their capacity to address social, health, democratic, and ecological issues. There are proposals for scaling up, but they are scattered. We believe it is urgent to establish the political conditions for its flourishing by ambitiously transforming our collective institutions while defending the foundations of the already severely tested social state.

The goal of our Collective for a Society of the Commons is to be a driving force for transitioning to a society structured around the commons. To achieve this, we are working on building a programmatic foundation and mobilizing to make the construction of a commons society a priority in the presidential and legislative campaigns.

After about thirty meetings, animated debates, and numerous contributions from stakeholders involved in these issues, we have arrived at this Call and have already laid the groundwork for three booklets of proposals.

This is just the beginning. We will continue to promote the narrative of a society of the commons in public debate. We will continue to build connections with politics. We will pursue work with associative networks, citizen collectives, entrepreneurs, artists, activists, and academics. Together, let's write the proposals to transition from a primarily capitalist society to a society founded on the commons."

(ChatGPT translation)



In french, the original text:

"La société des communs est en gestation. Elle se développe mais reste fragile, alors même que les modes d’action en communs font chaque jour la démonstration de leur capacité à répondre aux problématiques sociales, sanitaires, démocratiques et écologiques. Les propositions pour passer à l’échelle existent, mais sont éparpillées. Nous pensons qu’il est urgent de mettre en place les conditions politiques de son épanouissement en engageant une transformation ambitieuse de nos institutions collectives tout en défendant les bases de l’État social déjà rudement mises à l’épreuve. 

L’objectif de notre Collectif pour une société des communs est d’être force de proposition pour transiter vers une société structurée autour des communs. Pour y parvenir, nous travaillons à la constitution d’un socle programmatique et nous nous mobilisons pour faire de la construction d’une société des communs la priorité de la campagne présidentielle et des législatives.

Après une trentaine de réunions, de débats animés et de nombreuses contributions d’acteurs impliqués sur ces questions, nous avons abouti à cet Appel et avons déjà posé les bases de 3 livrets de propositions. 

Ceci n’est qu’un début. Nous allons continuer à porter le récit d’une société des communs dans le débat public. Nous allons continuer à nouer des liens avec le politique. Nous allons poursuivre le travail avec des réseaux associatifs, des collectifs citoyens, des entrepreneurs, des artistes, des militants et des universitaires. Ensemble, écrivons les propositions pour basculer d’une société principalement capitaliste à une société fondée sur les communs."

(https://societedescommuns.com/a-propos/)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:France]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]