=Definition=

Mathieu O'Neil:

"Although we refer in shorthand to “Collaborative Production”, in fact,
speaking of Open Informational Peer to peer Production might be more appropriated.

These four are the minimum terms which define the features of the modalities described by
the above mentioned concepts. By analyzing them, we will have an operational definition
of the phenomenon, based on the contributions of the above mentioned authors.

==a) Production:== 

Three issues regarding the term production.

i) When talking about collaborative production we are not concerned with the distribution,
exchange or consumption phenomena, but with the -original or not- creation, generation,
production which takes shape through a set of specific organizational forms. This implies,
in order to use a common expression from the intellectual property world, the existence of a
certain level of inventive activity (OECD, 2007:18) which distinguish the production from
the mere copy or spread of a certain piece of knowledge. Naturally, the boundary of this
distinction can be very variable.

ii) In order to speak of collaborative production is a necessary condition that the process
endures over time, thus not being based on casual interactions. (Vercelli, 2006:56). This
does not mean that every single contributor must have a long commitment to a specific
project, but that the productive process as a whole has a certain diachronic durationvii.

iii) Moreover, the result of the production, the output, has the distinctive feature of being
consumed or used by the same networks which produce it. The producers are, at the same
time, consumers or users of the goods they produce. They are prosumers, according to
Toffler´s expression (1981) which was developed then by Tapscott and Williams (2005:
191)


==b) Informational:== 

Three points have to be remarked here.

i) We are not referring here to the production of any good or service but only to a particular
kind of goods: primary informational goods or, simply, to flows of digital information.
Although, this is extremely important, many papers forget to point it out. All the other
features of collaborative production -the non-hierarchical organization, using inputs which
are not subject to proprietary exclusion, the also shared nature of the outputs- have existed
from the origins of humanity and, of course, they still remain. The real novelty arises from
combining some ancestral, although marginal organizational forms, with the distinctive
features of informational goods.

ii) But this informational production has the Internet as an assembly line. It is not a
production just relying on any digital network, but on a very specific one based on TCP/ IP,
WWW, etc. In this regard, there is a requirement: the digital information flows in the
collaborative production must be widely available. They must be “published”- according to
OCDE (2007) - on any website; the exchange of bits should not occur trough closed.More
specifically, it is necessary for collaborating individuals to have a shared platform. In
addition to one or a set of websites, a number of tools of software and a base language have
to be shared among the developers development of informational goods.

iii) The informational nature of production –informational goods produced via the Internet is
the base of two critical organizational features of collaborative production: “modularity”
and “granularity” according to Benkler (2005:112). Both are referred to breaking down the
production in minimal fragments which allow the prosumer add microscopic quantities of
knowledge. This, in effect, is both due to the possibilities of distribution and coordination
of the Internet and the discrete nature of digital information which can be broken down to
levels which are not possible with other forms of knowledge.


==c) Peer to peer:== 

The adjective “collaborative” is, at least, vague. Actually, if there is one
only point on what the whole social sciences books agree, it might be the “collaborative”
nature of any human production. Now, this collaboration can be immediate or not, face to
face or not, forced or not, capitalist or not, contractual or not, paid or unpaid, can include
individual or collective agents, etc. The concept of “peer to peer” is more specific because
it means that collaborators tend to have the same status regarding their roles in the
productive process. However, this is not enough.

i) Although we refer here to organizational schemes in which, indeed, there is a trend
towards horizontality, in all cases there is a certain hierarchyviii. In some cases, the
structure appears as a truncated pyramid, with different kinds of administrators, moderators,
editors on the top. Thus, some individuals who, based on their own merits, are recognized
by the network of prosumers, are engaged in roles of coordination, selection and edition of
digital information flows (Vidal, 2000: 57). In other cases, there is a genuine quasihorizontal
network of collaborating producers and a single transcendent agent who
centralizes a set of functions and information. This is the case of collaborative production
driven by capitalist business structures, as we´ll discuss below.

ii) Moreover, an important feature of the collaborative production is that the producing
peers don´t belong to the same company or institution. This means that the informational
goods production takes place either out of the work time or by actors belonging to different
companies or structures. Otherwise –if prosumers are paid by the same company or belong
to the same state institution, for example-, we are not facing about Collaborative Production
but instead a network firm, a different and well known organizational form. So, according
to OECD (2007), collaborative production is usually amateur.

iii) In this sense, peers who produce, agents who collaborate, do so on their own
independent choice (Benkler, 2005). In other words, in contrast to other organizational
forms, in this case –whether being a capitalist production or not-, there is no entity capable
of limiting the number of prosumers. Whether existing a superior instance over de peer
collaboration or not, any knowledge flow which could be involved in the productive
process cannot be excluded ex ante.

==d) Open:== 

At this point we must take into account the legal characteristics of both inputs and
outputs which circulate in these processes we analyze.

i) First, distinguishing inputs from outputs is important. The latter are entirely made of
digital information while the formers are only partially so. A share of the inputs of
collaborative production come from digital technologies -netbooks, cell phones, cameras,
musical instruments, etc.-, some skills, and certain amount of energy. This is important
because these resources are often not publicly owned. Instead, some of the inputs which are
digital information themselves are usually free, being under Creative Commons licenses,
GPL or other. However, it is not true that all these informational inputs are free. The
software running Facebook or Wikipedia –in order to mention one capitalistic example and
other which is not- are not available to be modified or copied. In this regard, we must be
cautious when talking about productive process inputs.

ii) On the contrary, the nature of the outputs can be easily defined. Informational goods
which are produced in the collaborative production are open access: they can be copied
and modified without excessive restrictions. Anyway, different legal forms are involved
here. In some cases, the goods are licensed under the aforementioned Creative Commons or
GPL. This is the case of content from Wikipedia or Free Software. In other cases, the
informational goods have ambiguous situations regarding to their intellectual property
status, like Flickr photos, YouTube videos, music of My Space or Second Life objects. It
should be noted that the problems of the latter situations do not arise primarily from
violation of copyright of third parties but, instead, from the lack of recognition of the
authorship of the prosumers."
(http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


=Typolog 1y=

==Public Non-State Collaborative Production==

Mathieu O'Neil:

"The Public Non-State Collaborative Production is
strictly non-commercial. That is, in this modality, none of the involved actors are seeking
to obtain merchandises as a result of the productive process. Thus, the reason for joining
those processes is partially given by their efficiency, but largely by a set of values related to
the “cooperation”, “free knowledge” and similar ideas. Additionally and usually, there is a
consummatory or intrinsic motivation encouraging the prosumers, this is, actors get some
kind of self-fulfillment through productive activity itself (Lakhani and Wolf, 2005; Hertel,
Niedner, and Herrmann, 2003). Another relevant feature is that prosumers barely depend on
a particular platform and, in some cases, they are able to create those platforms themselves.
Finally, it should be noted that this kind of collaboration takes place in a public sphere that,
however, has no relation with the state."


==Mixed Collaborative Production==

"The capitalist firm begins to play a role here. ... A team, which developed and “released” the Linux code, was created by IBM. The insertion
of a capitalist firm - and not one precisely beloved by programmers of Linux-, in forums,
and other repositories deserved a careful plan to gain the confidence of the so-called Linux
“community”. ... a decisive
aspect for this second form of collaborative production to emerge was that the IBM got
integrated without significantly affecting the previous organization of the productive
process.

In practice, the ideal types of “capitalist company” and “non-capitalist producers”
take no pure shape but are combined in various ways. Unlike what happened in Non-
Capitalist Collaborative Production, many of the individuals who don´t produce for a firm,
neither do it by pure self-satisfaction or ideological reasons. Here, prosumers estimate that
producing free software will allow them to acquire knowledge that will be useful in their
careers, building a reputation or working on technical assistance and consultancies, etc.
Others –or even the same actors above mentioned- are motivated by the usefulness they
obtain from the tools they produce themselves by free software. And conversely: many of
the actors who produce under company control are deeply involved with certain values of
the collaborative production as individualsxxii. However, the business and the individuals
perspectives must be distinguished here. By definition, a company has always an
instrumental and commercial orientation, but their employees not necessarily.

Summarizing, there are two ideal types of agents in this second form, the Mixed
Collaborative Production. On one hand, some individual and collective prosumers who are
not commodities producers. On the other hand, others –usually companies but also
individuals who produce their own developments- who do enter into the production process
clearly in order to obtain inputs for their own capitalist processes. Nevertheless, the
specificity of this second type is that the capitalist enterprise intervention does not affect the
rules of the production process. Firms, big or little ones, place the same status as other
actors in organizational terms. They have neither decisional power over the whole process
nor control of key knowledge. Moreover, other actors do not depend on the company to
develop the process. If the firm gets out of the process, production will keep on without
major changes. The capitalist enterprise plays a somewhat immanent role in collaborative
production."


==[[Capitalist Collaborative Production]]==


Mathieu O'Neil:

"In contrast to the latter form, the most salient feature of Capitalist Collaborative
Production is being governed by one or several companies, having control of the platform
which enables collaboration. This third modality characterizes almost all the so-called Web
2.0 (Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, Flickr, Twitter, etc.) but also appears as a
complementary modality in pioneer sites (EBay, Amazon). An illustrative case of this
operation is Second Life, just like Ariel Vercelli studied it (2009, Chapter 5).

...

Both the commercial and recreational users depend on the guidelines set by the
company. Specifically, to contact other users, whether to make friends or to look for buyers,
the prosumers must pass through the platform ruled by Linden Lab. In fact, the
monetization of Second Life by allowing prosumers to sell the fruits of their labour
emerges from the intellectual property rules which Linden Lab establishes for its world.
The proprietary nature of the “residents” is used as an effective advertising tactic to attract
users.

...

Although the power of the company controlling the platform is all-embracing, the
productive scheme requires attracting the two other types of actors, moreover, requires that
these agents produce contents. In order to do that, companies act like benevolent dictators
which conceal their power as much as possible. Indeed, in order to keep the efficiency of
the production process, it must look like a pure peer to peer collaboration. In the eyes of
prosumers, corporate control of the platform, of the data and of the production process
itself has to be diluted in the silent usualness of the digital landscape.

Capitalist Collaborative Production has been, then, exemplified. Here, as in the
Mixed Collaborative Production, companies which take part of the production process for
profit and prosumers who have no commercial interests coexist. However, in the model that
we have been analyzing here three typical productive agents are often present - not only
two as in the case of mixed production. First, non-commercial prosumers. There is nothing
new about them. These are the same actors seen in the two previous modalities and which
show up in any collaborative production form. Secondly, commercial prosumers which
have the same status as the other prosumers in the production process. They have nearly the
same power as them and must obey the same rules. Although they look like the companies
which participated in the Mixed Collaborative Production, there is a great difference.
Following the same example, when a team of IBM got integrated to the networks of Linux
producers, this team was actually interested in what both kinds of agents collectively
produced. IBM wanted digital information flows produced by developers, paid or unpaid
ones. In contrast, commercial producers of Second Life have no interest in what users
produce in the virtual environment and companies which are advertised on Facebook have
no interest about the photos of their “friends”. These companies aim to capture flows of
attention of those non-commercial producers /users, to integrate their recognition networks,
or directly, to sell them a product. To put it simpler, in the mixed collaborative production,
the commercial producers look for interactions with non-commercial producers in order to
access to their informational goods. This is, commercial producers were interested in users
as producers. By contrast, in the capitalist collaborative production, commercial producers
are interested in other users only as consumers.

However, the key agent of this productive modality is a third kind of agent which
radically changes the organization of the production process by completely handling the
process. This is another type of capitalist enterprise which now plays a transcendent role.
First of all, the collaboration platform is controlled by it. And through the platform, it
contains all the information related to prosumers, manages digital flows which are no
available to users, owns the trademarks which bring together producers, etc. Thus, the only
way of the other two types of agents to produce in this modality is through the capitalist
enterprise. But, in order to keep functioning the collaborative production modality, the
controlling company needs to look like the silent stage, the neutral environment of the
productive theater."
(http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


==[[Statist Collaborative Production]]==

Mathieu O'Neil:

"So far, we have discussed two forms of collaborative production which relatively tend
to the horizontal organization (non-capitalist collaborative production and the mixed one)
and one form in which a particular kind of agent centralizes the power over the reticular
collaborative process (capitalist collaborative production). Nevertheless, an organizational
scheme as the latter not necessarily ought to be commanded by a commercial firm. The
main candidate to play this non-commercial centralization role is the State.

...

A first interesting case is [[Peer to Patent]], a website which cooperates with the U.S.
Patent office (USPTO)."

...

The second example is British, related to the health system and extremely easy. PatientOpinion.org. is a website which allows to produce collaboratively opinions about
different hospitals, health centers, hospices and doctors in the United Kingdom and in the
National Health System (NHS). Here again, we face a collaborative production process in
which the platform and some key data are managed by the state or an institution which
depends on it. Nevertheless, unlike Peer to Patent, in Patient Opinion producers are actually
consumers.

...

Summarizing, in order to conceptualize the ideal type of State collaborative production,
the features of the different given examples have to be abstracted. In spite of being a poorly
developed form yet, it seems reasonable to assume that it might grow in the immediate
future. There are two productive agents here: above-mentioned producers / users and state
agents who operate the centralized platform. Although companies might be part of the
group of producers, that is not a norm in this form. The decisive factor here is that,
ultimately, regulation of information flows and, more specifically, the possibility of using
them as critical inputs for their own production process, is in the hand of state institutions
-which could be municipal, regional, national or international."
(http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


=Typology 2=

David de Ugarte:

"Services of collaborative production allow people and small organizations to share spaces, tools and skills in the development of products, services or commercial artwork.

* [[Co-Working]]. At the most basic level, sharing work space. Like other services, it began as a spontaneous form of collaboration between freelancers — who were building an environment and relationships — and businesses that were optimizing the use of office space and were building relationships. Soon, it made the leap to a real-estate business: everywhere, investors appeared who outfitted workspaces to share and added stimulus programs to facilitate networking and, in some cases, even help in the incubation of business ideas.


* [[Co-Design]] and [[Co-Creatio]]n. Platforms like “Sensorica” create spaces and provide tools for discussion and industrial design to different professionals who collaborate on the design and development of a product and finally participate of the results of its sale. A similar format has been explored by musicians and other artists, with platforms like “Red Panal.”


* [[Co-Financing]]. Surely the most transformative facet of the “sharing economy.” If “Kiva” let thousands of people finance microenterprises in poverty zones with minimal management costs, “Kickstarter” allowed for the financing of projects of direct economy without their promoters having to commit to surrendering ownership. In fact, the “crowdfunding” model turns purchasing in advance and symbolic support into an alternative to funding as such through capital investment or a loan."
(http://english.lasindias.com/a-basic-dictionary-of-the-sharing-economy-sharing-cities-and-communitarianism)

=Graphics=


{| border="1" cellpadding="10" cellspacing="0"
|- class="Tabla11"
| class="Tabla1_A1" style="text-align: left; width: 2.692cm" rowspan="2" colspan="2" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28"></span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28"></span></span>
| class="Tabla1_C1" style="text-align: left; width: 5.249cm" colspan="2" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T74">Centralized Control of the Platform?</span></span>
|- class="Tabla11"
| class="Tabla1_C2" style="text-align: left; width: 5.249cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">Yes</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_C1" style="text-align: left; width: 6.662cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">No</span></span>
|- class="Tabla11"
| class="Tabla1_C2" style="text-align: left; width: 2.692cm" rowspan="2" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73"></span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73"></span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73"></span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">Participation </span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">of </span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">enterprises?</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_C2" style="text-align: left; width: 1.251cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">Yes</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_C3" style="text-align: left; width: 5.249cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Capitalist''' </span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Collaborative Production'''</span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28">(Second Life, Facebook)</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_D3" style="text-align: left; width: 6.662cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Mixed''' </span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Collaborative Production'''</span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28">(IBM+Linux, Red Hat)</span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28"></span></span>
|- class="Tabla11"
| class="Tabla1_C2" style="text-align: left; width: 1.251cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T73">No</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_C3" style="text-align: left; width: 5.249cm" |
<span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Statist''' </span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T26">'''Collaborative Production'''</span></span><span class="long_5f_text"><span class="T28">(Peer-to-Patent, Patient Opinion, E-petition)</span></span>
| class="Tabla1_D3" style="text-align: left; width: 6.662cm" |
'''Public Non-state Collaborative Production'''(Origin of Linux, Wikipedia)
|}

* Source: 2010 submission to the CSPP journal: [http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]