
'''*  Special issue on Collective Enlightenment. Spanda Journal, Vol. VII, 1, 2017'''  

URL = http://www.spanda.org/SpandaJournal_VII,1.pdf

=Contents=

* Sahlan Momo (ed.), Benighted, Enlightened, and Delighted |  pages V-IX.
* Joanna Macy (interview), Learning to See in the Darkness amid Catastrophe |  pages XI-XII.
* Ervin László, The Evolution of our Consciousness Is the Enlightenment of Humanity |  pages 1-3.
* Duane Elgin, Humanity’s Journey Home: We are Learning to Live in a Living Universe |  pages 5-13.
* George Pór, On the Verge of Collective Awakening |  pages 15-30.
* Peter Russell, Blind Spot: The Unforeseen End of Accelerating Change |  pages 31-42.
* Deepak Chopra, A Critical Issue: What to do When Darkness Rises? |  pages 43-44.
* Tom Atlee ~ Rosa Zubizarreta, The Embodiment of Wholeness in our Social Order: Our Evolutionary Challenge as Humans |  pages 45-55.
* Terri O’Fallon, The Integration of Awareness with the Individual and the Collective |  pages 57-62.
* Allan Combs, Collective Enlightenment |  pages 63-67.
* Richard Barrett, The Ego-Soul Dynamics of Enlightenment |  pages 69-74.
* Thomas Hübl ~ Julie Jordan Avritt, Toward the Integration of Collective Trauma in a Time of Exponential Change |  pages 75-83.
* Michel Bauwens ~ Edward Berge, [[Collective Enlightenment through Postmetaphysical Eyes]] |  pages 85-92.
* Zachary Stein ~ Marc Gafni,  The Apocalypse of the Modern World-System  & Related Possibilities for Democratizing Enlightenment |  pages 93-101.
* Mariya K. Karagyozova, Collective Enlightenment – The Ascent |  pages 103-106.
* John E. Stewart, Enlightenment and the Evolution of the Material World |  pages 107-114.
* Fred Master, My Process of Developing Awareness: From a Finite Understanding towards Glimpses of Infinity |  pages 115-122.
* Gregory Wilpert, [[Consciousness for the Post-Capitalist Commons]]: A Developmental Psychological Perspective |  pages 123-130.
* Roger D. Nelson, Global Consciousness Project |  pages 131-136.
* Eric Reynolds, Next Stage Organizations |  pages 137-145.
* Alfonso Montuori, The Evolution of Creativity and the Creativity of Evolution |  pages 147-158.
* Geoff Fitch, Truthfulness and Collective Enlightenment |  pages 159-163.
* Charles Johnston, Bringing Wisdom to the Future – Creative Systems Theory’s Concept of “Cultural Maturity” |  pages 165-174.
* Jim Rough, The ToBe Project. How to Facilitate All of us to Come Together as We The People |  pages 175-182.
* Bruce H. Lipton, An Introduction to Conscious Evolution: a Theory we Can Thrive with |  pages 183-192.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]