

=Descriptions=

"A large body of practice has now
developed under the banner
of collective impact—the
commitment of a multi-actor
alliance from different sectors to a
common agenda for solving social
and environmental problems,
whether alcohol abuse, recidivism
in the criminal justice system,
or river basin-wide pollution
issues. This structured form of
collaboration was first articulated
in 2011 in the Stanford Social
Innovation Review (Kania and Kramer, 2011).

Collective impact alliances are
outcomes-focused; they grew
directly out of the sense that,
on any given challenge, single
organisations might have been
achieving results but the problem
persisted. In collective impact,
stakeholders develop a shared
vision and joint approach around
an ambitious but clearly defined
goal, coordinate their activities and
measurement approach, maintain
communication, and share a
common enabling infrastructure or ‘backbone’.

A well-known example is Strive
Partnership in Cincinnati
(strivepartnership.org), which started
as a ‘cradle-to-career community’
in 2006. By bringing together local
leaders to improve education
in the region’s urban core, the
partnership sought to increase
student success in three public
school districts. More than 300
cross-sector representatives
joined in the effort, including
school district superintendents,
business and nonprofit leaders,
city officials, and university
presidents. As Strive Partnership
emphasises, it “didn’t try to create
a new educational program or
attempt to convince donors to
spend more money. Instead,
through a carefully structured
process, Strive focused the entire
educational community on a single
set of goals, measured in the same
way” (Kania and Kramer, 2011). Every
year they publish a partnership
report to catalyse discussion
around the current state of
education in the community. This
report includes an review of trends
over time, highlighting the areas
of greatest impact as well as
areas where more focus is needed
in order to improve the cradleto-career
journey. Evaluation is
essential to understand how to
“ensure success for every child,
every step of the way, cradle to
career” (Strive Partnership, 2015)."
(from the North Camden Zone report on 'Place-based systems change', via Indy Johar)


[[Category:Facilitation]]