

=Discussion=

==Collective Action and the role of Community Norms==

In a case study on Mexico, Prof. Bray makes interesting comments about the individualist 'rational actor' bias of collective action theory.

David Barton Bray:

"Collective action theory seeks to understand how groups of individuals
are able to cooperate to overcome social dilemmas, assuming that being
a self-interested, short-term maximizer is the default position. The
behavioral approach to collective action begins with an evolutionary
argument: human beings have evolved the capacity to learn cooperation
norms and social regulations which have enhanced the success of groups.
In this view, individual rational action is just one of a suite or a continuum
of behaviors from the very individual to the very social which human
beings exhibit and which can be adaptive in different circumstances. It
further suggests that the default position may be cooperation, which can
then be withdrawn if there is no reciprocity. Whether cooperation or
individual actions dominate depends heavily on the social context.
However, the need to build a universal theory of human collective action
has lead to a continued emphasis on individual self-interest as the starting
point of analysis even among theorists focused on the role of social
norms. A major missing component even in behavioral collective action
theory focused on common property dilemmas is “community” as a
bearer of norms, as rich institutional environments. An
exception is Singleton and Taylor, who have argued that
communities, which they define as “communities of
mutually vulnerable actors”, dramatically lower the
transaction costs of collective action. In addition to
reducing transaction costs, some communities show a
remarkable and consistent capacity to control the “rational
egoists” among them and enforce a strict norm of
community service. In the reach for the most general
principles, the term communities is seldom used analytically
as the agent of collective action in formal studies,
the starting point of analysis is always “groups” as in
“groups of self-organized principals” or “forest user
groups”, not communities as such.
Yet, particularly in communities in rural areas of the lessdeveloped
countries, the favorite field subject of students
of common property, community is the overwhelming
social reality and source of norms that defines what
constitutes cooperative behavior. Community is by far
the most important arena where mutual commitment and
trust are developed, norms are created and enforced,
and where group identity is formed. In laboratory
studies based on experimental games, researchers have
found that in the study populations (mostly university
students) fall into behavioral categories that Ostrom calls
“conditional cooperators” and “willing punishers” , i.e.
“norm-using players” who under the “sparse institutional
environment” of the laboratory can assert cooperation
norms that can convince “rational egoists” towards
greater cooperation. Growing up and living in a relatively
isolated rural community with millennial traditions is to
play a game with extremely well-defined and time-tested
rules. A strong culture of cooperation and reciprocity in
traditional communities emerges, not as an inevitable
tendency, but because they are also well aware of the
problem of the “rational egoists” in their midst."

Source: Collective Action, Common Property Forests, Communities, and Markets. Summer 2008 edition of the (IASCP) Commons Digest 


[[Category:Relational]]