'''* Book: 1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed by Eric H. Cline. (Princeton University Press)'''

URL =

=Description=

Thomas Hall:

"Eric Cline’s new book, 1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed, is a detailed
account and discussion of how civilization, at least in the eastern Mediterranean,
collapsed. The date, 1177 BC, is more or less the midpoint of a process that took
many years and was the consequence of changes that occurred in the preceding
four centuries. The eastern Mediterranean spans the west coast of modern
Greece, to Mesopotamia on east, and just south of the Black Sea through upper
Egypt—that is, the upstream portion of the Nile valley approximately parallel to
and north of the southern end of the Red Sea. Even more than for the date, this
is a variable area. Cline’s book discusses all of these areas, though at times the
discussion focuses on only part of this area. Pages vi and vii provide a useful map
with the major empires and territories indicated.

Cline’s punch line is that all monocausal explanations are wrong, or at best,
incomplete. He concludes that the collapse was due to “A ‘Perfect Storm’ of
Calamities?” (Chapter 5).

..

In a brief Preface, Cline describes the aim of the book: to explain how the
Late Bronze Age ended. He also hopes to draw lessons from this study for
contemporary times, noting the work of Jared Diamond (2005) and Justin
Jennings (2011; but also see Kardulias 2014). A key parallel is that both
Diamond’s and Jennings’s books are concerned with “globalized world systems
with multiple civilizations” (p. xvi). He further notes that Carol Bell (2012),

Susan Sherratt (2003), and Fernand Braudel (2001) have made similar calls for
such comparisons. However, Cline’s book is also a bit of detective story, trying to
solve the mystery of the collapse of the Bronze Age. 1177 B.C. is directed toward
an audience larger than scholars of the Bronze Age."


=Review=

* ''Citation: Hall, Thomas. 2015. '''A ‘Perfect Storm’ in the Collapse of Bronze Age Civilization?''' Useful Insights and Roads not Taken: A Review Essay on '''1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed''' by Eric H. Cline (Princeton University Press). Cliodynamics 5: 75–86.''

URL = https://escholarship.org/content/qt9v71n5h4/qt9v71n5h4.pdf?t=pfo395

Thomas Hall:

'''1.'''

"this is an outstanding contribution to the
history of the Late Bronze Age in the Eastern Mediterranean and to broader
discussions of collapse. Cline’s copious notes allow scholars to pursue many
different topics and revisit many of the key writings on various aspects of that
history. For me at least, its greatest value is the ways in which it promotes
thinking about issues of collapse."

(https://escholarship.org/content/qt9v71n5h4/qt9v71n5h4.pdf?t=pfo395)


'''2.'''

"For scholars interested in collapse and massive changes in empires or world
systems, Chapter 5, “A ‘Perfect Storm’ of Calamities?” is the key chapter. Here,
Cline follows Sherlock Holmes in arguing that it is necessary to choose among
probabilities to solve the mystery of the collapse. To start, there is no consensus
among scholars on cause(s). Earthquakes may have contributed, but their timing
often was wrong for causing the collapse. The timing of climate change, drought,
and famine are similarly problematic; furthermore, evidence shows that the
population decline was not very steep. There is evidence, however, that the Early
Iron Age was dryer than the Late Bronze Age. To assert emigration begs the
question: what caused migration(s)? Internal rebellions also seem too few and
too weak to have initiated collapse.

What about invaders and/or rapid decline in international trade? Again, they
may have been possible contributors but insufficient to be the entire cause. A
sharp drop in trade may have made some cities more vulnerable to attack
because resources became scarcer. The question remains, why were the
destroyed cities not rebuilt by survivors. An increase in private merchants—as
opposed to state-sponsored merchants—may have been part and parcel of
increasing decentralization. Susan Sherratt (1998) argues that Sea Peoples may
have been a final phase in the replacement of old, centralized systems, but why
did decentralization occur at all? Ugarit was destroyed by external invaders;
possibly smaller declines and partial collapses may have generated chaos which,
in turn, may have opened new opportunities to private traders.
What about the celebrated Sea Peoples? Where did they go? Some came by
land as well as by sea, but coastal resettlers may not have caused widespread
destruction. Others suggest that the incursions were far more gradual over fifty
or more years. Still, questions remain. Why did Sea Peoples move? Were they
opportunists or maybe refugees?

Finally, Cline raises the issue of systems collapse, that is, failures that carried
both domino and multiplier consequences. He draws heavily on Colin Renfrew’s
(1979) discussion of collapse. Although he finds this explanation intriguing, it
still leaves open the “why?” There are many possibilities, dependence on bronze
and other prestige goods among them. At best, central rulers could delay
collapse, but not ultimately prevent it. Cline reviews these possibilities and turns
to complexity theory, which might predict collapse, but not precisely. One
condition is “hypercoherence” described by K. R. Dark (1998) under which
interconnections in feedback loops are so dense that if any one is broken, it
might cause collapse of the entire system. Collapse is nearly inevitable because
the costs of stability are very high. In short, complicated systems can break down
in a variety of ways. He concludes that monocausal explanations and linear
explanations will not suffice.

Cline concludes with a brief Epilogue. He notes that collapse, although a
disaster for current elites, can offer opportunities to others. He further
acknowledges that 1177 BC is not a precise date for collapse any more than 476
AD is a precise date for the collapse of western Roman Empire. Rather, it is a
convenient marker for a complex process that occurred over a number of years.
He notes that rebuilding was a very slow process entailing decades and even
centuries, citing some discussion of Dark Ages. He closes his account with an
argument that new peoples and city-states replaced what had gone before:
From them eventually came fresh developments and innovative
ideas, such as the alphabet, monotheistic religion, and eventually
democracy. Sometimes it takes a large-scale wildfire to help
renew the ecosystem of an old-growth forest and allow it to thrive
afresh (p. 176).

..

This kind of “perfect storm” is rooted in the concatenation of a variety of
simultaneous processes. Glen Kuecker also describes a potential collapse in the
twenty-first century as a result of a “perfect storm” and ways it might be survived
(2007, 2014, Kuecker and Hall 2011). Underlying both is Joseph Tainter’s (1988)
and later K. R. Dark’s (1998) analyses of the costs of complexity. Tainter
discusses “declining marginal returns to complexity” (see figure in Tainter 1988,
p. 119). Basically, he argues that increases in complexity cost more the higher the
existing level of complexity. Finally, it hits and inflection point and complexity
begins to decline despite further inputs. Soon this will lead to collapse of the
system. Of course, this holds under relatively static technological and
organizational conditions. Collapse leads to dissolution of the state. Elites are
almost always damaged extensively, if not entirely wiped out. Commoners,
however, occasionally may actually benefit from collapse, primarily because they
no longer need to supply the capital resources to continue high levels of
complexity. If, on the other hand, the state provided resources that facilitated
commoner production, then they too will suffer decline.

Dark adds to this discussion by noting that a new state, often based on new
technology and/or new forms of organization (i.e., complexity) sets a new curve
of increasing technology until a new inflection point is reached (see figure in
Dark 1998, p. 125). There is some similarity here to Carneiro’s (1970, 2000)
argument that circumscription of expansion puts great pressure on social
organizations. In cases where a new organizational form (e.g., the state) is not
invented, collapse of the competing societies into a simpler form is not
uncommon. In some cases, competition among those surviving may lead to
circumscription. Again, if a new form of organization does not arise, there may be
another simplification. Such cycling might continue for a long time (Anderson 1994,
1996; Hall 2001). Finally, Chase-Dunn and Hall (1997, Ch. 6; 2011, 2012; ChaseDunn and Lerro 2014; Chase-Dunn 2015) present an “iteration model” which
diagrams how many of the factors raised in these discussions interact in complex
feedback loops. Occasionally, the cyclical processes break down, and the worldsystem collapses. Occasionally, a new technology of production or organization
is invented that solves the problem. The system then returns to a cyclic iteration
process. Peter Turchin provides a complex model of rise and demise built from
the logic of evolutionary biology (2003; Turchin and Nefedov 2009).

All of these approaches—Tainter, Dark, Carneiro, Chase-Dunn and Hall,
Turchin—have at least one commonality. For all of them, the breakthrough to
new technology or organization occurs as a bifurcation point (so-called in chaos
theory); in short, a new evolutionary development occurs. It is important to note
that this is a new process with a considerable random component to it, hence
inherently unpredictable. Chase-Dunn and Hall’s iteration model attempts to
show this diagrammatically. Further, these general models account for why
states, empires, or world-systems typically seem to cycle or rise and fall, why
many states and/or cities are rebuilt in same areas. Only rarely was their radical
change. Thus, the Bronze Age collapse opened the way to development of the
Iron Age and larger states, empires, or world systems"

(https://escholarship.org/content/qt9v71n5h4/qt9v71n5h4.pdf?t=pfo395)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:Collapse]]