

=Description=

"Many Western states, including Utah, Washington and Colorado, have long outlawed individuals from collecting rainwater on their own properties.

As bizarre as it sounds, laws restricting property owners from "diverting" water  that falls on their own homes  and land have been on the books for quite some time in many Western states. Only recently, as droughts and renewed interest in water conservation methods have become more common, have individuals and business owners started butting heads with law enforcement  over the practice of collecting rainwater for personal use.

After constructing a large rainwater collection  system at his new dealership to use for washing new cars, Miller found out that the project was actually an "unlawful diversion of rainwater." Even though it makes logical conservation sense to collect rainwater for this type of use since rain is scarce in Utah, it's still considered a violation of water rights.

Utah isn't the only state with rainwater collection bans, either. Colorado and Washington  also have rainwater collection restrictions that limit the free use of rainwater, but these restrictions vary among different areas of the states and legislators have passed some laws to help ease the restrictions.

In Colorado, two new laws were recently passed that exempt certain small-scale rainwater collection systems, like the kind people might install on their homes, from collection restrictions.

Prior to the passage of these laws, Douglas County, Colorado, conducted a study  a study on how rainwater collection affects aquifer and groundwater supplies. The study revealed that letting people collect rainwater on their properties actually reduces demand from water facilities and improves conservation."
(http://worldtruth.tv/collecting-rainwater-now-illegal-in-many-states-as-big-government-claims-ownership-over-our-water/)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]