
The directory below is extracted from the source site: http://metagovernment.org/wiki/Related_projects#International_projects. Go there for updates.

==International projects==

* [http://cdd.stanford.edu/ The Center for Deliberative Democracy] — Housed in the Department of Communication at Stanford University, is devoted to research about democracy and public opinion obtained through Deliberative Polling.
* [http://www.echologic.org/ Echologic] — Democracy platform promoting values of sustainability, cooperation, and active participation. 
* [http://www.EarthOperatingSystem.net EarthOperatingSystem] — EarthOS 1.0 development team to evolve ways to wikigovern our planet.
** [http://www.wikigovern.net Wikigovern] — A start-up site inviting volunteer web developers to join in developing EarthOS 1.0.
*** [http://www.e-parl.net/ e-Parliament] — Builds a new kind of democratic global institution by linking up into a global forum the Members of Parliament and Congress that have been already elected.
*** [http://www.worldgovernment.org/ World Government] — Provides a global political service institution for the installation and maintenance of world peace. 
* [http://e-democracy.org/ ''e-Democracy.org''] — Builds online public space. 
* [http://www.mass-collaboration.net/ ''Mass Collaboration''] — Explores the possibility of massively collaborative direct democracy. 
* '''[[Metagovernment]]''' — The meta-organization which is working to coordinate and promote these other projects, particularly the active projects.
* [http://openpolitics.ca/ ''Open Politics''] — Supports civic engagement and the open exchange of ideas via the Internet. The site is designed to make it easier to learn, deliberate and decide complex issues in public policy. ''Represented on list by Michael Pilling.''
* [http://our-constitution.org ''Our Constitution''] — Collaborative site that aims to create a Constitution which would be accepted in an European referendum. 
* [http://www.tgde.org/ '''The World Parliament Experiment'''] — An Internet platform for political discussions. Besides elections, the forum allows debate, discussion and views sharing in an international environment.
* [http://www.wikia.com/wiki/Politics Wikia: Politics] — Lots of wikis about politics and wikicracy hosted by Wikia.
* [http://www.wikademia.org/Wikicracy ''Wikicracy''] — An early-stage wiki-model of governance. 
* [http://wikitution.org ''Wikituition''] (abandoned) — A collaborative draft writing for a new European Constitution.

==Regional Projects==

===Argentina===
* [http://www.hcdiputados-ba.gov.ar/banca93_index.htm Banca 93] — Citizens can cast their vote (not-binding) to approve or reject a draft law at the Chamber of Deputies of the Province of Buenos Aires.
* [http://www.noesdemocracia.com.ar NO] — Students can cast their vote (binding) to approve or reject a resolution at the Consejo Directivo of the faculty of science (FCEyN) of the University of Buenos Aires (UBA).

===Australia===
* [http://www.senatoronline.org.au/ ''Senator On-line''] (see also [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Senator_On-Line Senator On-line on Wikipedia]) — Ran 10 candidates for senate in 2007; running again in 2009. Platform is defined by web polls. 
===Germany===
* [http://www.mehr-demokratie.de/ ''Mehr Demokratie''] — German association lobbying for direct democracy. 

===Hungary===
* [http://ide-ide.hu/dokuk.html Party of Internet Democracy] (in Hungarian, see also [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Party_of_Internet_Democracy English Wikipedia page]) — Hungarian direct democracy party claiming elected members of their party must adhere to decisions as voted on their website.

===Iceland===
* [http://direct.democracy.is/ Open Direct Democracy] — A service which automatically fetches legal documents from Althingi, the Icelandic Parliament, and enables Icelandic citizens to interact with the legal process. Features include voting, commenting and submitting change proposals. There is an import module available for MediaWiki. All content is in Icelandic but the software is localized in both English and Icelandic. Software is available from GitHub [http://github.com/rbjarnason/open-direct-democracy/tree/master here].

===Israel===
* [http://Kol1.org/wiki ''Israeli Direct Democracy Movement''] 

===Italy===
* '''[[Telematics Freedom Foundation]]''' — Its general goal is the furthering of democracy, including media and global democracy, through the promotion of telematic solutions. 
* [http://www.internetcrazia.com/ic/ Internetcrazia] ([http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=it&u=http://www.internetcrazia.com/ English translation]) — Italian party advocating direct democracy through the Internet.
* [http://www.casaleggio.it/ Casaleggio Associati] is a software firm who on the one side has prooduced the blog of two political influential figures (Beppe Grillo and Antonio Di Pietro), and on the other has produced a [http://www.casaleggio.it/thefutureofpolitics video] on how they expect the future of democracy to be dominated by the internet. Both Grillo and Di Pietro favour a more strong integration of the net in politics. Using the net to control the politicians and even to discuss political decisions.

===New Zealand===
* [http://www.policeact.govt.nz/ Police Act Wiki] — A governmental wiki allowing input on their police code through the Internet. The final decisions are still up to politicians.

===Russia===
* [http://www.mexnap.info/ ''Mexnap''] ([http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&u=http://www.mexnap.info English translation]) — Russian project allowing citizens to vote on existing laws. 

===South Africa===
* [http://www.progressiveinitiative.org/Initiatives Progressive Initiative] — Party running in 2009 election, listing "electronic direct democracy" as one of their initiatives, and [http://www.progressiveinitiative.org/Initiative3 quoting] Metagovernment's basic principles.

===Spain===
* [http://www.d-3.info/ ''Democracia Directa Digital''] ([http://translate.google.com/translate?u=http://www.d-3.info&sl=es&tl=en English translation]) — Political "anti-party" attempting to implement direct democracy through the use of new information technologies. 
* [http://www.nuestracausa.es ''NuestraCausa''] (Spanish) — Enhanced representative democracy. \
===Sweden===
* [http://aktivdemokrati.se/ Aktivdemokrati] ([http://www.aktivdemokrati.se/AD-forum/viewforum.php?f=14 English FAQ]) 
* [http://demoex.net/ ''Demoex''] ([http://demoex.net/en/ English version]; see also [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demoex Demoex on Wikipedia]) — Commission in the local parliament of Vallentuna. Representatives act based on the results of local meetings with constituents. 
* [http://www.direktdemokraterna.se/ Direktdemokraterna] — Direct democracy party.

===United Kingdom===
* [http://www.mysociety.org/ mySociety] — Builds websites that give people simple, tangible benefits in the civic and community aspects of their lives. Runs [http://www.mysociety.org/projects/ projects] such as [http://www.mysociety.org/projects/no10-petitions-website/ No10 Petitions Website] and [http://www.mysociety.org/projects/writetothem/ WriteToThem].

===United States===
* [http://connectingnyc.org/ Connecting.nyc Inc.] - A New York not-for-profit advocating for the .nyc TLD's (like .com  and .org but just for New York City) development as a public interest resource. The view is that it's a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_pool_resources/ common pool resource] and requires an appropriate governance structure.
* [http://deepdebate.org/ DeepDebate] — Framework which makes it easier for a very large number of people to create a structured conversation.
* '''[[DemocracyLab]]''' — Software using participants’ posts and votes to build a dynamic map of political thought designed to facilitate consensus and solve problems. 
* [http://www.freegovernment.org/ ''Free Government''] (broken link) — Running a candidate for U.S. Congress, maybe several, but not until 2010. 
* [http://www.govit.org/ Govit] — Builds opinion legislation, then asks members to send it on to their representatives.
* [http://lowercased.org ''lowercase d''] — New York City group for direct democracy with web input. See their [http://lowercased.org/p/?page_id=58 plan]. 
* [http://www.mackinac.org/ Mackinac Center] and [http://usavotes.org/ USAVotes] — Provides transparency and information about Congressional representatives.
** [http://www.michiganvotes.org/ Michigan Votes].
** [http://vermontvotes.com/ Vermont Votes] and [http://www.samyoungforvermont.com/ Sam Young].
* [http://ni4d.us/ National Initiative for Democracy (NI4D)] — Proposal which will permit the People to make or change laws by initiative; a project of the [http://demofound.org/ Democracy Foundation].
* [http://openforumfoundation.org/ Open Forum Foundation] — Building a free, web-based platform that enables communication between decision-makers and their constituents.
* [http://www.policypitch.com PolicyPitch] — Commercial project to enable citizens to develop policy proposals for their community. Similar to Metagovernment in its community-based approach, though limited to formal governments in the U.S., not intended to replace governments, and not free and open ([http://www.policypitch.com/term_of_use.php commercial owner], commercial copyright, advertising-supported).
* [http://whitehouse2.org/ ''The White House 2''] — Web platform for American citizens to (unofficially) collectively act as the White House decision-makers, based on [[NationBuilder]]. 
* [http://wikiocracy.net/ ''The Wikiocracy Project''] — It aims to support the development of new political parties based on the wikiocracy model. The primary way it does this is through the development of the wikiocracy drupal module. 

<ref>http://metagovernment.org/wiki/Related_projects#International_projects</ref>

==References==
<references/>

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]