'''Collective Individuals = a collective institution whose interest diverges from the individuals that compose it,and acts as an individual itself.'''


=Context=


The concept is from the French anthropologist Louis Dumont, who studied egalitarianism and hierarchy in societies. Collective individuals are institutions or groups, such as the nation or the corporation, that act 'as if they were individuals', i.e. they act strategically to increase their power and privilege, and in which a selected group of guardians, i.e. the elite, the hierarchy of the group, act to increase their own power within it, often at the expense of the mass of individuals that compose it. In other words: power is transcended to the institution, and is no longer immanent to the individual members. The bureaucratizaton and hierarchisation of such institutions create recuring cycles of inequalities.

How to avoid this?

In peer to peer theory, Michel Bauwens put forward the thesis that the best peer governance practices adhere to the paradigm of non-representationality, and try to avoid 'transcendence of power to collective individuals', through the use of social or algorhythmic mechanisms, aimed to replace the role of 'mediating agents' which could divorce themselves from the community.

See the section on the De-Monopolization of Power in the P2P Manifesto [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/4.2.A._De-Monopolization_of_Power].

However, an important caveat: it is becoming increasingly clear that the solutions themselves have a drawback: 1) social mechanisms, such as the Wikipedia process, often lead to a hierarchy of engagement, in which experienced and active individualis have a primacy over loosely participating individuals (in their power to influence the content of the pages); 2) algorhythmic mechanisms, such as Google Page Ranking, reward older and successfull pages, creating a positive feedback loop that is hard for newcomers to break.


=Citations=


"But the user community is not without power to affect these processes: collective reaction through opinion storms are activated by abusive monopolistic behavior, and can quickly damage the reputation of the perpetrator, thereby forcing a change in behavior in the monopolistic ambitions. Competing resources are almost always available, or can be built by the open source community. But more fundamentally, the blogosphere practice shows that it is possible to route around such problems, by creating mediating processes using the community as a whole. Thus techniques such as folksonomies, i.e. communal tagging, or reputation ranking, such as the ‘Karma’ points used by the Slashdot community, avoid the emergence of autonomous mediating agents. The blogosphere itself, in the form of the Technorati ranking system for example, has found ways to calculate the interlinking done by countless individuals, thereby enabling itself to filter out the most used contributions. Again, monopolization is excluded."


What is the mechanism behind this? For this we have to turn again to the concept of non-representationality, (see our entry on the [[Non-representational Paradigm of Power]]) or what Negri calls immanence. In modernity, the concept is that autonomous individuals cannot create a peaceful order, and therefore they defer their power to a sovereign, whether it be the king of the nation. In becoming a people, they become a ‘collective individual’. They loose out as individuals, while the unified people or nation behaves ‘as if’ it was an individual, i.e. with ambition for power. It is ‘transcendent’ vis a vis its parts. In non-representationality however, nothing of the sort is given away. This means that the collective hereby created, is not a ‘collective individual’, it cannot act with ambition apart from its members. The genius of the protocols devised in peer to peer initiatives, is that they avoid the creation of a collective individual with agency. Instead, it is the communion of the collective which filters value. The ethical implication is important as well. Not having given anything up of their full power, the participants in fact voluntarily take up the concern not only for the whole in terms of the project, but for the social field in which its operates."
(http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/4.2.A._De-Monopolization_of_Power)



=Critique by Remi Sussan=

Remi Sussan stresses how new collective entities will necessarily emerge from peer to peer interactions, and that their interests will not necessarily coincide with those of the agents composing it:


“Je ne suis pas forcément d'accord. Si l'on suit les recherches sur la  " vie artificielle  " ou  " l'émergence  " il me semble logique de penser que les  "superorganismes  " les  " entités collectives  " vont forcément émerger de l'interaction entre agents. Ces entités collectives, si elles sont assez complexes peuvent effectivement poursuivre des agendas non reconnus par les agents qui les constituent, et même s'avérer dangereux pour eux. Je en suis pas du tout persuadé que la  " blogosphere  " ne va pas donner avec le temps, de telles entités collectives. Je suis même persuadé que, vu la façon dont les blogs tournent en  " circuits  " chacun reproduisant l'autre en fonction des goûts et opinions des auteurs, on ne tardera pas, si ce n'est déjà fait, à voir apparaître des  " voix collectives  " porteuse d'un message spécifique. A mon avis, c'est déjà ce qui s'est passé avec les pages web. Leurs connexions ont créé des  " clusters  " culturels bien définis, avec leur limites et leur conformisme propre.. En ce sens , l'émergence des  " meilleurs  " blogs pourrait être considérée de manière inverse : les  "meilleurs  " sont ceux qui expriment au mieux cette voix collective constituée par la communication de centaines de blogs analogues.

De même, il me semble que Linux en tant que tel est bel et bien un superorganisme, dont la structure et les contraintes techniques déterminent le mode de participation des membres de la communauté, et susceptible, par un mécanisme sélectif, d'approuver ou rejeter les contributions de untel ou untel. Linux est certes plus avancé qu'un Windows, mais il n'en impose pas moins un mode de pensée, il n'en constitue pas moins un système de limites. En d'autres mots, je pense que les véritables entités collectives ne se trouvent pas dans les catégorisations de l'époque moderne, mais bien dans les sociétés holistes que Dumont décrit dans homo hierarchicus. Mais je pense que la tendance a générer ces systèmes holistes est toujours demeurée, y compris à l'époque moderne (l'individualisme étant une nouveauté en ce monde) , même s'ils ont cessé d'être reconnus. Je pense également que ces  "entités collectives  " s'avèrent d'autant plus dangereuses qu'elles passent inaperçues.

Ma position est celle des gnostiques. On ne peut éviter l'émergence des superorganismes, des  " Dieux  ", des  "archontes", mais on peut les reconnaître en tant que tels et les utiliser au mieux, en évitant leur influence létale. Le changement introduit aujourd'hui par le P2P et les nouvelles méthodes de pensée n'est pas la disparition des superorganismes en tant que tel que la capacité qui nous est offerte aujourd'hui de les penser. En effet, des catégories comme la  " nation  ", la  " corporation  " ne sont pas forcément des " individus collectifs  " : ce sont des représentations de ces individus, représentations souvent naïves. La  " corporation  " n'est qu'un artefact qui peut ou non représenter un véritable entité collective : il peut exister plusieurs superorganismes au sein d'une même entreprise, sans pour autant qu 'il en existe une  " reconnaissance officielle  ". Par exemple, j'ai souventremarqué dans les entreprises des conflits existant entre les étages, chaque étage peut bien souvent être considéré comme une  " entité collective", avec ses coutumes, ses spécialités, son style, etc..

De même, la chute des pays de l'est ont montré que bon nombre de  " nations" etaient de pures fictions, tandis que des entités collectives jusque là négligées (ex les communautés religieuses, d'anciennes ethnies ) s'avéraient tout à fait réelles et actives. Je pense donc que les nouvelles pensées telle la vie artificielle, et les technologies émergentes comme le P2P nous permettent de faire accéder à la conscience de chacun l'existence de ces  " entités collectives,  " de comprendre leurs lois, leur dangers et leur limites, et de les voir tels qu'elles sont, et non imaginées sous la forme de représentations naives.. Elles ne nous libèrent pas de l'existence de ces  " individus collectifs  " qui sont là pour rester, pour le meilleur ou le pire."



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Relational]]