'''Collective Intelligence = "the capacity of a human community to evolve toward higher order complexity thought, problem-solving and integration through collaboration and innovation"''' ([[George Por]])


URL = [[Wikipedia: Collective intelligence]]

==Introduction==

Towards the creation of a ommicentric [[Ideosphere]]:

* Kosmic Alignment. A Principle of Global Unity. By Yasuhiko Genku Kimura. Reprinted with permission from Kosmos Journal, Spring/Summer 2005.
[http://www.via-visioninaction.org/via-li/articles/Kosmic_Alignment.pdf]

"We '''human beings are at our best not when we are engaged in abstract solitary reflection or on our individual transformation for its own sake but when we are engaged together in the act of transforming the world. The act of idea-generation through authentic thinking and the sustained engagement in the conversation of humankind, if conducted in the context of pursuit of truth, beauty, and goodness, will lead to powerful moral action that will engender a New World. To engage in such moral action and to become a co-creator of a New World is to become a world-weaver in the act of weaving the world and a history-maker in the act of making history'''." 

==Definitions==

Tom Attlee of the Co-Intelligence Institute has a restricted definition of collective intelligence, which he considers to be 'only one-fifth of co-intelligence', see http://www.co-intelligence.org/Collective_Intelligence.html

George Por summarizes:

"There are many definitions of collective intelligence available online. Below are the one's I found so far. Some of them are edited to make them readable as definitions. Most define what I would consider only one portion of the full range of collective intelligence, being too narrow either in their sense of the "collective" that is intelligent, or in the functions they equate with intelligence, or in their sense of where collective intelligence comes from. But they are all very articulate about what CI is from their perspective. 

I'll start with definitions proposed by the prolific Pierre Levy":

===Pierre Levy===

'''The capacity of human communities to co-operate intellectually in creation, innovation and invention.''' As our society becomes more and more knowledge-dependent, this collective ability becomes of fundamental importance. It is therefore vital to understand, among other things, how collective intelligence processes can be expanded by digital networks. It is one of the keys to success for modern societies.Pierre Levy (http://www.chairs.gc.ca/web/chairholders/viewprofile_e.asp?id=584)

'''The cognitive powers of a group''' -- e.g., perception, action planning and coordination, reasoning, prediction, memory, imagination and hypothesis generation, inquisitiveness, problem solving and, above all, learning capacity. Collective cognitive powers are closely related to the group's culture. -- Pierre Levy http://www.collectiveintelligence.info/cifaq.htm (the cognitive powers list from this source has been expanded with items from Levy's definitions in http://www.carpediemcommunication.com/pierrelevyUS.html and http://137.122.100.152/mt/mt-weblogs/roadmap/archives/000042.html)

'''A fully distributed intelligence that is continuously enhanced and synergised in real-time'''.
-- Pierre Levy http://www.poptel.org.uk/nuj/mike/presence.htm

'''Collective learning and creative process [realized] through exchanges of knowledge and intellectual creativity'''. -- Pierre Levy http://137.122.100.152/mt/mt-weblogs/roadmap/archives/000043.html

'''A form of universally distributed intelligence, constantly enhanced, coordinated in real time, and resulting in the effective mobilization of skills... No one knows everything, everyone knows something.''' -- Pierre Levy http://facultyofcinema.com/0738202614.html

Human communities, organizations and cultures exhibiting "mind-like" properties, such as learning, perceiving, acting, thinking, problem-solving, and so on. This embraces phenomena variously known as] distributed cognition, distributed knowledge systems, global brain, super-brain, global mind, group mind, ecology of mind, hive mind, learning organization, connected intelligence, networked intelligence, augmented intelligence, hyper-cortex, symbiotic man, etc... Emotions, bodies, medias, sign systems, social relations, technologies, biological environment and physical supports also play roles in collective intelligence processes. -- Pierre Levy http://137.122.100.152/mt/mt-weblogs/roadmap/archives/000042.html

===Jean-Francois Noubel===

The capability for a group to organize itself in order to decide upon its own future and control the means to attain it in complex contexts. -- Jean-Francois Noubel http://www.noubel.com/mt/weblogs/ci/archives/000102.php

The oldest human social organization where individuals decide to mutualize their knowledge, know-how and experience in order to generate a higher individual and collective benefit than if they remained alone. Collective intelligence is the foundation of positive-sum economies where the whole is more than the sum of its parties. -- Jean-Francois Noubel http://www.masternewmedia.org/2003/05/27/what_is_collective_intelligence.htm

===George Por===

An extensive attempt to define the various elements of CI can be read here at
http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/2004/08/defining_collective_intelligen.html

His short version:

'''The capacity of communities to evolve towards higher order integration and performance through collaboration and innovation'''. -- George Por http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public

===Others===

The capability of a collective/social system to hold questions and language too complex for any individual intelligence to hold, and to work out strategies, visions, goals, and images of a desired future, etc. -- edited from Finn Voldtofte's notes from a World Cafe http://www.worldcafe.dk/worldcafe/generative.htm

A specific property of a social structure, initialized when individuals organize, acquiring the ability to solve more complex problems than individuals can. This property amplifies if the social structure improves its synergy. -- Tadeusz Szuba http://jcwinnie.biz/wordpress/index.php?p=188

An unconscious, random, parallel and distributed computational process run by a social structure [such that the] social structure seems to be working well for a wide spectrum of beings (from bacterial colonies up to human social structures). -- Tadeusz (Ted) Szuba http://www.wordiq.com/definition/Collective_intelligence

People of different backgrounds or talents working together so as to help optimize the meshing of those talents in organizations -- Doug Engelbart http://collab.blueoxen.net/forums/yak/2003-03/msg00029.html

Collective problem-solving ability. -- Francis Heylighen http://www.kluweronline.com/article.asp?PIPS=238069&PDF=1

The capacity of families, groups, organizations, communities and entire societies to act intelligently as whole, living systems. -- Tom Atlee http://www.co-intelligence.org/I-fivedimensions.html

That which overcomes "groupthink" and individual cognitive bias in order to allow a relatively large number of people to cooperate in one process - leading to reliable action. -- Anonymous http://www.wordiq.com/definition/Collective_intelligence

Empowerment through the development and pooling of intelligence to attain common goals or resolve common problems. -- Phillip Brown and Hugh Lauder http://www.womencentre.org.hk/document/April/2002_6_5.pdf

==Taxonomy of Collective Intelligence==

'''1.'''

Proposed by [[George Por]] at http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/2006/05/forms_of_collective_intelligen.html


"a. '''Dialogic CI''' – A diverse group of participants suspend their old mental models and engage in dialogue that values the emergent whole higher than its parts. Variations of this approach include Bohmian dialogue, "generative conversation" ([[Otto Scharmer]]) 

b. '''Co-evolutionary CI''' – This form of CI builds on the power of such evolutionary mechanisms generating intelligence over time as trial and error, differentiation and integration, competition and collaboration, etc. Its examples include: ecosystems, sciences, and cultures.

c. '''Flow-based CI''' – A group of people become so absorbed in a shared activity that they experience being completely at one with it and one another. Ensembles, high-performance sport teams, astronauts, and others in that state of communion, report on both an enhanced state of autonomy, and collective intelligence.

d. '''Statistical CI''' - Individuals thinking and acting separately in large crowds can reach successful conclusion about their collective cognitive, coordination or predictive challenges. Examples include the "intelligence" of markets and cases popularized in the "Wisdom of Crowds" by [[James Surowiecki]].

e. '''Human-machine CI''' – This form of CI leverages the synergy of the human mind and its electronic extensions, drawing on the best capacities of both. The "collective" includes symbiotic networks of humans and computers working together and developing compound capabilities. It can also support all other forms of CI."
(http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/2006/05/forms_of_collective_intelligen.html)


'''2.'''

Henry Jenkins:

"We can argue that there are a range of different models of collective intelligence shaping the digital realm at the present time. We might distinguish broadly between three different models: 

1) '''An aggregative model which assumes that we can collect data based on the autonomous and anonymous decisions of “the crowd”''' and use it to gain insights into their collective behavior. This is the model which shapes Digg and to some degree, YouTube. 

2) a curatorial model where grassroots intermediaries seek to represent their various constituencies and bring together information that they think is valuable. This is the model which shapes the blogosphere. 

3) '''a deliberative model where many different voices come together, define problems, vet information, and find solutions which would be impossible for any individual to achieve'''. This is the model shaping Wikipedia or even more powerfully alternate universe games. Of the three, the deliberative model offers the most democratic potentials, especially when it is tempered by ethical and political commitments to diversity. This is the model which Pierre Levy describes in his book, Collective Intelligence. Levy’s account stresses the affirmative value placed on diversity in such a culture. The more diverse the community, the broader range of possible information and insights can inform the deliberative process."
(http://henryjenkins.org/2009/11/reflections_on_cultural_politi_1.html)

==Related and contrasting concepts==

===Difference between [[Wisdom of Crowds]] and Collective Intelligence===


Sam Rose explains the issue, inspired by Henry Jenkins, at http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/?p=662:

"According to Henry Jenkins, the “wisdom of crowds”  is applicable towards aggregating dispersed knowledge about quantifiable, objective data, while “collective intelligence”  is intelligence that derives from collective behavior and stigmergic, and/or consensus decision making.

The need for independence among “crowd” members contrasts with the requirement for connection and collaboration to see collective intelligence work.

The Wisdom of Crowds generally breaks down when information sharing/group think starts to skew and bias people towards errors. Collective Intelligence overcomes this by looking at different ways that groups can systematically enhance and improve collaboration and cooperation."
(http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/?p=662)

===Difference between [[Swarming]] and Collective Intelligence===

George Por at http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/archives/000270.html
 
Swarming is not CI because it lacks awareness and intentionality.

"Self-awareness is definirtely a requirement and antecedent of CI. That's exactly why I doubt that humans have a lot to learn from the frequently cited "CI" of bee hives, ant colonies, schools of fish, flock of birds, etc. Their coordinative mechanisms are great innovations of natural evolution that we need to study and understand but the quality of CI possible in human communities is quite different from, for instance, the "CI" of social insects. They have consciousness but unlike us, they are not conscious of having consciousness, therefore their available scenarios limited to the ones programmed by nature. We can change our future and that makes all the difference.

The negative impact of limited self-awareness is very visible in the Borg, and in real-life, authoritarian communities. Only evolved human beings who have chosen to realize their highest potential--being free from the limitations imposed by ego--will be capable to reach new peaks of collective intelligence demonstrated by the higher and sustained levels of shared-attention, harmony, joy, integration and collective performance. Personal evolution and collective intelligence are co-arising."
(http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/archives/000270.html)

===Difference with [[User-Generated Content]]===

Yihong Ding:

"Collective intelligence is the most well-known engagement of collectivism on World Wide Web. In particular, Web 2.0 advocates have declared "harnessing collective intelligence" to be the touchstone of the Web 2.0 revolution. By definition, collective intelligence is a form of intelligence that emerges from the collaboration and competition of many individuals. If someone feels a little bit puzzled of this definition, here is an alternative explanation that is imprecise but much easier to be understood. Informally, collective intelligence on the Web is the collections of user generated "intelligence".

A keen reader may immediately find an interesting comparison: are there any differences between user generated "intelligence" and user generated "content" (or user generated "data")? On Web 2.0, we have almost mentioned users generation content (UGC) as many times as collective intelligence. In many people's mind, UGC almost equals to the collective intelligence. But the actual meanings between "intelligence" and "content" or "data" are very much different. The intent of "intelligence" is much richer than "content/data". Tim O'Reilly also had briefly mentioned this distinction in one of his earlier post about harnessing collective intelligence.

Content/data is a type of intelligence but at the low end. Jean Piaget, a Swiss philosopher and pioneer of the constructivist epistemology, had a compact description about intelligence: "Intelligence is what you use when you don't know what to do." Content/data provides shallow and unrefined information for people to use. Content/data is often too crude to be efficiently used. Keeping the user generation intelligence at the level of content/data is not enough. This is a problem.

I foresee that the degree of complexity (as well as the degree of efficient usage) of the collective intelligence on the Web is going to evolve with the Web. For example, by tagging content with formal labels that are defined by ontologies, the user generated content/data would evolve to be the user generated knowledge. This is exactly what the vision of Semantic Web wants to bring to us. Moreover, by augmenting formally labeled content with external logic routines, the user generated knowledge would evolve to be the user generated wisdom. By encoding the mechanism of proactiveness into machine computation, the user generated wisdom might evolve to be the user generated creativity. By engaging user generated content/data, knowledge, wisdom, creativity together, we might eventually get the user generated personality, through which the human evolution reaches a new stage of being artificially immortal. Is this path a long way? Yes, there is a long way to go. Is this path an impossible dream? No, it is not. The practice of collective intelligence is converting our society into a virtual world simultaneously from the level of individuals and the level of collective groups."
(http://yihongs-research.blogspot.com/2007/12/collectivism-on-web.html)

===[[Extelligence]]===

Stewart and Cohen:

"The cultural counterpart of intelligence is an external feature, which we shall call extelligence.... '''Extelligence is all of the "cultural capital" that is available to us in the form of tribal legends, folklore, nursery tales, books, videotapes, CD-ROMs, and so on'''. However, extelligence is not just a matter of "keeping a record". The intelligence of each individual allows them not only to access to cumulative body of extelligence, but to add to or change it."
(http://www.poptel.org.uk/nuj/mike/presence.htm#noteStewart%20and%20Cohen%201997)

===From CI to [[Collective Wisdom]]===

Tom Atlee:

''''I am coming to suspect that it is the fringes that make the difference between collective intelligence and collective wisdom.'''

Collective intelligence solves problems or resolves conflicts of, by and for a group, an organization, a community or a whole society.  It solve those problems and conflicts for the here and now, for people who are interested, aware, and involved.

Collective wisdom, on the other hand, has a bigger challenge.  It needs to expand out from the particular problem or conflict, from the here and now, from those interested, aware and involved.  It needs to embrace larger contexts, interests, drivers and possibilities.  It has to consider the deep needs of people long gone and yet unborn, and to delve into deeper levels of understanding and caring.  It ventures into unseen dimensions of life  - into background trends, hidden corruptions and connections, psychospiritual influences, scientific microcosms and macrocosms - to realize unexpected consequences, novel resources, and extraordinarily potent answers.  Being the Big Picture form of intelligence, wisdom is born out of our capacity to stretch creatively into the unknown and the unacknowledged, into the new angle, the deeper parts of ourselves, the fringe insights and possibilities.

In the borderland where collective intelligence begins to expand into collective wisdom we see radical inclusion of erstwhile opponents in conversations enriched with broad-spectrum perspectives and information.  We find Citizen Juries of randomly selected citizens studying briefing materials which summarize the main conflicting approaches to the issue they're considering and then spending a week interviewing diverse partisans and experts and pulling together conclusions and recommendations to share with the public and its representatives.

Such approaches are so much more collectively intelligent than the polarized battles, bought-off politicians, and back room deals that shape so much of public policy today.  They are also wiser, although usually hovering on the edge of real wisdom.  They don't journey too far in the direction of greater wisdom.  That would take more thought, time, and resources.  And it can seem just a bit too theoretical and risky for those involved in making things better now, with what we have.

But we need that bigger, longer-term wisdom.  Given our circumstances, we can't be satisfied merely with intelligence - even when it is collective.  We need to invite and push ourselves and each other beyond smart into big-picture ways of being wiser together.  Why?  Because that's where our greatest challenges and dangers will transmute into our greatest creative breakthroughs and positive possibilities.  And because we are talking the edge of extinction here, for ourselves and so much of the rest of life - an edge that luckily also contains all our prospects for a far, far better world.

Open-ended emergent processes like those mentioned earlier are one approach to calling forth this wisdom, an approach especially suited to facilitating self-organization and transformation in organization and communities.  Initiatives to generate transformational public policy, however, could benefit from a different approach - specifically, expanding the techniques of deliberative democracy into the fringes.

For example, the practice of "framing an issue for deliberation" involves breaking the mainstream arguments about an issue into 3-5 diverse approaches, summarizing them, and presenting them as educational stimulants to citizen deliberators.  Occasionally, the deliberators are charged with choosing one approach over the others.  More often, they are invited to pull together an approach that seeks to resolve some of the difficult trade-offs that these competing approaches demand, often by mixing and matching aspects of them all.  Sometimes deliberators are even challenged and empowered (perhaps with Dynamic Facilitation's "choice-creating" process) to come up with something quite different from all the mainstream approaches, something that addresses the issue at a deeper, broader, or more imaginative level.

Alternatively (or additionally) citizen deliberators could be explicitly invited into the fringes.  The Web is filled with non-mainstream information and solutions for virtually every issue we face.  What if the 24 citizen deliberators in a Citizens Jury (for example) were broken up into 6 teams of 4 deliberators and given an afternoon to search the Web for the most useful existing information and/or possibilities they can find, relevant to the issue they're working on.  Each team would work independently from the others, in parallel, with any Web-searching assistance they needed.  They would be challenged to find information and options that are even better than what the other teams find.  At the end all the teams would come together to share and discuss what they found.  It would be an immersion in the messy world of the Web's juicy fringes, with no pre-ordained instructions or conclusions.  Informed by their earlier studies and interviews, the 24 deliberators could tap that rich brew for new ways of thinking about and solving - or even transcending - the issue before them.  It would be interesting to then bring in new experts who know about the new options the deliberators are considering, and to engage those new experts with the previous, more mainstream experts, to delve deeper into understanding what's going on and what's possible.*

Public wisdom involves the public and decision-makers (whomever they may be) taking into account what needs to be taken into account for broad, long-term benefit.  We need an active inquiry to formulate, test, use and institutionalize many diverse approaches to generating such wisdom.  The very diversity of approaches would be a resource for wisdom.  As a reader of this essay, you may have your own ideas.  That's great!  Post them as comments on this blog.  This essay is intended merely as an initial stimulant to raise interest and energy for the vital inquiry about how we can co-create our participatory wisdom."


==Discussion==

Alain Farmer:

"Collective intelligence (CI) is shared or group intelligence that emerges from the collaboration, collective efforts, and competition of many individuals and appears in consensus decision making. The term appears in sociobiology, political science and in context of mass peer review and crowdsourcing applications. And in Education (open pedagogies).

It may involve consensus, social capital and formalisms such as voting systems, social media and other means of quantifying mass activity. Collective IQ is a measure of collective intelligence, although it is often used interchangeably with the term collective intelligence.

It can be understood as an emergent property from the synergies among: 

1) data-information-knowledge; 

2) software-hardware; and 

3) experts (those with new insights as well as recognized authorities) that continually learns from feedback to produce just-in-time knowledge for better decisions than these three elements acting alone. 


Or more narrowly as an emergent property between people and ways of processing information. This notion of collective intelligence is referred to as "symbiotic intelligence" by Norman Lee Johnson.

The concept is used in sociology, business, computer science, mass communications, and in science fiction. Pierre Lévy defines collective intelligence as, "It is a form of universally distributed intelligence, constantly enhanced, coordinated in real time, and resulting in the effective mobilization of skills. I'll add the following indispensable characteristic to this definition: The basis and goal of collective intelligence is mutual recognition and enrichment of individuals rather than the cult of fetishized/hypostatized communities." According to researchers Pierre Lévy and Derrick de Kerckhove, it refers to capacity of networked ICTs (Information communication technologies) to enhance the collective pool of social knowledge by simultaneously expanding the extent of human interactions.

Collective intelligence strongly contributes to the shift of knowledge and power from the individual to the collective. According to Eric S. Raymond (1998) and JC Herz (2005), open source intelligence will eventually generate superior outcomes to knowledge generated by proprietary software developed within corporations (Flew 2008). Media theorist Henry Jenkins sees collective intelligence as an 'alternative source of media power', related to convergence culture. He draws attention to education and the way people are learning to participate in knowledge cultures outside formal learning settings.

Both Pierre Lévy (2007) and Henry Jenkins (2008) support the claim that collective intelligence is important for democratization, as it is interlinked with knowledge-based culture and sustained by collective idea sharing, and thus contributes to a better understanding of diverse society.

'''Writers who have influenced the idea of collective intelligence include Francis Galton, Douglas Hofstadter (1979), Peter Russell (1983), Tom Atlee (1993), Pierre Lévy (1994), Howard Bloom (1995), Francis Heylighen (1995), Douglas Engelbart, Louis Rosenberg, Cliff Joslyn, Ron Dembo, Gottfried Mayer-Kress (2003).'''

Pierre Lévy: I was predicting (along with a small minority of thinkers) that the Internet would become the centre of the global public space and the main medium of communication, in particular for the collaborative production and sharing of knowledge and the dissemination of news.

Engelbart attended the Program for the Future 2010 Conference where hundreds of people convened at The Tech Museum in San Jose and online to engage in dialog about how to pursue his vision to augment collective intelligence.[40] [40] "Douglas Engelbart". Corporation to Community. February 16, 2011.

Engelbart reasoned that the state of our current technology controls our ability to manipulate information, and that fact in turn will control our ability to develop new, improved technologies. He thus set himself to the revolutionary task of developing computer-based technologies for manipulating information directly, and also to improve individual and group processes for knowledge-work.

The dynamic knowledge repository (DKR) is a concept developed by Douglas C. Engelbart as a primary strategic focus for allowing humans to address complex problems.[when?] He has proposed that a DKR will enable us to develop a collective IQ greater than any individual's IQ. References and discussion of Engelbart's DKR concept are available at the Doug Engelbart Institute.

The Doug Engelbart Institute, previously known as The Bootstrap Alliance, is a collaborative organization founded in 1988 by the late Douglas Engelbart and his daughter Christina Engelbart,[1] to research into the enhancement of human ability to solve complex, urgent problems. Engelbart believed that it is possible to enhance society's collective intelligence by applying his strategies."

(http://ovn.world/index.php?title=Theoretical_background_-_collective_intelligence)

==More Information==

#The Website on Co-Intelligence, by Tom Attlee at http://www.co-intelligence.org/
#Defining Collective Intelligence, by George Por, at 
http://www.community-intelligence.com/blogs/public/2004/08/defining_collective_intelligen.html

See the related entry on [[Co-intelligence]] and the [[Wisdom of Crowds]]

Related concepts:

#[[Collective Behavior]]
#[[Collective Responsibility]]
#[[Collective Identity]]
#[[Collective Consciousness]]
#[[Collective Effervescence]]


Recommended by Tiago Peixoto:

Landemore, Hélène E., Democratic Reason: The Mechanisms of Collective Intelligence in Politics (April 1, 2011). COLLECTIVE WISDOM: PRINCIPLES AND MECHANISMS, Hélène Landemore and Jon Elster, eds., Cambridge University Press, Spring 2012.

You can find more of Hélène’s work here http://www.helenelandemore.com/.

Also, if you are interested in high-level talks and discussions about collective intelligence, the videos of conferences below are some of the best things out there:

# [http://www.youtube.com/user/CollectiveIntelConf Collective Intelligence Conference (Video) ]
# [http://www.canal-u.tv/producteurs/college_de_france/la_sagesse_collective_principes_et_mecanismes_college_de_france College de France – Collective Intelligence (Video) ]
# [http://politicalscience.yale.edu/epistemic-democracy-practice-videos Epistemic Democracy Conference (Video) ]

==Key Books to Read==


# [[Jean-Francois Noubel]]. Collective Intelligence. [http://p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Collective_Intelligence_-_Jean-Francois_Noubel] - ''Primer from 2004''
# [[Pierre Levy]], Aux Origines de L'Intelligence Collective. [http://www.archipress.org/levy/aql.htm] - ''Excerpt from a book, on historical precedents for the concept.''  Extensive [http://wiki.aardrock.com/Collective_Intelligence english summary] by Martien van Steenbergen.


===The [[Origins of Collective Intelligence]]===

Interview with the author, Pierre Levy:

* Fabiano Incerti and Douglas Borges Candido: "In your books Collective
Intelligence: For an Anthropology
of Cyberspace (1994) and
Cyberculture: The Culture of
Digital Society (1997), you argue
that the Internet and digital
technologies develop collective
intelligence, enabling new forms
of collaboration and knowledge
sharing. However, there is growing
concern that excessive use of social
networks and digital technologies
is associated with distraction and
delayed learning among young
people. How do you view this
apparent contradiction between
the potential of technologies to
strengthen collective intelligence
and the negative effects they
can have on the cognitive and
educational development of
young people?

R2 - I never claimed that the Internet
and digital technologies alone, and as
if the technologies were autonomous
subjects, would develop collective
intelligence. I claimed that the best use
we could make of the Internet and
digital technologies was to develop
human collective intelligence, which
is very different. And that is still what
I think. The idea of a “knowledge
space” that could be deployed above
the commercial space is a regulatory
ideal for action, not a factual prediction.
When I wrote Collective Intelligence –
from 1992 to 1993 – less than 1% of
humanity was connected to the Internet,
and the Web did not exist. You will not
find the word “Web” anywhere in the
book. However, today – in 2024 – we
have well over two-thirds of the world’s
population connected to the Internet.
The context is therefore completely
different, but the change in civilization
that I predicted 30 years ago today
seems obvious, although normally
we have to wait several generations to
confirm this type of mutation. In my
opinion, we are just at the beginning of
the digital revolution.
As for increasing collective
intelligence, many steps have been
taken to make knowledge accessible
to everyone. Wikipedia is a classic
example of a company that works on
collective intelligence, with millions
of volunteer contributors from all
countries and discussion groups
among experts for each article.
There are almost seven million
articles in English, two and a half
million articles in French and more
than a million articles in Portuguese.
Wikipedia is consulted by tens of
millions of people every day and
several billion every year! Free
software – now widely adopted and
distributed, including by large web
companies – is another important
area in which collective intelligence
is in command. Among the most
widely used free software are the
Linux operating system, the Mozilla
and Chromium browsers, the
OpenOffice suite, the Apache HTTP
server (which is the most widely used
on the Internet), the GIT version
control system, Signal messaging
and many others that would take too
long to list. I would add that digitized
libraries and museums, as well as
open access scientific articles and
sites like ArXiv.org, are common,
which has been transforming the
practices of scientific research and
communication. Today, everyone
can publish texts on their blogs,
videos and podcasts on YouTube or
other websites, which was not the
case thirty years ago. Social networks
allow the exchange of news and ideas
very quickly, as we see, for example,
on LinkedIn or X (formerly Twitter).
The Internet has therefore truly
enabled the development of new
forms of expression, collaboration
and knowledge sharing. There is still
much to be done. We are only at the
beginning of the anthropological
transformation that is underway."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]