
The directory below is extracted from the source site: http://metagovernment.org/wiki/Related_projects#International_projects. Go there for updates.

=Directory=


* '''[[Adhocracy project|Adhocracy]]''' — Drafting and (delegated) voting tool for small and medium-sized groups. 
* '''[[Metascore|Candiwi]]''' — The original software of the Metagovernment project. Based on consensus, synthesis, and a distributed framework. 
* [http://www.createdebate.com/ CreateDebate] — A social debate tool.
* [http://www.deborda.org/cdrom/ DecisionMaker] — A soft that uses and compares multiple current electoral systems, programmed by the de Borda Institute.
* [http://www.ideascale.com/ IdeaScale] — Enables companies to build living/breathing Digg style communities.
* [http://ideagra.ph Ideagraph] — An open, non-profit system for organizing arguments and achieving consensuses. 
* '''[[Indaba Application Network]]''' — Application framework for voting software. \
* [http://www.mixedink.com MixedInk] — A collaborative writing tool.
* '''[[NationBuilder]]''' — The platform running The White House 2, and potentially other systems. 
* [http://protoforge.org/ ProtoForge] —  A non-profit effort to develop an open, wiki style, systems engineering platform.
* [http://www.whynot.net/ WhyNot?] — An interesting tool that integrates some style of debate and voting for popularity of ideas flow.
* '''[[Vilfredo]]''' — Software which uses a human based genetic algorithm to help participants build a consensus. 
* '''[[Votorola]]''' — Communityware for building consensus and reaching decisions. 
* [http://trust.cse.ucsc.edu/ Wiki-Trust] — A MediaWiki extension for automatically building trust info by evaluating history data.
<ref>http://metagovernment.org/wiki/Related_projects#Software</ref>


=More Information=

See also: [[Collaborative Governance Software]]

==References==
<references/>



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Software]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Politics]]