
'''* Report: The commons : (co)managing commonly owned resources. PROCEEDINGS OF THE SYMPOSIUM OF 9 MARCH 2012 IN BRUSSELSÉTOPIA | OIKOS  | GREEN EUROPEAN FOUNDATION, 2012. By DAVID BOLLIER, ISABELLE CASSIERS et al.'''

URL = http://gef.eu/publication/gef-launch-report-on-the-commons/ [http://gef.eu/uploads/media/The_Commons_Comanaging_Commonly_Owned_Resources.pdf pdf]

=Description=

"The publication (of the Green Europe Foundation) brings together a number of contributions that were made at a day-long seminar held in Brussels earlier this year on the subject of the commons, organised by GEF together with the Belgian Green foundations Etopia and Oikos.

"The commons" is a term that is gaining increasing currency in political debate today, as thinkers and activists look for alternatives to what appears to be the failing model of the market economy. While many people have a broad idea of 'the commons', a means of co-managing a resource for the community as a whole, what does it means in practice? And where and when can the idea of a commons be applied? 

Many of these issues were discussed at the GEF seminar earlier this year. Since the idea of the commons was reintroduced to public debate by the likes of Elinor Ostrom, many new forms of commons have become viable. An example discussed at the seminar was the idea of genetics and DNA as a type of 'commons'. 

The topic is a rich one for debate, and this publication seeks to continue the discussion that began last March in Brussels."
(http://gef.eu/publication/gef-launch-report-on-the-commons/)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Conferences]]