
'''The Coming Revolt of the Guards. by Howard Zinn''' 


URL =  http://www.historyisaweapon.com/defcon1/zinncomrev24.html


Text:

"However, the unexpected victories-even temporary ones-of insurgents show the
vulnerability of the supposedly powerful. In a highly developed society, the
Establishment cannot survive without the obedience and loyalty of millions
of people who are given small rewards to keep the system going: the soldiers
and police, teachers and ministers, administrators and social workers,
technicians and production workers, doctors, lawyers, nurses, transport and
communications workers, garbage men and firemen. These people-the employed,
the somewhat privileged-are drawn into alliance with the elite. They become
the guards of the system, buffers between the upper and lower classes. If
they stop obeying, the system falls.
      

That will happen, I think, only when all of us who are slightly
privileged and slightly uneasy begin to see that we are like the guards in
the prison uprising at Attica—expendable; that the Establishment, whatever
rewards it gives us, will also, if necessary to maintain its control, kill
us. ....
      

All this takes us far from American history, into the realm of
imagination. But not totally removed from history. There are at least
glimpses in the past of such a possibility. In the sixties and seventies,
for the first time, the Establishment failed to produce national unity and
patriotic fervor in a war. There was a flood of cultural changes such as the
country had never seen-in sex, family, personal relations-exactly those
situations most difficult to control from the ordinary centers of power. And
never before was there such a general withdrawal of confidence from so many
elements of the political and economic system. In every period of history,
people have found ways to help one another-even in the midst of a culture of
competition and violence-if only for brief periods, to find joy in work,
struggle, companionship, nature.
      
The prospect is for times of turmoil, struggle, but also
inspiration. There is a chance that such a movement could succeed in doing
what the system itself has never done-bring about great change with little
violence. This is possible because the more of the 99 percent that begin to
see themselves as sharing needs, the more the guards and the prisoners see
their common interest, the more the Establishment becomes isolated,
ineffectual. The elite's weapons, money, control of information would be
useless in the face of a determined population. The servants of the system
would refuse to work to continue the old, deadly order, and would begin
using their time, their space-the very things given them by the system to
keep them quiet-to dismantle that system while creating a new one.
      
The prisoners of the system will continue to rebel, as before, in
ways that cannot be foreseen, at times that cannot be predicted. The new
fact of our era is the chance that they may be joined by the guards. We
readers and writers of books have been, for the most part, among the guards.
If we understand that, and act on it, not only will life be more satisfying,
right off, but our grandchildren, or our great grandchildren, might possibly
see a different and marvelous world."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]