
=Discussion=

John Michael Colón, Mason Herson-Hord et al.:

"How do we fund cooperatives, incentivize cooperation over competition, and
tie these member institutions to an explicitly socialist politics? We propose a
Common Fund, which would absorb the profits from a network of community-run cooperatives and pool money that communities could reinvest for economic development. It would be under the democratic control of the networked
cooperatives’ member-owners and would initially finance additional cooperatives 
to further grow that network. As it grows, the fund could invest in such profitless
purposes as building new infrastructure, establishing other independent socialist
institutions, and financing political movements to take over and reform local
government along radically democratic lines.

Credit streams through non-extractive finance from organizations such as Working World are a particularly good starting point for worker ownership. The Working World fund’s initial capital was raised from donations, investment capital,
and the profits of the successful workers’ cooperatives that control it. The organization uses this mixed capital stream to offer zero-interest loans and educational
support to newly founded worker co-ops or existing firms transferring ownership
to workers. Uniquely, the fund accepts no loan repayment until the co-op begins
to turn a profit, and even then it gets paid back strictly as a percentage of profits. (In months without profit, the firm pays nothing). The Working World has
funded over 200 worker-controlled companies around the world, and it has been
so successful that it is now spearheading the development of a network of local
funds for cooperatives. The fund currently needs local organizers to set up local
credit institutions and incubate new co-ops, and answering that call would be a
powerful addition to the labor organizing and grassroots cooperative development proposed here. Such a network of funds—if democratically controlled and
funded from the bottom-up—can form the basis of a new cooperative economy
and a new communally engaged labor movement.

There is no doubt that an organized workers struggle is important. But the union
movement of the past developed institutions primarily to leverage their collective
action within capitalism. Now these proletarian institutions must replace capitalism."
(https://thenextsystem.org/sites/default/files/2017-07/Symbiosis_AtLargeFirst-corrected-2.pdf)


=Source=

'''* Report: Community, Democracy, and Mutual Aid. Toward Dual Power and Beyond By John Michael Colón, Mason Herson-Hord, Katie S. Horvath, Dayton Martindale, & Matthew Porges. Next System Project,''' 

URL = https://thenextsystem.org/sites/default/files/2017-07/Symbiosis_AtLargeFirst-corrected-2.pdf

This is a production of the Symbiosis Research Collective. For more information, go to http://symbiosis-revolution.org/research-collective.

[[Category:Peerfunding]]