
'''= a free software project aimed at turning the infrastructure that successfully powers the CUNY Academic Commons into a free, distributable, easy-to-install package'''


URL = http://commonsinabox.org/


=Description=

"Commons In A Box (CBOX) is a free software project aimed at turning the infrastructure that successfully powers the CUNY Academic Commons into a free, distributable, easy-to-install package. Commons In A Box is a project of the City University of New York and the Graduate Center, CUNY and is made possible by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

CBOX takes the complexity out of creating a Commons site, helping organizations create a space where their members can discuss issues, collaborate on projects, and share their work. 

CBOX will be useful to any organization that is looking for a shared space in which to build an engaged community of users and developers."


=Characteristics=

"CBOX also provides:

* Out-of-the-box functionality with an intuitive set-up that guides site administrators through each step of installation.

* A powerful, responsive, highly customizable theme developed for community engagement, based on PressCrew’s Infinity Theming Engine.

* Responsive design for easy viewing on many devices, including tablets and smartphones.

* Collaborative document creation and file sharing.

* Reply-By-Email functionality for quick, on-the-go communication.

* Compatibility with many other WordPress and BuddyPress themes and plug-ins.

* Expansive wiki options."


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Commons]]