=Discussion=

Silvia Federici:

'''1.'''

"On this account, we too must include in our political agenda the communalization
of housework, reviving that rich feminist tradition that in the U.S. stretches from the
utopian socialist experiments of the mid-nineteenth century to the attempts that
‘materialist feminists’ made from the late nineteenth century to the early twentieth
century to reorganize and socialize domestic work and thereby the home and the
neighborhood, through collective housekeeping – attemps that continued until the 1920s
when the Red Scare put an end to them (Hayden 1981 and 1986). These practices and,
most importantly, the ability of past feminists to look at reproductive labor as an
important sphere of human activity not to be negated but to be revolutionized, must be
revisited and revalorized.
          
One crucial reason for creating collective forms of living is that the reproduction
of human beings is the most labor-intensive work on earth and, to a very large extent, it is
work that is irreducible to mechanization. We cannot mechanize childcare, care for the
ill, or the psychological work necessary to reintegrate our physical and emotional
balance. Despite the efforts that futuristic industrialists are making, we cannot robotize
care except at a terrible cost for the people involved. No one will accept nursebots as
caregivers, especially for children and the ill. Shared responsibility and cooperative work,
not given at the cost of the health of the providers, are the only guarantees of proper care.
For centuries, the reproduction of human beings has been a collective process. It has been
the work of extended families and communities on which people could rely, especially in
proletarian neighborhoods, even when they lived alone so that old age was not
accompanied by the desolate loneliness and dependence on which so many of our elderly
live. It is only with the advent of capitalism that reproduction has been completely
privatized, a process that is now carried to a degree that it destroys our lives. This trend
must be reversed, and the present time is propitious for such a project.



'''2.'''

"This time, however, it is women
who must build the new commons so that they do not remain transient spaces, temporary
autonomous zones, but become the foundation of new forms of social reproduction.
        
If the house is the oikos on which the economy is built, then it is women,
historically the house workers and house prisoners, who must take the initiative to
reclaim the house as a center of collective life, one traversed by multiple people and
forms of cooperation, providing safety without isolation and fixation, allowing for the
sharing and circulation of community possessions, and, above all, providing the
foundation for collective forms of reproduction. As has already been suggested, we can
draw inspiration for this project from the programs of the nineteenth century materialist
feminists who, convinced that the home was an important “spatial component of the
oppression of women,” organized communal kitchens, cooperative households calling for
workers’ control of reproduction (Hayden 1981)."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/federici-feminism-and-the-politics-of-commons.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Sharing]]