
'''= "a website of critical discussion born in Bologna in 2012 after the disintegration of UniNomade project".''' 

URL = http://www.commonware.org/

=Description=

Via Andrea Fumagalli:

" Commonware is a website of critical discussion born in Bologna in 2012 after the disintegration of UniNomade project. From the diaspora of Uninomade three areas of dscussion developed, within the theoreical and methodological framework of "neo-workerism" approach: EuroNomade, Effimera and, jut, Commonware. On this basis two seminar workshops were organized in and against the university of Bologna and against the sc. "Bologna Process: "From Marx to Operaism" and "Styles of Militancy". Commonware did it by trying to avoid a double risk, always lurking: the nostalgia of the roots and a present without history. Along this line of escape, the contraposition between "past" and "future" loses all consistency: only a genealogical and radically materialistic look can allow us to criticize concepts and organizational forms that are useless today and to invent new ones, to equip thought and direct the practice on the unresolved nodes of the present. 


The website is divided in digfferent sections: 

- Editorial (points of view and hypothesis of research on collected materials, on relevant nodes, on open problems); .

- Cartographies (descriptions of conflicts around the world and analysis and ideas for discussion on common traits and specificities of global movements).

- NeetWork (bout materials of inquiry and analysis within the new class composition and forms of work, focusing on the production of subjectivity and the network, gender and race)

- Cloe (a space of imagination of meetings and real exchanges, of lust and chastity, of the richness of the possible and of the misery of the present)

- Laboratories (permanent site on training and self-training, on the seminar cycles in preparation and in progress, with theoretical materials and conceptual work tools to build our political toolbox)

- Genealogie ( entire UniNomade archive accessible from 2010 to 2013).

- Gallery (space for anticipations of books and reviews, unpublished works and reprints, art and literature)"

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Italy]]