
=Directory=

(info below likely produced by ChatGPT)


'''* Thinkers Who’ve Moved Jung Toward Communal Contexts'''


"Several theorists and practitioners have attempted to bridge Jung’s individualism with collective frameworks:


==1. James Hillman & Archetypal Psychology==


Communal Shift: Hillman, a post-Jungian, critiqued Jung’s focus on the individual’s "inner work" and argued for a soul-centric approach tied to culture, ecology, and community.


Key Idea: The "animae mundi" (world soul) suggests that individuation isn’t just personal but involves repairing our collective imagination. Mythologies aren’t just private; they must resonate with the "commons of the psyche."


Limitation: Hillman’s work remains abstract—few concrete models for communal practice.


==2. Marion Woodman & Embodied Collective Healing==


Communal Shift: Jungian analyst Woodman linked individuation to communal trauma (e.g., patriarchy, addiction) through body-centered work (dance, ritual).


Key Idea: Personal mythologies must address shared wounds (e.g., her work with women’s groups reclaiming feminine archetypes).


Limitation: Her focus was often gendered/groups rather than broad societal structures.



==3. Murray Stein & Communal Individuation==


Communal Shift: Stein proposes "communal individuation"—the idea that groups (organizations, cultures) undergo collective transformation parallel to individuals.


Key Idea: Institutions have "group psyches" shaped by archetypes (e.g., a corporation’s "shadow").


Limitation: Still theoretical; lacks grassroots methods.


==4. Depth Psychology & Activism (Andrew Samuels, Sharon Blackie)==


Andrew Samuels: Reimagines Jungian therapy as political—e.g., how archetypes shape collective ideologies (nationalism, climate denial).


Sharon Blackie: Reconnects personal mythologies to land/place (Celtic traditions), arguing individuation must serve ecological/community resilience.


==5. Jean Shinoda Bolen & the Millionth Circle==


Communal Shift: Bolen applied Jung’s "collective unconscious" to feminist movements, advocating small circles as cells of cultural change.


Key Idea: "When a critical mass of individuals changes, society tips"—personal mythologies must intentionally align with communal justice."


[[Category:Relational]]