

'''* Article: Commoning as Differentiated Publicness. By Heidi Sohn, Stavros Kousoulas and Gerhard Bruyns. Introduction by the editors. Footprint Issue#16 Spring 2015. Book: H. Sohn, S. Kousoulas and G. Bruyns, Delft: Architecture Theory Chair in partnership with Stichting Footprint and Techne Press, pp. 1-8'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/11739178/Commoning_as_Differentiated_Publicness?email_work_card=view-paper


=Abstract=

“Contemporary commoning practices do not constitute a mere alternative, but instead comprise a qualitative threshold: a moment of critical differentiation. As such, they call out for the development of a set of renewed methodological, analytical and synthetic tools and devices that are better equipped to understand the in-between as a ‘thirding’: as a form of differentiated publicness. The editorial introduction offers a platform of negotiation, which far from disregarding the already established approaches to the thematic in question, aims at expanding their scope, complementing them with non-dialectical readings. By presenting non-hierarchical understandings of urban practices, as well as fostering the intersection of different trajectories and discourses, the introduction to this issue strives to provide a fertile ground for the encounter of the multidimensional and relational potentials of contemporary commoning practices.”


=Excerpt=

By Heidi Sohn, Stavros Kousoulas and Gerhard Bruyns:

“The syncretism of contemporary social move-
ments and the growing momentum of the commons
movement both illustrate the civil distrust of any
form of institutional government and the rejection of
deep structural categories embodied in the dualities
of state/market, public/private, objective/subjec-
tive and universal/local. In opposition to politics
without a public, what Hine calls a cynical ‘post-modern politics’,  the commons movement faces
important challenges and opportunities: 

- firstly, to liberate politics from the forces of state and market;
and secondly (and perhaps more importantly) to
assume a renewed role as a viable alternative to
the failure of the project of the public – ‘the promise
Within this context, the global rise of commons
movements in recent years is signicant in two
interconnected respects. 

Firstly, as David Bollier
comments, as a social movement it represents
a paradigmatic response or counterpoint to ‘the
pathologies of modern markets, government,
science and large institutions’.
 
Secondly, it marks  civil society’s growing interest in moving away from
conventional politics and public polity and, alternatively, towards formulating pragmatic working
systems beyond the frameworks of the market
and the state. In this way, new social and political
spaces of self-governance, empowerment and self-
determination can be opened according to local
circumstances and needs. This direction encom-
passes an understanding of the commons not only
as a resource but also a process and a practice: the
practice of commoning.”


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]