
'''* Book: JEAN-FRANÇOIS DRAPERI. Le fait associatif dans l’Occident médiéval. De l’émergence des communs à la suprématie des marchés. Le Bord de l'Eau,'''

URL = https://www.editionsbdl.com/produit/le-fait-associatif-dans-loccident-medieval/

English title: ''Associations in the Medieval West. From the emergence of the commons to the supremacy of markets.''

=Description=

Via Google Translate:

"Associations dominate the economy of the central Middle Ages: monasteries, parishes, guilds, brotherhoods, communes, found the renaissance of the 12th century. Acting on the medieval associative fact invites us to pose the hypothesis that associations and the social economy are not an invention of contemporary society, but rather a discovery. The social economy was not born in reaction to capitalism, but the capitalist economy was born from the transformation of trade associations and the seizure of power by merchants and bankers over the commons and communes in the 13th and 14th centuries. The shared origin of associations and commons makes it possible to reconnect the forgotten links of contemporary solidarities with traditional solidarities.

Rooting the associative fact in a thousand-year-old history finally invites us to think about “associatism”, defined as the long-term associative movement. The forms of associatism have evolved over the course of history. In the Middle Ages it took the form of the community association; during the contemporary period it takes that of the cooperative association.

Medieval associatism questions the contemporary social economy and its relationship with the dominant economy. While the medieval associative fact was in harmony with the fundamental values ​​of medieval society, the social and cooperative economy is in opposition to the generalized competition which animates the contemporary dominant economy. This explains on the one hand that medieval associatism integrated many macro-economic regulations and on the other hand that the cooperative social economy retracted on the entrepreneurial form."


==In French==

"Les associations dominent l’économie du Moyen Âge central : monastères, paroisses, ghildes, confréries, communes, fondent la renaissance du XIIe siècle. Acter le fait associatif médiéval invite à poser l’hypothèse selon laquelle les associations et l’économie sociale ne sont pas une invention de la société contemporaine, mais plutôt une découverte. L’économie sociale n’est pas née en réaction au capitalisme, mais l’économie capitaliste est née de la transformation des associations de métiers et la prise de pouvoir des marchands et des banquiers sur les communs et les communes aux XIIIe et XIVe siècles. 

L’origine partagée des associations et des communs, permet de renouer les liens oubliés des solidarités contemporaines avec les solidarités traditionnelles.

Enraciner le fait associatif dans une histoire millénaire invite enfin à penser l’« associatisme », défini comme le mouvement associatif de longue durée. Les formes de l’associatisme évoluent au cours de l’histoire. Au Moyen Âge il prend la forme de l’association communautaire ; pendant la période contemporaine il prend celle de l’association coopérative.


L’associatisme médiéval questionne l’économie sociale contemporaine et son rapport avec l’économie dominante. Alors que le fait associatif médiéval était en harmonie avec les valeurs fondamentales de la société médiévale, l’économie sociale et coopérative est en opposition avec la concurrence généralisée qui anime l’économie dominante contemporaine. Ceci explique d’une part que l’associatisme médiéval ait intégré de nombreuses régulations macro-économiques et d’autre part que l’économie sociale coopérative se soit rétractée sur la forme entrepreneuriale."

(https://www.editionsbdl.com/produit/le-fait-associatif-dans-loccident-medieval/)

[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]
[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:Civil Society]]