

= a personalized rendering of Ostrom eight commons governance principles, a credo for the commoners ?

Authors: the participants of the German Sommerschool on the Commons, which took place in Bechstedt/Thuringia in June 2012 [http://web03.webcoach.at/w16/commons/index.php/Hauptseite]

Title: Eight Points of Reference for Commoning


=Text=

"For us Ostrom’s design principles provide a template for the following points of reference. We hope that commoners may find them useful in reflecting on their own practice.

Commons do not exist in a perfect world, but rather in one that is hostile to commons. Therefore it is important that commoners be aware of the treasure they hold in their hands, to preserve it and help it flourish.

1.  As a commoner I clearly understand for which resources I need to care for and with whom I share this responsibility. Commons resources are those that we create together, that we maintain as gifts of nature or whose use has been guaranteed to everyone.

2.  We use the commons resources that we create, care for and maintain. We use the means (time, space, technology, and the quantity of a resource) that are available in a given context. As commoner I am satisfied that there is a fair relationship between my contributions and the benefits I receive.

3.  We enter into or modify our own rules and commitments, and every commoner can participate in this process. Our commitments serve to create, maintain, and preserve the commons to satisfy our needs.

4.  We monitor the respect of these commitments ourselves and sometimes we mandate others whom we trust to help reach this goal. We continually reassess whether our commitments still serve their purpose.

5.  We work out appropriate rules for dealing with violations of our commitments. We determine whether and what kinds of sanctions shall be used, depending on the context and severity of a violation.

6.  Every commoner can make use of a space and means for conflict resolution. We seek to resolve conflicts among us in an easily accessible and straightforward way.

7.  We regulate our own affairs, and external authorities respect that.

8.  We realize that every commons is part of a larger whole. Therefore, different institutions working at different scales are needed to coordinate stewardship and to cooperate with each other."
(http://bollier.org/blog/eight-points-reference-commoning)


=More Information=

* context via David Bollier, http://bollier.org/blog/eight-points-reference-commoning


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Commons]]