

=Discussion=

David Bollier:

"Financial innovation to benefit the commons is therefore an urgent priority for moving open source
governance to the next level. There are actually many initiatives afoot to develop this idea, as
described in a recent report, “Democratic Money and Capital for the Commons,” produced by the
Commons Strategies Group.36 The report makes clear that credit and risk can be
reconceptualized to serve the commons; it has been done before in various limited ways through
public banks, social and ethical lending, and community development finance institutions. But
there are also a number of innovative new models such as DIY credit systems, alternative
currencies, tech-enabled mutual credit societies, and cooperative organizational models like
Enspiral and OVNs. One might say that a post-capitalist vision for finance and money is fitfully
emerging.

The ultimate goal of commons-based, mutualized finance is to develop provisioning systems that
can blend the advantages of bottom-up innovation (inclusiveness, diversity, legitimacy) with the
best of top-down decision-making (speed, decisiveness, scale). Commons that can achieve this
sort of balance can avoid the disempowerment and exclusion often associated with top-down
governance, while also avoiding the muddled responsibility and indecisiveness of unstructured
decision-making.

As a nascent archetype of governance, online commons are attractive because they can host a
flexible, ongoing process of iteration, self-improvement, and viral expansion. The imagination and
goodwill of large numbers of people can be mobilized, without the cumbersome processes and
legal formalities of conventional government. Finally, at a time when conventional political
channels are dysfunctional because of ideological gridlock or single-party or dictatorial capture,
digital commons provide rare, necessary open spaces for experimentation and innovation. New
models can arise outside of the pathological force-fields of conventional politics, at least initially.
Of course, any of the scenarios sketched above require an open, nondiscriminatory Internet, or
“net neutrality,” which in turn requires state action and laws. This is precisely what many
authoritarian nation-states such as China, Saudi Arabia and others reject, and even many
democracies such as the US, France and the UK insist upon extensive surveillance of the digital
lives of their citizens. There is thus an unresolved tension between the state and open networks
that may or may not stifle new possibilities for open source governance."
(https://www.foe.co.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/transnational-republics-commoning-reinventing-governance-through-emergent.pdf)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]