
=Description=

Joam Evans Pim:

"My Community and I feel very honored to be invited to participate at
this first meeting of the European Commons Assembly.

I am a commoner at the Froxán Commons Community, a small village in
the Galizan municipality of Lousame, close to Santiago de Compostela.
Our rural Community has 100 hectares of woodlands which are managed
through direct assembly democracy and also self-manages important
services such as village water supply. The Community faces
considerable threats from the mining industry and has been drawn into
a protracted conflict with the companies.

The municipality of Lousame, in which I have recently served as local
councillor, is a good example of the reality of land commons in
Galiza. common land is 50% of the total in the municipality, with 33
commons community assemblies managing its resources, that also include
in most cases basic services such as supply of water.

In this corner of Europe, the commons are a crucial aspect of our
life. 1/3 of the land in Galiza is "commons", some 650.000 hectares
that contribute to the livelihood of more than half a million people.
Galizan "commons" is a form of "property" which is neither State-owned
nor individual, but belonging to communities as open and fluid groups
of people settled in the land that steward its resources.

With this context in mind, we are mostly interested in traditional
mechanisms for commons management through rural assembly democracy.
But we are also very interested in expanding the notion of the commons
to other practises and places. I am also involved with the iComunales
initiative (http://www.icomunales.org/), connected to the global ICCA
Consortium (http://www.iccaconsortium.org/)."

(Commonswatch mailing list, October 2016)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]