'''* Essay / Proposal:  The commons-based international Food Treaty: A legal architecture to sustain a fair and sustainable food transition. By Jose Luis Vivero Pol.  Rencontres internationales « Penser une démocratie alimentaire », 25-27 novembre 2013, Nantes'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/5899060/The_commons-based_international_Food_Treaty_a_legal_architecture_to_sustain_the_transition [https://www.academia.edu/attachments/32884494/download_file download]


=Summary=

"Food as a purely private good prevents millions to get such a basic resource, since the purchasing power determines access and the price of food does not reflect its multiple dimensions and the value to society. With the dominant no money-no food rationality, hunger still prevails in a world of abundance. Hunger is needlessly killing millions of our fellow humans, including 3.1 million young children every year, condemning many others to life-long exposure to illness and social exclusion. This paper argues this narrative has to be re-conceived and a binding Food Treaty, based on a commons approach to food, will create a more appropriate framework to work together towards a fairer and more sustainable world. The eradication of hunger no later than 2025 would be the main objective within a broader framework whereby food and nutrition security shall be understood as a Global Public Good. Within the treaty framework, those governments that are genuinely determined to end hunger (a coalition of the willing) could commit themselves to mutually-agreed binding goals, strategies and predictable  funding. The paper presents the rationale to substantiate the treaty, as well as objectives, provisions and a  possible route map for the process."


=More Information=

* The [[Food Commons Transition]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]