

=Discussion=

" the suggestion is to have specific watershed COMMODITY ECOLOGY institutionalizations. 

A watershed based institution is required to enhance and cultivate geographically optimal frameworks of technological innovation and materials choice. This is based innately upon the geographic specific dynamics upon how various other material choices, inputs, and outputs are arranged uniquely in each watershed--and require different solutions for different watersheds.

The goal factors are local economic durability, ecological security, and health optimalization. These are the goals that should be the keystone criteria in mind in these deliberations.

How can this be done? If it's democratization and local input and oversight of material choice processes and procedures of decision making, this means that consumers are the ultimate power of authority in materials choice relationships and should have some type of institution in which they can do one of two activities: arrange or call attention to user-producer relationships in material choices that they want in their area (that they fail to have), as well as complain about existing separation of producers who ignore the three goal criteria for sustainability (health, ecology, and economic sustainability) in their technological choices as well as material choices. 

These issues of materials choice decision making procedures are to be democratically nationalized (and watershed-based) issues, instead of exclusively a private issue taken typically with regard or even against the consumer interest (as in the current frameworks of “consumption without representation” in GMO foods for example). Instead, feedback from the public in consumer/user-producer relationships on what materials they want to consume in their watersheds, and which ones should be phased out, how to interlink each of them, and what technology is required to perform this, is involved here."
(http://biostate.blogspot.com/2007/05/two-institutions-required-in-every.html)


=More Information=

The other element of the [[Bioregional State]] is:

* [[Civic Democratic Institution]]: C.D.I.'S: CIVIC DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS THAT FACILITATE A PARTICULAR WATERSHED JURISDICTION’S POLITICS THROUGH AN INFORMAL ROTATING CITIZENS RECOGNITION VOTING FRAMEWORK


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Policy]]