
'''* Policy Paper: A Commons Approach to European Knowledge Policy. Sophie Bloemen & David Hammerstein. Commons Network and the Heinrich Böll Foundation, 2015'''

URL = http://commonsnetwork.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/A-Commons-Approach-to-European-Knowledge-Policy.pdf

=Summary=

"How can we address the high prices of medicines that are straining health budgets? How can openly sharing green knowledge help an agreement at the climate change talks in Paris this year? How could TTIP further privatize knowledge and what can we do about it? What does it mean to say the Internet belongs to everyone?

The Commons perspective sheds light on the democratic governance of knowledge for the common good and identifies knowledge as a shared resource that is a collective responsibility. It emphasizes equitable access to knowledge resources such as health-care, the need to prioritize ecological sustainability in knowledge policy and to promote participation in the management of an open and democratic Internet.

In the paper A Commons Approach to EU Knowledge Policy, Sophie Bloemen & David Hammerstein explain the commons perspective and apply it to various domains of policy that need urgent attention in Europe today."
(http://commonsnetwork.eu/a-commons-approach-to-european-knowledge-policy/)


=Executive Summary=

Sophie Bloemen & David Hammerstein:

"Thanks to the Internet and scores of new digital technologies, the past two decades
have seen revolutionary changes in economic production, much of it stemming from
unprecedented new forms of collaboration in the creation and sharing of knowledge.1
The sharing of useful knowledge brings significant economic, social and environmental
benefits, allowing people to have access to valuable knowledge goods, to participate
and to exercise their democratic rights.

Unfortunately, many of the economic and legal structures that govern knowledge and
its modes of production – not to mention cultural mindsets – are exclusionary. They
presume certain modes of corporate organization, market structures, government
investment policies, intellectual property rights and social welfare metrics that are
increasingly obsolete and socially undesirable. The European Union therefore faces an
urgent challenge: How to manage knowledge in a way that is socially and ecologically
sustainable? How can it candidly acknowledge epochal shifts in technology, commerce
and social practice by devising policies appropriate to the current age?

Such a shift is important if the EU is to assure the vitality of its scientific research,
enhance social wellbeing, as well as maintain its economic position in the world. Policy
structures have to enable ordinary people to freely access and share knowledge and
reap the benefits of collaborative technologies. Without such legal rights and practical
capabilities, Europeans will not be able to act as sovereign democratic citizens in the
face of powerful large state and corporate institutions. In this sense, EU policies for
knowledge-creation and sharing have profound implications for well-being, human
rights and social justice.

To be sure, the European Union (EU) embraces the idea of the “knowledge economy” as
an area of competitive advantage; its Lisbon strategy declared the EU’s ambition to
become ‘the most competitive and dynamic knowledge economy in the world’.
Paradoxically, this ambition is undercut by the EU’s fierce commitment to expanding
intellectual property rights (IPR) and enforcement, which often undercut the great
competitiveness and innovation unleashed by collaborative knowledge-creation.
Indeed whether these policies are serving the purpose of fostering innovation is subject
to debate while enclosing knowledge has led to high costs for society and the exclusion
of many from accessing knowledge goods. The lack of access to medicines and a weaker
dissemination of climate change technologies are prime examples. 

EU policies generally focus on the narrow benefits of IRP-based innovation for
individual companies and rely on archaic social wellbeing models such as GP growth
and narrow outdated models of human motivation. The EU has failed to explore the
considerable public benefits that could be had through robust, open ecosystems of
network-based collaboration. For example, the EU has paid little serious attention to the
enormous innovative capacities of free, libre and open source software (FLOSS), digital
peer production resulting in for example Wikipedia, open design and manufacturing,
social networking platforms, and countless other network-based modes of knowledge
creation, design and production.

Additionally, much of the EU’s public investment in research and innovation does not
sufficiently take into account the public interest. With the exception of recently adopted
open access publishing requirements and some proposals towards open science, it uses
public funds to subsidize proprietary technologies for example in health or
environment, while scanting on the larger payoffs that could result from public
investments in knowledge that remains a public good available to all.

Within this context, the fate of the Internet as a central gateway to knowledge and
information must be a primary concern. The Internet is a foundational infrastructure of
our time. It is therefore worrisome that large private actors are increasingly laying claim
to this indispensable public infrastructure and cultural space, while public policies that
would assure net neutrality are defeated. These developments are threatening the
future of democracy and open society as well as innovation and competition.

The commons perspective, as a new framework for understanding knowledge, can
contribute to some important, long-overdue EU policy discussions. The commons
embraces knowledge as a shared resource and its management a joint responsibility. It
points towards policies that facilitate equitable access to and the sustainable
management of knowledge. Rather than a narrow focus on intellectual property or
economic value alone, the commons approach requires us to attempt a more
comprehensive understanding of value and policies that serve the common good.

Commons thinking takes a community and ecosystem perspective, placing issues of
stewardship, social equity and long-term sustainability at the forefront of policy. With
the commons paradigm, we aim at going beyond a purely individual rights- and marketoriented
worldview: the very perspective that many consider to be at the root of current
economic and environmental crises. Instead of conceiving of society as a mere
collection of atomized individuals principally living as consumers, commons thinking
points to the reality of people’s lives as deeply embedded in social relationships,
communities, histories, traditions and nature.

As such a commons approach embraces the new opportunities for civic participation,
nonmarket self-provisioning and reduced inequality as well as greater de-centralized
innovation. The perspective points towards policies that for example favor open sharing
of knowledge and alternative incentive models that could make medicines far more 
affordable; generate more useful, localized environmental knowledge and technologies;
and facilitate more copious knowledge transfers to a Global South struggling to meet
basic human needs. The compelling logic, benefits and ethic of a commons approach to
knowledge, could improve policy in certain areas such as health, the environment,
science and culture, and the Internet.


'''* Here Come the Commons:'''

Given the social and environmental needs that could be more easily met through
greater sharing of knowledge, the EU needs to ensure that knowledge is accessible as a
public good (if not as commons), especially in the fields of health, environment and
education. It also needs to protect against centralized corporate control of our
knowledge infrastructure, and assure that the entire ecosystem of knowledgeproduction
and distribution remains open and decentralized. There must be the
structural space and legal protections for quasi-autonomous knowledge commons to
thrive.


The agenda is clear and extensive: more nonexclusive and socially responsible
licensing, open innovation programs, strong net neutrality rules, the decentralization
and democratization of infrastructure, open data policies, a science commons
infrastructure, and trade policies that promote knowledge sharing and technology
transfer, especially for ecological needs. 


An agenda at the EU level to expand the
knowledge commons might include:

• Non-exclusive licensing.

The EU should favor those forms of licensing for research that generate the highest
possible social benefit, particularly when public funding is involved. Socially responsible
or non-exclusive licenses on patents would enable broader, less expensive access to
biomedical innovations as well as immediate follow up innovation by competitors.

Another priority for which the same logic holds is the sharing of knowledge for green
technologies to fight climate change. Mandatory open-access publishing rules and the
use of Creative Commons licenses will also accelerate knowledge sharing.


• New policies and institutions that support knowledge commons

In light of the considerable benefits of collaborative sharing, the EU should develop
new policies and types of institutions that support durable knowledge commons.

Support for alternative incentives for biomedical research such as prizes, dissemination
of green technologies, the use of patent pools and data-sharing, could also require new
legal design, funding and the establishment of international frameworks.


• A halt to the further enclosure of knowledge through additional intellectual property
protection

The EU should refrain from further adding to the imbalance between excessive IP 
protection and knowledge sharing for the common good; by not i) adopting misguided
trade secrets regulation, ii)enacting upward harmonization of IP through trade
agreements and iii) exporting of unbalanced norms to third countries through trade
agreements


• Multilateral treaties or Conventions that promote common goods

Instead of using multilateral treaties solely to promote market exchange of private
knowledge goods and the enclosure of knowledge, the EU should support proposals
designed to invest in R&D and promote knowledge sharing among countries. This could
produce enormous social benefits by expanding global knowledge commons. This could
be particularly important within the international climate change discussions.


• Policies that recognize the Internet as infrastructure and Public Space

Net neutrality regulation is one obvious way that policy can assure universal and
affordable access to the Internet as a basic human right. Open standards for software
and technical protocols are another way to treat infrastructure as a commons, spurring
competition, better government procurement and greater democratic accountability. EU
policy should also address issues of ownership of data, the role of the market on the
Internet and the commodification of users.

We stand at a crossroads between a backward-looking regime of proprietary policies
based on archaic economic models – and a burgeoning new system that respects the
power of innovation and social practices in open networks, inviting us to make the most
of an emerging world of knowledge commons. EU policies can help to strengthen the
relevant social, cultural and environmental work of tens of thousands of "knowledge
commoners"- networks of innovative communities- around Europe. They are part of the
structural environment that enables society to fully reap the benefits of knowledge
sharing and collaborative production.

Let´s not miss this opportunity."
(http://commonsnetwork.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Executive-Summary-The-EU-and-the-Commons-A-Commons-Approach-to-European-Knowledge-Policy-.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Europe]]