'''* Article: Berlant, L. (2016). The commons: Infrastructures for troubling times. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 34(3), 393-419. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0263775816645989 doi]'''

URL = https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0263775816645989 [https://collective-n.com/fff/beyond/images/ak/berlant%20-%20infrastructures.pdf? pdf]


=Contextual Quote=

"In contemporary commons talk, social institutions that deliver mass
resources are deemed worthy only if they provide an infrastructure for the common
rather than privatizing it, along with providing something like what the state does, an
exterior-looking focalizing point of material and imaginary survival for its often
desperately nonsovereign members. Seeing world building as immanence, as
infrastructure-making, starts where the universalist sovereign fantasy is expelled as a
primary figure for mass flourishing: it is here that the Spinozan tradition finds its limit.
As the Spinozan Transcendentalists and their heirs in Deleuze, Hardt and Negri (2011),
and, from a queer perspective, Lee Edelman (2004) and Leo Bersani (2009) demonstrate,
it is very hard to move through symbolization without becoming overattached to a primary
analogy or figure. Institutions generate the positivity of attachment and protocol even while
destroying the livelihood of the attached lives. The notion of structure as calcified, as a thing,
also negates the ontology of adaptation and adjustment by casting them as epiphenomenal.

The figure—whether of desire’s negativity or the positivity of Commonwealth—can block
movement, establishing an anchor in a tableau and barring the formal productivity of
movement. But institutional failure leading to infrastructural collapse, from bridges to
systems to fantasy, here leads to a dynamic way to disturb the old logics, or analogics,
that have institutionalized images of shared life."

- Lauren Berlant [https://collective-n.com/fff/beyond/images/ak/berlant%20-%20infrastructures.pdf?]


=Description=

1. Via ChatGPT:

"Lauren Berlant's essay "The Commons: Infrastructures for Troubling Times" explores how infrastructures—such as roads, schools, and norms—shape our social experiences and responses during periods of crisis. Berlant defines infrastructure as "the living mediation of what organizes life," emphasizing its role in connecting individuals within a shared world. She introduces the concept of a "glitch" as an interruption that reveals infrastructural failures, prompting a reassessment of how these systems function. The essay encourages reimagining infrastructures beyond mere repair, considering how they might transform to better support communal life amid ongoing challenges."


'''2. From the author:'''

"This essay comes from my '''forthcoming book, On the Inconvenience of Other People''', which
has three broad aims. The first is to provide a concept of structure for transitional times. All
times are transitional. But at some crisis times like this one, politics is defined by a
collectively held sense that a glitch has appeared in the reproduction of life. A glitch is an
interruption within a transition, a troubled transmission. A glitch is also the revelation of an
infrastructural failure. The repair or replacement of broken infrastructure is, in this book’s
argument, necessary for any form of sociality to extend itself: but my interest is in how that
extension can be non-reproductive, generating a form from within brokenness beyond the
exigencies of the current crisis, and alternatively to it too. But a few definitional problems
arise from this observation. One is about what repair, or the beyond of glitch, looks like both
generally and amid a catastrophe; the other is defining what kind of form of life an
infrastructure is. These definitional questions are especially central to contemporary
counter-normative political struggle.

Infrastructure is not identical to system or structure, as we currently see them, because
infrastructure is defined by the movement or patterning of social form. It is the living
mediation of what organizes life: the lifeworld of structure. Roads, bridges, schools, food
chains, finance systems, prisons, families, districts, norms all the systems that link ongoing
proximity to being in a world-sustaining relation. Paul Edwards (2003) points out that the
failure of an infrastructure is ordinary in poor countries and countries at war, and people
suffer through it, adapting and adjusting; but even ordinary failure opens up the potential
for new organizations of life, for what Deborah Cowen (2014) has described as logistics, or
creative practicality in the supply chain (see also Masco, 2014; Rubenstein, 2010). So the
extension of relations in a certain direction cannot be conflated with the repair of what
wasn’t working. In the episode of a hiccup, the erasure of the symptom doesn’t prove
that the problem of metabolizing has been resolved; likewise, the reinitializing of a system
that has been stalled by a glitch might involve local patching or debugging (or forgetting, if
the glitch is fantasmatic), while not generating a more robust or resourceful apparatus. All
one can say is, first, that an infrastructure is defined by use and movement; second, that
resilience and repair don’t necessarily neutralize the problem that generated the need for
them, but might reproduce them. At minimum resilience organizes energies for reinhabiting
the ordinary where structure finds its expression: but that’s at minimum."

(https://collective-n.com/fff/beyond/images/ak/berlant%20-%20infrastructures.pdf?)


=Excerpt=

Lauren Berlant:

"As communal spaces in the US and Europe—town squares, streets, schools, sidewalks,
roads, and beaches—are diminished into nonspaces and zoned byways by the ballooning
marketplace, and as what used to be called public utilities on the ever more archaic
Monopoly board are now sold off to sustain shrinking urban and small town tax bases, a
spirit of resistance is taking hold around the world. People are reclaiming bits of nature and
of culture, and saying ‘‘this is going to be public space.’’ Those public spaces are, like
Emerson’s, placeholder forms for the commons to come. In other words, through the
commons concept the very concept of the public is being reinvented now, against, with,
and from within the nation and capital. Through the neoanarchist reinvention of
infrastructure down to the body’s processual retraining a collective presencing is seeking
its genres, which may or may not transform what the sense of the commons is. Negri claims
that any such actions are precarious, as on the terrain of the reproduction of life ‘‘capital will
reduce its opposition to a unity by sucking dry its living power’’ (Curcio and Zseluk, 2010).
Likewise, older forms of populism, state socialism, and religious community are drawing
energy from the concept as a way of recasting what the figure of community is that the public
can imagine living and attaching affect to. Betsy Taylor, while optimistic, nonetheless
reminds us that the commons must enter ‘‘through a phase of destruction into a complex
process of material transformation that becomes the basis for renewal or ‘natality’’’ (2003).
She imagines locality as the solution to the violent fungibility and displacement of all
production and life in contemporary capitalism (Taylor, 2002; 2003).

This is to say that what Naomi Klein calls the ‘‘radical reclaiming of the commons’’
(2001) will involve not only debate about the new ordinary to come and transformation
of the vast wealth of the world into a part of a thriving sustainable life, but will also involve
unlearning the expectation of sovereignty as self-possession, a mechanism for control and
evidence of freedom. For the commons always points to what threatens to be unbearable not
only in political and economic terms but in the scenes of mistrust that proceed with or
without the heuristic of trust.

The commons wants terms in which trust would become more robust. In liberal capitalist
contexts, and as our mirror in austerity politics has insisted, this will involve rethinking work
as well as labor, and the political as well as politics. It will involve a massive recasting of the
relation of economy to modes of intimacy, which is to say to obligations and practices of
worlding and care, and in such a way that debunks the productivist ideology that collapses
the citizen with the worker.

Meanwhile, in the situation tragedy of the present, we live on the precipice of infrastructure
collapse economically, politically, and in the built and natural worlds. Mid-twentieth century
forms of expansive world building toward the good life have little or unreliable traction. In a
fundamentally unstable economy, planning can be seen as a neurotic reminder of the previous
era’s optimism that everyone, or anyone, could be significantly necessary to capital: now, what
used to be called alienation, a structure that felt alienated, is experienced at once as sensual
saturation and physical exhaustion; now, work has taken on a contradictory status as
perpetual and impossible, as only an increasingly lucky few can afford to retire and
progressively fewer can find economically adequate occupations. When inheritance and
planning are up for grabs, when disturbed relations of cause and effect induce the present
as a management crisis, time appears as a disturbance of continuity rather than an ordinary
ground of anyone’s or any institution’s control. What ought the reproduction of life involve if
life in the near future cannot move beyond superintending its own destruction in a contentious
encounter of debt with discipline? What will it take to reorganize constituent power beyond
the claim that society should be a club for constant growth, with the vast wealth that there is
more justly distributed? What good could happen to personal life, to kinship, to the world of
unsaids that house the reproduction of intimate life in the material and fantasmatic ordinary?
Will the state’s abandonment of its publics lead to abandonment of the state or an
intensification of the demand for a sovereign?

Spahr’s work slides consciousness of all of this into suspending its judgment without
evacuating judgment, absorbing the noise of the world, and breaking the world into noise.
This training in unlearning the world through reading it across many profoundly
malfunctioning genealogical machineries produces an infrastructure of patience and
appetite, an unusual pair. But if there is a flatness to what’s evoked in her broken figuration
of what also continues, and if the poetry evokes the violence of indistinction as a way to figure
democracy, it is also haunted by the universalist desire to mechanize change rather than to stop
for or to be stopped by the inconvenient. This was the bourgeois world-wish too, imagining the
commons from the position of a rich life that manages the transition into fantasy, desire, and
material exchanges that no longer governed by possession. We write out of where we write
from. In our final case, the fantasy of losing the world gestures beyond the machinic, though:
perhaps because it’s already lost the plenitude and the resources of the promise."

(https://collective-n.com/fff/beyond/images/ak/berlant%20-%20infrastructures.pdf?)

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]