

=Source=

Special issue of borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012: Commons, Class Struggle and the World. Editors: Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison.

* Introduction by Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison, [[Commons, Class Struggle and the World]], http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/yanghowison_commons.pdf

See: [[Commons and Class Struggle]] [http://www.borderlands.net.au/issues/vol11no2.html]

=Description=



“The ‘commons’ has become one of the keywords in the global class struggle against neoliberal capitalism. The term shares etymological kinship with word such as ‘community’, ‘communism’, and ‘communal’—all of which have been variously expropriated by enclosing powers from above and re-appropriated by movements from below. It invokes the language and customs of pre-capitalist social formations, implicitly negating the stadial concept of history. However, just as the ‘commons’ historically did not mean a singular, static practice but was redefined constantly by what commoners did in their subsistence economy, the future of ‘commons’ will be determined by the content and vector of our struggles, as we define who and what kind of class we will constitute, as the forces arrayed against us will attempt to do the same for their own ends. This collection aims to expand and diversify the discussion around the ongoing historical process of the ‘commons’, provoking new ways of looking at this age-old non-capitalist practice of sharing, subsistence, survival.”
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/yanghowison_commons.htm)


=Excerpts=


==Introduction==

Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison:

The last twenty-three years since the collapse of the statesocialist/capitalist regimes of Eastern Europe have shown repeatedly
the intractable universality of commons and class struggle in defining 
our history. Against the juggernaut of neoliberal accumulation, which 
proceeded rapidly to enclose the ruins of the failed Soviet state, the 
most signal  forms of class struggle emerged as a defense and 
reinvention of the commons, from the 1994 Zapatista indigenous 
rebellion in Chiapas, Mexico to the multiplicity of anti-capitalist 
commoning activities which find spontaneous expressions in postdisaster mutual aid, urban community avant-gardening, workers’ occupation and direct control of abandoned factories.

E.P. Thompson and his Warwick School of History have produced the 
locus classicus in the English social history of the commons, offering 
a much-needed long-term perspective on what has become a fiercely 
contested  terrain of ideological class strife: the commons today 
encompass virtually all fields of social life and reproduction, from the 
traditional indigenous commons and cyber-commons to public access 
to education and healthcare. But various global capitalist institutions 
are also seeking to co-opt  these movements  into a vehicle  for 
restructuring themselves, as a means to shore up the failures of the 
neoliberal  strategy. Prior to the historical commencement of the 
English commoners’ struggle against enclosures and privatizing 
innovations of the market in the eighteenth century,  the  commons 
served traditionally as an essential integument in binding the feudal 
class structure. Over a decade into the twenty-first century, we are at 
a historical conjuncture  that has made us confront again with the 
epochal necessity to reconstitute the very meaning and ramification of 
this  ‘pre-modern’ term, which stands so starkly against the grain of 
capitalist modernity. 

This collection aims to capture some of the essential features  and 
challenges of this class struggle over the commons and its historical 
roots. 

Peter Linebaugh, social historian of the revolutionary Atlantic, 
reveals how the theory of stadial time came to be expropriated from 
the miners’ knowledge of the earth in the  eighteenth century, while 
Edward and Catherine Despard and other organic figures of the transAtlantic class struggle sought to restore the non-teleological, sacred 
time of the revolutionary commons. If the trope of equating the earth 
to the machine is at least as old as the origin of geological science 
(James Hutton, William ‘Strata’ Smith), as Linebaugh shows, we may 
be facing a world-historical moment of catastrophic capitalism when 
an alternative re-grounding of the earth from below is urgently  needed. 

This is exactly what Sabu Kohso, translator of English-Japanese radical thought (David Graeber, [[Kojin Karatani]]),  argues in 
the wake of the Great Eastern Japanese Earthquake (‘3/11’) of 2011, 
namely the necessity of grounding the abstraction of the  ‘world’ (of 
international politics, to say nothing of history and revolution) in the 
‘planetary machine’ that is the earth. Kohso implies that this may lead 
to revolutionary renovation in how we conceive labor and value, 
commons and class struggle, as  this process of rethinking displaces
the centrality of abstract humanity that has defined both the classical 
bourgeois project and that of its supposed state socialist antagonist.


It is not only the ecological ground and the social forces seeking its 
reconstitution which are under intense pressure but also political 
economy and  the discursive terrain of the commons. 

Massimo De  Angelis,  the  critical political economist who wrote  The Beginning of 
History: Value Struggle and Global Capital (Pluto Press, 2007) and 
edits the web journal  The Commoner, provides an overview of the 
depth and extent of the current economic, social, and ecological 
crises as they redefine the nature of the commons and its 
revolutionary prospects for the movement. De Angelis superimposes 
the paradox of capitalist economic growth over the  potential split 
developing between the movement of anti-neoliberal protest and 
movement of the commons. George Caffentzis, radical philosopher of 
money, dissects the discursive enclosure that the ‘commons’ faces 
today, especially in the work of what he terms ‘neo-Hardinian’ (after 
Garrett Hardin, the primary theorist of the anti-commons) scholars 
and policymakers who in his view are attempting to redefine the 
‘commons’ as a means of repairing the failure of the neoliberal 
capitalist project.

Closely bound up with this question of redefining knowledge and 
combating co-optation is the need to reorient our focus on the 
commons toward regions too often neglected by Anglophone activism 
and scholarship.  The late Andre Gunder Frank reminded us of the 
need for such  ‘reorientation’, pointing to the  ‘Orient’ or  ‘Asia’ as the 
fulcrum of a new world history. 


As such, two of the essays in this 
collection focus upon modern Turkey, crossroads of the geographical 
and ideological fissures that divide Asia and Europe,  ‘East’ and 
‘West’,  medieval and modern. 

The  issue of the ongoing ‘Kurdish 
question’, one of the most divisive issues in the formation of the 
Turkish state and indeed in contemporary Turkish society, is brought 
forth in full force  by Barış Ünlü,  editor of a volume (İletişim, 2010) 
celebrating the life and work of İsmail Beşikçi, the Turkish sociologist 
and 1987 candidate for the Nobel Peace Prize. Ünlü exposes  the 
contradictions immanent in this national-statist project against the 
commons  by showing  the manner in which Kurds constitute  an 
indigenous figure in the Turkish body politic, as its leading 
modernizers have promoted the dominant Kemalist ideology, which 
has invented the nationalist myth of ‘Turkishness’ — just as ‘whiteness’ 
was invented in the racialized class politics of U.S. capitalism — and 
consigned the Kurds into the  historical dustbin of  ‘feudal remains 
and/or reactionary-Islamist ideas’. This raises the difficult question of 
how the commons in its traditional garb cannot be separated readily 
from the conception of ethnos, whose ambiguous role in the formation 
of nationalism and state-building is all too well-known, and how 
principled intellectuals might play an organic role in forging a counterhegemonic discourse of the  cosmopolitan commons. Turkey also 
offers an important case study in how the commons cannot be 
conceived exclusively as a rural phenomenon. 

Jeffrey  Howison  and 
Irmak Ertuna-Howison—historical sociologist of  American 
conservatism and comparative literary theorist of technology and the 
avant-garde, respectively—analyze the  massive  urban 
developmentalist projects of the ‘New Istanbul’, emblematized 
ubiquitously in the proposed construction of the third bridge over the 
Bosphorus Strait and of ‘Canal Istanbul’ in the form of a second 
Bosphorus Strait. These projects will have profound social, financial, 
and ecological consequences, and represent a contemporary form of 
enclosure in which the conception and use of formerly public space in 
the urban commons becomes immediately the idiom of class struggle.

In order to struggle effectively against this capitalist project of 
reterritorialization, it is not only widening the scope of geographical 
imagination that is in order but nothing  less than a radical 
reconceptualization of social agency and historical stages. 

Jason  Hribal,  scholar of animal liberation and author of Fear of the Animal 
Planet: The [[Hidden History of Animal Resistance]] (AK Press, 2010), 
proposes such  a  reconceptualization in terms of animal-human 
relations, exposing the line of epistemological divide in this 
relationship to have arisen from the historical forces  of primary 
accumulation at work in the conceptual expropriation of animals from 
the category of the working class. Animal-as-worker is a notion that 
Hribal shows to be already present in slave narratives and political 
economists antedating Marx, who appears here as a decisive culprit 
in promoting an anthropocentric theory of class. 

Comparative historian  Manuel Yang rounds out our collection by bringing us back to the 
problematic of historical stages, differentiating Marx from Lewis Henry 
Morgan’s Eurocentric stadialism and showing the degree to which the 
commons appears as an essential motif in the Old Moor’s work.


This special issue sets out to sample some of the ongoing crucial 
debates and scholarship on the commons, as they are forged in the 
historical experience of class struggle and resistance to enclosure.


Many other narratives and voices from below are possible and 
awaiting be documented and argued over—we must do this in the 
trenches of wherever we find ourselves, whether Syntagma Square or 
Tahrir Square, Okinawa or Santiago, Kamagasaki slums or Skid Row 
L.A., Taiyan or Palestine. For class struggle and the commons are not 
a name of discipline or category of analysis—they are the defining 
experiences of how the world was made and is being made now."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/yanghowison_commons.pdf)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]