
=Description=

Cliff Rosenthal:

". The
Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI)
movement in the U.S., which includes community
development credit unions, banks, loan funds, venture
capital funds, and micro-enterprise organisations, has
outperformed the largest financial institutions over
the last year. Credit unions, for example, increased
their mortgage and consumer lending in 2008. Many
community development loan funds report more
well-qualified demand than they can readily meet.
Community development banks have demonstrated a
solid record.
The CDFI movement, which brings together all these
various sectors, have achieved unprecedented
recognition and support from the new administration
of President Obama. The U.S. Treasury Department’s
CDFI Fund, established and sustained through the joint
efforts of CDFI Coalition for fifteen years, has received
a special $100 million “stimulus” appropriation, and the
President’s request calls for a 100 per cent increase in
the annual appropriation in the coming year.
There are several lessons that we can draw from these
successes. First of all, the community-based financial
model is a viable one, especially in times of crisis.
Second, CDFIs have demonstrated to government
their value as a highly targeted means to provide
financing to underserved and excluded populations,
which have been hit especially hard by the downturn.
Third, as demonstrated by the broad diversity of
CDFIs in the U.S., multiple, creative financial tools
and institutions are needed. Fourth, bringing together
these diverse organizations in a lasting, disciplined
coalition maximizes the impact and benefit of the
various community development financial sectors.
Britain’s credit unions and community development
loan funds can raise their game by building a broadbased
Community Development Finance alliance that
as a mutual movement can speak with one voice to
Government and to other social investors.
Community Banking Partnerships are an outstanding
example of thinking outside the conventional banking
box. The established CBPs have proven to be capable
lenders, vigorous builders of partnerships with the
public and private sector, and important providers of
financial advice and other non-monetary services. The
experience of these urban and rural “pathfinders,” with
their comprehensive approach, is well worth replicating
on a broader scale. The publication by nef and NACUW
of this report is an important step in validating and
promoting the CBP model."
(http://www.nacuw.org.uk/sites/www.nacuw.org.uk/files2/pdf/Community_Banking_Partnership.pdf)

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Community]]