=Description=

"Capital Redefined presents a unique perspective on the nature of “capital,”
departing from the prevailing reductionist accounts. Hosseini and Gills offer
an expanded perspective on Marxian value theory by addressing its main
limitations and building their own integrative value theory. They argue that
the current understanding of “value” must be re-examined and liberated from
its subservient ties to capital while acknowledging the ways in which capital
appropriates value. This is achieved by differentiating between “fetish value”
created by capital and “true value” generated through various commons-based
forms of coexistence.

The authors propose a defetishization of value by rejecting the commonly
accepted idea of its objectivity. They introduce their “commonist value
theory,” which redefines capital as both the product and process of perverting
the fundamental commoning causes of true value into sources of fetish
value. Capital is theorized through a “modular” framework, where multiple
intersecting processes constitute a comprehensive power structure, a “value
regime,” representing an unprecedented degree of the domination of capital
over life. Their theory reconciles two apparently incompatible views on the
notion of value. One view encompasses all inputs involved in capitalist value
production and conflates intrinsic and commodity values. The other warns
against this conflation as it treats capital as an entity tightly associated only
with commodity production and wage labor.

The authors believe that establishing alternative forms of value creation
based on normative principles of living in commons is crucial as an analytical
base for criticizing existing power structures and economic systems."

(https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf)


=Discussion=

S.A. Hamed and Barry K. Gils:

"This book [[Capital Redefined]] proposes a novel approach to theorizing capital and ‘capitalism’ by incorporating the ‘normativity of life’ into its critical analysis and recognizing the absence of inherent true value in capital. It challenges the prevailing belief that capital is the ultimate source of worth and redirects our attention to the flourishing of life and the preservation and enhancement of its thriving capacities. This transformative perspective calls for a fundamental reevaluation of our socio-economic and political systems, aiming to transcend the destructive contradictions and deficiencies of capitalism.

Redefining capital necessitates redefining ‘value’ in the process. Although the notion of value has been neglected in most modern social theories (Pitts, 2021), Marx’s assertion that “value forms the foundation of capital” (Marx, 1993: 421) remains as relevant as ever. This, however, raises the question of how to redefine capital while also acknowledging the value of socio-ecological relations in shaping it. These relations should not be seen simply as a context or precondition, but rather as a set of interrelated causal mechanisms that are embedded in and against capital. Merely contemplating the socioecological, cultural, and (geo-)political dimensions of capitalist functionality as the vital conditions for economic exploitation, without theorizing their re/ construction in the process of capitalist value production, is inadequate to grasp the complex challenges posed by capital, and the prospects for profound conflicts and paradigm shifts.

Redefining capital and value entails revisiting and expanding upon Marxian conceptions while deploying a new perspective inspired by a new discourse on the ‘commons’ and ‘commoning’ developed here in the form of a ‘modular conceptual framework.’ This framework, built on a critical realist ontology, conceptualizes capital as an ensemble of multiple interrelated socio-historical (infra)processes, rather than as an analytically isolated inner structure of ‘the capitalist system’ (see Chapters 3 and 4). This perspective goes beyond the limitations of productivism, economism, and the post-value turn while emphasizing intersectional and ecological dimensions and complex relationships with post-capitalist alternatives and transformative movements. This book reflects on the strengths, potentialities, and limitations of the Marxian tradition of understanding capital in terms of value. It then argues for expanding on these limitations and proposes relevant solutions by presenting a new normative value theory that prioritizes the sources of life as commons and their intrinsic value. Thus, offering a commonist value theory.

This theory encompasses both critical and analytical elements. According to this new theory, the ultimate sources of what we call ‘true value’ are precisely the organized life’s condiciones sine quibus non, which under capitalist relations are perverted into the causal sources of what we call ‘fetish value’ as the essence of capital (Hosseini, 2022a).

True value is sustainably (re)produced only through the commoning modes of living and interconnecting. A commons, whether material or immaterial, naturally occurring or manufactured, is a living organism made up of communities of interconnected and interdependent entities. In normal conditions, the activities of these entities borrow their vitality from the entirety of the commons and, in return, contribute to the survival and thriving of the whole, inclusive of all individual (living) entities. One for all, all for one, and unity in diversity – this is how true value is regenerated.

Under the supremacy of capital, however, the so-called modern civilization emerged as a development through which not only were commons expropriated, but also de-commonized, losing their essence as commons.

Capitalism has now become capitality, a life-killing mode deeply coded into the genetics of our daily lives, thanks to its axiological primacy. Only a profound (re-) commonization of our modern socio-ecological relations can liberate life from the immense grip and power of capital; a transformative process that holds the potential to effectively transcend the predicament of mere survival, while also transforming ubiquitous capitalist relations."

(https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf)


=More information=

* Book: Hosseini, S A Hamed; Gills, Barry K. (2024) : [[Capital Redefined]]: A Commonist Value Theory for Liberating Life, Rethinking Globalizations/ Routledge, 2024 [https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003340386 doi]

URL = https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf

[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]