'''* Report: COMMONS IN SOUTH EAST EUROPE. Case of Croatia, Bosnia & Herzegovina and Macedonia. By Tomislav Tomašević, Vedran Horvat, Alma Midžić, Ivana Dragšić, Miodrag Dakić. Institute for Political Ecology, 2018'''

URL = http://ipe.hr/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IPE_COMMONS_ENG_web.pdf

=Contents=

* Comprehensive introduction – 9
* Compact history of the commons – 15
* Classical theory of the commons – 29
* Critical theory of the commons – 44
* Context of South East Europe – 58
* Cases of commons governance – 73
* Cases of commons struggles – 115


Tomislav Tomašević & Vedran Horvat:

"The second chapter presents the origin of the concept and the practice of commons
throughout history. This primarily shows how commons were the only instrument
of governance in prehistoric societies, as these societies had not developed either
state or (private) property. Contrary to dominant beliefs in political philosophy,
which served to justify both the origin of the state and the origin of private property,
recent evidence presented by Karl Wilderquist and Stephen McCall show that
human life in prehistoric societies was neither short nor brutish. As soon as first
states appeared, private property rights were introduced, but this is not how philosophers
of social contract tell their story. Contractarian philosophers argue that
private property preceded the formation of states, which were formed by free individuals
who decided to bow to state authority in order to protect their individual
freedom and private property, something they could not do in the allegedly nasty
and brutal stateless societies. As states slowly became the dominant form of social
organisation and private property became the dominant property relation, common
property and community governance institutions became more rare. Modern era
brought the dominant social form of nation-state coupled with the dominant economic
form of market capitalism, while the commons became invisible and, for a
large part of modern societies, unimaginable.

The third chapter introduces classical theory of the commons which was popularised
by the work of Elinor Ostrom. Her work was largely influenced by the (neo)
classical economic, political and legal science. Classical theory used the criteria of
rivalry and excludability to divide economic goods into four categories: private, club,
public and common goods. Common goods or common-pool resources are both
rivalrous, which means that their consumption could decrease the possibility of
others to use the same goods, and non-excludable, which means it is difficult to
prevent access to these goods to unauthorised users. Garrett Hardin used the concept
of common-pool resources to claim that their consumption by the growing
population will lead to inevitable tragedy and destruction of the “commons”, so the
only solution is state regulation or their division through privatisation of property
rights. Ostrom examined hundreds of cases around the world and proved that natural
common-pool resources can be self-managed without the state or the market,
by a community of users who design, implement and monitor rules to use these
resources sustainably.

The fourth chapter introduces critical theory of the commons that aims to transform
society through commons towards progressive ends. After Ostrom received
the Nobel Prize in 2009, the commons became a new narrative and paradigm
that aimed to provide an answer to the tragedy of the states and the tragedy of
the markets. Heinrich Böll Foundation, in cooperation with other organisations,
facilitated not only theoretical work on the commons by critical scholars, but also
the building of a social movement that focused on the commons, in order to create
a more socially just, democratic and materially sustainable society. Most critical
scholars agree that there are no inherent characteristics that make some goods
commons, but that commons are produced and their characteristics given through
social dynamic. All commons consist of three elements in mutual relationship: 1)
resource to be governed, 2) community of users governing the resource, 3) institutions
designed by users in order to govern the resource. However, many social
practices could satisfy these criteria, but one would not call them progressive from
a critical theory point of view. Silke Helfrich proposed three normative criteria for
commons which depend on the context of each social practice. These three normative
criteria are: 1) fair access, 2) collective control and 3) sustainable use, while
each corresponds to progressive values of social justice, democracy and ecological
sustainability. This proves not only that commons are examined according to their
context and normative criteria, but also that commons are inherently political. Ugo
Mattei takes this one step further in his activist theory of the commons, claiming
that the commons are a political act of claiming resources in common against the
state elites and economic oligarchy.

The fifth chapter places theory and practice of the commons in the past and present
context of the South East Europe (see) region. For the purpose of this study,
the countries considered South East Europe are Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo and Macedonia. These countries have
a common institutional history as they were part of the Federal People's Republic
of Yugoslavia, later named the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia, between
1945 and the beginning of the 1990s. Since the 1950s, Yugoslavia developed
a globally distinct socio-economic system called self-governing socialism. As the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia broke its connections to Soviet Union led by
Stalin in 1948, Yugoslavia became politically isolated both from the market-capitalist
West and the state-socialist East, so its leaders decided to build a new
governing model based on both anti-capitalist and anti-statist ideology. Within
this system, there was a series of experiments with workers' self-managed enterprises,
but there were also self-management experiments in other non-economic
sectors, like housing, health, education and culture. At first Yugoslavia 
had state property of the means of production and limited private property, but
in the 1950s a new type of property was introduced—social property. Although
Yugoslav workers' self-management had many problems, leading to the upper
class of bureaucrats and technocrats making relevant decisions instead of the
workers, important lessons in collective governance and property can still be
learned from this period. However, such practices were poorly researched because
in the 1990s they were largely vilified by nationalist forces, which declared
them a part of the so-called “totalitarianism”. This legacy is a major obstacle for
advocating any forms of collective governance in the region today, since words
like “cooperative”, frequently used in Western Europe, are still perceived as
synonymous with the forced collectivisation experiment of the late 1940s by
large segments of the see region population. Nevertheless, as case studies from
Croatia, Bosnia & Herzegovina and Macedonia will demonstrate, different social
movements in the region are embracing the commons paradigm. These movements
are resisting the privatisation of key natural resources and public services
that regional governments are pressured into by austerity measures imposed on
South East Europe. However, the majority of these natural resources and public
services is still controlled by the state and misused for the benefit of a small
corrupt elite that has captured the state. The commons, as part of the global
endeavour to redefine common good and democracy, are becoming a powerful
paradigm in the see region as well.

The sixth chapter presents some of the cases of commons governance from Croatia,
Bosnia & Herzegovina and Macedonia which were selected based on diversity of
the resources governed and communities of users. These countries were chosen for
the first phase of the research, while the remaining countries of South East Europe
will be researched in the second phase. The classical, mostly Ostrom-based definition
of commons is used for identifying and analysing these governance cases.
Commons are defined in this regard as a social practice of governing a resource not
by state or market but by a community of users that self-governs the resource through
institutions that it creates. Using this definition, authors identified several cases
in each of the three countries that show that there are old and new examples of
community self-governance of resources within South East Europe region. These
resources range from buildings and pastures to water infrastructure and green
areas. In researching the cases, authors used semi-structured interviews with the
main actors of commons governance, as well as legal documents, minutes of the
meetings and news sources. Cases are described in terms of the resource, community
and governance institutions, after which they are analysed according to
Ostrom”s eight design principles for sustainable commons.

The seventh chapter presents cases of commons struggle in Croatia, Bosnia &
Herzegovina and Macedonia. In identifying and analysing these cases, authors
used the critical definition of the commons mostly based on Ugo Mattei, which
defines the commons as a political act of claiming resources in common through conflict
against commodification, commercialisation, privatisation and state enclosure
of resources for the benefit of few. These cases show that the commons paradigm
is increasingly appealing to various progressive social movements in South East
Europe that struggle against enclosure and privatisation of local resources. These
struggles range from movements against the privatisation of public spaces in urban
centres or areas reserved for city expansion to movements against enclosure and
devastation of rivers or excessive urbanisation and destruction of lakes. Authors
again used semi-structured interviews with the main actors and coupled that with
other sources of information like news sources and documents. Cases are described
in terms of the resource claimed, actors that lead the struggle, relations to the state
and market, and then analysed to see how the discourse that the movements used
fits the discourse of the commons.

The eighth chapter discusses similarities and differences between the analysed cases
and makes some cautious conclusions about the commons theory and practice in
Croatia, Bosnia & Herzegovina and Macedonia. This is followed by some policy
recommendations that could support commons governance as a path for radical
democratisation of South East Europe countries. Hopefully, these conclusions and
the whole study will spark more advanced theoretical texts and more robust empirical
studies of the commons in the region in the future."

[[Category:Bosnia]]
[[Category:Croatia]]
[[Category:Macedonia]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Europe]]