

=Typology=

==Two types of [[Community Wireless Networking]]==

Magnus Lawrie:

"Two types of Wireless Network have been adopted by CWNs. Infrastructure
mode relies on static ariels to share bandwidth to connecting client computers
with management of the network on a separate centralized administrative
layer. Ad-hoc wireless networks may also rely on a fixed infrastructure.
Typically they are created between many communicating mobile devices (or
’nodes’). Ad-hoc wireless networks are said to be self-healing: If a node fails,
data is automatically re-routed to find the shortest possible path between
two end points.


'''* DjurslandS.net'''

DjurslandS.net in Denmark is among the largest CWNs in the world).

250 volunteer built radio stations share fast internet connections with over
5000 remote rural households in an area of 3360 sq/km (Neilsen, 2007, p.3).

The Djursland peninsula, extending East from Jutland, is encircled by a
fibre-optic backbone. At the end of the 1990s, despite the proximity of this
communications ’trunk road’, most Djursland homes fell into the ’last mile’
of connectivity, where broadband was technically inoperable. For incumbent
telecom providers, extending coverage was financially unjustifiable - market
failure had occurred. By now Djursland had been in economic decline for
some years. The closure in 1998 of Djursland’s only regional newspaper was
the motivation to set up an internet information portal. Boevl, the computer
enthusiasts’ group who took up this challenge had engaged in socially-active
projects since 1992. With grant aid they had established a free access computer workshop, undertaken computer recycling and instigated fifteen similar
projects in Lithuania and Kazakhstan. By practical steps of widening access
to information and services, Boevl developed their vision of the ICT-Society
in Djursland and from January 2001, worked with a decision making board
towards the ideal of ”lightning fast internet access for a fixed price all over
Djursland” (Neilsen, 2007, p.7). A phased development programme followed,
with the pilot project expected to receive EU support. However, an obscure
funding process resulted in the ruling that (even in the absence of competition) government intervention in the market was not allowed. As the options
for external support dwindled, by increments Djursland’s network - built on
DIY pragmatism more than Free Software idealism - became self-sustaining.

Through economies of scale and hobbyist-led technical innovations costs reduced, whilst individuals worked to greatly expand the network. Members of
DjurslandS.net provided themselves fast internet access, at one-third of the
subscriber fees in more ’economically viable’ urban areas.


'''* Freifunk:'''

Freifunk was established in Berlin in 2002 to create independent,
community-based, non-commercial, open and uncensored data networks
(Freifunk, 2004). Freifunk has done this using wireless technology, operating
on unlicensed segments of the radio spectrum. Technical efforts have centred
on adapting OpenWRT – Free Software run on consumer wireless routers.

The resulting ’firmware’, developed by a small team of volunteers, manages
bandwidth allocation in order to maintain an equal flow of data throughout a
wireless network; Regardless of network size, traffic, or the relative locations
of two communicating points, data will be exchanged with equal priority.

A flexible ’mesh’ networking arrangement (many nodes connecting to many
neighbour nodes) invests control of the network in the end devices, not an
additional layer. By sharing technology and experiences, several Freifunk
networks were established in Berlin. These were connected through wireless
links known as the Berlin Backbone (BBB). Although the linked networks
continued to operate independently, the BBB could be seen as an administrative layer which takes control away from end devices, whilst enhanced
possibilities for local audio and video applications such as free radio, internet
telephony and webTV advance the case for uncensored data and net neutrality. Freifunk’s social aim has been to strengthen existing organization
and to develop e-democracy and grass roots structures appropriate to the
digital era. Balances between social and technical participation in Freifunk
networks is achieved by the absence of privileged nodes; horizontalism remains built in the network, whilst the hobbyist aspect of the organization
keeps the network free to use and free of commercial interests. A diversity
of participants and agendas is maintained through router firmware designed
to put control with users."
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/commons_wireless_autonomy.pdf)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]