

=Discussion=

PM:

"We don’t have to be particularly inventive in finding
a fall-back scenario when markets fail. The
most reformist, gradualist, pragmatic approach
is the best, boring as it may be.

It could look as follows (the figures relate
to the world; the sequence doesn’t imply
hierarchy, but only the material size of the
respective spheres):


==The [[Three Institutional Spheres of Commoning]]==


===1 Public Services===

PM:

"For the whole infrastructure and the production
of existentially necessary goods the
present existing state must and can be transformed
into an institution of extended public
services on a larger-scale.

It is obvious that
more transparency and democratic participation
will be needed than today’s administrations
offer, more resilient structures.

States must also observe Ostrom’s rules of
governing the commons, which, in fact, are
nothing but principles of good governance.
To renounce on large scale social cooperation
because there is a risk of degeneration
into hierarchical power structures (Cf. Holloway)
is a form of defeatism and is not
compatible with the needs of the large urban
societies we live in.

From the initial function as an apparatus
of repression the modern state has gradually
been transformed into a cooperative
entity, in which each member contributes
what s/he can afford (taxes) and receives
what s/he needs (public services, from education
to loans and health care). Once inequalities
have been diminished and
oligarchic interests have disappeared,
states can in turn reduce their repressive
and governing functions (“power over”)
and become sober cooperative administrations
of things. The neo-liberal ideologues’
hatred directed at “the state” in any form
is conceivable when considering its cooperative
aspect and potential.

In the eyes of the neo-liberal predators the
very existence of the state is scandalous,
even more so of a state that has partly assumed
the role of an institution of the commons. The global financial crisis is being
used to destroy all the commons-aspects of
the state: in Greece, in Portugal, but also
in the still “healthy” regions of Europe.

Should we ever be confronted with local,
regional or global collapses, we won’t have
the time to establish fancy alternative models
of large-scale social cooperation
have been diminished and
oligarchic interests have disappeared,
states can in turn reduce their repressive
and governing functions (“power over”)
and become sober cooperative administrations
of things. The neo-liberal ideologues’
hatred directed at “the state” in any form
is conceivable when considering its cooperative
aspect and potential.

(We’re not talking here about small survivalist
projects in alternative niches.) We
must use what we have, and since the state
is available it can function again as a fallback
option. Let us reclaim the state
then!51 It s not the first time that this has
happened and can therefore happen again.)



===2 Food Subsistence===

Based on Agro-urban Neighborhoods
The household (from Greek oikos=house,
family+nomos = order) is the basis of any
economy and is therefore the first social
module of subsistence. Besides general,
public and industrial subsistence, housing,
food, clothing, everyday culture etc.
belong to the every-day life organizational
sphere of subsistence.

The second pillar of a post-growth society
are therefore subsistence communities on
the level of neighborhoods, that can, most
importantly, assume most of the food supply
and production. This sphere comprises
about one sixth of the overall economic activities
if we take current household expenses
as a reference. Neighborhoods are
the basic social module of a society based
on the commons.

The neighborhoods are the source of the
empowerment, the trust and the communicative
capacity that we need to determine
our own destiny. Neighborhoods
provide the social conditions to establish
attitudes and values that enable people to
make society sustainable."


===3 The Creative-Cooperative Sphere===

To be honest this sphere is a residual category.

It comprises all kinds of activities that
are made possible by public and communal
subsistence (the two other spheres).

It’s a creative-cooperative sector that must respect
the social and ecological guidelines,
but is characterized by the principle of free
association (or individuality). Activities in
this sphere can be individual or assume the
form of “club-commons,” cooperative
firms, foundations etc. Membership (Ostrom’s rule 1) is required, but access is
open in principle. Any form of exchange or
production can be tried out: markets,
bazaars, gifts, open workshops, fairs,
money, bartering etc. In this area trading
instead of sharing isn’t a systemic issue."
(http://www.o500.org/books/pm_power_of_neighborhood.pdf)



==[[Six Modules for the Institutions of the Global Commons]]==

"The trinity of the commons corresponds to
the political wisdom of the division of powers,
of checks and balances. It represents material
democracy and structural prudence,
which teaches us not put all your eggs in one
basket. Do not trust yourself too much.


Most of the different types of commons
and of activities can be distributed in six
modules:

* NEIGHBORHOOD 

* BOROUGH/TOWN

* CITY/REGION 

* TERRITORY

* SUBCONTINENT 

* PLANET


These modules are emergent entities, generated
by possible reintegration of functions,
minimization of transport,
economies of scale, communicative and
political considerations, general features of
stable, resilient systems. It is obvious, that
they must be interpreted according to local
conditions. The suggested modules are not
identical in every circumstance, but they
share more what Wittgenstein called “family
resemblance.”58 We must not think of
them as containers or gated communities,
but rather as clouds with a fuzzy silhouette,
as defined spaces and meeting points
at the same time.

There is an intrinsic connection between
functions and the size of the territories
they serve. The cooperative state of public
services works best in medium-sized territories
that can be integrated without excessive
use of energy for transportation.

What we need is a global secession of
medium-sized territories.

Big nations can be replaced by criss-cross
federations and coalitions of territories
that are defined by function, not by historical
fictions. Territories can be members of
sub-continental or global cooperatives for
specific purposes. Such communal enterprises
are already in existence, e.g. the
CERN, a cooperative effort of nations, big
and small. Unfortunately CERN isn’t subjected
to real democratic monitoring and
in this respect not a perfect model.

Sub-continental or global cooperation is
needed to develop the new ecological
products, modular components or materials
that can be used or assembled in territories
or even neighborhoods."
(http://www.o500.org/books/pm_power_of_neighborhood.pdf)

=Source=

* book:  The [[Power of Neighborhood and the Commons]]


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]