

=Description=

The Common Good Balance Sheet is a central tool of the Economy for the Common Good (ECG). The ECG places human beings and all living entities at the center of economic activity. It translates standards for human relationships as well as constitutional values into an economic context and rewards stakeholders for behaving and organizing themselves in a humane, cooperative, ecological and democratic way.

Companies from all sectors and all sizes use the Common Good Balance Sheet to measure their contribution to the Common Good of a democratic society. It gives an account of the degree to which the company fulfills the five most important constitutional values of democratic states: human dignity, solidarity, sustainability, justice and democracy. In making this assessment, it can obtain a maximum of 1,000 Common Good Points, which appear on its products in the form of a five-color Common Good traffic light. The better the Common Good Balance is, the greater the legal advantages for this company should be in the future, with these ranging from lower value-added tax rates and customs tariffs to preferential treatment in public procurement.

The external audit clarifies to what extent the Common Good ideals have been put into practice in the day-to-day life of the company. The companies turn in a critical self-evaluation in their Common Good Report, which is then checked externally by auditors. An external audit is mandatory for a company to receive three seedlings, thus reaching the highest certification level."
(https://www.ecogood.org/en/ecg-balance-sheet/what-common-good-balance-sheet)


=More Information=

* [[Economy for the Common Good]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]