'''* Article: The Commons as a Legal Concept. By Maria Rosaria Marella. Law Critique (2017) 28:61–86'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/35969919/The_Commons_as_a_Legal_Concept


=Contextual Quote=

"I argue that legal tools needed to establish the law of the commons are available right now, in the era of neoliberalism. More speciﬁcally, I contend, ﬁrst, that the legal  recognition and regulation of the commons is consistent with the law in force and 
the current legal regimes of private property, and second, that this present stage of  globalization, both in the peripheries and at the core of the capitalist system, is more  favourable to the establishment of the ‘law of the commons’ as a possible new area  of private law. "

- Maria Rosaria Marella [https://www.academia.edu/35969919/The_Commons_as_a_Legal_Concept]


=Description=

"Scientific debates about the political, economic and even legal aspects of commons have circulated wherever commons are perceived to pose a challenge to the increasing commodification of people's lives. Indeed, a wide range of commons has emerged worldwide. Emerging commons pose a challenge to the law which is now requested to provide legal tools to resist the dispossession of the common wealth. Nevertheless, commons do not embody a reality which is external or unfamiliar to the law. This paper is an attempt to reframe the commons as a legal concept. '''In this article I argue that commons are not just a marginal element of contemporary legal systems. Rather, they embody the premises for important transformative practices and discourses and represent a subversive site in the legal order.''' I maintain, first, that the law of the commons is consistent with the law in force and the current legal regimes of private property and, second, that the current stage of globalization is most favourable to the establishment of a law of the commons both in the peripheries and at the core of the capitalist system. However, '''given the persistent dominance of the individual-based property paradigm, the legitimacy of the commons on legal grounds remains problematic.''' Certainly the recognition and protection of the commons challenge the legal regime of property in force and query about the possible limits that the law may impose upon property rights. It is evident that '''the true core of the commons discourse as a legal discourse rests upon its relation with property and depends on the notion of property that we assume as normative. The Hohfeldian idea of property as a bundle of rights offers a good starting point for articulating a legal theory of the commons under positive law'''."


=Contents=

Maria Rosaria Marella:

"The paper is structured in four sections. 

The ﬁrst two sections offer, respectively, 
a deﬁnition and a taxonomy of what can be reasonably conceived as commons at 
this present time. 

In doing so, '''the ﬁrst section draws mainly on the Italian  experience''', which offers some interesting elements both at the political and 
doctrinal level and is characterized by what I deﬁne as a non-naturalistic approach 
to the commons. 

'''The second section on Taxonomy''' adopts this particular approach 
in order to design a taxonomy of resources capable of deﬁning commons in legal 
terms. 

'''Section three on the Legal Basis of the Commons''' offers a genealogical 
account of the commons as an exception to property law and, at the same time, as 
something internal to it. 

'''In section four on Use versus Ownership''' I map various 
legal arrangements that have concretely assigned legitimacy or, more precisely, a 
legal form to collective rights of use as property rights distinct from property 
ownership. 

In '''the Conclusion''' I return to the relation between the discourse of 
commons and '''the idea of property as a bundle of rights''' and consider the issue of 
urban squatting within the Italian common goods movement as a case study for 
cross-examining and re-proposing the ‘unbundling’ hypothesis."


=Excerpts=

By Maria Rosaria Marella:

'''1.'''

"Evidence of commons can be found in most legal systems. Collective rights on 
communal lands have always been enforced in continental Europe, Asia and Africa. 
Collective properties in Italy, indigenous rights on land in North and South 
America, as well as collective rights of servitudes or use (such as usi civici in Italy) 
are currently granted by many national laws. In some cases they are recognized as 
formal entitlements, in others they are governed through informal practices. 
While collective rights of access and use are usually presented as a nostalgic 
throwback to old communal lands, such a narrative is now increasingly undermined 
by a variety of ‘emerging commons’, such as Common Interest Communities, 
Limited Equity Housing Cooperatives and Community Land Trusts in North 
America or Guerrilla Gardens in urban areas worldwide, not to mention intangible 
commons such as the very many experiences of commoning on the Internet 
(Wikipedia being just one notable example). The complexity of this situation 
contradicts any suggestion that commons are either exceptional or a mere legacy of 
the past. 

Recently, a wide variety of legal instruments have been deployed to protect (or 
re-appropriate) the commons, ranging from property-like or ‘counterposed property 
claims’, to the denial of private property (such as informality in urban
development), by way of creating a legal person out of the common resource to be 
protected (below ‘Use Across the Subject/Object Distinction’ section). Thus 
multiple legal tools are available in all legal systems and serve as functional 
equivalents."


'''2.'''

"In this article I argue that commons are not just a marginal component of 
contemporary legal systems. On the contrary, they embody the premises for 
important transformative practices and discourses and represent a subversive site in 
the legal order: commons both challenge the dominance of private property in legal 
discourse and confront the abuse of intellectual property that has occurred 
worldwide in the last decades. Even more radically, they disrupt both the subject/ 
object and the public/private dichotomies. Regarding the former, if we understand 
the commons as social systems consisting of communities and resources managed in 
common, it becomes clear that resources and communities are mutually constitutive, 
to the extent that the distinction between the legal subject/titleholder and the object 
of the entitlement starts to disappear. Indeed, among the variety of legal 
arrangements adopted to protect the commons '''there are some that blur (or ﬂip) 
the subject/object opposition'''.

..

The commons as a social entity goes beyond both the 
individualistic approach to private law and the dogma of state sovereignty in public 
law. In fact, in modern legal systems, the commons represent the epitome of the 
crisis of the public/private dichotomy in property law. This is particularly true for 
civil law systems where the public/private distinction in the allocation of resources 
radically marked the abolition of feudalism and located itself at the core of the legal 
system. Conversely emergent commons are now claimed to be located beyond the 
market/state opposition. 

This point was clearly corroborated in 2011 in two important decisions made by 
the Supreme Court of India and the Italian Supreme Court. The ﬁrst decision refers 
to an emblematic example of political corruption involving the transfer from the 
local government to a private developer of an area located in a village in the State of 
Punjab, which included a pond that was crucial for local inhabitants as a source of 
water for drinking, washing and watering cattle. The Court condemned this 
widespread practice of the public administration and declared the need to protect 
common rights in order to defend the lives of communities. 

The Italian decision is particularly relevant because it offered a ﬁrst formal 
recognition of the category of common goods. Examining the claim of a private 
ﬁshery to an area of the Venice Lagoon, the Court maintained that state properties 
had to be considered common goods when they were devoted to the fulﬁllment of 
people’s fundamental rights (in this case, the right to enjoy the environment). 

Despite the dominant account, these judgments show that one does not need to 
return to a mythical golden age to ﬁnd the social and political premises for ﬁtting the 
commons into the legal order, nor is it necessary to wait for a better time (i.e. the 
end of capitalism) for the commons to acquire legal status."


'''3.'''

"This paper is an attempt to reframe the commons as a legal concept. 

It moves from the acknowledgement that the many collective initiatives of social struggle and 
resistance that have occurred across the globe have ﬁrmly placed the question of the 
legal recognition of the commons on the radical agenda. From this perspective, the 
commons provide a good example of how it is possible to challenge the public/ 
private and state sovereignty/market divisions as major ideological frameworks that 
enable the dispossession of what is produced in common. 

It suggests that the legal basis for the commons can be mainly traced to within 
private law and particularly the ﬁeld of property law. However, the aim here is not 
to advocate a third type of property in addition to the public and the private. Instead, 
Hohfeld’s theory of property as a bundle of rights can be usefully applied to 
unbundle property to provide a theoretical foundation to the commons. The main 
argument here is that property forms a continuum from individual to collective 
property and that alongside this continuum different bundles of rights exist in 
varying degrees. These rights can be rearticulated in the context of the commons 
and offer a broad spectrum of legal arrangements that ground collective rights of use 
in the law in force."

[[Category:P2P_Law]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Commons]]