'''= projects that are specifically or more loosely related to a commons-oriented transition for our political economy, society, and civilizational model.'''

For more Commons Transition-specific resources, please visit our related projects:

* '''[http://commonstransition.org/ Commons Transition Home Page]''' Contains a general overview on Commons Transition Strategies, articles, videos and a blog. It is the landing page for the Commons Transition Platform.
* ''' [http://commonstransition.org/stories/ Commons Transition Stories]''' Browse through our selection of featured essays, interviews and texts on Commons Transition projects and related initiatives.
* '''[http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/Main_Page The Commons Transition Wiki]''' The Commons Transition Strategies Wiki is a database for policy papers and proposals related to Commons Transition. 


==The Commons Transition Plan==

* ''' [[Commons Transition Plan]]'''
* '''[http://commonstransition.org/a-commons-transition-plan/ The Commons Transition Plan in the Commons Transition Website]'''
* '''[http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/Commons_Transition_Plan The Commons Transition Plan in the Commons Transition Wiki]'''

The Commons Transition Plan is a non-region specific adaptation of the 1st Commons Transition plan developed by Michel Bauwens for [http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/Category:FLOK | The FLOK Society Project]. The Ecuadorian plan was itself built on the original FLOK Proposal "Sumak Yachay. Devenir Sociedad del Conocimiento Común y Abierto. Designing the FLOK Society. v.1.5.2. By Xabier E. Barandiarán & Daniel Vázquez, 2013.", i.e. Designing the FLOK Society, by  Xabier E. Barandiarán & Daniel Vázquez. The FLOK Society team leaders were Daniel Vazquez and Xabier Barandiarán, with Michel Bauwens, as research director, assisted by five research stream coordinators and the assistant coordinator Daniel Araya. Building on those proposals, the plan specifically calls for an integrative or 'wholistic' approach, which goes beyond technology, and calls for measures that take into account different aspects of social change that need to occur if not simultaneously, then at least linked through a positive feedback loop, in which various measures reinforce each other. It also broadens and deepens the call by looking at commons-based infrastructures not just for knowledge, but for other social and productive activities.

===Related P2P Transition Proposals===

* The [http://en.wiki.floksociety.org/w/Research_Plan Commons Transition Plan], crafted for the floksociety.org project in Ecuador in 2014
* Las Indias summarizes recent p2p thinking from the period 2012-2013: http://english.lasindias.com/michel-bauwens-and-the-new-socioeconomic-alternatives/
* a good summary of the triarchical proposal to simultaneously transform civil society, the market and the state: http://www.shareable.net/blog/blueprint-for-p2p-society-the-partner-state-ethical-economy
* key institutional concepts of the [[Partner State]] and [[Public-Commons Partnerships]]
* local and large-scale political strategies: 
*# local change through civic Alliances of the Commons and Chamber of the Commons producing social charters to recreate local political majorities: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/proposed-next-steps-for-the-emerging-p2p-and-commons-networks/2013/04/02 ; 
*# the global alliance of the commons at nation-state level and beyond http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/04/2012416102253184145.html
* [[Transition Proposals Towards a Commons-Oriented Economy and Society]]
* [[Three Competing Societal and Economic Models in the Age of Peer Production]]

===Specialized Domain-Specific Transition Proposals===

See also the [[:Category: Policy]]

* [[Policies for Shareable Commons Domains]], Alanna Hartzok
* '''Transforming the energy matrix: [[Transition Policies for the Development of the Distributed Energy Model]]. by George Dafermos, Panos Kotsampopoulos, et al.''' [http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-7-policies-for-the-commons/peer-reviewed-papers/transforming-the-energy-matrix/] ; [[General Principles for Policy Making for Distributed Energy]]
* [[Transforming the Productive Base of the Economy Through the Open Design Commons and Distributed Manufacturing]]

==More Information==
See the [[:Category: Commons Transition]]