
'''* Book: Commonism: A New Aesthetics of the Real. edited by Nico Dockx and Pascal Gielen, for the Antennae-Arts in Society series (Amsterdam: Valiz, September 2018),''' 

URL = https://www.valiz.nl/publicaties/commonism.html [https://www.ideabooks.nl/9789492095473-commonism-a-new-aesthetics-of-the-real]

==Contextual Citation==

Pascal Gielen and Sonja Lavaert:

"Our book Commonism is about the triangle of ideology, aesthetics and the commons.1 Our tentative assumption is that commonism may be the next meta-ideology, after neoliberalism. We understand ideology not only negatively as a false awareness, but also positively as a logic of faith that connects fiction and reality and can make people long for and work towards a better form of living together."
(https://www.onlineopen.org/the-salt-of-the-earth)


=Description=

"Following half a century of neoliberalism, there appears to be a new ideology in the making, called “commonism”. This book attempts to map these new ideological notions through examples and artistic practices, as well as critical reflection. How are the commons constituted in society? How do they shape the reality of our living together? What strategies and aesthetics do artistic commoners adopt? Is there an alternative and more just future imaginable through the political ideology of the commons? Commonism claims to be better aligned with the ecological and social reality of today than capitalism. Perhaps it is also closer to how social relationships actually function."
(https://www.ideabooks.nl/9789492095473-commonism-a-new-aesthetics-of-the-real)

==Contents==


* 1 Pigeoning Fanzine: Commonism Issue, ‘Le drame incessant’
: Pat McCarthy
* 53 Introduction:Ideology & Aesthetics of the Real.
: Nico Dockx & Pascal Gielen

===Part 1: Commonability & The Art of Assembling===

* 72 Herewith Your Common PDF
: Liam Gillick

* 75 Common Aesthetics: The Shape of a New Meta-Ideology
: Pascal Gielen

* 91 The Salt of the Earth
: On Commonism: An Interview with Antonio Negri Pascal Gielen & Sonja Lavaert (Excerpt [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Assembly#Interview])

* 117 Bread Kneads Hands
: Futurefarmers

* 135 Notes on Artistic Commoning
: Rudi Laermans

* 149 Indigenous, Not Homogenous &mdash; An Interview with Elizabeth A. Povinelli
: Matteo Lucchetti & Judith Wielander (Visible)

===Part 2: A-Legality & Commoning Economies===

* 169 Precariat—A Revolutionary Class?
: Lara Garcia Diaz & Pascal Gielen

* 183 Commoning Art, Democracy, and the Precariat, a Dialogue
: Evi Swinnen in Conversation with Michel Bauwens

* 199 No-Pressure Economies
: Nico Dockx in Conversation with Rirkrit Tiravanija, Sedhapong Kirativongkamchon, Paphonsak La-or & Superflex about the land foundation

* 219 The Value of Squatting &mdash; a Nipple Another Exchange Value
: Nico Dockx in Conversation with Dennis Tyfus

* 237 Blockchain: Tragedy in Cyberspace? How the Commoner Could Benefit from the Free-Rider
: Walter Van Andel & Louis Volont

* 253 Induced Legality and the Art of Building Common Infrastructures
: An Interview with Santiago Cirugeda, Recetas Urbanas Lara Garcia Diaz

===Part 3: Secrets & Commoning Politics===

* 269 When Politics Becomes Unavoidable &mdash; From Community Art to Commoning Art
: Pascal Gielen & Hanka Otte

* 283 When Commons Becomes Official Politics &mdash; Exploring the Relationship between Commons, Politics, and Art in Naples
: Giuliana Ciancio

* 299 Commons towards New Participatory Institutions &mdash; The Neapolitan Experience
: Maria Francesca De Tullio ([https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Neapolitan_Experience_with_New_Commons-Based_Participatory_Institutions Excerpt])

* 315 Who Steals the Goose from off the Common? An Interview with Peter Linebaugh
: Louis Volont

===Part 4: Affects & Commoning Space-Time===

* 331 Uncommon Common &mdash; Spatial Denial in Urban Settings of Los Angeles
: Harry Gamboa Jr.

* 345 The Potentials of Space Commoning &mdash; The Capacity to Act and Think through Space
: Stavros Stavrides

* 363 Building Bridges &mdash; Art as a Space of Rehearsal
: Jörn Schafaff

* 381 Organizational Aesthetics and Emotional Infrastructure
: Nomeda & Gediminas Urbonas

* 401 The Commons as a Deliberative CounterIdeology
: Eric Kluitenberg



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]