
'''= “Utilizing decentralized technology for curating, valuing and limiting contributions. Building relational memory that honors time, labor, and care - keeping value in circulation even where cash is scarce.”''' [https://grassecon.substack.com/p/call-to-commoning]


=Contextual Quote=

* '''Leveraging Digital Systems for Regional and Global Connectivity'''

"With the advent of digital technology, we now have the tools to document, visualize, and manage Commitment Pools effectively. These digital systems do not just provide a platform for recording and tracking commitments but also open doors to worldwide visibility and connectivity between groups. By networking Commitment Pools globally, communities can learn from each other, exchange resources, and bolster their economic and ecological resilience."

- Will Ruddick [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vr9Q6nIYwSXELDVXwG5-N-9A2JspzeUCCZzOFnQyZ-g/edit]


=The Concept=

Will Ruddick:

"Commitment pooling protocol isn't just a tool for coordinating resources—it's a deep grammar of commons economies. It invites us to shift from transactional “deals” to relational weaving, where economies emerge from the promises we make and keep with one another."

(email, April 2025)


==Theoretical Foundations==

Will Ruddick:

"According to Bergstra and Burgess' (2014) work on Promise Theory, '''a commitment is a promise that requires a non-returnable investment of resources on the part of the promiser (commitment issuer)'''. Trust, according to Promise Theory, is also built through the interdependence and flow of commitments. In a community, the fulfillment of one commitment often relies on others fulfilling theirs. This interconnectedness means that reliability becomes critical as parties consistently meet their commitments, trust grows. Vouchers represent a formalized commitment of the issuer to redeem the voucher as payment for specified goods or services (fulfilling their commitment) with various terms and conditions, such as expiration and transferability. A subscription can be thought of as a formalized commitment; you pay money upfront for a subscription and you use it over time for repeated, specified services of the issuer. A bus ticket or even airline reward points can be considered formalized commitments or vouchers. My mother holds about 5 forms of loyalty points - all of which are vouchers or formalized commitments of various businesses. 


This is akin to the group voucher system GrE has used since 2010. This works when there are clear commitments in the group and processes to mitigate disputes as seen in the work of Ostrom (1990) on Commons governance. 

A single business can issue a voucher, like a telecom issuing an airtime credit. In Kenya, exchangeable airtime credit - redeemable for using the mobile phone network - became a viable medium of exchange starting in 2008. These vouchers can flow and circulate as a medium of exchange if the terms and conditions allow it. However, in either case of a group voucher or single issuer voucher, one would be wary if the supply of vouchers greatly exceeded the issuer's (group or individual) ability to redeem them. 

National Currency can be seen as a voucher redeemable by the state for tax payments and possibly, state services. When the state and banking system produce increasing supplies of their vouchers without clear service offerings (commitments), the risk of over issuing or overselling these vouchers is high and can result in a poor unit of account and can also cause inflation where the nation's subjects must increasingly pay for the state’s lack of commitment. 

Note that the state is not alone here, the risk of over issuance (over commitment) can happen with individuals, groups and businesses as well. It is important to note that when vouchers are used as a general medium of exchange, there is a risk of glossing over their true backing or commitment. One would not want a telecom airtime credit to become the de facto national currency as it would risk the simple failure of that company (a single point of failure) to crash the entire system. 

While any individual voucher could theoretically act as a general medium of exchange, a robust interconnected network of pooled vouchers can be much more polycentric and resilient. Learning from the ROLA traditions like Mwerya, commitments are pooled in order to be exchangeable for one another. '''These systems of exchangeable commitments are fundamentally different from group credit or voucher based monetary systems''' (credit money)."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vr9Q6nIYwSXELDVXwG5-N-9A2JspzeUCCZzOFnQyZ-g/edit?fbclid=IwAR3eGNogOKpwP2lw_AQaylm1bPf-5dzVLqnqPIBL8MygFV6QfTHTRa6oAkg#heading=h.e9275ut7f344])


==[[Pooling]]==

Pooling defined, by Will Ruddick:

"Pooling represents the curation,  aggregation and distribution or exchange of resources for collective use or benefit. In traditional Kenyan communities, pooling is a vibrant way of life in communal land stewardship and shared agricultural practices — a living testament to how communities organize themselves to show great collective strength.

Pooling seamlessly extends into many modern contexts, too. In Economics, pooling is seen in collective savings schemes and joint investment funds, and in Environmental Science, community-led conservation efforts show how collective management can preserve natural resources for the greater good.

One of the core elements in pooling is peering. Peering, in its essence, represents fair exchanges of resources. In the realm of Economics and Resource Management, this can be seen in practices like barter systems and direct trade. In rural Kenya, peering finds its roots in traditions that reflect a profound connection and mutual respect among individuals, such as knowledge transfer, reciprocal exchange, and mutual service and aid practices.

Although economics and anthropology have a lot to say about direct exchange, important insights can be learned from networking technologies and systems theory as well. In Information Technology, peering typically occurs through Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Networking, a form of direct and decentralized communication that allows individuals to enter into various forms of market and nonmarket exchange. Systems Theory provides concepts for understanding network collaborations and direct data synchronizations."

(https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vr9Q6nIYwSXELDVXwG5-N-9A2JspzeUCCZzOFnQyZ-g/edit?fbclid=IwAR3eGNogOKpwP2lw_AQaylm1bPf-5dzVLqnqPIBL8MygFV6QfTHTRa6oAkg#heading=h.cpe7ju5oh3e)


==Example==

Will Ruddick:

"[[Distributed Computing]] Frameworks and [[Smart Grids]], ... integrate direct peer interactions with the pooling of  resources for greater efficiency and innovation for everyone." 

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vr9Q6nIYwSXELDVXwG5-N-9A2JspzeUCCZzOFnQyZ-g/edit])


=Characteristics=

Will Ruddick:

“Commitment Pools: The Protocols of Intentional Evolution

In resource coordination systems, a framework called Commitment Pooling can be seen as trust routing. A Commitment Pool is a network of promises structured by four metabolic functions:

# Curation – Choosing what kinds of commitments matter.
# Valuation – Acknowledging which commitments carry trust-weight.
# Limitation – Setting the bounds of one’s promise-making capacity.
# Exchange – Swapping one’s own promises for others’, when trust allows.

These pools hey form a relational lattice … a decentralized architecture of mutual trust that can be seen in all living systems.”

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/consciousness-as-a-causal-bridge)


==Insurance Commoning==

 "let’s pick apart everything insurance and put it into a polycentric, decentralized frame of commitment pooling"

Will Ruddick explains:

"In community pools, the math can be expressed as seeding and caps instead: how much the group commits in calm times, how much any person can draw in a crisis, how big the event-level and pool-level ceilings must be. Where data is thin, we lean on credibility - giving some weight to our own history and some weight to the wider region’s experience.

We watch the pool’s loss ratio and, if we’re formal, the combined ratio to see whether outflows plus operating effort are sustainable relative to inflows and reserves.
(In other words is your pool sustainable, are you loosing more than you are able to put back in over time?)

Because disasters cluster, a single village should not stand alone. This is where reinsurance logic appears in community language. A local pool can arrange a promise (overlapping pools) from a regional pool (a stop-loss commitment that absorbs losses above a threshold) or share a slice of risk in a quota share (regional common pool) with peers.

In polycentric networks - like all living systems, federation beats centralization: each pool keeps local judgment while agreeing on common attachments, limits, and reinstatement rules for severe seasons. The goal is not financial engineering; it is to keep the calabash from breaking again."

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/insurance-as-a-living-commons)

=Discussion=

Will Ruddick:

"A formalized commitment is a non-returnable investment of resources, symbolized as a voucher, representing a promise to redeem for specified goods or services under certain terms. A commitment pool is a financial product that aggregates these vouchers, allowing for the exchange and relative valuation of various commitments within a community, enhancing resource coordination and mutual support.

Credit and debt arise from rights conferred to the bearer and issuer respectively as defined by the terms and conditions.

A credit note and a voucher are the same, many credit obligations are similar financial products based on formalized commitments that can define credit and debt relationships as well as the conditions for settlement. 

Mutually issued and jointly liable financial products can instantiate and settle credit and debt, but they are not credit or debt themselves. 

The term Mutual Credit is and has been a brand name for systems in which a group creates a financial product based on a formalized commitment (In brief)that whomever has a -ve trade balance will be productive for others in the group until they reach a 0 trade balance. 

It's a fine name, but it is unscientific  and used in many contradictory ways. (Mutually held, mutually liable, mutually redeemed)

Consider instead or in addition to this form of agreement or financial product what actually makes resource pooling and peering functional?

Pooling of Commitments is in essence what a Mutual Credit is trying to do. The Mutual Credit though lacks resolution on the individual commitments and liabilities of the members. This can be fine if they really have strong trust systems in place. But for most of society we need some form of curation to bring people together as living healthy thriving systems.

Because Mutual Credit philosophy starts with groups and spontaneous credit and debt, it misses the core ingredient of commitment and how those are pooled. Instead Mutual Credit moves directly to exchange and bridging mutual credits with more mutual credits becomes a carnival missing the key. 

I think Keynes' Bancor was the key (but too large), Imagine aggregate Bancors across regions. Commitment pooling on decentralized ledgers gives this possibility. It provides memory, authentication, execution and transparency. On top of which every function a pooling system needs is there (curation, limitation, valuation, exchange). Networks of pools each with their own Bancor (Price Vectors) can be very effective.

I'm inspired by the physicist Dirac and practical examples based on ancient rotational labor practices I am part of weekly here in Kenya and these practices are global and ubiquitous (or were at some point) in nearly every culture.

- mutual credit is a fine short name for a particular form of group financial product and could be broadened to cover a lot of mutual created instruments. But it is shrouded in myth and pseudo science and does no favors in a history of poorly implemented and understood systems that have nearly all failed for 30+ years.

I think the terms communism and socialism have a similar faithful following and poor understanding."

(email, March 2024)


==[[Intention Networks]]==

'''= networks of interwoven intentions'''

Will Ruddick:

"The speculative exploration of quantum cognition is a really fun lens through which I like to '''understand human social consciousness as a network of interwoven intentions''' — a vast ecosystem of overlapping pools. These pools, much like neural synapses or quantum entanglements, operate beyond classical computational models, offering a framework for collective intelligence and resource coordination. ...

There is a lot of speculation that our human cognition might not be a linear sequence of stored memories and logical operations. Instead, it could be a living system of relational commitments—an entangled web of perceptions, predictions, and stored knowledge, dynamically updated in real time. In this sense, the quantum brain mirrors the very structures of community-based economies where individuals are not just autonomous agents but part of a network that functions through shared commitments."

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/the-quantum-social-brain)

=Article=

'''* Article / Report: [[Commitment Pooling]] - An Economic Protocol Inspired by Ancestral Wisdom. By William O. Ruddick - Founder of Grassroots Economics Foundation, 2024'''

URL = ([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Vr9Q6nIYwSXELDVXwG5-N-9A2JspzeUCCZzOFnQyZ-g/edit?fbclid=IwAR3eGNogOKpwP2lw_AQaylm1bPf-5dzVLqnqPIBL8MygFV6QfTHTRa6oAkg])

''"a protocol that GrE is developing for resource coordination. The paper theorizes concepts not as isolated phenomena unique to Kenya or GrE programs, but as universally applicable mechanisms that transcend regional and cultural boundaries."''


"This prospective report introduces the pooling of commitments, as a mechanism for curating and fairly exchanging resources within communities. This approach hinges on the idea that commitments can be effectively pooled to create a more equitable and collaborative economic system, and echoes traditional mutual service practices. To operationalize this concept, the paper presents a protocol being piloted by Grassroots Economics; the Commitment Pooling Protocol is designed to aggregate commitments while facilitating the management and fair exchange of resources. The study describes the background, development, and potential impact of this approach, demonstrating how it can support autonomous, decentralized, non-monetary, and polycentric systems of Commitment Pooling. The emphasis is on fostering community well-being, aligning economic practices with the ethos of mutual service, and collective agency. Through practical use cases and analysis, the paper showcases the versatility of this protocol in various socio-economic contexts, highlighting its potential in supporting a more inclusive and resilient economic future."

==Excerpts==

Will Ruddick:

"Pooling as socio-economic protocol demonstrates how individual autonomy can be orchestrated to yield collective welfare without blind faith in external markets. We can begin to see how ancient systems, inspired by age-old wisdom, can drive sustainable economic models and community solidarity practices in contemporary contexts. Through commitment pooling, a curation of commitments can act as a store of wealth (pooling) for a community while at the same time, though a relative value indexing process, host an exchange system (peering).
This synthesis is already at work in Distributed Computing Frameworks and Smart Grids, which integrate direct peer interactions with the pooling of  resources for greater efficiency and innovation for everyone.  

The principles of peering and pooling are not merely academic concepts, however; they are deeply embedded in human interactions and the natural world. One reason that these concepts resonate across disciplines — from Ecology to Computer Science to Systems Theory — is because they reflect fundamental aspects of nature and life: syntropy and symbiosis among living organisms, connectivity in networks, and the shared destiny of biophysical or imagined communities.

In embracing these principles, we're not just applying theories but are reconnecting with ancient wisdom that has sustained diverse types of communities for generations. As we move forward, whether in developing technologies, managing resources, or building communities, we need to remember the strength found in direct connections, mutual commitments, and collective actions.

By looking through the lens pooling across disciplines, I see a universal blueprint for ecological sustainability, societal cooperation, and mutual respect — a reminder that, in diversity there can also be unity, and in sharing, there is strength.

In seeing the success of ROLA traditions merged with voucher usage and building upon the historical context of mutual service practices like Mweria, the development of economic protocols at GrE represents a fusion of traditional community support systems with contemporary technology. The essence of these practices, rooted in shared commitments and resource pooling, has been adapted into a protocol: Commitment Pool.

While GrE’s vouchers embody the formalized and quantified commitments between individuals and groups, the Commitment Pooling protocol facilitates the pooling of these vouchers on a larger scale. This change from traditional ROLA pooling of informal commitments to digital commitment pooling through decentralized ledger technology addresses the challenges of scale and efficiency observed when traditional systems face capitalist predation. It's a transformative step that not only seeks to preserve the core values of mutual service but also expands their resilience, reach and applicability in today's diverse economic landscapes. The next section delves into the specifics of formalized commitments and the Commitment Pooling Protocol, illustrating how they might serve as modern embodiments of age-old communal principles."




=More information=

* = "networks of interwoven intentions", see [[Intention Networks]]

* This video explanation makes the concept simple to understand: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_TLly1aEkyE

* '''Article: LETTERS FROM THE FIELD: COMMITMENT POOLING – AN ECONOMIC PROTOCOL INSPIRED BY ANCESTRAL WISDOM. By William O. Ruddick. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNITY CURRENCY RESEARCH, Vol. 27 pp. 54-79'''

URL = https://ijccr.net/ijccr-27-2023/vol-27-pp-54-79/?

See: [[Commitment Pooling as an Economic Protocol Insprired by Ancestral Wisdom]]

"This prospective report introduces the pooling of commitments, as a mechanism for curating and fairly exchanging resources within communities. This approach hinges on the idea that commitments can be effectively pooled to create a more equitable and collaborative economic system, building on the efficacy of traditional mutual service practices. To operationalize this concept, the paper presents a protocol being piloted by Grassroots Economics called Commitment Pooling. The Commitment Pooling Protocol is designed to aggregate commitments (via digital systems) while facilitating the management and fair exchange of resources. The study describes the background, development, and potential impact of this approach, demonstrating how it can support autonomous, decentralized, non-monetary, and polycentric systems of Commitment Pooling. The emphasis is on fostering community well-being, aligning individual economic transactions with the ethos of mutual service and collective agency. Through practical use cases and analysis, the paper shows the versatility of this protocol in various socio-economic contexts, highlighting its potential in building more inclusive and resilient economic systems.:

[[Category:Bioregional]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Neotraditional]]