


=Example=

* FORDHALL COMMUNITY LAND INITIATIVE WEBSITE, http://www.fordhallfarm.com

"Fordhall Organic Farm, based in North Shropshire, England has been chemical free for over 65 years. Rearing cattle, sheep and pigs on an outdoor extensive grazing system and being in community-ownership sinced 2006, Fordhall is pioneering in every sense.

By securing Fordhall Farm, the Fordhall Community Land Initiative (FCLI) and the community landlord is committed to building a sustainable future whilst guaranteeing that farming will be an affordable way of life for generations to come.

In the ever-demanding consumer economy that we live in today, traditional farming is struggling to be a profitable profession. It is challenging for small farmers like Fordhall Farm, to compete with large-scale producers and knockback prices. Fordhall Farm is secured and leased out by the Community Land Initiative. It can now ensure that the small farmer will be given an opportunity to maintain and capitalise on family traditions; providing a model for other at risk farms across the country.

On a more personal note, Fordhall Farm is one of the longest running natural organic farms in England and this heritage must be protected and preserved. Many of the initial supporters were personal friends of the late Arthur Hollins and recognised his groundbreaking research into organic farming. People are still supporting The Fordhall Initiative because they can appreciate the work and determination of those involved. It is this combination of history, environmental qualities and undeterred motivation which has made Fordhall Farm a treasure to visit.

The FCLI recognises that good quality local produce needs to be accessible to all. The Fordhall Farm shop and hog roast facility provides both organic and local food to the area by the tenant farmer (Ben Hollins).

One of the fundamental aims of the FCLI is to assist in educating people in the production of food and the impact of animal welfare. It therefore uses the land for community benefit in as many ways as it can think of, without actually farming it."
(http://www.fordhallfarm.com/about_fordhall.php)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:UK]]