
'''Book: Manuel Castells - Communication Power. Oxford University Press, 2009,''' 


=Description=

""Where does power lie in the network society?" This is the central question that Manuel Castells tries to answer in his first book in ten years. After the disillusionment of the internet utopia as a liberating medium per se, Castells describes society using hardware/software terminology, drawing a stimulating picture. He grounds his analysis of the network society through different mass media conflicts like the media control and censorship in the USA, Russia, and China, the global environmental movement and the Barack Obama presidential campaign. These case studies are carefully detailed and make evident how power is differentiated in the network society, and suggesting that we are about to face change because networked structure can't be fully regulated by a few. Castells seems to be pessimistic, "whoever has enough money, including political leaders, will have a better chance of operating the switch in its favor." But one of the central points of his essay is the creation of a new appealing category describing contemporary communication in society that is "mass self-communication". It's about potentially reaching a global audience, but "self-generated, self-directed and self-selected". The commodification of self-communication is one of the big challenges of corporate control, although "the more they invest in expanding communication networks, the more people build their own networks". People should be aware of this and should try to move beyond the tendency to "overcome the powerlessness of their solitary despair by networking their desire", as they still evidently do."
(http://www.neural.it/art/2009/11/manuel_castells_communication.phtml)



=Review=

Christian Fuchs:

"The task that Manuel Castells has set
himself for his book Comunication Power,
is to elaborate answers to the question:
“where does power lie in the global network
society?” (p. 42). He tries to show that communication
is the central power in contemporary
society by analyzing and presenting numerous
empirical examples and by drawing
on data from many studies. The discussion
that follows does not engage with every detail
of Castells’ voluminous 570 page book because
this is in my opinion not the task of a
reflective review essay. Therefore I will concentrate
on a selective discussion of those
aspects that I personally find most important.

In Communication Power, Castells continues
the analysis of what he has termed the
network society, from a specific perspective –
the one of power. He argues that global social
networks and social networks of social networks
that make use of global digital communication
networks are the fundamental source
of power and counter-power in contemporary
society. The relation between power and
counter-power is analyzed in respect to the
contradictions between multinational corporate
media networks and the creative audience,
framing and counter-framing, biased/biased/
scandal media politics and insurgent
grassroots media politics.

Manuel Castells’ Communication
Power is a powerful narrative about the connection
of communication and power in contemporary
society that presents rich empirical
details, illuminating case studies, and represents
an original and insightful approach. It
will shape the disciplinary and transdisciplinary
discussions about communication and
power in the coming years. The central new
category that the book introduces is the one of
mass self-communication. Good books bring
up many new questions, so I do have questions
and also doubts about Castells’ notion of
power, the use of computer science terms for
analyzing society, the assessment and categorical
description of the power distribution
between global multimedia corporations and
the creative audience, the feasibility of the
notion of web 2.0, his notion of social movements,
the role of the movement for democratic
globalization in contemporary society,
and the centrality of informationalism and
communication power. When all this is being
said, it remains no doubt that this book empowers
the academic discourse about communication
power.

Contemporary society is a society of global
economic crisis. This has resulted in a return
of the importance of economic questions,
which are also questions about class, in social
theory and has shown which huge power the
global financial and economic networks have
over our lives. The central political task might
now be to develop counter-power against the
commodification of everything. That this is
easier said than done was communicated
recently by the result of the elections to the
European Parliament. The task for social theory
in the contemporary situation is to develop
analyses of power and potential counterpower.

Manuel Castells reminds us that the
role of communication certainly should not be
neglected in such endeavours."
(http://triplec.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/136/90)



=Excerpt:= 

==Typology of Power in the Network Society==

Christian Fuchs:

"Four kinds of power in the network society
are introduced: 

* networking power, 

* network power, 

* networked power, 

* network-making power (pp. 42-47, 418-420). 

Network-making power is for Castells the “paramount form of
power in the network society” (p. 47). It is held
and exercised by programmers and switchers.

* Programmers have the power “to constitute
network(s), and to program/reprogram the
network(s) in terms of the goals assigned to
the network”. 

* Switchers have the power “to
connect and ensure the cooperation of different
networks by sharing common goals and
combining resources, while fending off competition
from other networks by setting up
strategic cooperation” (p. 45). Castells gives
numerous examples in his book for the usage
of “programming” and “switching” networks in
order to enact power and counter-power. He
illuminates how power and “resistance to
power is achieved through the same two
mechanisms that constitute power in the network
society: the programs of the networks
and the switches between networks” (p. 47).

The basic analysis is applied to power struggles
between 

* the global corporate multimedia
networks and the creative audience (chapter
2), the development of media policies in the
USA (chapter 2), 

* framing and counter-framing
in political campaigns, especially the framing
of the US public mind before, during, and after
the Iraq war (chapter 3); 

* to scandal politics in
Spain in the 1990s (chapter 4), 

* media control and censorship in the USA, Russia, and
China (chapter 4); 

* the environmental movement,
the global movement against corporate
globalization, the spontaneous citizens’
movement that emerged in Spain after the al-
Qaeda attacks in 2004, and the Barack
Obama presidential primary campaign (chapter
5)."
(http://triplec.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/136/90)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Media]]