

=Discussion=

On the occasion of MediaWiki's move from volunteer to professional development, Aryeh Gregor comments on the distinction between the two models:


"Let me begin with definitions.  I will draw a basic distinction
between community development and centralized development.  I'll start
with two motivating examples.

Firefox is developed by a community.  Everything involved in the
project and its development is open.  Most of the work is done by
employees of Mozilla, and all important decisions are made by
employees of Mozilla, but anyone on the Internet can view what's
happening and get involved.  Bugs you open might get ignored forever,
and you might have to poke people a bunch to get patches reviewed, and
you might have to tolerate a considerable amount of bluntness and
follow other people's marching orders if you want to contribute
anything.  But in principle, any random person in the world can make
largely the same contributions as a Mozilla employee.

Internet Explorer is developed by a centralized team.  They have blogs
where they sometimes share detailed info about their development
process and reasoning.  They very carefully read all user feedback
left in the comments.  They have a bug tracker where anyone can file
bugs, and they guarantee that they'll look at and attempt to reproduce
every single bug filed in a timely fashion.  But although they pay
close attention to feedback, giving feedback is the only way you can
really participate without getting hired by Microsoft.  You can't
write any code, or have a voice in discussions at all comparable to an
IE team member.

These examples illustrate some important things:

* Community development does not mean democracy.  Even in a totally
community-oriented project, all decisions might ultimately be made by
a small group of individuals.  (For instance, in the case of the Linux
kernel, one person.)
* Community development does not mean community members do most of the
work.  From what I've heard, employees of Mozilla write most of
Firefox's code, but it's still completely community-oriented
development.
* Listening to feedback is not the same as actually involving the
community.  Even a totally closed project can be extremely attentive
to feedback.  In fact, it's common for community projects to be *less*
receptive to feedback, taking a "we'll listen to you when you write
the code" attitude.

Keeping these in mind, I'll characterize a perfectly community-based
development process like this: your say in the project is proportional
to your contributions, and nothing prevents you from contributing as
much as your time and ability allow.  If you happen to be paid, it
doesn't give you any additional say -- you just happen to be able to
spend more time contributing.  The decision-making process is open and
transparent, and arguments are weighed on the basis of their merits
and the speaker's history of contributions.  This is of course not
fully attainable in practice, but one can see how close or far a
project is from the ideal.


Centralized and community development processes both have advantages
and disadvantages.  Some of the advantages of centralized development
(as relevant to open-source projects) are:

* Paid employees don't have to spend time reviewing code from a lot of
people who will only ever contribute a few patches, so they don't
duplicate effort teaching everyone their project's coding conventions,
or even educating them on basic things like XSS.
* Because discussion can be private and everyone is more likely to be
in similar time zones, it's possible to rely heavily on face-to-face
or voice communication, which a lot of people are more comfortable
with and which is a lot more efficient.
* Since there are many fewer developers, they can socialize and get to
know each other, reducing conflict and argument.
* Full-time developers don't have to try coordinating with volunteers
who may only be available at odd times or who may disappear randomly
for weeks.

In short, centralized development allows employees' time to be spent
more on actual coding, and less on communication.  It's (at least
superficially) more efficient.  On the other hand, community
development has advantages as well:

* You get work done for free.  If it's easier to volunteers to make a
meaningful difference, you'll get many more volunteers.  Once they're
up to speed, you don't have to watch over them much more than you
would an employee, but you get their work for free.
* You can hire community developers.  You already know how good they
are and they don't need to be brought up to speed with your codebase,
saving you a lot of money and trouble compared to advertising for
applicants.
* Your software becomes more versatile, because volunteers will work
on aspects that interest them even if they aren't in the interest of
the controlling organization.  This gets you more users and more
developers.

Although there are superficial efficiency advantages to centralizing
development, experience indicates that community-based development can
be much more cost-effective in practice.  Projects like Mozilla and
Apache (and for that matter Wikimedia until recently) make software
that's very competitive with centrally-developed competitors at a
fraction of the cost.

On top of that, of course, the idea of centralized development is
contrary to Wikimedia's ideals.  Just as the Board is trying to pursue
individual donations over corporate sponsorship, it fits with
Wikimedia's goals and structure to have as community-oriented a
structure as possible.  Projects like Mozilla make it clear that this
is attainable and productive.


Returning to the concept of community development, let's look at two
key things: actual coding, and decision-making.  In community-based
development, anyone who's willing to write good code can get it
submitted and included into the product.  Someone with a greater
history of contributions will be able to get their code included more
easily, but only because the development community is willing to trust
them more.  They get by with less review, and the review is more
readily given because of a greater expectation that it will be
productive.  Similarly, when it comes to decision-making, anyone has
an equal opportunity to try convincing the decision-makers (who might
be only one or a few people) of their point of view.  In the end, the
decision is made by appointed decision-makers, but with great
deference toward the opinions of other established contributors."
(http://lists.wikimedia.org/pipermail/wikitech-l/2010-September/049190.html)



[[Category:Peerproduction]]