'''* Report: [[Commons Transition Plan for the City of Sydney]]. Co-authored by Jodie Hampson, Inka Santala, Monique Potts, Tirrania Suhood and Bronwen Morgan. Sydney Commons Lab, Version 1, August 2019'''

URL = https://drive.google.com/file/d/1TxN4-XFORuS6i_xgL0QhLyWODXXWS6zx/view?usp=sharing  

Version submitted to Sydney City Council – Version One

== Status ==

'''1. Monique Potts, September 2019:'''

"The plan has been submitted to City of Sydney council to inform their strategy for Sustainable Sydney 2050 and will also form the basis of our direction and strategy for the Sydney Commons Lab."


'''2. Jodie Hampson:'''

"The plan is an ongoing works, and this initial version is intended as a 'conversation starter' and we have recently submitted the plan to Council for further exploration within the Sustainable Sydney 2050 plan context. 

One of the many opportunities identified through the plan, for example, is the development of a network, which highlights and connects the existing experiences and expertise within the 'common good' ecosystem (both locally and internationally). The aim here is to connect inspiring people and organisations for increased sharing and commons capacity, innovation, collective leadership and the acceleration of positive change."

== Description ==

"This document outlines the Sydney Commons Lab’s (SCL) ‘Sydney Commons Transition
Plan’ as one possible path toward change. ‘Commons’ initiatives (defined in Part 2) are
aimed at overcoming pressing modern challenges by providing an alternative to the
motives and structures of a global market that often prioritises profit over social and
environmental well-being. A profit and competition-based system disenfranchises people
from their natural urge to cooperate with one another for meeting everyday needs; which
is a necessary prerequisite for long-term sustainable change. As an alternative, this Plan
looks beyond the mainstream market economy, promoting the study and support of
changes that can improve social cohesion and connection; empower residents and
communities; incentivise new and innovative projects; maintain and improve inclusivity
and access to resources; and ensure that all of this is done in a sustainable way.

In the plan, opportunities and potential benefits for the City of Sydney are identified
under three main headings:

1. Social – including neighbourhood and community cohesion, inclusion and
connection; improving community members’ individual skills and
confidence; developing community resilience and autonomy; turning passive
‘consumers’ into ‘contributors’;

2. Environmental – including the sharing and maximising utility of resources
and food; and developing community level ‘stewardship’ norms for managing
resources and associated environmental benefit;

3. Economic – including local economy benefits (new regenerative business
models and approaches to creating meaningful livelihoods); economic
resilience; and peer-to-peer arrangements for reduced-cost goods and
services."

== Contents ==

===Part 1: Introduction===

A Commons Vision for the City of Sydney…………………….………...……..6

===Part 2: Commons Transition Plan Foundations===

A) The Aim of the Plan…………………………...……………………………..…...8

B) What are the Commons?...............................................................8

C) Potential Benefits of the Commons..……………….…..……………..….10

D) Research Overview….………………..……...………………...……………….11

===Part 3: Existing Sydney Commons Prototypes===

A) Inner West Tool Library………….………………….…………………………14

B) Crop Swap Australia……..…………..………………………………………….16

C) Pingala………………………….………..…………………………………………..18

D) FoodLab Sydney………..……………..………………………………………….20

===Part 4: The City of Sydney Commons Ecosystem Analysis===

A) Organisational Financial Viability…………………………………………..22

B) Levelling the Playing Field……………………………………………………..23

C) Diverse Value Forms……………………………………………………………..24

D) A Commons Ecosystem………………………………………………………….25

E) Personal Livelihood…………………………………………..……………….…26

F) Partnerships……………………………………………………………….….......28

===Part 5: Preliminary General Findings for the City of Sydney Council===

A) Strategy Directions……………………………………………………………….34

B) Policy Framework - Recommendations…………………………..………35

===Part 6: International Commons Movement and Ecosystem===

Overview……………….……………………………………………..…………………..36

A) Bologna Case Study……………………………………….………………………36

B) Barcelona Case Study….…………………………………………………………37

C) Seoul Case Study…………………………………………………………………..38

D) International Interviews……………………………………………………….39

#Former Chief Strategy Officer, City of Ghent………………………………..39
#Commons Network, Amsterdam………….………………………………………41
#Goteo Foundation, Spain………...…………………………………………………43

===Part 7: Conclusion===

== Executive Summary ==

"On a planet facing rapid environmental destruction and in societies confronting constant
social and economic challenges, cities can factor significantly into both problems and
solutions. With small governments and localised interests, cities are capable of moving
faster and more creatively than nations – but they are also the level at which social and
economic challenges can take root and spread. The City of Sydney has observed these
kinds of problems – food insecurity; income inequality; a lack of community;
disempowerment among residents – in its own research (including Sustainable Sydney
2050 planning endeavours).

This document outlines the Sydney Commons Lab’s (SCL) ‘Sydney Commons Transition
Plan’ as one possible path toward change. ‘Commons’ initiatives (defined in Part 2) are
aimed at overcoming pressing modern challenges by providing an alternative to the
motives and structures of a global market that often prioritises profit over social and
environmental well-being. A profit and competition-based system disenfranchises people
from their natural urge to cooperate with one another for meeting everyday needs; which
is a necessary prerequisite for long-term sustainable change. As an alternative, this Plan
looks beyond the mainstream market economy, promoting the study and support of
changes that can improve social cohesion and connection; empower residents and
communities; incentivise new and innovative projects; maintain and improve inclusivity
and access to resources; and ensure that all of this is done in a sustainable way.

In the plan, opportunities and potential benefits for the City of Sydney are identified
under three main headings:

1. Social – including neighbourhood and community cohesion, inclusion and
connection; improving community members’ individual skills and
confidence; developing community resilience and autonomy; turning passive
‘consumers’ into ‘contributors’;

2. Environmental – including the sharing and maximising utility of resources
and food; and developing community level ‘stewardship’ norms for managing
resources and associated environmental benefit;

3. Economic – including local economy benefits (new regenerative business
models and approaches to creating meaningful livelihoods); economic
resilience; and peer-to-peer arrangements for reduced-cost goods and
services.

The Plan draws on multiple resources as well as original empirical research in developingmits recommendations and principles. 

Part 3 of this empirical research identifies and
examines, via documentary resource analysis and interviews, four existing Sydney based
commons-oriented initiatives as ‘prototypes’ for further exploration. These prototypes –
looking at food, energy and other community resource-sharing activities – identify the
areas of need and the immense potential and benefit of such initiatives. By recognising
and examining these prototypes, the potential for amplifying their positive impacts
through a concerted and supported commons movement is evident.

In Part 4, commons-oriented initiatives across the City of Sydney are examined more
broadly, through an online questionnaire and interviews. This examination identifies
numerous themes for commons-oriented initiatives, including a disconnection from
‘traditional’ sources of funding, such as government and venture capital; difficulties in
competing within profit-driven markets; the lack of a developed ‘commons-oriented
sector’ ecosystem; a disconnection between levels of government on commons issues;
and a lack of community awareness regarding the role of local government in enabling
commons-oriented initiatives and a broader commons movement. 

Discussed in detail in the Plan, this support for commons-oriented initiatives might
include assisting organisational financial viability, and participant livelihood needs, and
their ability to function within a competition-oriented market; logistical assistance, like
providing space and infrastructure, recognising the initiatives’ contributory and
collaborative character; and policy/regulation efforts. The international case studies
identified in Part 6 further demonstrates this support in practice, by highlighting the
concrete approaches local government have taken in support of the commons in Seoul,
Bologna and Barcelona. Additional research asked broader questions from an
international perspective, including interviews with international commons leaders and
policy-makers and case-studies of commons-oriented initiatives, infrastructure and
policy in cities in Europe and Asia.

From this empirical and original research, five strategy directions and eight specific
policy developments (see Part 5) are recommended for inclusion in the Sustainable
Sydney 2050 plan. These strategy directions and policy recommendations will also assist
in directing the activities of the SCL.


===Recommended Strategy Directions:===

1. Create a coherent policy framework to support the growth of a commons
ecosystem

2. Prioritise commons-oriented projects and localised community wealth
building

3. Open public resources

4. Act as a broker between established organisations and the grassroots

5. Collaborate with other councils to advocate for change


===Policy Recommendations:===

1. Advocate for non-commercial finance loans

2. Offer a suite of commons-oriented capacity building workshops

3. Create an inventory of civic assets for use and make underutilized spaces
available

4. Enable communal sharing, including education programs

5. Provide technical support and research funding

6. Provide entrepreneurship support and participative tools

7. Support two specific commons-oriented pilot projects

8. Support the development of a commons network

== Excerpts ==

=== Acknowledgements ===

"In accordance with Bauwens and Onzia’s (2017) recognition that ‘the success of the
individual genius depends on the collective ability to create a fertile ground,’ we wish to
acknowledge the many players that were pivotal to the ‘non-linear’ emergence of this
Plan.

The New Economy Network Australia, which formed in 2016, and Mercury Cooperative,
have played key roles in connecting commons actors and in inspiring commons
initiatives in recent years. The Sharing Map Sydney (n.d.) initiated a general mapping
exercise in early 2018 with the aim of locating key local stakeholders and projects that
could be working towards ‘commons’ objectives. Additionally,	the Sydney launch of the
book ‘Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons’ (Shareable, 2018) occurred in
early 2018, which brought together numerous commons-oriented actors across the City
of Sydney.

''Following on from these occurrences, a series of ‘Commons’ events were organised in
late 2018, centred around Michel Bauwens thought-provoking work, and organised by
social change consultants InCollaboration, and supported by the UTS Centre for
Business and Social Innovation, Mercury Co-op and Start Some Good (InCollaboration,
2018).''

Following on from these ‘Commons’ events, Councillor Jess Scully organised a
Roundtable and invited event participants, interested academics and City of Sydney staff
to discuss the progression of commons initiatives in Sydney. The interest from the
Roundtable encouraged InCollaboration to progress a [[Sydney Commons Lab]] (SCL),
which aims to support and promote commons initiatives by developing working models
for policies, inspiring new initiatives and linking both with shared ideas, resources and
energy (InCollaboration, n.d.).

'''InCollaboration took on the role of lead catalysing organisation''' for the SCL whilst
collaborating with numerous commons-oriented organisations, including Sydney Policy
Lab - Sydney University, University of NSW - Faculty of Law, University of Technology
Sydney – Centre for Business and Social Innovation, The Sharing Tree, Sharing Map,
New Economy Network Australia, Foodlab Sydney, [[P2P Foundation]], Social Surplus,
Mercury Coop, The Grove, Incubator Coop, Pre-Power, StartSomeGood, Shelter NSW,
Urban Apostles and Co:Lab4.

The Sydney Commons Transition Plan is a foundational focus for the SCL. The Plan has
been developed in dialogue with SCL members and co-authored by Jodie Hampson, Inka
Santala, Monique Potts, Tirrania Suhood and Bronwen Morgan, with research assistance
from Deborah Hartstein and Shavin Wijeyaratne. Work on the Plan has benefited from
the support of the Allens Hub for Technology, Law and Innovation. It has also benefited
by cooperating with the “Sharing Cities” research project, a continuing PhD research
project exploring communal sharing as a form of ‘commoning’ within the City of Sydney.
The findings of the “Sharing Cities” research project will further contribute to this
ongoing Plan in the near future.

Finally, we are grateful for the generosity and contribution of numerous local and
international commoners, including those listed in the references section, and the many
that have remained anonymous."

=== Preliminary General Findings for the City of Sydney Council ===

(Part 5:)

"As outlined in Part 2, the aim of this plan is to work as a discussion paper, drawing
attention to the growing number of commons-oriented initiatives in the City of Sydney
and their potential implications regarding the local community at large. Additionally, the
plan provides a practical toolkit, proposing concrete strategy directions and policy
frameworks for the local government towards 2050. In this section, we draw together the
results of our research and propose some general findings and concrete
recommendations for the local government moving forward. These recommendations
are based on the six recurrent themes (see Figure 3) identified throughout the City of
Sydney Commons Ecosystem Analysis (Part 4).

As our initial consultations demonstrate, commons-oriented initiatives provide a
valuable service to the local community, not only in terms of providing a service or
produce, but offering residents education, creating social connections and increasing
community resourcefulness to tackle the city’s social and sustainability challenges. Yet,
many of the commons-oriented initiatives and work remains largely ignored by the
mainstream market. As such, there is a need for the local government to better support
these commons-oriented initiatives.

A clear need exists for local government to help connect these commons-oriented
projects in the development of a more coherent sector. Currently, the majority of
commons-oriented initiatives are working in silos with immense barriers to remaining
viable within a competitive and profit-oriented market. With strategic support in the
early stages, commons-oriented initiatives are more likely to thrive and become selfsustaining over the longer-term. The plan suggests there is potential for local
government to work in closer collaboration with commons-oriented initiatives, opening
up public resources for communal use and/or providing more resources for commonsoriented projects. In progressing the commons in Sydney, we note the City of Ghent
experience (see Part 6) and suggestion to ‘invite an open conversation on how commons
want to work with the city and allow them to self organise.’ We also acknowledge the
importance of independent civic based institutions for ‘creating space for an open and
open dialogue between the city council, city employees and the commons’ (see Part 6).
We acknowledge that the Australian context differs in comparison to the European
context, particularly in regards to power dynamics and legislative bases for influencing
policy development and planning. Yet, as we have demonstrated through the Plan, there 
are many possibilities for the City of Sydney to enable and support the growth of these
commons-oriented initiatives for shared benefit. As a financially thriving and wellrespected local government, the City of Sydney has the resources and capacity to really
harness this potential, to create a ‘commons’ agenda and establish clear working guidelines."

== License ==

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/]

== More Information ==
* [[Sydney Commons Lab]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Australia]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]