

=Description=

"After four years of growth and countless events,  the community of the commons hub is truly one of a kind. Rooted in the Crypto Commons movement—established and nurtured by the Hub’s co-founder Felix—this network has expanded far beyond its origins. Going beyond crypto, today it integrates influences from permaculture, the arts, mindfulness, conceptual and strategy games, automation, and meta-modernism.

What unites these diverse threads is a shared determination to challenge the status quo: to embark on bold inquiries, embrace unconventional perspectives, ask uncomfortable questions, and maintain independence from funders and other power holders. Against the odds, this community dares to explore and create, not only resisting the mainstream but actively imagining and building alternatives.

These shared experiences of thinking outside the box, confronting adversity, and striving for change have forged deep bonds of solidarity and friendship. Over time, these connections have given rise to a shared worldview: an understanding that the challenges ahead demand collective strength, resilience, and humanity.

Its community makes the commons hub more than a place; it’s a beacon of determination and responsibility. Together, we are committed to building pockets of resistance and resilience—spaces where a new system and society can take root and flourish. This vision of standing together through transformation continues to guide and inspire everything the Hub represents."

(https://www.commons-hub.at/page/community)


=Location=

Commons Hub

2651 Reichenau an der Rax

Richard von Schoeller-Straße 9

Hirschwang an der Rax, Austria

(outskirts of Vienna)


=More information=

* Co-founder [[Felix Fritsch]]

[[Category:Places]]
[[Category:Austria]]