'''* Book: [[Commons Perspectives in South Korea]]. Routledge, 2022.'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/Commons-Perspectives-in-South-Korea-Context-Fields-and-Alternatives/Choe-Kim-Jang-Yoon-Park/p/book/9781032123844 [https://www.amazon.com/Commons-Perspectives-South-Korea-Alternatives/dp/1032123842]

''"Since its founding in 2011, the Research Center on the Commons and Sustainable Society has been at the forefront of Commons Research in South Korea."''


=Description=

"This book brings together the discoveries and insights the Center has produced in its first decade, as a contribution to international commons research and to the understanding of the commons in South Korea particularly.


Divided into five main parts, the book charts the course of commons research in South Korea. 

* Part I surveys the historical background to commons thinking through the course of its foundation as a dictator-led developmental state through to its current democratic and neoliberal status quo. Following on from this, 

* Part II looks at how diverse commons perspectives have taken root during this period. 

* Part III then analyses the various specific fields through which commons research in Korea has grown. After this, 

* Part IV presents the fruits of this commons research ― the alternative policies and social actions that have been proposed for Korean society. Lastly, 

* Part V addresses the remaining challenges which ongoing commons research in Korea is seeking to address."


=Contents=

Introduction / Hyun Choe and Suh-Hyun Park


==Part I: The Historical and Social Context of the Rise of Commons Perspectives in South Korea==

1. Progression of Contemporary Korean History, Dissolution of the Commons, and Rise of Commons Thinking
Sun-Jin Yun

2. The Value of Common Resources Theory: Beyond Developmentalism and Neoliberalism
Seongtae Hong

3. The Crisis of Social Reproduction in Korean Society and Commons Thinking
Young-Gyung Paik


==Part II: Competing and Cooperating Views in Korean Perspectives on the Commons==

4. Sunureum as Traditional Commoning in Jeju: Reinterpretation of Jeju’s Livestock Culture
Ja-Kyung Kim

5. Commons, the Golden Rule, and Sea Fields around Jeju
Hyun Choe

6. A Perspective on the Rise of the Commons Movements in South Korea
Hun-Gyo Jang


==Part III: The Fields of the Commons in South Korea==

7. Decision-Making Structure on Village Commons and Common Management: The Case of Haengwon-ri, Jeju
Ja-Kyung Kim

8. Formation and Deprivation of the Commons: Case of the Gyeonguiseon Commons and Its Implications
Sang-Cheol Kim

9. Knowledge Commons Movement in the Humanities and Social Sciences in South Korea: A Case Study on the Knowledge Commoning Association in South Korea
Suh-Hyun Park


==Part IV: Commons-Based Alternatives in South Korea==

10. Energy Commons for a Transition Strategy
Deokhwa Hong

11. A Study on Introducing a Youth Dividend to Jeju Island: Measures to Finance a Citizens’ Dividend Program from Commons
Hyun Choe and Jaesub Lee

12. The Commons: Legal Rights and Institutions to Protect Our Common Wealth
Tae-Hyun Park


==Part V: The Future Tasks of Korean Commons Research==

13. Commons Research in Korea in the 21st Century: Progress and Tasks
Yea-Yl Yoon

14. Two Dimensions and Politics of the Commons
Yeong-Sin Jeong

[[Category:South Korea]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Research]]