

URL = http://www.commonslearningalliance.org/


=Description=

"We support the growing commons movement and people who want to learn about it with well-organized knowledge resources and educational programs featuring the commons. We offer our support to capacity building in commons group and organizations, as well as to educational institutions, with programs tailored to their needs. 

The Commons Learning Alliance exists, also, for supporting the formation of communities of practice in the commons field and "strengthening the linkages between commons practitioners, scholars, and activists, so that we can learn from each other and support each other’s work" (David Bollier). 



The Commons Learning Alliance offers four different but interrelated services or "spaces."

1. Community Learning Garden. It is an interactive, living repository of an expanding body of knowledge about the commons.  In this space there are a range of commons-related documents organized by subject areas and tagged for easy find and reference. This is a Creative Commons-licensed, open-source space where you can browse, quote, add-to, reuse, repurpose or even remix resources.

Here, we make accessible as widely as possible the collected strategic insights emerging from key commons gatherings, e.g.: the Berlin Commons Conference and the Sustaining Commons: Sustaining Our Future” conference in Hyderabad.  We facilitate the sharing and development of strategic reflection about the state of commons and its relationship with state, market and civil society.


2. Commons Campus. This is a learning environment where you can find two kinds of online courses:

E-learning  courses on the commons.  Some courses are introductory, others cover more advanced topics.  Some course are free, others have a modest tuition to cover expenses.

Social learning  courses that emphasize mutual exploration and shared innovation.  As we learn together, we grow our collective intelligence.

We provide our advanced learning management system and online teaching methodologies as support to organizations wanting to offer courses on the commons. Our commons educators are also available to co-develop curricula for schools and higher education.


3. Common Forums.  This is an interaction hub that hosts conversations about anything relating to the commons, including the development of the Commons Learning Alliance itself as a commons.


4. Online Library.  This is a collection of downloadable, annotated resources related to various dimensions of the commons. Here you can find articles, research papers, links to books, videos, and websites, and other knowledge assets. Commoners are encouraged to add assets to the library so that they can be shared with others."
(http://www.commonslearningalliance.org/about-us)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Movements]]