
'''= "an emerging movement which is developing a vision for economic and social development in Scotland which is distinct and different from the political orthodoxy that dominates politics and economics in London".''' [http://scottishcommonweal.org/what-is-common-weal/]

URL = http://scottishcommonweal.org/ [http://www.allofusfirst.org/what-is-common-weal/]


=Description=

"It is based on the conviction that we will get better outcomes for both society and individuals if we emphasise mutuality and equity rather than conflict and inequality.

All of this can be captured in one simple phrase: to build more we must share more.

It comes from the old Scots term, which carries the meanings of both ‘shared wealth’ and ‘our wellbeing is common to us all’. These values are strong both in Scottish history and in contemporary Scottish life.

Many people who support a Common Weal vision support independence, but some don’t. The aim is to create a programme for the economic and social transformation of Scotland. That programme will outline what powers are needed to achieve change and where they are held. It is then for others to explain how they would achieve this vision in their preferred constitutional outcome.


...


The Common Weal Project aims to develop a broad programme for action in Scotland. However, it begins by identifying six key transitions required to move towards a Common Weal vision:

* There must be tax reform to reduce inequality, ensure strong public services and ensure that domestic industries are competing on an even playing field

* Redefine welfare as a ‘contract between the people’ which all benefit from, with secure funding and strong social buy-in

* Radically reform finance to make sure it is providing real investment security for industry and real savings security for citizens

* Promote more balanced ownership structures in the economy to increase resilience and promote high-quality employment

* Diversify the economy to move away from the low-pay employment that creates poverty, inequality and contribute to public sector deficits

* Implement participative democracy practices at all levels to prevent abuse of power by vested interest and better to reflect the public will"
(http://scottishcommonweal.org/what-is-common-weal/)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Scotland]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Commons]]