Concept put forward by Jodi Dean in a to be published book of the same title

Also an essay, '''Communicative Capitalism: Circulation and the Foreclosure of Politics''', in the book, Digital Media and Democracy: Tactics in Hard Times (2008)

=Discussion=


Brian Holmes:

"Jodi and I both participated in an edited volume called
Digital Media and Democracy: Tactics in Hard Times (2008).
Her text is really challenging: "Communicative Capitalism:
Circulation and the Foreclosure of Politics." In it she
asks: "Why has the expansion and intensification of
communication networks, the proliferation of the very tools
of democracy, coincided with the collapse of democratic
deliberation and, indeed, struggle?" Since I'd done a lot of
work with activist artists using networked communications in
the counter-globalization protests, editor Megan Boler
naturally thought I'd be on the other side of the fence. She
asked me straight out: "Brian, how do you respond to Jodi
Dean's argument and pessimism?"

It was hard to answer that, because as a protester involved
in large but usually losing struggles even before 9-11, I
had my own questions about how democratic social movements
could be cut off at their height and then fade away so
easily. I acknowledged a lot of Dean's concerns, but I did
want to point out that a broad, multilayered, highly
articulated international movement had existed in reality,
not just fantasy, and that its activities both on the
streets and in the public spheres where policies are debated
and opposed had been brought to a stop, not by dynamics
inherent to networked communications, but by a combination
of carefully orchestrated media campaigns and violent police
repression. In the wake of that and other experiences I
think it is important to go on organizing and maintaining
even relatively small social movements and groups devoted to
alternative ideas and practices. I think it important not to
deny their existence and possibility. Still the mere
existence of resistance movements in no way precludes the
idea that there are belief structures and everyday practices
in our societies that stifle and repress both raw dissent
and long-term political alternatives among the majority of
the citizens. And the fact that people who are socialized to
believe very strongly in democratic ideals and sometimes
even in subversion nonetheless take part in the sustaining
rituals of an objectively exploitative and repressive social
order is exactly why our majority belief systems need to be
critiqued! Why don't we DO what we SAY we are doing?

Here is one of Jodi's key concepts: "Communicative
capitalism designates that form of late capitalism in which
values heralded as central to democracy take material form
in networked communications technologies. Ideals of access,
inclusion, discussion and participation come to be realized
in and through expansions, intensifications and
interconnections of global telecommunications" [these and
the following quotes are from the text referenced above,
"Communicative Capitalism," p. 104]. The problem from her
viewpoint is, not only does this infrastructure fail to
deliver a deliberative democracy that can address the
problems of inequality, environmental decay and war, but
worse, it becomes the object of a fetishization that exalts
the technology as proof of a democratic progress that
manifestly is not happening.

A number of observations are given in support. The first is
the fantasy of an abundance of messages which should enrich
the public sphere. But are these messages in the strict
sense of the word? "One of the most basic formulations of
the idea of communication is in terms of a message and the
response to a message. Under communicative capitalism, this
changes. Messages are contributions to circulating content
-- not actions to elicit responses. Differently put, the
exchange value of messages overtakes their use value. ...
Uncoupled from contexts of action and application -- as on
the Web or in print and broadcast media -- the message is
simply part of a circulating data stream. ... The value of a
particular contribution is likewise inversely proportionate
to the openness, inclusivity, or extent of a circulating
data stream -- the more opinions or comments that are out
there, the less of an impact that any given one might make
(and the more shock, spectacle or newness that is necesary
for a contribution to register or have an impact). In sum,
communication functions symptomatically to produce its own
negation" [107].

Zero comments, the extremely familiar phrase used as the
title of Geert Lovink's book on blogging, seems to point in
exactly that direction. Dean goes on: "Even when we know
that our specific contributions (our messages, posting,
books, articles, films, letters to the editor) simply
circulate in a rapidly moving and changing flow of content,
in contributing, in participating, we act as if we do not
know this. This action manifests ideology as the belief
underlying action, the belief reproducing communicative
capitalism" [108].

In addition to (or in compensation for) this basic
meaninglessness of the message -- its inability to elicit
either a collaborative response or a friend-enemy
confrontation -- Dean describes a technology fetishism that
applies to the machinery and processes of communication. She
details three modes of fetishism: condensation,
displacement, foreclosure.

CONDENSATION: "The complexities of problems -- of
organization, struggle, duration, decisiveness, division,
representation, etc. -- are condensed into one thing, one
problem to be solved and one technological solution" [112].
Example: the problem of people in democracies is supposedly
that they aren't informed: so give them information
technology! "Additional examples of condensation appear when
cybertheorists and activists emphasize singular Web sites,
blogs, and events... so small that [they don't even] show up
on blog ranking sites like daypop or Technorati" [113]. She
goes further with a study apparently showing that in the US,
increasing disclosure in chemical emissions, food labeling
and medical error came exactly at a time when attempts to
impose binding legislation were being defeated...

DISPLACEMENT: "Politics is displaced upon the activities of
everyday or ordinary people... What the everyday people do
in their everyday lives is supposed to overflow with
poliical activity: conflicts, negotiations, resistances,
collusions, cabals, transgressions, and resignifications.
... To put up a Web site, to deface a Web site, to redirect
hits to other sites, to deny access to a Web site, to link
to a Web site -- this is construed as real political action.
In my view, this sort of emphasis displaces political energy
from the hard work of organizing and struggle" [113].

FORECLOSURE: "The political purchase of the technological
fetish is given in advance; it is immediate, presumed,
understood. ... Saying that 'revolution means the
wikification' of the world [as done by Schneider and Lovink
in some manifesto] ... relies on an ontologization such that
the political nature of the world is produced by the
particular technological practices. Struggle, conflict and
context vanish, immediately and magically. Or, put somewhat
differently, they are foreclosed, eliminated in advance so
as to create a space for the uopian celebration of open
source."
"To ontologize the political [that is, to give it the
character of an immediate, primary and necessary reality] is
to collapse the very symbolic space necessary for
politicization, a space between the object and its
representation, its ability to stand for something beyond
itself. The power of the technological fetish stems from
this foreclosure of the political. ... Technologies can and
should be politicized. They should be made to represent
something beyond themselves in the service of something
beyond themselves. Only such a treatment will avoid
fetishization" [114-115].

All of the above does happen quite a lot, in my experience.
For example, in Europe we have seen the initially
politicized "tactical media" mostly decline into gadgets
displayed at festivals sponsored by corporations and
consensus-hungry governments, with some theoretical
discourse (such as my own) included in order to make sure
the stuff looks serious and the academic public has
something to chew on. In the US, someone like Kevin Kelly
can still produce a piece of obscene techno-corporate
boosterism like his recent text, totally distorting any
specific historical meaning of the word "socialism" -- a
move quite close to those of net-cooperation theorist Yann
Moulier Boutang, the editor-in-chief of the supposedly
post-hierarchical journal Multitudes which I used to be part
of, who continues to talk about "the communism of capital"
as though we were still beneath the spell of the
dot-communist nineties. Since there is (or was) money in the
digital realm, and also unlimited space for writing, why not
let your leftist fantasies expand there, and pick up 500
euro at the door?

I do not mean to disavow all the artistic and activist
projects I have collaborated on and written about over the
last fifteen years, particularly not because quite a lot of
them were overtly antagonistic and unfolded outside official
spaces -- but nonetheless the effects of technological
fetishism and its linkage to corporate profit are still very
clear to me, and I have very often seen governments using
the idealism of open source and DIY activism to cover over
the pursuit of business as usual. Already a couple years ago
I wrote a text called "The Absent Rival: Radical Art in a
Political Vacuum," to describe exactly the lack of
meaningful confrontation that had been encountered by
activist groups like the Yes Men. Especially now I am
puzzled by the passivity of the American citizenry who have
just been royally ripped off by the corporate-financial
class and yet since Obama's election, no one has taken to
the streets, even while Geithner, Bernanke and Summers do
everything to reinstate the power of the bankers. It's
obviously not just the fault of social media, far from it,
but why are people in the overdeveloped countries  no longer
able to use the tremendous communicative possibilities
offered by the Internet to organize themselves politically,
as they (we) were seemingly able to do around the turn of
the century? That they are doing it in Iran right now is of
course fantastic, and it recalls some of the potential (see
for example the very enthusiastic text by Henry Giroux on
Counterpunch -- you wonder, did he somehow miss Seattle and
Genoa?). But Iran is a totally different situation from
here, it is a closed society, ours is a liberal society,
founded precisely on the legitimacy granted by open
communication. Openness is a tough nut to crack, precisely
because there is no shell, no outside.

Let's consider what I think is Jodi's most challenging idea.
The question is stated in the text from which I have been
quoting: "If Freud is correct in saying that a fetish not
only covers over a trauma but that in so doing it helps one
through a trauma, what might serve as an analogous
sociopolitical trauma today?" [110]. The answer is most
fully stated, fittingly enough, in a short "Reply" she made
to Wendy Brown and a number of other critics of
neoliberalism in the journal Theory & Event, 11/4 (2008).
Now I will offer a long and sustained quote from that reply:

"The idea of communicative capitalism highlights the way
participation and the freedom to express oneself are
essential to the economic success of neoliberalism --
telecommunications networks are inseparable from production,
consumption, political expression, and state surveillance.
The more people participate -- blog, email, register their
opinions -- the stronger the telecommunications
infrastructure necessary for financial flows and markets and
the greater the opportunities for surveillance. Under
communicative capitalism, then, communication functions
fetishistically as a disavowal of a more fundamental
political disempowerment or castration.

"If Freud is correct in saying a fetish not only covers over
a trauma but in so doing helps one through a trauma, what
might serve as the analogous socio-political trauma today? A
likely answer can be found in the left's role in the
collapse of the welfare state: its betrayal of fundamental
commitments to social solidarity. I want to flag three
aspects of left failure in order to mark some of the
political aspects of the open site of trauma...: the left's
abandonment of workers and the poor, its retreat from the
state and repudiation of collective action, and its
acceptance of the neoliberal economy as the "only game in
town."

"The late 1960s and early 1970s witnessed a set of profound
changes in the world economy, changes associated with
declines in economic growth and increases in inflation and
unemployment. Powerful figures in the corporate and finance
sectors took this opportunity to dismantle the welfare state
(by privatizing public holdings, cutting back on public
services, and rewriting laws for the benefit of
corporations). For the most part, the American left seemed
relatively unaware of the ways business was acting as a
class to consolidate political power -- a fundamental
component of which was the passage of a set of campaign
finance laws establishing the rights of corporations to
contribute unlimited amounts of money to political parties
and political action committees. Instead, coming out of the
movements associated with 1968, increasingly prominent
voices on the left emphasized and fought for personal
freedoms, freedoms from parental and state constraints as
well as freedoms for the expression of differences of race,
sex, and sexuality. While these ideals were situated within
movements for social justice, their coexistence was
precarious, as tensions at the time between workers and
students made clear....

"Identity politics proved a boon for the right, enabling the
alliance between social conservatives and neoliberals. The
former opposed the welfare state for the way it allegedly
undermined morality and family values, encouraged
criminality, abortion, and sex outside of marriage, and
benefited the drug-addicted and lazy more than the sober and
diligent. Engaged in struggles against social conservatives
on all these fronts, many leftists embraced the emphasis on
freedom and attack on the state prominent among neoliberals.
The state seemed but another repressive authority, its
provisions tied to the sexism of the traditional family and
the racism of the white mainstream. Unions appeared corrupt,
already part of a status quo limiting opportunities to the
white and the male. Likewise, in the wake of more than a
quarter century of anti-communism, ever fewer leftists found
in Marxism a viable language for expressing political
aspirations. They argued that oppression occurs along
multiple axes; a focus on class obscures the diversity of
political struggles. The economic problems plaguing the
welfare state, moreover, suggested to some the limits of
political attempts at regulation and redistribution. Given
the imperatives of complex systems, some form of capitalism,
it seemed, would and should persist; what was needed were
guarantees for the rights and differences of all within
capitalist societies, a more radical or participatory
approach to democracy.

"Yet, as they echoed the criticisms of the state prominent
among on the right, leftists failed to envision a new form
of social solidarity. Instead, they continued to emphasize
the plurality of struggles on a variety of social and
cultural terrains and affirm different modes of living. Such
an emphasis and affirmation enabled an easy coexistence with
consumer capitalism insofar as choices of fashion and
entertainment could be quickly read as political
significant. Anti-racist? Wear a Malcolm X t-shirt.
Gay-friendly? Fly a rainbow flag. The ease of political
expression, the quick availability of the affective thrill
of radicality, could let more people feel like they were
politically engaged, even as the shift in political parties
from person-intensive to finance-intensive organization
strategies reduced the political opportunities open to most
Americans to voting or giving money.

"In short, many on the American left responded to the attack
on the welfare state, collapse of Keynesianism, and
emergence of a neoliberal consensus by forfeiting their
historical solidarity with workers and the poor, retreating
from the state, and losing the sense that collective
solutions to large scale systemic inequalities are possible
and necessary. The failure of solidarity was manifest
perhaps most acutely in President Bill Clinton's destruction
of welfare guarantees (aid to families with dependent
children) in favor of Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(capped at five years) in the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996. Republicans
didn't eliminate welfare; Democrats, the party associated
with the interests of the poor and the working class since
the Depression, did. This failure of solidarity is closely
linked to the left's withdrawal from the state—even as
various elements on the right developed strategies for
funding and winning electoral campaigns, interpreting the
constitution, and rewriting laws, even as corporate and
business interests steadily increased their political
investments, the left failed adequately to defend what had
long ago been won, namely, the notion that the most
fundamental role of the state is insuring a minimal social
and economic standard below which no one is allowed to fall.

"Finally, as it overlapped with a reluctance to offend any
particular desires for freedom, backing away from the state
resonated with a sense that there is no alternative to the
market. And, more than simply an approach to the
distribution of goods and services, this sense is more
profoundly a sense political inefficacy: we can't do
anything about anything. In part, the loss of agency results
from the prior acceptance of the inevitability of
capitalism. But, it results as well from an underlying
skepticism toward uttering the word "we," toward speaking
for others and in so doing failing to recognize their
difference and specificity. Indeed, to this extent to speak
of the left in the U.S under communicative capitalism makes
no sense—there is no such collectivity."

*****

So -- the fondness of the left-leaning middle classes for
the subversive proliferation of individualized messages made
possible by networked communications actually helped us get
through a trauma, which was the realization that we were and
continue to be complicit in breaking the pact of social
solidarity that fomerly allowed for a redistribution of the
wealth between the professional and the working classes
after the Second World War. The EXPRESSSION of
"dot-communism" or any other belief in networked social
cooperation was a compensation for the FACT of neoliberal
rollback of collective welfare provision, with the consent
of the middle classes who could save on taxes and profit
from the new investment opportunities and new professional
activities that appeared with the "monetary turn" of the
1980s. This interpretation is all the more striking when you
realize that the expansion of civilian telecommunications
technology was initially driven by the corporate sectors
that made financialization into their class strategy in the
1970s; then the massification of the Internet in 1990s,
while socially much more complex, was again financed by
speculative investments. So that the middle-class adoption
of communications technology as a utopian object of desire
clearly represents an identification with the power and
prestige of finance -- even if anyone who knows the history
of the Internet could never reduce its fabrication and
technological form to this kind of simple ideological
formula...

There are more things to be drawn out of Jodi's texts on
exactly how people manage to distract their attention from
the difficult truths of contemporary society, and I hope in
a later post to tease out some of them. The point here, I
should be clear, is not just to be melancholically critical,
but instead to use the opportunity of our virtual assembly
to do some work and to ask how that work could become
practical -- how a group or rather, a network of artists and
technologists and intellectuals could better understand the
sort of collective predicaments in which we are all caught,
so as to start devising strategies to get out of them."\
(IDC mailing list June 2009)


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Books]]