
'''* Article: Commons for Peace. James Quilligan. Kosmos Journal,  FALL | WINTER 2011''' 

URL = http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/commons-for-peace/


=Description=

"Although the term ‘human security’ has various meanings, two have predominated. Following the Cold War, several major studies—including the UN Secretary-General’s 1992 report, Agenda for Peace; the 1994 World Development Report of the UN Development Program; and the 2003 report, Human Security Now, by the UN Commission on Human Security—proposed peaceful alternatives to military security. This shifted the traditional meaning of security from national defense to social development and the rights of civilians. Meanwhile, a second branch of human security was examining reasons why the international community should intervene in a sovereign state, which jeopardizes the safety and security of its people through political violence or military aggression. The principle of responsibility to protect (R2P) was put forward by the 2001 report of the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty to bring peace and legal order to citizens whose lives are endangered by their own government."


=Excerpts=

==[[How Commons' Rights Differ from Human Rights]]==

James Quilligan:

" Human security may call for community-based
development, social well-being and popular selfdetermination,
but the rights of local citizens preempt sovereign
authority only during humanitarian crises—not when there is a
military security threat. Since many analysts in the human security
field view human rights and development as a legitimate part
of the people’s social contract with their government, they challenge
the issue of state sovereignty mainly in terms of the legitimacy
of foreign intervention.

The commons field takes a different approach. It questions the
effectiveness of the traditional model of human rights and development,
stressing the importance of socially created value and
the management of resources by local communities beyond the
purview of government jurisdiction or market incentives. Rather
than subjects of the state, civilians must be treated as people
whose livelihoods are destroyed when they are separated from
the social and natural wealth upon which they depend. Commoners
want the state to provide greater security for the rights of citizens
to produce and manage these resources and less support for
their privatization. The commons thus provide a strong critique
of the inequality and unrest that result from market forces. Destabilization
of a commons may be caused by many factors, not the
least of which are corporate-driven efforts to enclose and extract
a valuable resource. This can result in the financing of social instability.

It’s true that poverty, disease and lack of capacity or development
by local people may be an immediate cause—or result
—of failed commons. Yet the underlying reasons for failed commons,
resource conflict and security crises often involve the meddling
of the domestic state, a foreign state, or domestic or foreign
businesses in the management and production of a community’s
natural and social capital. The field of human security does not
address this dimension of resource security.

At the same time, human security, with its realism concerning the
alternatives to armed security, can be helpful to commons practitioners
who view the commons in a political vacuum, isolated
from state and regional influences. Commoners believe that communities
can generate genuine livelihood and well-being simply
by negotiating, monitoring and policing their own rules for resource
management. But this minimizes the fact that state or regional
conflict over the ownership and production of local stocks
and supplies can pose major security problems—of infrastructure,
governance, lawlessness, hostility and fear. In many cases,
sudden and catastrophic changes in political regimes lead to radical
and violent changes, disrupting the peace, security and wellbeing
of a community’s ability to manage its commons.

While human security supports the protection of civilian interests
through human rights, material relief and the mobilization of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts, it places more emphasis
on the personal safety of citizens than on specific means for the
self-management of their commons. Commoners argue that wellintentioned
proposals for human rights, social development and
peacebuilding are often imposed on pre-existing commons and
neglect the survival and subsistence needs of their resource communities,
resulting in poverty, disrupted livelihoods and resource
refugees. The uprooting and displacement of a population, crime,
weapons and extremist ideologies are also cross-border problems,
which is why a regional approach to human security may be necessary.

Commons advocates often point out that sovereign jurisdictions
and their social institutions rarely match the territorial
expanse of ecosystems, social and cultural groupings and religious
diasporas. Yet most commoners have little experience in the management
of resource crises which transcend state boundaries."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/commons-for-peace.pdf)


==[[Socially Chartered Agreements for Resource Security]]==

James Quilligan:

"Both fields generally agree that sustainable security in particular
areas should be established by the people who live there, since
they are the ones most knowledgeable about potential solutions
to their problems. Commoners assert that resource security cannot
be guaranteed by people they don’t know or trust, and many
human security proponents agree that outside forces are not always
the best source of citizen safety. Some advocates of human
security support a participatory framework for peacekeeping,
civilian protection and self-determination in disputed areas and
conflict zones, one aspect of which is the local governance of
community holdings and provisions which may be endangered.
Many resource communities have also developed social charters
under peaceful conditions—declarations of their rights to produce
and manage a commons—which involve a wide range of
people who depend on these assets for their physical and material
welfare. Socially chartered agreements allow citizens and local
public officials to design effective policies and institutions specifically
tailored to their circumstances. Social charters can also be
created for regional commons by addressing the security of resources
vital to all stakeholders in a transborder environment,
such as water, food and energy. In strife-torn areas, social charters
may include plans for peacekeepers to manage conflict and protect
civilians. These peacekeeping measures could be financed
through leases or taxes on the commons."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/commons-for-peace.pdf)


==[[Commons for Peace as a Anti-Enclosure Movement]]==

James Quilligan:

"The challenge now for those who recognize the importance of
Commons for Peace (C4P) is to define security as non-closure:
the rolling back of new or existing property enclosures which
deny the rights of people to their means of livelihood and welfare.

Government and market enclosures remove people from their
sources of living wealth and sustenance, leading to failed commons
and the potential for resource conflict and armed intervention.
Proponents of human security, unlike commons activists, have
generally not opposed state enclosure laws or privatization. This
is probably the sharpest difference now between human security
and the commons. Yet there is much common ground: both fields
agree on devolving power to local communities and the non-interference
of outside forces. They converge on the creation of locally
chartered agreements for the protection of civilians and their common
goods, encouraging communities to flourish through legitimate
local management. They also agree that peace itself is a social and
cultural good, which must be locally managed and shared.

As a democratic movement, Commons for Peace would defend the
social protests that emerge from the destruction of a commons—or
from any form of external control that does not promote life,
human dignity, security and peace. Socially chartered agreements
for the local production and management of commons are won
through hard-fought but peaceful negotiations to protect them
from enclosure, overuse and deterioration. This means safeguarding
a community’s sources of survival, sustenance and well-being
by resisting abusive interference, whether domestic or foreign.
C4P would speak for a third sector of popular will—the powerful
force of people who are infuriated by losing not only the benefits
of access, use, production and governance of their commons, but
also the safety and security which only this natural and social capital
can offer. The indignation of C4P must be focused through
the determination of communities to reclaim their commons
non-violently and redefine the boundaries of resource domains
threatened by further enclosure and exploitation.

Neither human security nor the commons are concepts currently
recognized in mainstream society. All the more reason that these
fields should join forces. C4P would demonstrate that human
rights, poverty, disease, food, health, education, political participation
and the peaceful management of resource conflict can no longer
be separated from the commons. Indeed, nothing is more vital to
the peace and security of individuals and communities across the
world today than the long-term preservation of their commons."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/commons-for-peace.pdf)



[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]