

=Introduction and Context=

Via Biens Communs, http://bienscommuns.org/blog/?p=1180

"The World Social Forum and the World Forum on Science and Democracy will be two opportunities for the commoners to interact with other civic and social movements.

A list of discussion is now open for volunteers at : https://bienscommuns.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/dakar



==Discussing the Commons in the World Forum on Science and Democracy (WFSD)==


The World Forum on Science and Democracy (WFSD) will be held on February the 4th and 5th. Its objective is twofold :

* questioning the functionning of the scientific institutions and funding (science and technology political orientation, means of production of knowledge, independence fo scientists…)
    
* promoting alternatives considering Science as a common (open archives, open educational resources, open scientific publication, open data…).



Two frames are proposed by the WFSD : plenary sessions and self organized workshops. We would like to  propose a set of workshops and a plenary session based in the two following issues :

* Struggles for Commons knowledge : open science, diversity in the production of knowledge, alliance…?
    
* How researchers address the issue of the elaboration of the notion of commons and the analysis of the populare experiences, with and by social and civic movements ?


Perhaps the result of such workshops could be a note written with participants, not at all a declaration, but a proposal of shared agenda of work for the period from now to Rio + 20.

We will be pleased  to organize this with all the organizations that will be in Dakar and will be volonteer to work with a such approach or at least that agree to discuss it and to participate in the elaboration of a shared program.


==Discussing the Commons in the The World Social Forum==


The World Social Forum (on February the 7th and 11th) is a place to try to built a large political debate and discussion. A such process aims at to take in the table of the discussion political questions linked with commons, to move towards a politicization of the issue of the commons, and a shared strategy by activists and social movements. The articulation of such questions could allow us to elaborate a global vision of the place and the role of the commons in the project of social and political transformation with social movements.


Some questions suggested to make the proposal concrete :

* How to design the welfare state at the age of commons ?
    
* How do the Rights of Mother Earth and the Commons approach complement each other in re-designing international solidarity?
    
* What about popular education in the commons context ?
    
* What are the transformations of political processes and governance  in the era of the commons? How are changing the ways of doing politics ? what consequences and opportunities for social movements?
    
* What rôle does economic actors play in the commons (free software, wiki…, foundations, corporations, mutualism, local solidarity economic actors, …) in the economy at global and local levels ? How ? what alliances ? Business …and so what ?
    
* What are the roles of the commons regarding the consequences of the exploitation of natural resources (war, slave-work, environmental diseases, destruction of cultural patrimony, … ) ?
    
* What are the structures needed by social movements, and that they will assume, in order to be able to spread the idea of the commons as a political objective or demand, and to build an inclusive dynamic that allow people who are not at this point producers of commons to become part of the game ?
    
* this list is open to new questions …



Other existing initiatives in relation with the Commons at Dakar could be linked in order to be able to  agglutinate the proposals of activities in the World Social Forum.

* '''A list of discussion to prepare the work on The Commons in Dakar'''.

A list has been created for bringing the discussion on the commons to Dakar in February 2011 at the World social Forum and at the World Forum Science and Democracy. The address of the list is : dakar@bienscommuns.org. Anyone can be registred at https://bienscommuns.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/dakar

This space is wide open to all women and men who wish to exchange their ideas and experiences of the commons for social and political change.

The discussion list is moderated for non-registered and non moderated for registrants. The archives are accessible to registered people. We do not want that languages will be an obstacle to participate, but we are not able to provide a systematic translation of the discussions. So we recommend using preferably English, French or Spanish in the list. This list is hosted by VECAM and moderated by Valerie Peugeot, Herve Le Crosnier, Alain Ambrosi and Frederic Sultan. You can contact them by sending an e-mail to dakar-owner@bienscommuns.org

This proposal was made with the input from Rosa Acevedo, Alain Ambrosi, [[Geneviève Azam]], [[Michel Bauwens]], [[David Bollier]], Nicola Bullard, Beatriz Busaniche, [[Silke Helfrich]], Wojtek Kalinowski, Gaelle Krikorian, Hervé Le Crosnier, Heike Loeschmann, Olivier Petitjean, Valerie Peugeot, Simon Emmanuel Roux, Miguel Said Vieira, Frédéric Sultan. The most of them have subscribed to the discussion list.

If you wish to take part in this discussion in order to prepare for Dakar, join us!"

=Question 1: How to design the welfare state at the age of commons ?=

 
==Response 1: Brigitte Kratzwald==


For this question also look at the notes from our ICC workshop:
http://p2pfoundation.net/Berlin_Commons_Conference/Workshops/Welfare_State

And - especially as to the social forum in Dakar - it is important to
consider the huge differences in current welfarestate-systems around the
world. We always have to start from the existing siutation and what can be
an improvement in one country might be a step backwards in another. While
surely in developing countries self-organised health and educational
services often are the only possibility to get any, in Europe we have to
think about how to apply the logic of the commons within the existing
systems rather. And by the help of the commons to develop them in a way
that they can exist without economic growth. Because, in my opinion, one
of the main shortcomings of current welfare systems is their dependence on
waged labour and thus on economic growth, so that they are not working in
growthless ecomonies which we should aim on because of ecological reasons.
So one important point could be not to reproduce these shortcomings in
developing countries.

This could mean what we called in Berlin to defend the essence of the
welfare state but not its form.

But I think there are a few things that hold for all countries. Most
important: we must not abandon the demand for redistribution of wealth.
Commons need resources and we should not take the accountability from the
state for providing the necessary resources and a proper administration
for education, health care, etc.

The second point is the importance of involving people in decision making,
so through the idea of the commons, public services can come nearer to the
citizens, not reducing them to customers "buying" the services some
experts think, would meet their needs, while at the same time reducing
people's control over their lives.

For example the state can provide stuff and knowledge for energy of
IT-services, but the people decide about production and distribution.

But, certainly, looking on the welfare state from a commons perspective
means much more than re-structuring existing services. The welfare state
from its origin stems for the problems caused by industrial capitalism.
Actually, many of the problems those services are supposed to solve, are a
consequence of the existing system of production. Thus the increasing
health and social costs are also due to the destructive nature of this
system. If we only give the social and health services back to the people,
we still accept the role of repairing the damages done by a
globalised finance capitalism and thus externalizing it's costs.

So, in my opinion, social security and public health should actually be
the products of commoning, we had to organise the reproduction of our
society in a way that these damages would not occur. And there for example
in developing countries the access to natural commons as soil or water
could play an important role in reducing the need for welfare state
services.

== Response: Sam Rose ==

The co-governance of resources recognized as a "commons" calls for more direct engagement from participants on all scales. Delegation to representatives should decrease. Therefore, so should the need for a "state" to mediate "welfare" of people.

=Question 2: Politics and Governance implications for Social Movements?=


'''What are the transformations of political processes and governance in the era of the commons? How are changing the ways of doing politics ? What consequences and opportunities for social movements?'''

==Response 1==

Brigitte Kratzwald:

The most important aspect in my opinion would be that regulations would
develop bottom up and not top down, by what you can call “customary law
communities”. Some information on that you can find here:

http://www.cato-unbound.org/2007/08/16/bruce-l-benson/polycentric-governance/

Through mechanisms like that global problems can be dealt with on a local
or regional level which gives social movements much more opportunities to
involve in decision making.



=Question 3: What role do economic actors play in the commons?=

'''What rôle does economic actors play in the commons (free software, wiki…, foundations, corporations, mutualism, local solidarity economic actors, …) in the economy at global and local levels ? How ? what alliances ? Business …and so what ?'''


==Response 1==

Brigitte Kratzwald:

I think that economic actors play an important role in the commons. If one
does not want the commons to replace all forms of production for markets -
and I personally do not like to replace one hegemonic system by another
hegemonic one - we need to prevent that corporations and enterprises
exploit and overuse the commons and exclude other people from using them.
This is only possible, if economic actors simply become commoners too.
They have to stick to the rules for the use of resources they together
with other commoners have agreed on. They are not allowed to sell those
resources but only the products they produce by help of these resources.
There are a lot of examples for that, watersheds, fishing places, forests,
free software, etc.

The other aspect is, as all the other commoners, they have to give
something back to the commons. Contributing to its maintainance or to the
livelyhoods of other commoners by providing part of their products free
for their community. These commitments limit the amount of production of
an enterprise and its expectations for profit, because it only gets a
limited amount of resources. And I think this is quite what "real" CSR
should mean, an enterprise using resources in a sustainable way and
contributing to the wellbeing of the community it is situated in.

The next role is to develop technologies that reduce the use of resources
or improve the possibilities of recycling to achieve closed production
loops. The issue of digital commons exploiting natural commons Martin rose
in the last discussion is a case in point. I think C2C-production would be
a big step to a commons-based society and enterprises can take a leading
role in that.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cradle_to_Cradle:_Remaking_the_Way_We_Make_Things

And the last thing is that, if entrepreneurs want to really produce
sustainably they themselves need their social commons, because they will
not be able to produce at the same price as other enterprises do, as they
cease to externalize their costs. So they need a local market, which in
times of the internet could also be a virtual "local" market, where they
interact with consumers who share their concerns about the commons. I
think that local markets can be an important commons, provided that prices
in those local markets are not shaped by the mechanism of demand and
supply but by the needs and possibilities of producers and consumers and
the local natural environment, where sometimes also consumers can share
the risks of the producers by giving money in advance like in
CSA-projects, while enterprises consider local needs in their policies.

So in my opinion, enterprises can and must be commoners - but we should
not mix up the two different spheres. Enterprises are commoners if they
use some resources together with other commoners and fulfil their
commitments to the commons. But the enterprise itself cannot be a commons
as it produces commodities it wants to sell on the market to make the
profit it needs to survive. This profit however would not be on the costs
of the commons but based on the protection of them. And in the case of
cooperatives would be distributed amongst the associates. And to achieve
this we need a proper set of rules and a appropriate political framework.


'''An update on the role of enterprises:'''

'''1.'''

"Enterprises - as juridical persons (is this correct English?) -
because it are the enterprises that use resources, pollute water and air,
etc. We should not reduce it to the individual responsibility of the
entrepreneurs, but it should be part of the constitution of enterprises.
Enterprises can be owners of things (and not the enterpreneurs), why
shouldn't they be able to be commoners? I know that - and this I suppose
is your main concern - the idea of a capitalist enterprise as a unit
striving to maximise its profit is not compatible with the idea of the
commons and in that I agree with you. This is the main problem of
entrepreneurs (i.e. individuals) who personally want to act socially and
ecologically responsible, but cannot succeed as long as their enterprises
have to compete on global markets.

But I know as well that there are many people (who like to be
entrepreneurs, but want to escape this dilemma) who for themselves try to
define the role of an enterprise not through profit, but through its
contribution to the benefit of the community (in German "Gemeinwohl"), and
I think they are very serious about it. Already now there are examples
where enterprises are part of commons regulations and through this fact
they are also part of the local community, that to a certain degree,
reduces the pressure of global market competition. Thus they are as
dependent on commons as those of us who are not so much in favour of
entrepeneurship as you and me ;-). But still we have some common interests
and there could be fruitful cooperation and mutual benefit, provided we
don't mix up things as mentioned before."


'''2.'''

What I see is that some people, who from what reasons ever prefer being
entrepreneurs to being commoners, try to develop a new concept of
entrepreneurship that in many aspects seems quite compatible with the
production of commons. And as I don't want to force my concept on other
people, I'd like to work out where cooperation is possible and what are
the contradictions and conflicts. In this process we also have to shape
the links between such enterprises and commons. And in my opinion the
rights and duties to a commons have to be linked to the enterprises
independently from the individuals running them. But of course this is not
to disguise individual failures behind an enterprise as a legal person,
but to make sure that these rules and duties continue even if the owner
changes. Everybody is only allowed to run this enterprise if he conforms
to these rules.



[[Category:Commons]]