==Description==

A. Allen Butcher on [[Communal Economics]]:

[[Production Sharing]] "in communal economies is only half of the economic process; the other half being
distribution and consumption without an exchange system. Regular planning cycles setting labor and
money budgets (the latter from exchange with the dominant culture outside of the community) is the
primary method of sharing communal assets. Budgeting is essentially a form of rationing, since there
are always more ideas on things to do than there are resources. One budgeted item is usually small
personal discretionary funds or allowances, which results in communal assets becoming private
property. This is for exchange outside of the community for commodities or services that the
community does not provide, often for vacations.

Other forms of communal distribution include: first-come-first-served (e.g., food serving and other
items “up-for-grabs”), to each as needed (e.g., health services), seniority (e.g., Twin Oaks’ sabbatical
program), resources given to individuals for personal needs and wants upon request (e.g., East Wind’s
“Weeds and Knots”), drawing lots rolling dice or other systems of chance, and the “double-blind
preferences matrix.” This latter distribution system is used in situations where two or more people
want the same item, most often a room or residence, or when there are any limited numbers of items to
be distributed among interested people. All of the items to be distributed are given a similar name
such as a type of flower, then all of the people desiring those items are given a similar name such as a
type of animal. Each person in the matrix rates the items according to their first through third
preferences and a two-dimensional matrix is made, with flowers on one axis, animals on the other. A
member is found who does not know who or what the animals or flowers represent, and is asked to
arrange the matrix so that each animal gets its highest preference possible in flowers, resulting in most
people getting their first or second preference."
(http://www.culturemagic.org/PDF/c3Communal%20Economics.pdf)

==Discussion==

===Communal Theory===

A. Allen Butcher:

"Communal distribution is managed in egalitarian communities to provide the greatest good for the
greatest number, or to each according to need, with the highest degree of fairness possible given the
limits of the community’s resources. Developing fair and equitable methods of producing and
distributing communal assets is essential in those communities affirming that creating community does
not require the deprivation of privacy, whether in relationships, goods, or space. By contrast, in
monasticism an ascetic lifestyle and a vow of poverty are defining features of the community.
To explain how entrusting communal resources to individual members can be consistent with the
communal value of sharing, two theories are available. First, the “communal privacy theory” states
that increasing levels of privacy, afforded by entrusting additional resources or powers to members
does not reduce the community’s level of communalism as long as the equity or ultimate responsibility
and power remains shared under communal ownership and control. Second, the “communal sharing
theory” states that the greater the experience people have of sharing among themselves, the greater will
be their commitment to the community thus formed. (Butcher 1991)

Increasing computerization of communal economies using various forms of time economies for
production and various processes for distribution will aid the growth of communal economies as long
as those processes serve the values and needs of the members. Sharing in communal society can
include beliefs, ideals, thoughts, feelings and emotions as well as goods and services, power and
leadership in communal governance."
(http://www.culturemagic.org/PDF/c3Communal%20Economics.pdf)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Community Economics]]

[[Category:Community]]