
=Discussion=

Jay Weinstein:

"The concept of a common humanity with
a consciousness of itself is very old and widely
discussed. In fact, for many centuries in
Western and Eastern philosophy the idea was
believed to be self evident to anyone who could
reason properly. Ultimately, such beliefs were
dismissed as too vague and/or ambiguous.

However, in several instances, such as in
Immanuel Kant's writings on morality, philosophers attempted to make the quest for a common humanity more specific. In the early 19th
century, Kant in particular proposed in his
moral imperative a certain kind of thought and
action that would be an effective means to
achieve the goal of species consciousness. At
about the same time, Auguste Comte, founder
of the discipline of sociology, coined the term
to refer to such thought and action that is used
to this day: altruism. In this way, the links
between a common humanity, species consciousness, reason, moral imperatives, and
altruism were forged.

In Karl Marx's revolutionary program to
create a common humanity, one finds the key
principle of a group in-itself. This indicates that
group-consciousness, including in this context
species-consciousness, is the product of common life conditions plus a shared understanding
by members of the group (species) that they
have common interests - that the wellbeing of
each depends on the wellbeing of all. Also necessary is a common "other" against which the
group (species) can identify itself. In the case of
the human species, in particular, this other is
nature, with which humanity as a whole can
and must cooperate in order to survive and
prosper. Because, it appears, the achievement
of species consciousness is neither automatic
nor inevitable, the need for a program to guide
the quest is once more apparent."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)
=More information=

'''* Article: [[Creative Altruism]]: The Prospects for a Common Humanity in the Age of Globalization. By Jay Weinstein. Journal of Futures Studies, August 2004, 9(1): 45 - 58'''

URL = https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]