'''= Article by [[Ian Angus]], part 1 of “Robbing the Soil”''' published 2021-08-01

URL = https://climateandcapitalism.com/2021/08/01/robbing-the-soil-1-commons-and-classes-before-capitalism/

== Excerpts ==

Lead quote: “All progress in capitalist agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil.” (Karl Marx)

…

“Preventing soil degradation and preserving soil fertility ought to be a global priority, but it isn’t. According to the United Nations, a third of the world’s land is now severely degraded, and we lose 24 billion tonnes of fertile soil every year. More than 1.3 billion people depend on food from degraded or degrading agricultural land.<ref>https://www.unccd.int/news-events/better-land-use-and-management-critical-achieving-agenda-2030-says-new-report</ref> Even in the richest countries, almost all food production depends on massive applications of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides that further degrade the soil and poison the environment.”

…

<blockquote>
“What existed in fact was not a ‘tragedy of the commons’ but rather a triumph: that for hundreds of years — and perhaps thousands, although written records do not exist to prove the longer era — land was managed successfully by communities.”<ref>Susan Jane Buck Cox, No Tragedy of the Commons, Environmental Ethics 7, no. 1 (1985), 60.</ref>
</blockquote>
“The most important account of how common-field agriculture in England actually worked is Jeanette Neeson’s award-winning book, Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in England, 1700-1820. Her study of surviving manorial records from the 1700s showed that the common-field villagers, who met two or three times a year to decide matters of common interest, were fully aware of the need to regulate the metabolism between livestock, crops and soil.”

…

“Agricultural historian Mark Overton estimates that “in the early sixteenth century, around 80 per cent of farmers were only growing enough food for the needs of their family household.” Of the remaining 20%, only a few were actual capitalists who employed laborers and accumulated ever more land and wealth. Nevertheless, by the 1500s two very different approaches to the land co-existed in many commons communities.
<blockquote>
“The attitudes and behavior of farmers producing exclusively for their own needs were very different from those farmers trying to make a profit. They valued their produce in terms of what use it was to them rather than for its value for exchange in the market. … Larger, profit orientated, farmers were still constrained by soils and climate, and by local customs and traditions, but also had an eye to the market as to which crop and livestock combinations would make them most money.”<ref>Mark Overton, Agricultural Revolution in England: The Transformation of the Agrarian Economy, 1500-1850 (Cambridge University Press, 1996), 8, 21.</ref>
</blockquote>
As we’ll see, that division eventually led to the overthrow of the commons.”

== Commentary ==

== More Information ==
* [[Ian Angus]]

* Republished in [https://www.resilience.org/stories/2021-08-11/robbing-the-soil-1-commons-and-classes-before-capitalism/ Resilience]

=== References ===
<references />

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]