'''* Commons-based Peer Production and Education.  J. Philipp Schmidt'''

URL = http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/fcrw/sites/fcrw/images/Schmidt_Education_FreeCulture_25Oct2009.pdf

Short essay for the Free Culture Research Workshop. Harvard University, 23 October 2009. The author is affiliated with P2PU.org, UNU/MERIT, Shuttleworth Foundation

==Text==

Much free culture research has focused on the incentives that compel individuals to
participate in commons-based peer production, the governance of peer production
communities, open innovation processes, and the intersection of law with
technology and society. An field that deserves more focused attention, and which
has the potential to become a key driver for free culture practices is education.
Culture and education are inseparably connected. Historically, education has been
a mechanism to manifest a shared culture, for example in the case of the Humboldt
University, the model for today's modern research university. However, education
not only shapes culture, but is in turn influenced by it. The practices of knowledge
creation and diffusion, research and teaching, have changed significantly over time,
mirroring broader changes in culture and society. The free culture movement, and
the practice of commons-based peer production that lies at its core, offer
interesting perspective for education and I will briefly describe two possible
directions for research in this field: the analysis of learning processes in free culture
communities, and the notion of a trusted community-based reputation that can
serve as a form of accreditation.

===Understanding Learning===

The very principles of sharing and collaboration in a community of peers, which
underpin the concept of free culture, are deeply related to the concept of learning.
Culture evolves as new generations learn about and adapt the works of those that
came before them. Innovation and invention depend from on the ability to inspect
and learn from the earlier work done by others. Opening up and sharing existing
codified knowledge as well as parts of the innovation process itself (including idea
generation, testing, and prototyping) creates opportunities for others to learn and
to participate.

It is therefore not surprising that upon closer inspection of commons-based peer
production communities we find learning at their core. Open source software
developers state that gaining new knowledge and sharing knowledge with others
(learning and teaching) are key motivations for their participation. Equally,
learning is an intrinsic part of user-centered innovation processes where
individuals exchange designs and improve upon them. Learning in these projects is
not limited to facts and ideas, but extends to social behaviors and dispositions.
Participants in online gaming communities develop communication and leadership
skills, and contributors to social media sites exhibit high levels of media literacy
and are comfortably working with video, audio and photo.

In a commons-based peer production framework, the concepts of 
# learning and
# assessment of learning
become inseparable. 

The community continuously
reviews and evaluates the contributions of its members. Open source software
developers do not write exams, but the quality of their work (as an indicator for
their knowledge) is tested as part of the project's inherent quality review process.
Acceptance of a developer's software code into the release of the application is the
equivalent of passing an exam.

The realization that a community of peers is able to effectively evaluate the
individual learning achievements of its members is important in the context of
education. The types of skills that are relevant in the digital economy are difficult to
test through standardised exams: ability to analyse complex information,
collaborate with others, and show leadership do not lend themselves to testing, but
are better observed on an individual basis. In addition, there is enormous growth in
the demand for education, and today's common models for assessment, which
require an individual expert to review the work of students, does not scale. A peer
assessment model as demonstrated in commons-based peer production offers an
alternative that addresses both these challenges.

This leads us to two research questions: How can the intrinsic assessment
mechanism we observe in open source software projects be applied to other
domains, especially those that do not typically include the collaborative
construction of an artefact? And secondly, how can these social assessment
mechanisms be applied to formal education to improve the relevance of the skills
that are being evaluated?

===Reputation as a function of trust in aggregate opinions.===

We make decisions by referring to information sources we trust, for example, we
ask our friends or colleagues for their opinion of a book. If we receive two
contradicting recommendations, we calculate a level of trust in each to make a
purchasing decision. We can refer to the total level of trust we have in a person's
opinion as their reputation.

We are more likely to buy a book if it comes recommended by a friend, whose
recommendations had been useful to us in the past. His reputation is high, because
we have calculated a high trust score for him. Theoretically, this chain of trust can
be extended to people outside our immediate networks. If we trust our friend on a
particular subject, and she trusts a third person on that subject (and so on), then
we are likely to also trust the opinion of our friend's friend.

The problem with these inter-personal recommendation models is that they don't
scale in the physical world. We can't – on the fly – compute the aggregated trust
value we place in the opinion of someone who is a remote member of our social
network – a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend.

In the information world such computations are possible and increasingly being
used to help our decision making. Amazon uses collaborative filtering to
recommend books, based on aggregate preferences and opinions of thousands of
other customers. Reddit, digg and similar services aggregate opinions on what is
worth our attention in order to filter news.

Degrees are the education system's solution for our inability to dynamically
compute trust scores for a large number of opinions. For an employer it is not
feasible to ask the opinion of every professor that has every taught a job applicant.
The level of reputation that is embodied in a degree, depends on the value of trust
we assign to the network of individuals whose opinions were aggregated to confer
the degree.

There is first evidence that reputation in commons-based peer production
communities can serve a similar purpose. Open source software developers
consider their participation as equally useful as a degree, and employers have
stated that they would accept demonstrated open source experience instead of an
academic degree. We need further research to determine if this is a unique case or
if it signals a broader change in education. In other words, can reputation that
reflects the aggregate opinions of participants in common-based peer production
be transferred into economic opportunities that usually require an academic
degree?"
(http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/fcrw/sites/fcrw/images/Schmidt_Education_FreeCulture_25Oct2009.pdf)

==More Information==

Contact the author via phi.schmidt at gmail.com

Recommended by the author:

#Chris Watkins spoke with one of the other founders of P2PU, at http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/peer-2-peer-university/2009/01/18
#2009 update P2PU workshop, to set out our strategy for 2010, see http://www.p2pu.org/Workshop
#UNESCO OER Toolkit: http://oerwiki.iiep-unesco.org/index.php?title=UNESCO_OER_Toolkit
#Education 3.0 paper: http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1625/1540
#on openness as a strategy for innovation, via http://www.guni-rmies.net/info/default.php?id=166

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Articles]]