

'''= Master's Thesis: A COMMON(S)STATE: Art commons in a Social Knowledge Economy. By Pedro Cagigal. Masters in Digital Culture and Society at Kings College, 2014'''

=Abstract=

"The Ecuadorian government is intending to develop a Social Knowledge 
Economy (SKE) that would change the parameters of the countryʼs intellectual 
property legislation and create public policies to promote an open commons 
knowledge economy. SKE comes forth as a convergence of two processes that 
have been looking into ʻpost-neoliberalʼ alternatives: Free Culture and South 
Americaʼs ʻleft turnʼ Good Living paradigm. This research pretends to explore 
some ideas grounding the cultural proposals for the SKE project, to shed light 
on some of the tensions in delineating these alternatives. Through deep 
interviews with local artists and cultural managers,  I will analyse what contextual 
aspects and debates on cultural policies should be considered to create a state-supported digital-commons of art production under a SKE. I will argue that 
discussions around the property of state-supported-art can be useful to look into 
the challenges and complexities in the relation between a commons and the 
State. Looking into this process can also bring new perspectives regarding
discussions on digital rights; opening a space to rethink the place of the State in 
some of the core ideas in Free Culture.

[[Category:Art]]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Culture]]