'''= "we develop landscape restoration projects that are based on business cases".''' [http://www.commonland.com/en/about-us]

URL = http://www.commonland.com/

=Contextual Quote=

Daniel Christian Wahl:

"The work of the Dutch ‘Commonland Foundation’ commonland.com with its “four returns, three landscapes, 20 years” approach is already demonstrating in Australia, South Africa, Spain and the Netherlands how landscape scale regeneration is possible. Their long-term systemic approach to regeneration is to create collaboration at the landscape scale that brings together diverse land-owners and a cross-sector alliance through the ‘return of inspiration.’ Through a shared commitment to bioregional ecosystems restoration they create the conditions for social and ecological returns. Over the longer term these will lead to regional economic returns."
(https://medium.com/@designforsustainability/building-a-new-normal-f1cbcc414a66)


=Description=

"Commonland believes that landscape restoration offers tremendous untapped opportunities for sustainable economic development. To demonstrate this potential, we develop landscape restoration projects that are based on business cases. 

Multidisciplinary teams actively involve investors, companies and entrepreneurs in long-term restoration partnerships with farmers and land-users. Long-term commitment is important as it takes approximately 20 years – or one generation – to restore a landscape. Our holistic restoration approach combines and connects natural and economic landscape zones and delivers 4 returns®. 

Our goal is to realize large-scale landscape restoration with local farmers, land-users and experts, based on sustainable 4 returns business cases. Our mission is to contribute to a large-scale landscape restoration industry, aligned with international policies and guidelines.

Commonland contributes to the Bonn Challenge, a global effort to restore 150 million hectares of the world’s deforested and degraded land by 2020 and 350 million hectares by 2030."
(http://www.commonland.com/en/about-us)


=Principles=

==The [[Commonland Four Returns Framework]]==

An assessment tool based on 4 aspects:

"Our 4 Returns framework tackles the four main losses associated with land degradation – loss of hope, social networks, biodiversity and economic value – and aims to regenerate the landscape to create 4 Returns instead:

* "Return of Inspiration: Giving people hope and a sense of purpose


* Social return: Bringing back jobs, education and social connections


* Natural return: Restoring biodiversity and soils for healthy and resilient landscapes


* Financial return: Realising long-term sustainable income for communities."

(https://commonland.com/4-returns-framework/)


=Governance=

"Commonland consists of a foundation and two impact companies: 4 Returns Projects and 4 Returns Partners. 
The foundation guards and develops the 4 returns restoration approach and works in close cooperation with scientific institutions, business schools, and experts from non-governmental organizations. We are also creating an Academy for Business and Landscapes with our mission partners to educate the next generation of business leaders.

4 Returns Projects develops local companies’ and farmers’ initiatives that grow landscape restoration projects. We work on sustainable business cases with different stakeholders in the field, taking all interests into account. To build on their present strengths, these local companies partner with existing initiatives.

4 Returns Partners provides advisory services to third parties that wish to implement long-term restoration projects. This way, we can share our lessons with others who want to accelerate the process towards a restoration industry. 

Both 4 Returns Projects and 4 Returns Partners benefit from Commonland’s strong network which gives access to a variety of investors and banks. 

Commonland is stimulating the development of dedicated funding structures."

(http://www.commonland.com/en/about-us)

[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]