
'''* Book: The Commons and a New Global Governance. Edited by Samuel Cogolati and Jan Wouters. Leuven Global Governance series, Elgar, 2018'''

URL = https://www.elgaronline.com/abstract/edcoll/9781788118507/9781788118507.xml

Foreword by Michel Bauwens; afterword from Tine De Moor

=Description=

"Given the new-found importance of the commons in current political discourse, it has become increasingly necessary to explore the democratic, institutional, and legal implications of the commons for global governance today. This book analyses and explores the ground-breaking model of the commons and its relation to these debates."


=Contents=

* 1 Introduction: democratic, institutional and legal implications
of the commons for global governance 1
Samuel Cogolati and Jan Wouters


==PART I DEMOCRATIC PERSPECTIVES==

* 2 What democracy for the global commons? 20
Pierre Dardot
* 3 Federal commons 37
Nicolás Brando and Helder De Schutter
* 4 A (non-)violent revolution? Strategies of civility for the politics
of the common 57
Christiaan Boonen
* 5 Forget Ostrom: from the development commons to the
common as social sovereignty 78
Pierre Sauvêtre


==PART II INSTITUTIONAL PERSPECTIVES==

* 6 Governance of the global commons: a question of supply and
demand, the answer of polycentricism 102
Rutger Hagen and Christophe Crombez
* 7 The rule of law and accountability: exploring trajectories for
democratizing governance of global public goods and global
commons 130
Maja Groff and Sylvia Karlsson-Vinkhuyzen
* 8 Expropriation by definition? Regime complexes, structural
power, and global public goods 160
Thomas R. Eimer
* 9 Knowledge commons and global governance of academic
publishing 186
Maarja Beerkens


==PART III LEGAL PERSPECTIVES==

* 10 The ecology of international law: towards an international
legal system in tune with nature and community? 212
Ugo Mattei
* 11 From eroding to enabling the commons: the dual movement in
international law 231
Olivier De Schutter
* 12 International law to save the commons 266
Samuel Cogolati and Jan Wouters
* 13 Procedure and substance in international environmental law
and the protection of the global commons 291
Jutta Brunnée
* 14 Conclusion: is the governance of the commons a model for a
new global governance? 322
Martin Deleixhe

=Excerpt=

From the foreword by Michel Bauwens:

"In his influential book, The Great Transformation, Karl Polanyi describes
a fundamental double movement that has traversed the history of industrial
capitalism, which is also referred to as the ‘Lib-Lab’ pendulum. With the
global system understood as a combination of a Capital system, a State
system, and an ‘Imagined Community’, that is, the Nation, Polanyi showed
how phases when the market forces prevailed at the cost of increasing
ecological and social instability were alternated with periods where the
pendulum swung back and social forces mobilized, driving the state to rein
in the free market economy.

It seems quite clear that this mechanism no longer functions as it once
did. Despite a massive growth of social movements from the right and the
left, social and ecological progress remains limited. The impending challenges posed, inter alia, by climate change, ecological and resource crises
demand new approaches. The reason that the pendulum logic no longer
seems applicable is, in all likelihood, that on the one hand, the new neoliberal global system today relies on a financialized transnational capital,
coupled with global private platforms, whose global functional governance
is threatening the very sovereignty of state actors; and, on the other, that
the inter-state system is rather weak, pervaded by rivalries that preclude
more united global action.

Part of the solution might be to scale-up the double movement to the
global level. A vital question then becomes, what kind of processes or
institutions might create sufficient countervailing influence, and alternative global governance systems, to rebalance the global system?

This volume seeks to answer just that conundrum, by providing an
in-depth analysis of what is likely to drive this rebalancing – the commons.
Given the current context, it is vital to start researching this topic at the
global level, as well as to revisit previous work on the commons, like that
of Elinor Ostrom, who has focused on their local equivalent.
For the last 20 years, we have seen emerging, in particular, global knowledge commons, for example in the form of global open source communities, which are composed of global contributive communities, and usually
accompanied by democratic ‘FLOSS Foundations’ (non-profit foundations
involved in open and free software projects). Such communities are operating on a transnational scale, and are often also co-evolving with global
entrepreneurial coalitions that operate in the marketplace around these
commons. At the local level, we also witness the rise of urban and bioregional material commons, which are reconceiving the major provisioning
systems (food, energy, transport, housing), on the basis of new logics such
as contributive models of democracy. The city of Ghent in Belgium, for
example, has been conducting a pioneering study on the functioning of
these urban commons and the necessity for public-commons cooperation
and partnerships. Global and shared open design depositories for vital
common infrastructures are now on the agenda, perhaps driven by coalitions of such cities. 
It is, therefore, unsurprising that more and more voices
are calling for a reassessment of global resources – for example, natural
resource commons – as global commons. For example, the Reporting 3.0
project has created a ‘Global Threshold and Allocations Council’, which
looks at resource availability and sustainability to determine how much
of a resource could be used on a global scale without endangering their
accessibility for future generations, thereby putting biocapacity accountability on the agenda. Proposals like the Skytrust, suggested by Peter
Barnes, which would consider the atmosphere as a commons, have been
circulating for more than a decade, proposing ‘cap and dividend’ schemes
for the allocation of these kinds of resources. But how will all this function
and interact with the international system, along with powerful global
multinational corporate players? Where will we find the social forces to
push through these necessary reforms of the global system?

The time has come for researchers and scientists to focus their efforts
on potential global governance mechanisms for the commons, existing or
to come. This is precisely what has inspired this volume and why it should
be considered a significant milestone in the study of the commons at the
global level."

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Books]]