
'''* Essay: Software Freedom and The Global Commons: Community Wireless Networking as a Culture and Economics of Autonomy. Magnus Lawrie. 12th January 2011'''


URL = http://ditch.org.uk/download/commons_wireless_autonomy.pdf


=Description=

"The existence of CWNs raises questions about the propertization of com-
munications network infrastructure and bandwidth. These are questions
about Commons, but also privacy and net neutrality. To what extent is
Freedom ’in’ the network? How does this contribute to a sustainable net-
work (in both technical and social terms). Who are the architects? All
these questions (questions of sovereignty) raised by Lessig (1999) could be
summarized as ”Who owns the network?”."

From the conclusion:

"This essay has particularly drawn on the work of Lessig, Boyle and Benkler -
all important in Creative Commons. Their work shares similarities; crossover
and re-use is evident in many aspects. Sharing is important in open architectures (social, technical – whether of licenses or networks) and essential to
’innovation commons’. Online, interoperability has been a built-in feature,
accounting for a vast growth in networked software (Lessig, 2001). However,
”There is a tragedy in the innovation commons tendency of industry to add
techniques to the network that undermine it” (Lessig, 2001, p.62); Although
paramount to expanding commons, this interoperability is in no way guaranteed. New means to enforce copyright (operating at the code and physical
layers) threaten as much.

CWNs promise an alternative. These cultures thrive on diversity. In
and between groups, the focus is often on achieving shared objectives, rather
than solving contentious political issues. Self-organization is the basis for
development of all kinds. This may be for reasons of idealism, also pragmatism: DjurslandS.net uses proprietary software. Freifunk holds to Free Software principles, in its development of own-branded firmware and horizontal,
grassroots democracy. DjurslandS.net, with its size and reach, represents
the occupation of a redundant space - a commons claimed. For Freifunk
the image is of a space carved out - a commons created. In these ways,
autonomous cultures (in particular, squatting cultures) are visible in both
actual and conceptual terms. Economically, DjurslandS.net has been driven
by the need for Internet access. It is subscription-based. The network is
not free-for-all. However, it is self-funding (self-sustaining) and was built by
its membership without external economic support; A case can be made for
DjurslandS.net as an economics of autonomy. Freifunk offers free network
access, both to the Berlin ’cloud’ and, through users’ connected nodes, to
the external Internet. This clearly is an economics of autonomy, where ”the
fact that others can free ride, doesn’t kill innovation” (Lessig, 2001, p.71). In
these experimental spaces, which exist between Left and Right, where newcomers are pitted against incumbents and where all comers question the role
of regulation (Lessig, 2001), the opposite of control (the opposite of property)
emerges. In this space Free Software idealism, tempered by hacker-inspired
pragmatism forges a culture and economics of autonomy."
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/commons_wireless_autonomy.pdf)

=Excerpts=


==Two types of [[Community Wireless Networking]]==

Magnus Lawrie:

"Two types of Wireless Network have been adopted by CWNs. Infrastructure
mode relies on static ariels to share bandwidth to connecting client computers
with management of the network on a separate centralized administrative
layer. Ad-hoc wireless networks may also rely on a fixed infrastructure.
Typically they are created between many communicating mobile devices (or
’nodes’). Ad-hoc wireless networks are said to be self-healing: If a node fails,
data is automatically re-routed to find the shortest possible path between
two end points.


'''* DjurslandS.net'''

DjurslandS.net in Denmark is among the largest CWNs in the world).

250 volunteer built radio stations share fast internet connections with over
5000 remote rural households in an area of 3360 sq/km (Neilsen, 2007, p.3).

The Djursland peninsula, extending East from Jutland, is encircled by a
fibre-optic backbone. At the end of the 1990s, despite the proximity of this
communications ’trunk road’, most Djursland homes fell into the ’last mile’
of connectivity, where broadband was technically inoperable. For incumbent
telecom providers, extending coverage was financially unjustifiable - market
failure had occurred. By now Djursland had been in economic decline for
some years. The closure in 1998 of Djursland’s only regional newspaper was
the motivation to set up an internet information portal. Boevl, the computer
enthusiasts’ group who took up this challenge had engaged in socially-active
projects since 1992. With grant aid they had established a free access computer workshop, undertaken computer recycling and instigated fifteen similar
projects in Lithuania and Kazakhstan. By practical steps of widening access
to information and services, Boevl developed their vision of the ICT-Society
in Djursland and from January 2001, worked with a decision making board
towards the ideal of ”lightning fast internet access for a fixed price all over
Djursland” (Neilsen, 2007, p.7). A phased development programme followed,
with the pilot project expected to receive EU support. However, an obscure
funding process resulted in the ruling that (even in the absence of competition) government intervention in the market was not allowed. As the options
for external support dwindled, by increments Djursland’s network - built on
DIY pragmatism more than Free Software idealism - became self-sustaining.

Through economies of scale and hobbyist-led technical innovations costs reduced, whilst individuals worked to greatly expand the network. Members of
DjurslandS.net provided themselves fast internet access, at one-third of the
subscriber fees in more ’economically viable’ urban areas.


'''* Freifunk:'''

Freifunk was established in Berlin in 2002 to create independent,
community-based, non-commercial, open and uncensored data networks
(Freifunk, 2004). Freifunk has done this using wireless technology, operating
on unlicensed segments of the radio spectrum. Technical efforts have centred
on adapting OpenWRT – Free Software run on consumer wireless routers.

The resulting ’firmware’, developed by a small team of volunteers, manages
bandwidth allocation in order to maintain an equal flow of data throughout a
wireless network; Regardless of network size, traffic, or the relative locations
of two communicating points, data will be exchanged with equal priority.

A flexible ’mesh’ networking arrangement (many nodes connecting to many
neighbour nodes) invests control of the network in the end devices, not an
additional layer. By sharing technology and experiences, several Freifunk
networks were established in Berlin. These were connected through wireless
links known as the Berlin Backbone (BBB). Although the linked networks
continued to operate independently, the BBB could be seen as an administrative layer which takes control away from end devices, whilst enhanced
possibilities for local audio and video applications such as free radio, internet
telephony and webTV advance the case for uncensored data and net neutrality. Freifunk’s social aim has been to strengthen existing organization
and to develop e-democracy and grass roots structures appropriate to the
digital era. Balances between social and technical participation in Freifunk
networks is achieved by the absence of privileged nodes; horizontalism remains built in the network, whilst the hobbyist aspect of the organization
keeps the network free to use and free of commercial interests. A diversity
of participants and agendas is maintained through router firmware designed
to put control with users."
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/commons_wireless_autonomy.pdf)


==Typology of [[Wireless Mesh Networks]]==

Magnus Lawrie:

"Two types of wireless mesh network exist. These we have seen in two distinctive CWNs: infrastructure (with a separate administrative layer) and
ad-hoc (where control is ’in’ the network). These principles extend more or
less easily to describe user participation in the network. An organizational
hierarchy is more discernable in Djursland, whereas such distinctions are
not so clearly deliniated in the Freifunk community. The case studies show
cultures where organizational questions (technical and social) are always informed by a view where ”architecture is politics” (Kapor, 2006). Contrasting
legal and technical systems for Free Content distribution present alternative
models for dealing in scarce natural resources and cheap-to-copy data. Keeping Boyle’s objections in mind, we might consider the fate of software and
public good in the Global Commons to be intertwined. Certainly, in this
context, much thinking is being redefined. To this extent such hitherto arcane fields as economics and law are being opened to scrutiny, and even
celebrity. In 1989 political rhetoric concentrated on the grand themes of Left
versus Right. Today opposing sides are drawn less by political lines, more by
pragmatic aims. The diversity of CWN membership, as well as recent Intelectual Property case law, suggests it is now far more a matter of incumbents
versus newcomers. Participants in CWNs may be recognized as empiricists,
not ideologues (Lessig, 2001, p.69), driven by rough consenus and running
code (Clark, 1992). The ’viral’ and self-organizing characteristics of CWNs
however suggest both a culture and economics of autonomy, which values the
Free Software Definition."


=More Information=

* [[Wireless Commons]]



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Global Commons]]

[[Category:Economics]]