=Description=

Shae Brown:

"The Complexity Patterning design and educational strategy is about the patterns of these relational dynamics between people and with the entire more-than-human world. It is a way to perceive, think about, and consciously know our relationship with the complexity all around us. This includes time as a complex phenomenon. And perhaps by understanding relational dynamics through pattern thinking we might be able to think about our participation in the emergence of life in a more purposeful way.  To increase the relational integration of consciousness toward making evolution increasingly purposeful. Pattern thinking is an approach to consciously curated emergence."

(https://alexanderlaszlo.net/blog/consciousness-and-the-deep-complexity-paradigm/)

"'''The aim of Complexity Patterning is to build students’ capacity for conscious relationality''', by tuning consciousness to the broad and dynamic patterning of human embeddedness in the world around us. The Complexity Patterning design and educational strategy has proven to be a way to expand the range of information students are conscious of. Tuning students’ consciousness to the complexity they are, and are a part of, is a useful way forward in transformational education. There is a dynamic and indeterminate quality in complex phenomena as well, and humans certainly are complex phenomena. Patterns are useful here as they can express this paradox of constancy and dynamic change."

(https://alexanderlaszlo.net/blog/bringing-education-into-the-c21/)


=More information=

* Brown, S. L. (2023). Complexity Patterning: A patterns-based design and strategy for transformational Education. ISSS Yearbook. Systems Research and Behavioural Science


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Complexity]]
[[Category:Education]]