

=Description=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Hardware is not useful without software. The adoption of personal-scale
manufacturing machines comes hand-in-hand with the emergence of cheaper, and
increasingly accessible computer aided design software (CAD).

Industrial designers and engineers have used CAD software for decades. However,
CAD software has been slow to reach the consumer market and remains one of the
last bastions of software still targeted to, and controlled primarily by high-end
industrial users. CAD software is expensive, requires a computer with an excellent
monitor and lots of memory, and perhaps most importantly, has a long learning curve
that deters casual users. In industry, CAD software long ago replaced drafting tables
and paper blueprints. However, due to its cost and complexity, CAD software has
remained the tool of trained specialists and professional designers, not home users.


Industrial designers use CAD software mainly to design detailed 3D models or 2D
drawings of components or floor plans. Process diagrams are another popular
application.

The cost of CAD software is dropping and software companies are working hard to make it more user-friendly."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=Tools=

* In 2008, Google entered the CAD game with a no-cost version of 3D modeling software
called SketchUp. Currently, SketchUp is offered in a “Pro” version that costs about
$500 (at the time of this writing), alongside a free version."

* Rhino offers Windowsbased
3D design software from $95 to $1000. http://www.rhino3d.com/ . 

* A company called Silo offers Windows and Mac based design software for $99 and $159.
http://www.nevercenter.com/silo/


=Discussion=

==[[CAD for Personal Manufacturing]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Realistically, though CAD software
continues to drop in price and complexity,
it’s still nowhere near as user-friendly as
today’s mainstream office applications.

Another barrier is that even the low-end
CAD software described above was not
created with personal fabrication
applications in mind. Instead, today’s CAD
software reflects its industrial legacy and is
intended primarily for modeling and
visualization applications rather than
designing consumer goods and machine parts.

Ideally, to accelerate the adoption
of CAD software aimed at the personal
manufacturing market, design software
would need to be easier to use and
optimized for the unique constraints and
capabilities of the physical manufacturing
process."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Software]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]