
'''* Article: Computing and the Current Crisis: The Significant Role of New Information Technologies in Our Socio-Economic Meltdown David Hakken, tripleC, Vol. 8. No. 2, pp 205-220'''

URL = http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/161/193


=Abstract=

"There is good reason to be concerned about the long-term implications of the current crisis for the reproduction of
contemporary social formations. Thus there is an urgent need to understand it character, especially its distinctive features.
This article identifies profound ambiguities in valuing assets as new and key economic features of this crisis, ambiguities
traceable to the dominant, “computationalist” computing used to develop new financial instruments. After some preliminaries,
the article identifies four specific ways in which computerization of finance is generative of crisis. It then demonstrates
how computationalist computing is linked to other efforts to extend commodification based on the ideology of so-called “intellectual
property” (IP). Several other accounts for the crisis are considered and then demonstrated to have less explanatory
value. After considering how some commons-oriented (e.g., Free/Libre and/or Opening Source Software development
projects) forms of computing also undermine the IP project, the article concludes with a brief discussion of what research on
Socially Robust and Enduring Computing might contribute to fostering alternative, non-crisis generative ways to compute."


=Excerpts Part One: Analyzing the Problem=

David Hakken:

"In my view, what is distinctive about the current crisis is new and significant ambiguities in
valuation, the process by which particular cultural forms are assigned particular values, including
but not only their values as commodities. Further, I think one kind of social practice – the way
automated information and/or communication technologies have normally been used, or “computing”
for short—is central to the creation of these ambiguities, that computing has played a key, insufficiently
understood role in bringing them about. Thus, focusing on how we compute, and more
generally, the role of technology in the crisis, provides a way to think more inclusively about it. Doing
so broadens our focus, so we can attend to general changes in the dynamics of current social
formation reproduction.


Thus, the articles’ central contentions are:

• That the co-occurrence of the crisis and a substantial increase in the degree to which human
activity is computerized is indicative of a substantial (e.g., what used to be called a “causal”
(Campbell, 2005)) connection between them;
• That the substantial connection between crisis and computing is likely rooted in financial entities
computerized in the dominant “computationalist” manner, which in turn are the primary
source of the ambiguities in valuation that give the current crisis its special character;
• That this unique feature of the current crisis is one facet of a more general intervention, several
efforts to commodify a greater proportion of the reproductive dynamics of contemporary social
formations (including the “invention” of “Intellectual Property” (IP)) rather than other facets of
computing (e.g., web 2.0 or “playbor”) or of social formation reproduction (e.g., globalization)
currently given much attention; and
• That the contemporaneous, widespread development of alternative ways to compute, such as
Free/Libre and/or Open Source Software (FLOSS), exacerbate the current crisis while also
modeling forms of computing which, being less generative of crisis, are worthy of additional
study.

I argue that calling it a “computing-induced crisis” is justifiable in the registers used by contemporary
social theorists to talk about social causation, that understanding how we currently compute is necessary in order to specifying the alternative computing practices needed to avoid similar

crises in the future. The dynamics of social formation reproduction have changed, computing has
much to do with the change, and the change is manifest in but not caused by new relationships
among workers, managers, and consumers at the point of production. Rather, the new dynamic of
crisis follows from implementation of a new way of conceptualizing the role of computing in the
creation and sale of a range of new financial commodities. This new ideology of using computers to
extend commodification fit with certain additional changes in, e.g., legal instrumentalities like “intellectual
property.” While intended to aid the reproduction of capital, the new moves have (thus far)
caused more problems that they have solved—i.e., have produced crisis.

Making this complex case definitively would require more than a single article. Here, I sketch out
my argument, beginning with the reasons for seeing a connection between crisis and the dominant
forms of computing as it was breaking. I then outline some alternative, non-computing-oriented accounts
of the crisis and why I don’t find them as persuasive as a focus on computing. Next, I draw
out the connection between computing’s dominant forms and attempts at a new property regime,
showing how the failures of these forms and this regime are intimately connected to the crisis. I
then explicate the paradoxical role of FLOSS, in both exposing flaws in the regime and furthering
crisis. I conclude by discussing how to identify the different, more socially robust ways to compute
that are required if we are not to experience this kind of crisis, or even more virulent varieties of it,
repeatedly."


==Ways in which Computing Bears Responsibility for the Current Crisis==


Stated positively and in broad-brush terms, I see four ways in which computing, especially a particular
form of it that I call “computationalist” has played a central, generative role in the current crisis.
I see these four forms as being sufficiently prior to the crisis in both logical and temporal
senses to speak of them in a loose but still meaningful register (see footnote #3) as causative of
the crisis. 


They are:

1. Perhaps the most obvious crisis-generative aspect of computing is the profoundly instrumental
role it played in the creation and marketing of a broad range of new financial instruments; that
is, in new forms of financialization. “Financialization” of an economy occurs when a substantial
proportion of capital realization takes place through the creation and sale of abstract monetary
instruments, rather than through the production and sale of “real” (material) goods and services.
Following Baran and Sweezy (1966), Foster and Magdoff (2009) make a convincing case that
financialization has long been the chief strategy of late capitalism for fighting against the tendencies
toward stagnation. Financialization has been evident in many capitalist economies
since the 1970s; thus, the current crisis cannot follow from financialization in general. However,
crisis does follow from the spread of particular, highly computer mediated financial instruments
upon which the realization of profit became very dependent just prior to the outbreak of the current
crisis. Instruments typical of the current form of financialization include those that garnered
most public attention, the sub-prime mortgage-based securities created largely in the United
States and marketed worldwide. Equally important to the crisis, I believe, were other computered
commodities, including those collateralized in new forms of debt obligation (engineered
by mixing several financial components into complex and largely opaque new entities, and similarly
sold via new (international; see below) markets in securities), and parallel, equally nontransparent
credit default swaps (essentially a financialized form of insurance).


2. Computing is heavily implicated in the emergence and trade of all these new commodities.

Given their complexity, none of them, nor markets in them, could have existed without it. Nor
was computing’s role merely one of creating the possibility of doing such things. Only a few of
the forms of financialization that were possible to computerize were actually developed (Tett
2009b). Those financial commodities that were developed and marketed were given the properties
they had via what computer people call “affordances”—inclinations that, given existing preexisting
developments or “path dependencies,” are likely to follow, unless action is taken to prevent
them. Indeed, many of the AICTs that made these new commodities possible were developed
precisely in order to create things like them. This path dependency was a consequence of
the particular mix of the entrepreneurial and technical built into contemporary education in and
the practice of computing. In short, to the extent that computing was essential to these commodities’
creation, and that market failures in these new financial commodities were central to
the crisis, computing caused the crisis.

These computered financial instruments strongly afforded the elaboration of national markets
for capital into a virtually global single market. Just as a desire for new commodities to trade in,
so that more money could be made, drove computing development and implementation, so the
development of international computing networks strongly incentivized creation of an unboundried
market in capital. Indeed, the two go together; prospects for profitable trading in the new
financial instruments were directly related to the extent to which the reach of the capital market
could be scaled up.

However, this up-scaled market was formed without a simultaneously up-scaling of a parallel
set of governance tools with which to regulate the trade carried out on it.

...

3. Less publicized but equally central to the generation of crisis were the widely adopted, computered
models of the risks to sellers and buyers associated with trade in the new financial instruments.
As the instruments were new, there was no “track record” of actuarial data on which
to base judgments regarding the risks involved in buying, holding, and selling them. One consequence
was major difficulties in pricing them, the implications of which exacerbated by the absence
of forms of international governance in up-scaled markets.

Indeed, were it not for the development of complex, algorithm-based (computerized) risk assessment
tools, trade in the new commodities, especially international, might well have remained
marginal to capital realization. Moreover, the tools that were developed were based on
presumptions like the idea that sufficiently detailed models would capture all relevant risk factors,
as well as the notion that risk would follow the normal statistical distribution. As Gillian Tett
demonstrates (2009b), these computer-based risk models were applied far beyond the intended
applications of their initial developers. Presumed to be reliable, they became essentially the basis
of price-setting models in the new financial instruments.

The arrival of crisis demonstrated these risk models were faulty. Numerous scholars and commentators,
following Nassim Nicholas Taleb (2007), critiqued the models’ for their failure to incorporate
the risk of the kind of general “systemic” failure that actually did occur."


==Asset Value Unknowability as the Core of the Current Crisis==

"Asset value unknowability as the core of the current crisis:

In at least three additional important ways, the computerization of financial instruments led to a
situation where assets’ values became ambiguous and increasingly unknowable."


After giving 3 reasons for this, Hakken concludes:

"In short, a unique, perhaps the unique, characteristics of the current crisis is precisely these
huge, persisting socio-economic spaces of unknowability. Given that a huge proportion of economic
activity (Tett estimates some 80%) was financialized, this unknowability is lodged at the center of the reproduction of contemporary capitalist social formations. 

The consequences of the lack
of fit between the particular forms of computer-mediation of financial assets, on the one hand, and
the wide swathes of unknowability to which their use led, on the other, have been amplified by the
substantial upping of the scale (e.g., the “globalization” of markets in capital) at which some aspects
of social formations (but not all) are able to be reproduced, further increasing the difficulty of
establishing what specific value any given asset has. Indeed, it seems to me that the crisis will continue
as long as a substantial body of difficult to evaluate assets persists.
In sum, by 2008, many large social formations were in crisis. This crisis was a function of an
economy highly mediated by a particular form of financialization (Tett, 2009a) which itself was afforded
by a particular form of computing. The absence of any of the four ways outlined above in
which computationalist computing afforded shaky financialization would have reduced the salience
of the other two; all four seem central to a specific computing regime, a computing sociotechnological
system in the sense of Thomas Hughes (2004), or a computing technology actor
network in the Science, Technology, and Society language of Callon and Latour (1992). In the absence
of such a computing regime, there may have been a crisis, but it would likely have taken a
different, possibly less virulent form."


==How unknownability is linked to Intellectual Property==

"At base, the unknowability of the new financial commodities is a consequence of the at base
oxymoronic character of Intellectual Property. IP is an oxymoron in that, in order for the intellectual
merit of, say, an idea, to be acknowledged and then valued on some quantitative scale of relative
merit, it must first be communicated. However valuable I might consider my own ideas, there can
be no compelling reason for another to share my evaluation without her first understanding them.
For her to do this, I can’t keep them private; I have to say what they are. I can’t even get away with
just saying what they are “like.” However, once communicated, it is difficult to control the understander’s
use of the idea. Thus, any effort to turn ideas into private property faces a fiendish difficulty:
how to keep control over things, like ideas or notions, that by their nature must be shared if
they are to be evaluated. This problem is exacerbated by digitalization: once created, digital representations
of ideas and notions are reproducible at extremely low cost (think of the cost to the
writer of an email)."


=Excerpts Part Two: The Solution=

David Hakken:

"New, more socially robust forms of computing – deriving from, inter alia, what I call the strong
program in social computing – not only must but can be developed and should be implemented as
part of a crisis recovery/avoidance strategy. Fortunately, some computer practitioners – whom I like
to call informists – have some good ideas about how to pursue socially robust and therefore enduring
computing (SREC; Hakken, 2010), ideas incubated within the non-dominant forms of computing
that have refused to reduce themselves to formalisms alone. The alternative practices are central
to the Social Informatics within which I frame my research and that I teach at the new School of
Informatics and Computing at Indiana University in the USA and at Trento University in Italy. Their
ability to thrive, however, depends upon reinforcement of property regimes very different from IP
and much more like the “commons” oriented regimes of FLOSS. Let us hope that commonsilluminative
views, like those resulting in a Nobel Economics Prize for my Indiana University colleague
Elinor Ostrom (e.g., 1990), come to provide a clear alternative orientation for professional
computing."

=Source=

tripleC (cognition, communication, co-operation): Open Access Journal
for a Global Sustainable Information Society.
Vol. 8. No. 2: Special Issue on Capitalist Crisis, Communication & Culture
Edited by Christian Fuchs, Matthias Schafranek, David Hakken, Marcus Breen

URL = http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/issue/current




[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Politics]]