

= Free Open Source Software =

==Cyclos== 

[[Cyclos|(Read more)]]

* '''links''': http://project.cyclos.org/ ; http://sourceforge.net/projects/cyclos/
* '''for use in''': complementary currency systems like LETS, Barter, Time bank, C3 (consumer commerce circuit) and micro finance systems like VLC (combination of micro finance with local currency). Cyclos is a transactional (on-line banking) system with several community functionalities and extended modules. 
* '''license''' : GPL (open source) license
* '''used by''' : cyclos is used all over the world, some examples are http://www.circuitocompras.com.br, http://www.regiogeld.de or http://www.puntotransacciones.com ([http://project.cyclos.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=233&Itemid=236| a more complete list can be found here]).

==[[Open Transactions]]==
* '''links''': https://github.com/FellowTraveler/Open-Transactions/wiki ; https://github.com/FellowTraveler/Open-Transactions
* '''Description''': "It’s a solid, easy-to-use, FINANCIAL CRYPTO and DIGITAL CASH LIBRARY. Including an operational API, SERVER and CLIENT. Transaction processor featuring Untraceable Digital Cash, Anonymous Numbered Accounts, Triple-Signed Receipts, Basket Currencies, and Signed XML Contracts. Also supports cheques, invoices, payment plans, markets with trades, and other instruments... it's like PGP for Money.... Uses OpenSSL and Lucre blinded tokens. ---Mac OS X, Linux, FreeBSD, Android, Windows---Native APIs for Java, Ruby, Python, PHP, Perl, C, C++, Objective-C, C#, Tcl, and LISP"
* '''license''' : GNU Affero General Public (open source) License

==[[Open Universal Dividend Currency]]==
[[Open UDC|Read more]]

* '''links''': http://www.openudc.org/
* '''Description''': "OpenUDC aims to define a set of open protocols and standards to exchange new currencies, and to provide a free software implementation of them.
UDC means Universal Digital Currencies or Universal Dividend Currencies. Both definitions are fair since a currency in line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights HAVE TO apply the Universal Dividend.
The OpenUDC project has a theoretical reference to the Théorie Relative de la Monnaie (TRM) which can be read to understand why OpenUDC uses Universal Dividend Money System.
The Universal Monetary Dividend as defined in the TRM is more precise than the Basic income as it specifies where the money comes from, how it is created, and why so. But the TRM is not a technical description of how such a money system can be developed concretely, and so the choices of OpenUDC technical tools are totally independent of the TRM.
OpenUDC implementations allow human members to exchange in a spirit of equity, digital goods and services in space, between members, and time, between members and future members." (http://www.openudc.org/index.php?pages/About)

On May 2013, Open UDC was forked to [https://github.com/OlivierAuber/open-udc Open HDC] (Open Human Dividend Currency).

==[[Bitcoin]]==
* '''link''' : http://www.bitcoin.org/ https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin
* '''Description''' : "Bitcoin is a peer-to-peer digital currency. Peer-to-peer (P2P) means that there is no central authority to issue new money or keep track of transactions. Instead, these tasks are managed collectively by the nodes of the network."
* '''used by''' : a [https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Trade large number of sites] have started to accept Bitcoin and there is also a [http://bitcoincharts.com/markets/ market for different Bitcoin demoninations]
* '''license''' : [https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/license.txt open source]

==Ripple==
[[Ripple|(Read more)]]

* '''links''': http://code.ripplepay.com/ ; http://ripple.sourceforge.net/ ; http://sourceforge.net/projects/ripple ; http://ripplep2p.com/wiki/
* '''Description''' : a money system based on 'friendly obligations'.
* '''license''' : The software that runs ripplepay.com is available under the GPL open-source license.
* '''used by''': 
** [[Ripple Pay]] (https://ripplepay.com/) the original implementation by [http://ripple-project.org/Main/RyanFugger Ryan Fugger] (see [http://ripple-project.org/Main/UsersGuide user's guide])
** [https://www.shirehours.com/ Shire Hours] - Ripplepay clone operated by John Bilyeu
** [http://multiswap.net/ Multiswap]
* '''see also''': [http://ripple-project.org/Main/Implementations Ripple Implementations]
** the [http://sourceforge.net/projects/cmb/ Circular Multilateral Barter] code that powers Evgeni Pandurski's [http://multiswap.net/ Multiswap] site
** [https://github.com/jplewicke/rivulet Rivulet] John Paul Lewicke's Ripple server and AJAX front-end
** [https://raindroplet.info/ Rain Droplet] - Open decentralized community credit service operated by Daniel Holt, based on Ripplepay
** [http://ripplexchange.com/ Ripplexchange] - Daniel Holt's Ripple marketplace
** [http://ripple-project.org/Protocol/Index Ripple Distributed Protocol] - Designs for a system of distributed independent Ripple servers
** [https://github.com/rfugger/ripple/ Ripplebase] - Ryan Fugger's partially complete multi-client Ripple transaction server (see also [http://ripple-project.org/Implementation/Index documentation])

==Open Coin==
[[Open Coin|(Read more)]]
* '''link''': https://opencoin.org/
* '''Description''' : "The opencoin project implements "digital cash". The system gives minting software, wallet software and everything that is necessary to have a system for anonymous electronic transactions. It can be used for vouchers, online payments, complementary currencies etc. opencoin defines standards and provides an implementation around the blind-signature system as invented by David Chaum, known as electronic cash / digicash. 
* '''license''' : The software and specs are opensource under a GPL License.

==OS Currency==
[[OS Currency|(Read more)]]

* '''link''' : http://www.opensourcecurrency.org/2008/11/oscurrency-demo-site-and-github.html
* '''Description''' : "OS Currency is an open source complementary currency system derived from Insoshi, a Ruby on Rails open source social network project. It is being developed by branches of the software in different locations by a number of organizations and individuals for the use of Timebanks, B2Bs and other currency systems throughout the US and Europe. Each branch is autonomous and some code is divergent, though there are plans to remerge the folks with the best of all features. It has social networking, reputation, directory and email components with subgroup,language translation and multiple currency capabilities."
* '''built over''': http://portal.insoshi.com/
* '''license''': [https://github.com/austintimeexchange/oscurrency/blob/edge/LICENSE GNU AFFERO GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 3]
* '''used by''': 
** [http://www.austintimeexchange.org/ Austin Time Exchange]
** [http://catskillstime.org/ Catskills Timebank]
** [http://brooklyntimebank.org/ Brooklyn Timebank]
** [http://www.time-exchange.gr/ Time Exchange Greece]
** [http://timebank.sfbace.org/ Bay Area Community Exchange/BACE (Bay Area)]
** [http://demo.opensourcecurrency.org/ Demo Site]
** Developing fork in Spain and for Commercial B 2 B system
* '''documentation: https://github.com/oscurrency/oscurrency

==[[Drupal Mutual Credit Project]]==

* '''link''' : http://drupal.org/project/mutual_credit 
* '''built with''' : [http://drupal.org/ Drupal]
* '''Description''' : "An all-embracing and flexible package which includes a mutual credit engine, transaction forms and displays, including several views and blocks. It can be used as a digital back end for paper money projects, or to run an entire LETS or Timebank. With a little tweaking, it can manage currencies conforming to a wide range of designs."
* '''used by''' :
** http://communityforge.net/ offer a hosted version "For community groups and social clubs with no IT budget, the basic package allows hundreds of users, full control over pages and menu items. Unlimited exchanges, membership expiry, offline member support. Export members and exchange history to csv format. Other community building features include calendar, image gallery, and news feed. "
** apparently [http://www.timebanks.org/ Timebanks USA] are using it for development of "Community Weaver II" (see hosted offering of existing version [http://community.timebanks.org/ here])
** as of Mar 2nd 2011 a total of 57 sites currently report using this module
* '''license''' :

==[[Open Bank Project]]==

* '''link''' : http://www.openbankproject.com/
* "We aim to create a RESTful API so that banks and their customers can securely and cost effectively adopt Web 2.0, Open Source and 3rd party tools, services and strategies. We want to promote greater openness to financial data."
* '''license''' :

==[[Time Bank]]==
* '''links''' : http://wadobo.com/trac/timebank/ (wiki and code) http://timebank.wadobo.com/ (demo)
* '''Description''' : "Time Bank is a web service for managing a time bank, in which users offer their time doing service in exchange for services provided by others users for the same amount of time."
* '''used by'''
** [http://ecolocal.wadobo.com Ecolocal] is an association in Seville, Spain
** [http://www.comunitats.com Comunitats ] Create your TimeBank Site, Spain
** [http://rciclo.wadobo.com R-ciclo] is an association in Granada, Spain
** [http://sugus.wadobo.com SUGUS GNU/Linux association] - Linux user group of Seville University.
** [http://gelves.wadobo.com Gelves] is a an association in Gelves, Seville, Spain
* '''license''' :

==[[Mifos]] - [[Microfinance Open Source]]==
* '''link''' : http://sourceforge.net/projects/mifos/ http://mifos.org/
* '''Description''' : "Mifos is an MIS purpose-built for the microfinance industry. It provides MFIs the key functionality to better serve the poor: client management, loans & savings portfolio tracking, reporting, & social performance measurement. mifos.org has more info"
* '''used by''' :
** With 21 existing customers with another 19 in the pipeline (as of Mar 2nd 2011) Mifos will soon be servicing a total of [http://mifos.org/community/whos-using-mifos over a million clients]
* '''license''' : Apache License V2.0

==MyBanco - [[Open Source Core Banking]]==
* '''link''' : http://www.mybanco.org/
* '''Description''' : "So you are paying thousands of dollars to do your Core Banking? Well, don't. MyBanco let's you do your core banking without paying one cent. Save on your bank's TCO (Total Cost of Ownership) by reducing the money you pay to companies offering proprietory systems, and start saving money, by using free and open source software"
* '''license''' :  GNU Affero General Public License

==[[Local Exchange]]==
* '''link''' : http://sourceforge.net/projects/local-exchange/ [http://www.cxss.org.uk/drupal51/node/65 Local Exchange UK ver 1.01]
* '''Description''' : "Local Exchange is a web-based local currency system. Local currency systems, such as LETS or Time Dollars, are designed to foster goods and service exchange on a community level"
* '''used by''' :
** [http://www.fourthcornerexchange.com/ Fourth Corner Exchange] is the original implementation
** [http://www.localexchange.org.uk/ www.Local Exchange.org.uk] lists 18 (as of March 2nd 2011) LETS groups using the updated UK version
* '''license''' : GNU General Public License (GPL)

==[[Cclite]]==
* '''link''' : http://www.hughbarnard.org/content/alternative-currency-software http://sourceforge.net/projects/cclite/ http://groups.google.co.uk/group/cclite?hl=en
* '''Description''' : "Cclite is a Perl package for local exchange trading systems (LETS), banking and other alternative money systems. Multi-registry, multi-currency, web services based (SOAP) and REST transactions and templated to give multi-lingual capabilitie" "Community currency accounting for local exchange trading systems (LETS)and other alternative money systems. Multi-registry (group), multi-currency, with inter-registry transactions using web services (SOAP), templated to give multi-lingual capablitie"
* '''license''' : GNU General Public License (GPL)

==[[PyLETS]]==
* '''link''' : http://copsewood.net/py_lets_cgi/index.html
* '''Description''' : "PyLETS CGI is a simple, lightweight on-line mono-LETS accounting web application written in Python"
* '''license''' : GNU Public License Version 3
* '''see also''' : [http://copsewood.net/mrs/index.html Multi Registry System (MRS) Links and Resources]


==Community Exchange System==
[[Community Exchange System|(Read more)]]

* '''links''': http://ces.org.za/ (CES International); http://ces.org.za/demo/index.htm (CES Demo site); http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_Exchange_System
* '''built with''' : ASP planning to redevelop in [http://drupal.org/ Drupal]
* '''Description''' : The [[Community Exchange System]] (CES) is a community-based exchange system that facilitates the exchange of goods and services, both locally and remotely. It supports [[Mutual Credit]] style trading systems such as [[LETS]] and [[Timebanking]]. 
* '''used by''': 
** [http://ces.org.za/ Community Exchange System] - started in 2003, currently used by over 480 groups in 53 countries 
** [http://www.communityexchange.net.au/ Community Exchange System Australia] - set up in 2012, used by 37 Australian trading groups
** [http://timebanking.com.au/ timebanking.com.au] - A Timebanking trial commissioned by Communities NSW Australia  
* '''license''' : open source  

= Relevant Mailing Lists =

* [http://groups.google.com/group/agile-banking Agile Banking Google Group] "Lets change the world of banking and finance. This group is not for interesting theory, but about practical steps we can take to reinvent banking"
* [http://groups.google.com/group/opensourcecurrency OSCurrency Google Group] "OSCurrency is complementary currency system derived from Insoshi, a Ruby on Rails open source social network project"
* [http://groups.google.com/group/rippleusers/ Ripple Users Google Group] "Discussions about the Ripple decentralized monetary system project at http://ripple-project.org" (lots of related discussion happens on the list too)
* [https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=econ-lets ECON-LETS] "econ-lets is intended for discussion of the economic, social and telematics issues surrounding the development of LETS (Local Exchange Trading Systems)"

= Projects for Software = 

* [[Open Money]] : published under ??? license 
* Marc Fawzi's [http://evolvingtrends.wordpress.com/2008/10/21/p2p-social-currency-money-20/ Draft of P2P Currency Proposal] [[P2P Social Currency Model|(Read more)]]

= Currency Simulation =

Phil Jones has done some work simulating currency stuff:

http://optimaes.ning.com/

old site at http://www.nooranch.com/synaesmedia/optimaes/optimaes.cgi

= Other Platforms =

# [[Regenerosity]] :

- links : http://partysmart.org/vcsh/index.php ; http://regenerosity.com/

- software used :

- license :

= Other (older) lists of Currency Software =

* http://www.complementarycurrency.org/software.html
* http://copsewood.net/writings/wsfii2005bullets.html
* http://www.letslinkuk.net/members/software.htm ( restricted access ? )

= Accounting Practices =

For some unsorted material, see http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Accounting

= Forum Entries =

http://openmoney.ning.com/forum/topics/wiki-list-of-existing-and



also see :

* [[P2P Exchange Infrastructure Projects]]
* [[P2P Social Currency Model]]


[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Software]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Technology]]