=Source=

See: [[Five Approaches to Technological Metamodernism]]. By Stephen Reid.

URL = https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lIoPO8XqrUDckmW1-MQZbTSbFsholmVg6Wb25QBYBfU/edit?tab=t.0

=Comparison=

Table produced by Gemini 2.0 Pro Experimental; prompted by Stephen Reid,

comparing d/acc (Vitalik Buterin) vs Cosmo-localism (Michel Bauwens)

Also includes the approaches:

#Alignment at Large (Welf von Hören)
#Axiological Design (The Consilience Project)
#Awakened Design (Aki Järvinen)


==Core Idea==

Accelerate defensive technologies; prioritize decentralization and distribution of power to avoid dystopian outcomes (especially from AI). Focus on tools that enhance human agency, not replace it.

Combine local, resilient, and regenerative production with global, open-source knowledge sharing and coordination (using Web3 tools). Balance efficiency and resilience.


==Key Concepts==

Defense, decentralization, differential acceleration, open source, empowerment, human-computer augmentation (BCI), cryptographic tools, verifiable computation, public goods funding.

Local production, global knowledge commons, bioregionalism, regenerative practices, "heavy is local, light is global," open-source technology, Web3 funding, translocal coordination, fourth sector.


==Critique of... ==

Centralized control, offense-favoring technologies, "AI doomerism" without constructive alternatives, uncritical techno-optimism.

"Exit" plays of crypto elites, disconnect between global tech and local communities, unsustainable global trade, closed-source systems, artificial needs and desires.

==Proposed Solutions==

Prioritize defensive technologies (cybersecurity, bio-defense, info-defense), build decentralized infrastructure, empower individuals through technology, develop human-computer interfaces.

Cosmo-local production systems, open-source knowledge sharing, regenerative funding ecosystems, distributed manufacturing, universal ledgers, translocal cooperation, "capital for the commons."


==Role of Technology==

Technology can be a force for good, but its direction must be consciously shaped. Focus on tools that enhance human capabilities and distribute power, rather than concentrating it.

Technology as a tool for enabling cosmo-localism, facilitating global coordination of knowledge and resources, supporting local resilience.


==Relationship to Capitalism==

Implicitly critical of unchecked capitalism; seeks to use technology to create more equitable and decentralized systems. Emphasizes public goods.

Critical of globalized, extractive capitalism. Proposes an alternative model based on localized production and shared resources.


==Metamodern Qualities==

Oscillates between optimism (about technology's potential) and pessimism (about current trajectories). Embraces complexity and seeks to create systems that are both robust and adaptable. Values participation and distributed power.

Reconciles seemingly opposing forces (local/global, heavy/light). Seeks a "third way" beyond existing paradigms. Emphasizes holism and interconnectedness."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lIoPO8XqrUDckmW1-MQZbTSbFsholmVg6Wb25QBYBfU/edit?tab=t.0])

[[Category:Cosmo-Local_Production]]
[[Category:Crypto_Politics]]
[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]