

=Description=

Bruno Latour:

'I have chosen to give this manifesto a worthy 
banner, the word compositionism. Yes, I would like to be able to write 
“The Compositionist Manifesto” by reverting to an outmoded genre in 
the grand style of old, beginning with something like: “A specter haunts 
not only Europe but the world: that of compositionism. All the Powers 
of the Modernist World have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise 
this specter!” 

Even though the word “composition” is a bit too long and windy, what 
is nice is that it underlines that things have to be put together (Latin 474 new literary history
componere) while retaining their heterogeneity. Also, it is connected with 
composure; it has clear roots in art, painting, music, theater, dance, 
and thus is associated with choreography and scenography; it is not 
too far from “compromise” and “compromising,” retaining a certain 
diplomatic and prudential flavor. Speaking of flavor, it carries with it 
the pungent but ecologically correct smell of “compost,” itself due to 
the active “de-composition” of many invisible agents. . . . 

Above all,  a composition can fail and thus retains what is most important in the 
notion of constructivism (a label which I could have used as well, had it 
not been already taken by art history). It thus draws attention away from 
the irrelevant difference between what is constructed and what is not 
constructed, toward the crucial difference between what is well or badly
constructed, well or badly composed.

What is to be composed may, at 
any point, be decomposed.
In other words, compositionism takes up the task of searching for 
universality but without believing that this universality is already there, 
waiting to be unveiled and discovered. It is thus as far from relativism (in 
the papal sense of the word) as it is from universalism (in the modernist 
meaning of the world—more on this later). From universalism it takes 
up the task of building a common world; from relativism, the certainty 
that this common world has to be built from utterly heterogeneous 
parts that will never make a whole, but at best a fragile, revisable, and 
diverse composite material."
(http://www.bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/120-NLH-GB.pdf)


=Discussion=

==Compositionism as a replacement of critique==

Bruno Latour:

"In a first meaning, compositionism could stand as an alternative to 
critique (I don’t mean a critique of critique but a reuse of critique; not an 
even more critical critique but rather critique acquired secondhand—so 
to speak—and put to a different use). To be sure, critique did a wonderful job of debunking prejudices, enlightening nations, and prodding 
minds, but, as I have argued elsewhere, it “ran out of steam” because it 
was predicated on the discovery of a true world of realities lying behind “compositionist manifesto” 
a veil of appearances.

This beautiful staging had the great advantage of 
creating a huge difference of potential between the world of delusion 
and the world of reality, thus generating an immense source of productive energy that in a few centuries reshaped the face of the Earth. But 
it also had the immense drawback of creating a massive gap between 
what was felt and what was real. Ironically, given the Nietzschean fervor 
of so many iconoclasts, critique relies on a rear world of the beyond, 
that is, on a transcendence that is no less transcendent for being fully 
secular. With critique, you may debunk, reveal, unveil, but only as long 
as you establish, through this process of creative destruction, a privileged 
access to the world of reality behind the veils of appearances. Critique, 
in other words, has all the limits of utopia: it relies on the certainty of 
the world beyond this world. By contrast, for compositionism, there is no 
world of beyond. It is all about immanence.

The difference is not moot, because what performs a critique cannot also 
compose. It is really a mundane question of having the right tools for the 
right job. With a hammer (or a sledge hammer) in hand you can do a 
lot of things: break down walls, destroy idols, ridicule prejudices, but 
you cannot repair, take care, assemble, reassemble, stitch together. It is 
no more possible to compose with the paraphernalia of critique than it 
is to cook with a seesaw. Its limitations are greater still, for the hammer 
of critique can only prevail if, behind the slowly dismantled wall of appearances, is finally revealed the netherworld of reality. But when there 
is nothing real to be seen behind this destroyed wall, critique suddenly 
looks like another call to nihilism. What is the use of poking holes in 
delusions, if nothing more true is revealed beneath? 

This is precisely what has happened to postmodernism, which can 
be defined as another form of modernism, fully equipped with the 
same iconoclastic tools as the moderns, but without the belief in a real 
world beyond. No wonder it had no other solution but to break itself to 
pieces, ending up debunking the debunkers. Critique was meaningful 
only as long as it was accompanied by the sturdy yet juvenile belief in a 
real world beyond. Once deprived of this naïve belief in transcendence, 
critique is no longer able to produce this difference of potential that 
had literally given it steam. As if the hammer had ricocheted off the 
wall and smashed the debunkers. And this is why it has been necessary 
to move from iconoclasm to what I have called iconoclash—namely, the 
suspension of the critical impulse, the transformation of debunking from 
a resource (the main resource of intellectual life in the last century, it 
would seem), to a topic to be carefully studied.

While critics still believe 
that there is too much belief and too many things standing in the way 
of reality, compositionists believe that there are enough ruins and that 476 new literary history
everything has to be reassembled piece by piece. Which is another way 
of saying that we don’t wish to have too much to do with the twentieth 
century: “Let the dead bury their dead.”

In suspending the critical gesture, we begin to understand retrospectively the oddness of the definition of nature to which critique had been 
wed. It had two surprising features: the discovery, revelation, unveiling 
of what lay behind the subjective fog of appearances; and what ensured 
the continuity in space and time of all beings in their inner reality. It 
has long been realized by science studies, by feminist theory, and, in 
a much wider way, by all sorts of environmental movements, that this 
era’s character was precisely not the long-awaited taking into account of 
nature, but rather the total dissolution of the various notions of nature. 
In brief, ecology seals the end of nature."
(http://www.bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/120-NLH-GB.pdf)


[[Category:Intelligence]]