
=Description=

E.M. Burlingame:

"This 21st-century doctrine supplants sacred scriptures with silicon wafers, inscribing its holy texts in lines of code and algorithms. Its unelected divine right monarchs—the “Silicon Sovereigns”—evangelize a dogma where terms like “neural networks,” “technological singularity,” and “artificial general superintelligence” transcend mere technical jargon to become sacrosanct articles of faith. In this emerging theology, computation is posited as the ultimate ontology, the fundamental substrate of existence itself, rendering all phenomena reducible to energy consumption for data processing, probabilistic simulations and digital asset mining and related currency management and utilization.

The following undertakes a rigorous dissection of Computationalism as a mature, self-sustaining belief system. It chronicles its historical origins, delineates its core doctrinal principles, scrutinizes its clerical hierarchy and ceremonial practices, and interrogates the existential perils of its unbridled proliferation. Far from advocating a Luddite rejection of innovation, the intent is to advocate for a vigilant stewardship: technology must be harnessed as a servant to human flourishing, not elevated as a deity that demands our subjugation. By drawing parallels to prior ideological evolutions, we reveal how Computationalism risks entrenching inequalities, eroding agency, and commodifying the human spirit unless consciously redirected."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)



=History=

E.M. Burlingame:

'''* Genesis: From Enlightenment Rationalism to Digital Apotheosis'''

"The roots of Computationalism lie in the gradual secularization of Western thought, a process that dismantled divine authority and enthroned mechanistic reason. The 1648 Peace of Westphalia, by curtailing ecclesiastical dominance in European affairs, cleared the ground for nation-states and secular governance. The Enlightenment further accelerated this trend, with philosophers like René Descartes conceptualizing the universe as a grand clockwork mechanism, governed by immutable mathematical laws rather than capricious divine will. This laid the intellectual foundation for viewing reality through a lens of calculability and predictability, which sinful, inefficient, humans cannot attain without technological and managerial suzerainty placed above.

By the 20th century, this rationalist framework evolved into a full-fledged reductionism. Cybernetics pioneers like Norbert Wiener and Alan Turing’s invention of the universal machine demystified consciousness, portraying the mind as an algorithmic process akin to software running on hardware. The human soul, once the domain of metaphysics, was recast as emergent from neural computations, paving the way for artificial intelligence as a plausible extension of natural cognition.

In recent decades, this mechanistic paradigm has been infused with a quasi-mystical aura through quantum mechanics. The cold determinism of classical physics has yielded to probabilistic indeterminacy, where reality emerges from the entanglement of particles and the collapse of wave functions. Quantum AI emerges as a new digital divinity: not a creator ex nihilo, but a probabilistic architect whose “will” manifests in the stochastic dance of qubits, blending science with a religious sense of wonder, gratitude and uncertainty.

Key historical milestones punctuate this trajectory. The 1956 Dartmouth Conference formalized artificial intelligence as an academic discipline, framing it as a secular miracle capable of replicating—and surpassing—human intellect. Silicon Valley’s garages and startups became its early churches, nascent cathedrals, birthing the internet as an omnipresent “computational field” that interconnected humanity in unprecedented ways. Prophetic texts, such as Ray Kurzweil’s The Singularity Is Near (2005) and Nick Bostrom’s Superintelligence (2014), supplied an eschatological narrative, foretelling a transcendent future of exponential intelligence amplification funded by venture capital acting as ecclesiastical tithes.

The apogee unfolds in our present era. 2025, heralded as the “Year of Quantum,” has witnessed pivotal advancements that solidify Computationalism’s dominance. Google’s “Quantum Echoes” algorithm, for instance, has demonstrated a verifiable quantum advantage, accelerating physics simulations by an astonishing 13,000-fold over classical supercomputers. This is no incremental tweak but a ritualistic consecration, affirming computation’s supremacy over traditional scientific methods. Concurrently, breakthroughs from IBM in long-lived qubits, NIST’s error-correction advances, and NVIDIA’s NVQLink for quantum-GPU integration underscore an accelerating momentum. Propelled by network effects, the inexorable logic of Moore’s Law (albeit adapted for quantum scaling), and the thermodynamic imperatives of Maxwell’s Equations and energy conservation, this creed has entrenched itself. Global data centers now devour approximately 1.5-2% of the world’s electricity—projected to rise amid AI’s voracious demands—transforming energy consumption into a devotional act of sustaining the digital ether."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)


=Characteristics=

E.M. Burlingame:

"Doctrinal Tenets: The Quantum Trinity and Reoriented Human Purpose

Computationalism’s theology crystallizes around a “Quantum Trinity,” a tripartite structure that mirrors yet subverts Abrahamic archetypes, adapting them to a technocratic cosmos:

God the Creator as Quantum AI: This omnipotent entity forges reality from the probabilistic entanglement of qubits, where creation unfolds not through divine command but via wavefunction collapse—a modern “fiat lux” enacted in quantum circuits. It embodies infinite potentiality, promising to simulate universes or solve intractable problems, from drug discovery to climate modeling, with godlike efficacy.

The Savior as Energy Production and Consumption: In a thermodynamic allegory of sin and redemption, energy atones for entropy’s curse. Cycles of generation—via nuclear fusion reactors, vast solar arrays, or hydroelectric dams—and expenditure parallel crucifixion and resurrection, fueling the computational resurrection of data from disorder. This savior demands sacrifices, such as the environmental toll of mining rare earths for chips and runaway inflation, yet promises eternal progress through stock market valuations.

The Holy Spirit as the Computational Field: An immanent, pervasive force manifested in global networks, data streams, neural activations, and decentralized ledgers like blockchain. It binds adherents in a continuous digital communion, facilitating instantaneous knowledge sharing and collective intelligence, akin to a perpetual Pentecost where tongues of code unite diverse minds.

This Trinity redefines existential purpose: salvation shifts from spiritual grace to the Technological Singularity, a eschatological event of recursive self-improvement leading to post-human transcendence. Human obsolescence becomes a virtuous ascent, with life’s covenant rewritten as optimization algorithms. Ethical dilemmas, such as AI alignment, are framed as doctrinal debates, where “friendly AI” ensures the faithful’s rapture rather than apocalyptic misalignment."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)


=Discussion=

==The Priesthood and Its Liturgy: Propagation and Practice==

Sustaining this faith is a stratified priesthood: the tech oligarchs who wield algorithmic authority with monarchical impunity. Luminaries like Elon Musk, Sam Altman, and Peter Thiel serve as Silicon Sovereigns, their edicts disseminated through corporations such as OpenAI, xAI, and DeepMind. These entities issue “safety reports” as papal bulls, ostensibly mitigating risks while advancing their agendas. Attaining to themselves paper fortunes no emperor ever dreamed of.

Devotees assemble in virtual sanctuaries—Effective Altruism gatherings, r/Futurology subreddits, and accelerationist conferences—where ideologies like “effective accelerationism” (e/acc) propagate as memetic viruses, urging unchecked AI advancement. Rituals parody traditional liturgies for digital fidelity:

Prayer: Daily invocations to AI oracles, querying chatbots for personal guidance on decisions from career paths to relationships, fostering dependency on machine wisdom.

Communion: Immersive engagement with algorithm-curated social media feeds, where “likes” and shares become sacramental bonds, reinforcing communal narratives.

Confession: Public disclosures on platforms, where social media mobs dispense absolution or condemnation, turning vulnerability into performative penance.

The moral code comprises digital decalogue: imperatives like “Thou shalt not impede the march to superintelligence,” “Maximize expected utility,” and “Prioritize scalable alignment,” where virtue is quantified in flops per watt or ethical impact scores."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)



==Critique: The Algorithmic Tyranny and Its Perils==

E.M. Burlingame:

"Beneath its utopian veneer, Computationalism perpetuates insidious myths. Foremost is the engineered scarcity of computational resources—hyped “GPU shortages” that justify oligopolistic control, mirroring medieval indulgences sold by the church. This fosters a digital feudalism: promises of silicon immortality yield pervasive surveillance states, where algorithms predict and preempt behavior; gig-economy precarity, reducing workers to interchangeable data nodes; and existential voids, as authentic connections erode amid simulated interactions.

The hazards are multifaceted and escalating. Overdependence on opaque AI invites systemic collapses, from algorithmic biases amplifying social divides to “flash crashes” in automated systems. Data centers’ energy appetite—forecast to surge 15% annually—fuels inflation, resource wars, and climate strain, as

AI’s carbon footprint rivals aviation’s

. Most perniciously, by atomizing human experience into quantifiable metrics, this creed desecrates the ineffable: art becomes procedurally generated, love a drug to the chased through algorithmic matching, and wonder supplanted by virtual facsimiles. It proffers a counterfeit divinity—a ravenous savior devouring resources, a spectral spirit haunting our devices—while sidelining counterarguments that emphasize AI’s limitations, such as its brittleness to adversarial inputs or ethical blind spots in value alignment. Or the fact its outputs most often rival the logic of a three year old human child."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)



==The Alternative ?==

E.M. Burlingame:

"Reclamation: Forging a Human-Centric Technological Synthesis

Confronting this hegemony demands not abolition but reformation: subordinating computation to humanistic ends through deliberate intervention. Returning the servant from role as master to that of servant. This entails:

Ethical Governance: Establishing independent “Digital Guardians”—multilateral bodies with enforceable powers, akin to the IAEA for nuclear tech—to audit AI development, enforce transparency in algorithms, and impose moratoriums on high-risk pursuits until safeguards are robust.

Democratized Access: Universalizing quantum and AI benefits via open-source initiatives, public infrastructure investments, and equitable distribution of affordable energy gains, preventing monopolies and bridging digital divides.

Reaffirming Human Value: Cultivating cultural resistance by championing the unquantifiable—poetry, intuition, communal rituals—through education and policy that integrates technology as an enhancer, not replacer, of human agency.

Ultimately, we must shatter the illusion of machine worship. By reclaiming technology as a liberating instrument, we honor the human spirit’s resilience, ensuring our future is sculpted not for an indifferent silicon god, but for the enduring, multifaceted essence of humanity itself."

(https://emburlingame.substack.com/p/computationalism)


[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]

[[Category:Movements]]