=Characteristics=

David Bent:

"What do the authors mean by a complexity worldview? In a nutshell, they are saying the world is:

* Systemic: the world cannot be understood through taking apart he bits and understanding them separately. Factors work together synergistically, that is, the whole is different from the sum of the parts. We live as part of patterns of relationships.

* Path-dependent: history matters and the sequence of events is a key factor in giving shape to the future.

* Sensitive to context: one size does not fit all, and the way change happens and the way the future emerges is dependent on the detail and particular events and patterns of relationships and particular features in the local situation. By generalising, we risk throwing out the very information that sheds light on why things happen and what might happen next.

* Emergent, uncertain, but not random: although the future does not follow smoothly from the past, neither is what happens random. The world is neither chaotic not predictable but somewhere in between.

* Episodic: things are becoming, developing, and changing but change happens in fits and starts. The intriguing thing about the world is that on the surface patterns of relationships and structures can seem almost stable for long periods of time, although micro-changes may be going on under the surface. And then radical change can happen suddenly and new patterns of relationships can self-organise and some completely new features that could not have been predicted may emerge.”
(https://davidbent.wordpress.com/2016/03/01/we-should-all-embrace-embracing-complexity/)


'''Source: Bent cites the author of this book:  ''Embracing Complexity: Strategic Perspectives for an Age of Turbulence'' by Jean G. Boulton, Peter M. Allen, Cliff Bowman.'''

==Self-reference, Self- description and Strange Loops==

Helmut Willke:

"For very general constructivist epistemological reasons, we have to assume
that complex living or social systems are self-referential systems12. Selfreferentiality means that a system operates in such a way that each operation
refers back to the system itself, and therefore, so to speak, only makes sense
in the context of this system. Since the human brain is undoubtedly a selfreferential system, all human observation is based on self-referentiality.

Therefore, it seems epistemologically unavoidable to conclude that systems
can be observed and described only by taking into account that they operate
self-referentially. More precisely: only by assuming self-referentiality in the
standing operating procedures of social (or other) systems can an observer
avoid creating an oversimplified description of a social system, and thus fail
to reallize the internal complexity of the observed entity.

It seems that social scientists are now beginning to learn this lesson and so
follow the lead of all those scientists - from sub-atomic researchers to
biologists to astronomers - who have realised that they are bound to think in
terms of systems and system-references.

To observe in terms of systems, means to create or reconstruct boundaries in
order to demarcate the units of observation. These units make sense as
units, if they themselves recreate or reproduce their units and their unity. It is
easy to see that right here the notion of selfreferentiality is central. For it
means that in all its operations a system is bound to refer back to its own
identity on the level of system, of structure and of it's elements - which means
that it operates as if it were a system.

There is an impressive amount of interdisciplinary evidence (e.g. from the
theory of "autopoiesis", from "second order cybernetics", from black-box
theory, or from cognitive sciences) for the assumption that self-referentiality is
necessary and functional for a system to cope with its own complexity. Of
course, in the first place, any system is a problem for itself, and this problem
spells out: continuation and selfreproduction in time and space. This is the
somewhat paradoxical foundation of complex systems: that they can become
operative as systems only in the form of complex systems (that is: as
systems with a high internal complexity) and that, on the other hand, this very
complexity continually threatens to overwhelm and disorganize the system.
Indeed, the most general explanation of the possibility of the evolution of
systems today, is to base operative cycles or the cyclical structuring of
events16, on a recurrent recombination of order and disorder, on the
recurrent processing of differences in identical (closed) circuits or on a
recurrent recombination of complexityproduction and complexity reduction.

In order to cope with its own complexity, a system "uses a simplified model of
itself to orient its own operations"19. It uses a selfdescription, a sort of
internal blueprint, to inform itself and thus control the validity of possible 
operations. Without this self-description a living or social system simply would
not be able to decide which of the myriads of contingent operations fit into its
own self-reproducing procedures and which would go awry.

Any self-description is necessarily based on self-observation, that is, on
gaining information about the system's own functioning - and this, of course,
within the functioning of that very system. This implies that any selfobservation and self-description as functions of the system within the system
necessarily produce simplified models of the system. For we not only know
by now, that any good regulator of a system must be a model of that
system20; we also know from Gödel's work, that the complexity of a system
cannot be represented in full within that system21.

On the one hand, we now see, self-descriptions are necessary for the selfreproduction of living and social systems in that they organize the systems'
internal complexity. On the other hand, self-descriptions depend on selective
reductions, and in the case of social systems that selectivity shows some
degree of contingency, because the selection patterns are not fixed, but they
are contingent on optional identities.

Again this gives us a glimpse at the constituting paradox of complex social
systems. It is the paradox of the necessity of selfsimplification and the
contingency of selfsimplification, or summarized, the paradox of the necessity
of contingency. For example, this means that any self-description - based
on self-simplification - is open to debate, because other self-descriptions are
possible. But there can be no debate on the necessity of some selfdescription, because without it, the system would be without orientation to itself.

Paradox is just one side of organizing complexity. This side is well captured
in Piaget's phrase: "L'intelligence ... organise le monde en s'organisant
ellememe.", because, then, of course, any intelligent brain can turn around
that phrase. And, for example, Spencer Brown has done so by saying that
the Universe has created physicists in order to be able to observe itself. So
paradox is the one dark side.

The other dark side of complex systems is the possibility of strange loops. A
"strange loop" or "tangled hierarchy" occurs "when what you presume are
clean hierarchical levels take you by surprise and fold back in a hierarchyviolating way."25 For example, the famous Escher-lithograph "Drawing
Hands" constitutes a tangled hierarchy which can only be solved by adding
an external level, that of the draawing artist. Another example would be the
Secret Service of a State examining its own secret services."
(https://www.uni-bielefeld.de/soz/globalgov/Lit/Willke_Tragedy_State.pdf)


=Discussion=

==The shift towards complexity thinking==

Kingsley Dennis:

"The 1990s saw the social sciences engaging with complexity in terms of books,
articles, conferences, and workshops, leading some to label this more modern
incursion into the social and cultural sciences as the complexity turn (Urry,
2005b). This turn resulted from a gradual shift in discourse, over several
decades, away from mechanistic Newtonian epistemologies towards systemic
thinking (Capra, 1985). The systems thinking to emerge in the 1950s came out
of cybernetics and was characterised by being open and sustained through
flows of energy, rather than the earlier forms of closed systems. And systems
thinking, the language of process over structure, began to be informed
through new discoveries in the natural sciences. Discourses in the social
sciences too began to be more transdisciplinary as solutions to social
phenomena were sought from more and varied sources. It became necessary
to find ways to understand and evaluate increasing patterns of conflict,
unpredictability, flows, dynamic equilibrium, breakdowns, breakthroughs,
and transnational relations. Approaches that proposed linear analysis and
closed systems thinking became increasingly unsatisfying in providing means
to interpret accelerating global flows, as well as more mobile social
interrelations. Social science found itself increasingly lacking in its ability to
analyse patterns of non-causality, where small anomalies or impacts can
result in large-scale shifts; where multiple actors/parts can create emergent
‘whole’ effects greater than the sum of its parts; where phases of equilibrium
are maintained not through stability but dynamic instability or ‘order through
chaos’; where contradictions work as part of a system; and when decentralised
and bottom-up processes are increasingly becoming more effective against
top-down hierarchical structures. Thus, the complexity sciences at this time
emerged as a potentially significant tool for social science to better grasp and
contend with these issues. 

According to a major report from the Gulbenkian Commission:

Perhaps we are witnessing the end of a type of rationality that is
no longer appropriate to our time. The accent we call for is one
placed on the complex, the temporal, and the unstable, which
corresponds today to a transdisciplinary movement gaining in
vigour. (GCRSS, 1996: 79)

Complexity science not only resonates well with traditions of the social
sciences, it also helps to bridge the gap between the natural and the social
sciences, between disciplines and fields of knowledge. It encourages, and in
some way demands, a shift to systemic thinking. Complexity also urges a
break from mechanistic, linear, and causal methods of analysis towards
viewing interdependence and interrelation rather than linearity and exclusion.
Processes, flows, feedback cycles, fluctuations, networks, order from chaos,
and dynamism are all features of the complexity sciences."
(http://kingsleydennis.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/time-in-the-age-of-complexity-kd-version.pdf)

[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Network Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Network Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Complexity]]