
'''* Article: Of solar collectors, wind power, and car sharing: Comparing and understanding successful cases of grassroots innovations. By Michael Ornetzeder and Harald Rohracher, Linköping University Post Print, 2013'''

URL = http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:685433/FULLTEXT01.pdf


=Abstract=

"Grassroots activities so far have not been sufficiently appreciated as sources of
innovation. Transition processes towards more sustainable socio-technical energy, transport
or production systems, however, are hardly imaginable without a broader participation of
engaged citizens. This paper presents and compares three cases of successful grassroots
innovations for sustainability. In particular we compare the development of wind technology
in Denmark, the solar collector do-it-yourself movement in Austria, and the development of
car sharing in Switzerland. The paper aims at a better understanding of the preconditions,
patterns of growth and change and factors of success of grassroots innovations for more
sustainable socio-technical regimes such as energy and transport. In the analysis we focus on
dimensions such as the structural conditions and resources of origin, motivations of social
actors involved, learning processes and outcomes, competences and activities of those actors,
processes of institution-building, and the relationships to mainstream market actors. Based
on the empirical background the paper discusses implications for the theorisation of
grassroots innovations for greater sustainability and draws implications for further research." 



=More Information=

* Original citation: Michael Ornetzeder and Harald Rohracher, Of solar collectors, wind power, and car sharing:
Comparing and understanding successful cases of grassroots innovations, 2013, Global
Environmental Change, (23), 5, 856-867.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenycha.2012.12.007
Copyright: Elsevier
http://www.elsevier.com/
Postprint available at: Linköping University Electronic Press
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-102986

* see also from the same authors: User-led innovations and participation processes: lessons from
sustainable energy technologies, http://www.musiklexikon.ac.at:8000/ita/ita-papers/Ornetzeder_Rohracher_Energy_Policy_2006.pdf

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]