How different [[Organizational Form]]s create, deliver, and capture [[Value]].

==Core Concepts (please reduce)==


* Who owns the [[Means of Production]]?
* Who owns the [[Product]]?
* How are these limited resources Allocated?
* Can these material assets be bought and sold?
* How is [[Profit]] treated?
* How are Workers compensated?
* How are [[Investor]]s compensated?
* Is [[Abundance]] good or bad?
* Is [[Automation]] good or bad?
* Is Work a goal to maximize or a hurdle to minimize?
* Can 'regular' money be used within the system?
* Does the system provide an 'alternate' currency?
* How does the latecomer gain his own stake?
* Can the organization arbitrarily refuse admittance?
* How are Public Works funded?
* How are collective decisions made?
* How does a willing Worker know what needs to be done?
* How is Freeriding avoided?
* How are borders between 'public' and 'personal' property established?
* Who or how do we decide what and how much to produce?
* How do we avoid the Tyranny of the Majority?


==Various Approaches (please expand)==

* [[Bicycle Sharing System]] http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Bicycle_sharing_system
* Buying Club
* [[Capitalism]]
* City Government
* [[Club Goods]]
* [[Co-Creation]]
* [[Collaborative Consumption]] http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_consumption
* [[Collective]]
* [[Co-Production]]
* [[Common Security Clubs]]
* [[Commonism]]
* [[Communism]]
* [[Concurrent Estate]] http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrent_estate
* [[Condominium‎]]
* [[Condop]]
* [[Consumers Cooperative]]
* [[Copyfarleft]]
* [[Crowdfunding]] 
* [[Crowdsourcing]]
* [[Distributism]]
* [[Ecological Economics]]
* [[Economic Democracy]]
* [[Ecopyleft]]
* [[Ethical Economy]]
* [[Food Cooperative]]
* [[Fractional Ownership]] http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional_ownership
* [[Give Away Economy]]
* Home Owners Association
* [[Intention Economy]]
* [[Movement]]
* [[Mutual Home Ownership]]
* [[Mutual Organization]] http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_organization
* [[Neighborhood Renting and Loan Systems]]
* [[Neocommercialization]]
* [[Oekonux]]
* [[Open Capital]]
* [[Open Source Ecology]]
* [[P2P in Multi-Unit Housing]]
* Payer Grown
* [[Peer Production]]
* [[Peer Trust Network Project]]
* [[Peer-to-Peer Product-Service Systems]]
* [[Peerconomy]]
* [[Peoples Capitalism]]
* [[Product-Service System]]
* [[Property Left]]
* [[Public Private Property]]
* Republic
* [[Resource-based Economy]]
* [[Seikatsu Cooperatives]]
* [[Steady-State Economy]]
* [[United Diversity]]
* [[Use Communities]]
* [[User Owned]]
* [[Utilicontributism]]
* [[Worker Cooperative]]
* [[Worker Owned]]


[[Category:Peergovernance]]