{{Languages}}

'''=  a non-profit collective that aims to enable and simplify the work of other collectives and activists through the development of free online tools and resources, in order to reinforce the commons .'''

URL = http://comunes.org


=Description=
Comunes is a non-profit collective that aims to enable and simplify the work of other collectives and activists through the development of free online tools and resources, in order to reinforce the commons. 

=Projects=

It develops projects such as:

* [[MoveCommons]], a tool that connects volunteers and collectives, so that people who want to help can find out exactly where to do so. Social initiatives and collectives declare their principles through a series of icons (eg is it for-profit? is it horizontal?) displayed on the website. These icons also make it easier for search engines to trace and find them, grouped with similar initiatives. This means that collectives and volunteers can find communities that share their interests and work in defense of the commons.

* Created in 2002, [[Ourproject]] is a tool that facilitates collaborative work among individuals who want to share ideas and solve problems together. It offers a virtual space and a series of online tools for social/cultural/political/artistic projects that must licence their contents under Creative Commons licences. Their aim is to spread the ideas and methodologies of free/libre software into other social areas, promoting free culture. But there are usability issues – as in some other free software projects – because it requires a certain level of technical knowledge.

* [[Kune]] is a collaborative, decentralised social network. It aims to free collectives and activists from the need to depend on commercial online services and technical experts. Kune fits out easy-to-understand, user-friendly virtual spaces where individuals, groups and organisations can carry out all their online activities: internal organisation, online meetings and coordination, collaborative simultaneous drafting of documents, event planning, one-on-one and group communication, social network and online content publishing."[http://www.2011.fcforum.net/en/outcomes11/]


=More information=
* Website: http://comunes.org
* video : http://vimeo.com/31747500

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Spain]]
[[Category:Commons]]