We are all familiar with crowd-sourcing and the concepts of Wikinomics, Army of Davids, Groundswell, Wisdom of the Crowds, and so on.  Crowd-sourcing as it is understood by most assumes that each person knows what they know and contributes what they can, and the collective then achieves consensus.

Crowd-sourcing can be substantially improved by using a Strategic Analytic Model to help prioritize, channel, and nurture multinational, multiagency, multidisciplinary, multidomain information-sharing and sense-making (M4IS2).

A strategic analytic model provides the new generation of leadership with the benefits of the homework done by an older generation that is not as familiar with the tools and culture of crowd-sourcing as the new younger leaders.  Hence, a Strategic Analytic Model is both a recognition of the transition to a new panarchic world, and a starting point for collective intelligence applied to common goals.

Below are a few links that were developed by the Earth Intelligence Network, a 501c3 with 24 co-founders.  They combined the ten high-level threats to humanity identified and prioritized by the United Nations High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change, with a selection of twelve core policies from Agriculture to Water.

Applied within any zip code, municipality, county, state, or other geographic unit, this Strategic Analytic Model makes possible efficiencies of information-sharing and sense-making, voluntary harmonization of efforts by individuals and organizations, and the development of broader and deeper analytic models tailored to and created by the stakeholders themselves.
'''
Selected External Links'''

[http://www.phibetaiota.net/2010/12/strategic-analytic-model-for-creating-a-prosperous-world-at-peace/ Reference: Strategic Analytic Model for Creating a Prosperous World at Peace]

[http://www.phibetaiota.net/2010/10/10-high-level-threats-to-humanity/Reference: 10 High-Level Threats to Humanity]

[http://www.phibetaiota.net/2010/11/12-core-policy-domains/ Reference: 12 Core Policy Domains]

[http://www.phibetaiota.net/2010/11/reference-8-populations-4-methods/ Reference: 8 Populations, 4 Methods]

[http://www.phibetaiota.net/2011/01/reference-water-soul-of-the-earth-mirror-of-our-collective-souls/ Reference: WATER–Soul of the Earth, Mirror of Our Collective Souls]