'''* Article: Eskelinen, Teppo (2020). The conception of value in community economies. In Eskelinen, Teppo; Hirvilammi, Tuuli; Venäläinen, Juhana (Eds.) Enacting Community Economies Within a Welfare
State. MayFly, 23-45.''' 

URL = http://mayflybooks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ECEWAWS_final_e-book.pdf?[https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf self-archived copy]


=Description=

Teppo Eskelinen:

"Conceptions of value state the purpose of economic practices
and ultimately steer economic activity, as any social system
has a tendency to generate what is seen as having value. Further,
a dominant value conception is both performative and ontological.
Performativity means that the associated ideas not only describe,
but also shape social reality. Any given dominant conception of
value changes social reality so that more of the valuable will be
produced. Further, descriptions of value become treated as really
existing aspects of social reality and further the only possible
descriptions of value – thus ‘ontologisation‘. Alternatives then
appear to counter ‘what exists‘.

Yet such conceptions are not necessarily conscious but can
be implicit. Therefore, an explication of hegemonic value
conceptions is needed in order to support alternatives. As stated
in the introduction, it is necessary for the purposes of social justice
and ecological survival to create more localised, egalitarian and
sustainable economic forms. Community economies not only
entail non-capitalist practices, but also a unique idea of what is
valuable, and thereby worth doing. Community economies
insist on seeing value in social interaction, community, selforganisation and empowerment. This chapter sets out to describe the dominant capitalist value conception, a community economy
alternative, and analyse how the welfare state ethos could move in
the direction of the latter."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)


=Excerpts=

==The hegemonic value conception==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"The capitalist conception of economic value has gained a
hegemonic position. Because the hegemonic conception is rarely
articulated and more typically just embedded in practices as
a given, a criticism and search for alternatives should begin by
making the value conception explicit. While this could be done
by analysing the daily functioning of the capitalist society, there
is also an explicit value conception available: the one articulated
in economics. Contemporary mainstream economics is intimately
connected with capitalism. Furthermore, it carries major
epistemic power because this economics is the science for both
describing and reproducing the capitalist order: it is then a system
for reflecting, what capitalism sees as valuable.

The idea of value as it exists in contemporary economics is based
on two theories seen as mutually exclusive: the labour theory of
value and the subjective theory of value. More precisely, economics
can be seen as being grounded on the demand-based theory of
value, so that the justification narrative sees the labour theory of
value as the only existing (and conceivable) alternative to it. 


In other words, the conception of value in contemporary economies
is based on these two ideas: 

* first the dominance of the demandbased theory, and 
* second the belief that the theory of value needs
to be chosen from these two mutually exclusive alternatives.


Classical political economy, including Ricardo as well as Marx,
leaned on the labour theory of value (Theocarakis 2010). The
classical economists assumed a theoretical entry point, according
to which value refers to the amount of labour embodied in a
commodity, including historical labour needed to develop the
necessary physical capital. Ricardo formulated the theory as
follows: ‘The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other
commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative
quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not
on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour‘
(Ricardo 1817). ‘Labour‘ is thus a very general term for categorising
human productive activity appearing in several societal and
historical contexts (Mandel 1990). Furthermore, it is seen as a
commensurable substance, which allows the comparability of
completely different kinds of goods.

The labour theory of value has been criticised for being ambiguous
about the relation between value and price (generally on the
subject, see González 2013), or even as metaphysical (Robinson
1962). Yet the most influential criticism focuses on the tendency
of labour theory of value to ignore the subjective valuations of
market agents, in other words demand. This criticism gave rise
to the marginalist school of thought and the subjective theory of
value that forms the basis of neoclassical economics. According to
this theory, the economic value of a given good is determined by 
the interplay between subjective valuations of goods (expressed
though market demand) and the scarcity of these goods. Thus,
the value of a given good cannot be objective and constant, like
the labour theory of value suggests, but depends on the will of
consumers to pay for the good.

The subjective theory of value tends to reduce all theorising on
value into market transactions, in which the expressed valuations of
atomistic market subjects are decisive. The theory ignores the value
of things external to market goods as well as non-commodified
goods, as it assumes that valuation has to be expressed within
the market, if (economic) value is to exist. Indeed, the social
aspect of the economy or value that the theory recognises is the
existence of instrumental market relations: people might engage
in exchange and contracts as they observe temporary mutual gain.
Furthermore, value is seen to be consumed in the instance of
transaction: whatever happens to the object after the transaction
is a personal issue and beyond the scope of value theory.

On a quick look, the existing value conception, or more precisely
the paradigm describing these as mutually exclusive alternatives,
might sound sensible. Therefore, a critical look needs to be taken
on the particular weaknesses within this conception.
Both labour and subjective theory of value state, that value can be
detached from the social basis which enables its production. This
has a dual implication: firstly, no social patterns of care, upbringing
or such, are recognised as valuable; and secondly, the social process
in which economic goods are exchanged, is seen as meaningless
from the perspective of determination of value. Moreover, no
notion of power is incorporated in the value conception, therefore
casting the hierarchies in economic processes or their unmaking
as insignificant.

Additionally, the subjective theory of value functions effectively
as a justification for capitalist practices, particularly because
of what it omits. Two issues in this regard stand out. First off,
the subjective theory of value leans on an idea of well-being, 
according to which well-being is always enhanced when more
market preferences are met, thus forming the basis of seeing the
limitless growth of consumption as a well-being endeavor means
to improve well-being. Secondly, it sets no limits to how much the
perceived value of different inputs can be seen to deviate, thereby
giving an excuse to any magnitude of disparities.

All this leads to a need to see beyond these apparently exclusive
choices. It is not necessary to base the theory of value on either
a mechanical reference to the labour time used to produce the
good, nor a narrow theory functioning as an excuse for capitalist
practices. A better alternative is to ground economic value on
the whole process, including reproduction, social interaction as
a basis for well-being, together with a notion of limits to growth
and consumption. I will now turn to the community economy
conception of value as articulated within timebanks, to see how
these theoretical points figure in that context."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)


==Characteristics of the community economy conception of value==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"Mainstream economics appears locked with the ostensible
necessity to choose between the labour theory of value and the
subjective theory of value. While within social science there
have been some theoretical attempts to surpass this dichotomy,
community economies can be seen as highly informative for these
attempts, as they not only theorise, but also practice given value
forms. Community economies insist in their practice on an idea
of value, which would better grasp the social element inherent in
economic activity. This social element of value is not reducible to
either subjective notions nor mere labour time.

The task is then to explicate a theory of value from the basis of
the conception embodied in practices of community economies.

Community economies should be understood as economic in the
sense that there is some facilitation of exchange or organisation of
resources. Further, there has to be some sufficiently shared value
conception. This conception can be implicit as well as explicit, yet
it will be enacted in the practices of the system. The unique form
of economic value, not accepting the mainstream economic way to
draw the distinction between economic and non-economic, is one
of the key components making community economies stand as a
distinct category.

Below, I will sketch the key aspects of an alternative (community
economy) conception of value as expressed in timebanking.

‘Alternative‘ should be understood here in the sense of deviating
from the hegemonic economics narrative, rather than as marginal:
the conception can be widely enacted in everyday social life, yet
discursively marginalised. The analysis will be based on a reading
of key materials introducing timebanking. 

This comprises of, first,
books and reports explaining the concept and ideology. Second,
different kinds of booklets, internet publications and info leaflets
are used. Third, this body of texts is complemented with interviews
of some long-term timebank developers. These interviews are not
systematically analysed within this chapter, but rather were used
as a basis on which to form a preliminary understanding of the
issue.

The purpose of the analysis is then to use existing material to
scrutinise a conception of value within practices of alternative
economies which could extend to inform the purposes of the
welfare state. The conception of value is presented in terms of
what is unique in it. Therefore, it includes no separate category
for use-value in general: the obvious fact that people seek services
because these services are useful for them."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)

=Discussion=

==Welfare state and value diffusion==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"Next, I will turn to questions of how the conception of value in
community economies can resonate with the welfare state ethos.


As noted in the introduction of this book, this implies two separate
questions:

'''1. How could the welfare state protect the abilities of community economies to operate – in this case, to sustain their value form?;''' 

and

'''2. To what extent can welfare states assume the value conception of community economies?'''


The distinction between the welfare state ethos and institutions
is crucial. The welfare state as an ideal; and as a practice, should be
kept clearly separate.

As for the first, a key concept organising the discussion has
been ‘the partner state‘, as, again, mentioned in the introduction
of this book. When it comes to the value form, the partner state
assumes a new function: that is to say the state apparatus could
aim at protecting community economy ideas and practices from
capitalist expansion. As capitalism expands, it transforms ever new
aspects of social life into commodities, or functions in assisting 
capitalist value creation.

'''A further step is to ask: What aspects of the welfare state are
in line with the value model of community economies described
above? And as an accessory question: Could the existing welfare
state further assume this value model as part of its functions to
produce and deliver services?''' It is not fully clear, how the welfare
state should be interpreted in this context. To some extent, welfare
states, as we know them, lean heavily on a ‘commodified sphere‘,
and even push forward new frontiers of hypercommodification
in an attempt to finance the welfare institutions. This function
necessarily leans on the mainstream economics conception of
value in which the welfare state is seen as merely a vehicle of
redistribution. On the other hand, welfare states clearly have a
role in maintaining commons through the governance over public
goods relevant to the well-being and health of a given population,
such as health and education, as long as the governance is
sufficiently participatory. Further, welfare state institutions are (at
least ideally) human-made and democratically planned structures
which uphold a strongly egalitarian and social rights-based
conception of the distribution of services.

To some extent the community economies’ value conception
is an explicit attempt to rival the welfare capitalist model as we
know it, so the two value conceptions can be seen as somewhat
conflictual. However, as noted, the welfare state in itself is a highly
contested terrain. For these reasons it needs to be analysed, what
kinds of ideas of values are inherent in welfare state institutions,
what are possible, and what are impossible. This will enable analysing
how far can welfare states be pushed in the way of the community
economies’ value conception.

Yet what needs to be kept in mind as a critical point is, that
any activity is potentially vulnerable to commodification. This
includes several aspects of the conception of value outlined above.
The downside of the fact that ‘the economic‘ and ‘the social‘ are
not ontologically separate is, that many social and emotional 
functions can become commodities. Affects, social relations, and
generally ‘the social factor‘ can be turned into new spheres of
capitalist accumulation. So ‘value diffusion‘ should be understood
as value attached to practices which are distinctly anti-capitalist,
and the ideal welfare state as a mechanism protecting diverse value
conceptions."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)


==Conceptions of value within the welfare state==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"I will turn next to debating what ideas and practices associated with
the welfare state resonate with the conception of value discussed
above. In line with the distinction made in the introductory
chapter, my focus here is on the welfare state ethos, rather than
the current manifesting forms. It is so that this ethos can be seen
to entail ideas resembling the community economy approach
more than the currently existing systems of governance.

Firstly, the notion of trust is clearly part of the welfare state
tradition. Generalised social trust or general trust within a society,
which economists prefer to call ‘social capital‘ is often used to
explain the success of economies with generous welfare systems
(Halpern 2010; Whiteley 2000; World Bank 1998). While such
findings as clear correlations between trust towards strangers and
the economic conditions can indeed be shown, social capital tends
to emerge in economics as a category for everything which cannot
be explained by the traditional means of economics. This confirms
how such economics is devoid of means to develop a theory on
trust.

Sometimes the concept of ‘endogenous growth‘ is used to refer
to the totality including ‘investments‘ targeted at the social fabric
that reproduces and generates social capital: education being the
typical example. Together with low income disparities and the good
governance of basic institutions such investments foster a sense
of mutual trust and secure social cohesion. It is indeed possible
to discern the ‘virtuous circle‘ of the welfare state consisting of
an entanglement of strictly economic value and social goods as a 
single social-economic project (Hagfors et al. 2014).

Secondly, the idea of recognition can be discerned in the
welfare state tradition, even if not as an economic quality. It has
sometimes appeared in the form of the notion of ‘talent reserve‘,
which refers to the necessity of egalitarian education to avoid
socio-economic disparities leading to wasted talents in the lack
of opportunities to develop them. The tradition has also involved
some notions of ‘extended community‘, such as referring to the
welfare state as the ‘people’s home‘. Some cash transfer schemes
can be seen as mechanisms for recognising everyone’s input and
value as human beings. For instance, certain family allowances
that allow parents to take care of children at home can be seen
to come close to the recognition of the core economy. Future
universal recognition might take place through non-conditional
transfer schemes in terms of universal basic income. In essence,
one argument often made in support for universal basic income
is that it would recognise the social contribution of all individuals.
Thirdly, the reproductive is seen to depend on the productive.
Currently, this hierarchical order of value creation is quite central
to welfare state thought; being inscribed in the very notion
of the coexistence of the commodified and decommodified
spheres. While reproduction is to some extent supported, the
commodified sphere is seen as ‘buying‘ the operational space for
the decommodified sphere. In order to reflect the community
economy conception, there would have to be a recognition of the
reproductive sphere as equally or more value-creating. Fortunately,
the welfare state tradition, using the notion of ‘the virtuous circle‘,
could accommodate this kind of idea.

It appears that co-production (of public services) can be
integrated into the welfare state tradition if there is political will
to do so. Evidently, such ideas already exist within the current
discussion about organising public services, even if the wider
trend is towards the commodification of services and to economies
of scale. It is an open question, which also invites legitimate 
scepticism: To what extent will the co-production approach permeate
service provision? The answer requires transcending several binary
categorisations, such as producer/recipient, producer/product, or
professional/nonprofessional – yet there is nothing inherent in
the welfare state tradition, which would form an unsurmountable
obstacle to this.

Of course, it is a difficult matter to change welfare state
organisations, and to attempt to intermingle public functions
with community economies. The major obstacles stem from path
dependency and the deeply assumed preference for centralisation,
which have long permeated welfare state practices. Ideas like the
‘virtuous circle‘ and realising the potential from a talent pool within
a community ultimately have leaned on increased production and
hierarchical governance, even if this need not necessarily be the
case.

Because of these ingrained tendencies, there is a need to find
concrete examples of diffusing the alternative economy value
conception. One suggestion in this direction was the call to
extend the Helsinki timebank’s ‘time tax‘ into allowing municipal
tax payments. This initiative was put forward when when the
Finnish tax administration declared timebanks to be tax liable
(Eskelinen et al. 2017). Taxation on a euro equivalent value was
strongly opposed, as timebanks see their time-based currency,
materialising the ethos of everyone’s time being worth the same,
to be not convertible to capitalist money.

The proposal was to use the timebank’s platform to implement
municipal taxation in time currency. Already now, in order to
maintain its ‘infrastructure‘, the timebank collects a small levy
(in time) on each transaction. This levy could be used to pay
the municipality of Helsinki where the timebank is based, if the
municipality would open a timebank account to receive such
payments. According to the proposition, the municipal account,
in which time taxes accumulate, could be used by community-level
municipal service providers (community centres, day care centres, 
parks, etc). While in a timebank no-one is obliged to provide
a service, this municipal account would practically be used to
reward (in time currency) people for volunteering in communitylevel service provision. A further function of the ‘time tax‘ would
be to challenge the category of ‘work‘ through the official semieconomic recognition of the value of community engagement.

This suggestion serves as an example of recognising the virtues
of the welfare state while pushing the community economy
conception of value within the municipalities. More generally,
the ‘municipal tovi tax‘ would imply a) recognising timebanks as
contributing to the community; b) diffusing the commons values
into the realm of municipal services; and c) recognising the existing
internal time tax model as a legitimate system of self-governance.9
A further issue is, if in addition to transforming public service
provision this value conception could inform relations in the
sphere currently referred as to ‘the market‘. Part of the community
economy value conception is to cast the user-producer instead
of the consumer as the protagonist, which opens more diverse
economic subjectivities. While the matter is contested, some
optimistic theorists do argue that there is a general ‘move towards
commons format‘ (Bauwens and Ramos 2018) taking place, and
that this would eventually define future forms of the economy. An
often noted feature of this shift is a move from possession to access,
and while the latter does not automatically guarantee community
economy virtues to permeate the economy, it would perhaps more
easily allow this to take place. Further, some scholars expect to see
a turn into ‘ethical values‘ in the broader market, as production
tends towards the production of social goods instead of tangibles
in the current market (Arvidsson and Peitersen 2016)."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)

=More information=

* [[Core Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Community Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]