
'''* Article: Concentration of Power and Participation in Online Governance: the Ecosystem of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations. By Andrea Peña-Calvin, Javier Arroy et al.''' 

URL = https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3589335.3651481


=Abstract=

"Blockchain technology enables a new form of online community:
Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs), where members typically vote on proposals using tokens. Enthusiasts claim
DAOs provide new opportunities for openness, horizontality, and
democratization. However, this phenomenon is still under research,
especially given the lack of quantitative studies. This paper presents
the first census-like quantitative analysis of the whole ecosystem of
DAOs, including 30K DAO communities on the main DAO platforms.

This enables us to provide insights into the allegedly “democratic”
nature of DAOs, building metrics concerning their lifespan, participation, and power concentration. Most DAOs have a short lifespan
and low participation. There is also a positive correlation between
community size and voting power concentration. 

'''Like other online communities, DAOs seem to follow the iron law: becoming increasingly oligarchic as they grow. Still, a significant amount of DAOs of varying sizes defy this idea by being egalitarian by design'''."


=Excerpt=

From the conclusion:

"This work presents the first census covering all currently relevant
DAO platforms, resulting in 10K DAOs. The dataset is open-licensed
and available for further research. The analysis conducted enables
us to extract several characteristics of this new type of community
on a large scale and draw parallels with other online communities.
First, 20K of the initial 30K DAOs were empty DAOs, likely used
for testing. As with other software tools, casual or testing use is
common, but on the blockchain, it is permanently recorded and
may distort the perception. More importantly, numerous DAOs
are inactive or abandoned. This may suggest that, given the Web3
hype, many people started DAO projects but did not continue their
endeavors. Failure is a pattern well-documented in other online
collective projects, such as FLOSS and wiki projects.

Second, we can see how the majority of DAOs exhibit a small to
moderate size (in terms of unique voters), while a few stand out as
significantly larger. Again, this duality is reminiscent of patterns
observed in wiki-based and open-source communities.

Our analysis also reveals remarkable voting patterns. As DAO
size increases, its voter turnout and the number of proposals a
voter participates in greatly decrease. While the presence of passive
members is also common in online communities, it poses a
challenge to the scalability of representative governance in DAOs.

We also observe high levels of inequality in the distribution of
voting power. Notably, there is a statistically significant correlation
between larger DAOs and greater inequality. This prompts us to
consider inequality as a typical “feature” of collaborative online
communities once they reach a certain size, suggesting that DAOs
may conform to the “iron law of oligarchy”. This is particularly
relevant for DAOs, since “power can be bought” quite literally,
as many DAOs allow the purchase of governance tokens. Thus,
mitigating power imbalances within these communities may be a
critical consideration for fostering more inclusive and equitable
decision-making processes. However, we do identify a small number
of large egalitarian DAOs that defy the iron law of oligarchy and
demonstrate the variety of ways in which these organizations can
present themselves.

In sum, through exhaustive data collection and in-depth quantitative analysis, this work brings valuable insights into the power
distribution and participation patterns within the DAO ecosystem.
This work, along with its public dataset, serves as a base to delve
into new research questions about these communities, such as how
inequality affects governance effectiveness or decision-making outcomes."


[[Category:Crypto Governance]]

[[Category:Research]]