'''= Condominium governance arrangements between different states:'''

=Discussion=

Anne-Marie Slaughter, interviewed by the Bergruen Institute:

'''* Blake: As we’re thinking about these new fluid, hybrid networks, we return to the question of legitimacy. How can networks gain legitimacy?'''

Slaughter: Cities are an essential resource. If we look at where we need to tackle the issues we’ve been talking about, it’s mostly not at the national or even at the state government level, but rather at the city level. This is why I’m thinking a lot these days about city-states. Specifically, we need to think about the right jurisdictional unit for human beings to come together in ways that let them cooperate effectively to improve their collective circumstances. It has to be an entity that is big enough to have some real heft, but small enough to be directly connected to the people, which is how it will attain legitimacy.

Sovereignty is still defined as political independence and control over a defined piece of territory. But what if we can decouple governance from territory? What if jurisdictional boundaries didn’t have to be territorial? 

I’m fascinated with “[[Condominium]]” governance arrangements — for example, the idea that Israelis and Palestinians would share all the territory from the Mediterranean to the Jordan River, but that each would answer to a different government. Maybe we still need territorial boundaries for some things, but it’s worth thinking creatively about how these can be reconfigured. Does the future of governance rest solely with territorial jurisdictions? I’m pretty convinced it does not."

(https://www.noemamag.com/networked-planetary-governance/)


=More information=

==Mainstream etymology in housing==


''A condominium, or condo, is the form of housing tenure and other real property where a specified part of a piece of real estate (usually of an apartment house) is individually owned while use of and access to common facilities in the piece such as hallways, heating system, elevators, exterior areas is executed under legal rights associated with the individual ownership and controlled by the association of owners that jointly represent ownership of the whole piece. Colloquially, the term is often used to refer to the unit itself in place of the word "apartment". A condominium may be simply defined as an "apartment" that the resident "owns" as opposed to rents.'' -- http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Condominium