
'''* Article: Conflict, Claim and Contradiction in the New Indigenous State of Bolivia. Andrew Canessa. Desigualides.net, Working Paper No. 22, 2012.'''

URL = https://www.dropbox.com/sh/450f7untkaodvsy/dpxXZ5uJoD/Canessa%20-%20Conflict%20Claim%20and%20Contradiction%20in%20the%20New%20Indigenous%20State%20of%20Bolivia.pdf


=Source=

Canessa, Andrew 2012: “Conflict, Claim and Contradiction in the New Indigenous State of Bolivia”,
desiguALdades.net. Working Paper Series, No. 22, Berlin: desiguALdades.net Research Network on Interdependent Inequalities in Latin America.

The paper is a revised version of the keynote speech delivered by Andrew Canessa at the Second
Annual Conference of desiguALdades.net , “New Differences, Persistent Inequalities? Latin American
Experiences“, Berlin, December 8-9, 2011


=Abstract=

"Recent conflict between indigenous people and a self-styled indigenous state in Bolivia
has brought to the fore some of the paradoxes and contradictions within the concept
of indigeneity itself. The contemporary politics of state sponsored indigeneity in Bolivia
has as much capacity to create new inequalities as it does to address old ones and
there is a conceptual deficit in understanding contemporary indigenous rights claims,
in particular, as they relate to the state. I reject Peter Geschiere’s (2009) suggestion
that one should distinguish between ‘autochthony’ and ‘indigeneity’ but am inspired
by these arguments to suggest that one needs to make a critical distinction between
the kinds of claims different indigenous people make against the state. Of interest
here are the consequences of indigeneity being transformed from being a language of
resistance to a language of governance. I propose a conceptual distinction between
inclusive national indigeneity for the majority which seeks to co-opt the state through
accessing the language of governance and a minority concept of indigeneity which
needs protection from the state and continues to use indigeneity as a language of
resistance. Only by looking at the kinds of claims people make through the rhetoric
of indigeneity can we make sense of the current indigenous conflict in Bolivia and
elsewhere."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Bolivia]]