
'''* BACHELOR’S THESIS: THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN GREEN ECONOMY AND BIOMIMICRY. By Jenni Koho. TURKU UNIVERSITY OF APPLIED SCIENCES, Sustainable Development, 2012''' 

URL = https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/40960/Koho_Jenni.pdf

=ABSTRACT=

"The half of human wealth is coming from natural capital, which we are depleting with our current
economic model. Economic activity of human beings consumes more biomass than the Earth
can produce on a sustainable basis. The flaw of the current model is that costs and losses of
destroying the Earth are absent from the prices in the marketplace.

While our current model, “brown economy” is causing negative impacts on the environment,
green economy decouples resource use and environmental impacts from economic growth
decreasing the harmful effects of economic activities and aiming at sustainability over the long
haul.

Biomimicry is an innovation method seeking sustainable solutions for problems we humans face
by imitating nature’s patterns and strategies that have formed during thousands of centuries.
The method seeks to create earth-friendly products, processes, and policies that are
sustainable in the long run.

The aim of the study was to show connections between green economy and biomimicry and to
point out applicability of the method in greening economic activities. This study is a theoretical
research based on data, which consists of literature and articles written on biomimicry and
economy.

The study shows clear connections between biomimicry and green economy. Biomimicry is
about innovating new technologies and green economy stresses the importance of technology
transfer to developing countries. Biomimicry can be applied exactly on the same sectors of
economy which have most export potential in green economy: in primary and secondary
industry and in energy sector.

If green business is defined as a combination of practices and values, biomimicry fits in the
picture with flying colors due to the coverage of the method. Deeply green products and
technologies have markets in the future, and therefore biomimicry brings competitive advantage
to companies.

Adopting biomimicry as part of sustainability practices works in both ways: either biomimicry can
help making businesses greener and hence contributing to transition towards green economy or
after countries start shifting towards green economy biomimicry can help businesses to do their
share. On the basis of this study it can be stated that biomimicry has potential in serving as a
bridge between current and future economy."

=Excerpts=

==The [[Lightbulb Conspiracy]]==

Jenny Koho:

"[[Planned Obsolescence]] dates back till 1920s when industry started to shorten
the life spans of products to increase consumer demand. An influential advertisement
magazine warned companies that an article that refuses to wear out is
tragedy of business.

The first example of planned obsolescence is the story of light bulbs. Initially
manufacturers strived for producing long life span for their light bulbs, they
lasted even 2500 hours. The light bulb of Livermore fire station in California has
been burning continuously since 1901. In 1924 a group of businessmen gathered
together and founded the Phoebus cartel to lower the life span of the
bulbs to 1000 hours to control markets and customers worldwide. In 1925 a
board named 1000 hour life committee was found. It forced companies to design
light bulbs with the burning time of maximum 1000 hours. If companies exceeded
the burning time of their bulbs noticeably, they were fined. By the 1940s
the cartel had reached its goal: 1000 hours had become the standard life span
of light bulbs. If you still have some conventional light bulbs left in your closet,
check out how many hours they will burn, you will be surprised."


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Research]]