
URL = https://constitutievoordecommons.nl/

=Description=


Translated from the Dutch:


“What is the Constitution for the Commons?

* A Protective Barrier 

The Constitution for the Commons is a protective barrier against violations of our right to autonomous self-organization. And it is a breeding ground for stronger Commons.

It provides the Commons with protection, potential, and space to develop, acting as a critical friend to challenge and keep them aware of their role.


* A Living Organism 

The Constitution for the Commons is not a rigid legal code but rather a living organism of knowledge, culture, customs, rules, and laws. It ensures a balanced and respected place for the Commons in relation to the Government and the Market."


Original Dutch:


“Wat is de Constitutie voor de Commons?

* Beschermingswal

De Constitutie voor de Commons is een beschermingswal tegen inbreuken op ons recht van autonome zelforganisatie. Én het is een kweekvijver voor sterkere Commons.

Het biedt de Commons bescherming, potentie, ontwikkelruimte, en is als een kritische vriend aanwezig om te prikkelen, zodat ze bewust blijven van haar plek.


* Een levend orgaan

De Constitutie voor de Commons is geen starre Grondwet, maar eerder een levend orgaan van kennis, cultuur, gebruiken, regels en wetten. Zij zorgen voor een evenwichtige en gerespecteerde plek van de Commons ten opzichte van Overheid en de Markt.”

(https://constitutievoordecommons.nl/wat-is-het/) 


[[Category:Netherlands]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]