=Discussion=

Martin Wainstein:

"Consolidating a climate accounting system that can combine
state and NSA climate actions is essential to the success of the
Paris Agreement and the prevention of dangerous global
warming. In fact, NSAs and their progress should inform
national target-setting, tracking and policy-making that in
turn should encourage even more non-state action
commitments. Quantitatively assessing and tracking climate
pledges and certifying the efforts to achieve them, however,
are still fraught with difficulties. Existing measurement,
reporting and verification (MRV) systems to track climate
action —both from state and NSAs— are labor-intensive and
costly, frequently requiring third-party consultants, which
discourages resource-constrained actors from participating
and recording actions in transnational climate action
networks or measuring their climate change impacts at all.

If we were to consolidate and maintain a single recordkeeping ledger with global consensus (i.e. where all parties agree) the task would be far from a simple under a trustless
and competitive world. Decades of slow climate negotiations
among countries attest to the intricacy of this challenge. The
rise and maturity of blockchain and its cryptographic science,
paired with emerging digital technologies such as internetconnected sensors, big data and artificial intelligence can provide robust opportunities for existing and new climate
platforms to streamline and incentivize data collection,
climate action certification (i.e. MRV), accounting and trade.
These tools could fill a critical gap in the understanding of how
bottom-up non-state climate actions are implemented, what
they achieve, and how to build a sustainable system that
lowers measurement and reporting burdens to be more
inclusive globally.

Whilst the initial application of blockchain focused on digital
currencies (e.g. Bitcoin), other non-financial applications
quickly followed. In fact, its core promise of decentralized
consensus eventually caught the attention of the climate
world. Eventually, the UNFCCC declared its support for
research on blockchain and distributed ledger technologies
(UNFCCC, 2018). Following this announcement, initiatives like
the [[Climate Chain Coalition]] have successfully created a
growing network of entrepreneurial actors that are actively
exploring the blockchain and climate intersection, each with
their own set of technological value propositions.

To date, however, there hasn’t been a compelling direct
application of the technology, at least not in terms of a global
internationally recognized framework for carbon and climate
accounting that propose to leverage the power of trustless
decentralization and automation to integrate legacy
accounting practices with emerging technological ones. There
has also been little discussion about how to address questions
around the governance of these tools, data sharing between
existing climate platforms, development of globally accepted
accounting protocols for NSAs, and the dichotomy of
maintaining actor data privacy alongside climate
transparency."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

=More information=

* [[Towards a Blockchain for Global Climate Accounting]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]