
'''* CALLAHAN, B.R., C. HATHAWAY & M. KRISHNAMOORTHY, C. (2016). Quantitative Metrics for Generative Justice: Graphing
the value of diversity, Revista Teknokultura Vol. 13(2), 567-586'''

URL = http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52838/50004

=Abstract=

"Scholarship utilizing the Generative Justice framework has focused primarily on
qualitative data collection and analysis for its insights. This paper introduces a quantitative
data measurement, contributory diversity, which can be used to enhance the analysis of ethical
dimensions of value production under the Generative Justice lens. It is well known that the
identity of contributors—gender, ethnicity, and other categories—is a key issue for social
justice in general. Using the example of Open Source Software communities, we note that that
typical diversity measures, focusing exclusively on workforce demographics, can fail to fully
illuminate issues in value generation. Using Shannon’s entropy measure, we offer an
alternative metric which combines the traditional assessment of demographics with a measure
of value generation. This mapping allows for previously unacknowledged contributions to be
recognized, and can avoid some of the ways in which exclusionary practices are obscured. We
offer contributory diversity not as the single optimal metric, but rather as a call for others to
begin investigating the possibilities for quantitative measurements of the communities and
value flows that are studied using the Generative Justice framework."


[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]