
* Book: Leslie Haddon (Ed.), The Contemporary Internet, Berlin: Peter Lang Publication, 2011, 210 pp


=Review=

By Raul Pertierra, in: International Journal of Communication 5 (2011), Book Review 1687–1690


"The Contemporary Internet is one in a series of volumes on the
effects and consequences of the new communication technology. Over the
last few years, COST (European Cooperation in Society & Technology) has
been sponsoring international conferences to examine the uses of the new
media, in particular the Internet and broadband. While these conferences
generally deal with European examples, they also include research beyond
Europe. The theme of this volume, the third of the series, is culture.

While the concept of culture is increasingly being challenged by
anthropologists and sociologists for its vagueness and broadness, no other
term can capture the need to refer to notions of value and meaning
encountered in everyday life, from representations and identities to practices and material goods. It
seems that contemporary life is characterized by an excess of meaning even if most of us can make little
sense of it. The global condition and the new communication technology exacerbate this paradoxical
situation, where culture is a free-floating signifier rather than located in concrete and meaningful
experiences. This volume examines how the new communication technology is embedded, entwined, and
intercalated within cultural factors in various European countries.

Editor Leslie Haddon does an excellent job of contextualizing the diverse articles by pointing out
how, in significant ways, these are all related to cultural norms. For example, there seems to be less
concern in the mainstream media about the dangers of child pornography in Nordic countries. There may
be several reasons for this relative lack of concern, but it may also be related to a more tolerant Nordic
attitude toward sexuality. Certain national cultures such as the Netherlands, with its emphasis on
individual expression, may encourage more creative and generative uses of broadband services than
might a society like Spain, with its greater emphasis on collective interactions and media-consumerist
practices. These differences in the uses of the new media indicate that cultural factors affect how the new
communication technology is described in the mainstream media, adopted by particular users, and
developed by appropriate agencies."
(http://ijoc.org/ojs/index.php/ijoc/article/view/1381/637)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Culture]]