'''Essay:  Information and Communication Technologies and Society. A Contribution to the Critique of the Political Economy of the Internet. By Christian Fuchs.'''

URL = http://fuchs.icts.sbg.ac.at/ICTS_EJC.pdf


=A B S T R A C T=

"This article argues for the need of Critical Internet Theory. It outlines
how such a theory operates by the example of the role of gifts and commodities
in the Internet economy. It is argued that after the crisis of the
‘New Economy’, the emergence of what is termed ‘Web 2.0’ signifies the
increasing importance of the Internet gift commodity strategy. This strategy
commodifies the users who produce content and communications
online on free access platforms so that advertisement rates are driven up,
and functions as a legitimizing ideology. In this context, the notion of the
Internet prosumer commodity is introduced."
(http://fuchs.icts.sbg.ac.at/ICTS_EJC.pdf)


=Excerpts=

==The antagonism between productive forces and relations of production in informational capitalism:==

'''Information as gift and commodity'''


"Information-based productive forces 

The dialectical antagonistic character of
social and technical networks as the motor of competition and cooperation
in informational capitalism reflects Marx’s idea that the productive forces of
capitalism are at the same time means of exploitation and domination and
produce potentials that go beyond actuality, point towards a radically transformed
society and anticipate a fully cooperative design of the means of production.

The productive forces of contemporary capitalism are organized
around informational networks (Fuchs, 2008). It is due to three specific
characteristics of such structures that they come in contradiction with the
capitalist relations of production and are a germ form (Keimform) of a society
that is based on fully cooperative and socialized means of production:

• Information as a strategic economic resource is globally produced
and diffused by networks. It is a good that is hard to control in
single places or by single owners.

• Information is intangible. It can easily be copied, which results in
multiple ownerships and hence undermines individual private
property.

• The essence of networks is that they strive for establishing connections.
Networks are in essence a negation of individual ownership
and the atomism of capitalism.


Informational networks both extend and undermine capital accumulation.
Informational networks aggravate the capitalist contradiction between
the collective production and the individual appropriation of goods:
The contradiction between the general social power into which capital
develops, on the one hand, and the private power of the individual capitalists
over these social conditions of production, on the other, becomes ever
more irreconcilable, and yet contains the solution of the problem, because
it implies at the same time the transformation of the conditions of production
into general, common, social, conditions. (Marx, 1894: 274)

Networks are a material condition of a free association, but the cooperative
networking of the relations of production is not an automatic result
of networked productive forces; a true network society in the sense of an
association of free and equal producers (Marx, 1869: 62) is something that
people must struggle for and that they can achieve under the given conditions
but that could very well also never emerge if the dominant regime is
successful in continuing its reign. Networks are forms of development as
well as fetters of capitalism; paraphrasing Marx one can say that informational
capitalism is a point where the means of production have become
‘incompatible with their capitalist integument’ (Marx, 1867: 791).

The antagonistic economic character of network capitalism has two
opposing sides, the cooperative one of the informational gift economy and
the competitive one of the informational commodity economy.

Knowledge is in global network capitalism a strategic economic
resource; property struggles in the information society take on the form of
conflicts over the public or proprietary character of knowledge. Its production
is inherently social, cooperative and historical. Knowledge is in
many cases produced by individuals in a joint effort. New knowledge
incorporates earlier forms of knowledge; it is coined by the whole history
of knowledge. Hence, it is in essence a public good and it is difficult to
argue that there is an individual authorship that grounds individual property
rights and copyrights. Global economic networks and cyberspace
today function as channels of production and diffusion of knowledge commodities;
the accumulation of profit by selling knowledge is legally guaranteed
by intellectual property rights.

In society, information can only be produced jointly in cooperative
processes, not individually. Hence, Marx argued that knowledge ‘depends
partly on the cooperation of the living, and partly on the utilisation of the
labours of those who have gone before’ (Marx, 1894: 114). Whenever new
information emerges, it incorporates the whole societal history of information:
that is, information has a historical character. Hence, information
in essence is a public good, freely available to all. But in global informational
capitalism, information has become an important productive force
that favours new forms of capital accumulation. Information is today not
treated as a public good, rather as a commodity. There is an antagonism
between information as a public good and as a commodity."


==The commodified Internet economy and the non-commodified Internet economy==

'''The gift commodity Internet economy: social networking platforms'''

'''There is a commodified Internet economy and a non-commodified Internet
economy.''' 

Only those aspects of the Internet economy that are non-profit
gifts, that just have use value and no exchange value and are hence provided
without costs for the users and without selling advertisement space, can be
considered as decommodified or non-commodified. Examples are file-sharing
platforms, Wikipedia, Linux and Indymedia. 

Commodified Internet spaces are always profit oriented, but the goods they provide are not necessarily
exchange values and market oriented; in some cases (such as Google,
Yahoo, MySpace, YouTube, Netscape), free goods or platforms are provided
as gifts in order to drive up the number of users so that high advertisement
rates can be charged in order to achieve profit. In other cases, digital or nondigital
goods are sold with the help of the Internet (e.g. Amazon), or
exchange of goods is mediated and charged for (online marketplaces such as
eBay or the Amazon Marketplace). In any of these cases, the primary orientation
of such spaces is instrumental reason: that is, the material interest of
achieving money profit, a surplus to the invested capital.

In the early phase of the World Wide Web, platforms that provided
content were important business models. Many new stock companies in
the areas of Internet content and Internet services had emerged up to the
mid-1990s. By the years 2005 and 2006, accumulation strategies related
to the Internet had shifted from a primary focus on information to a focus
on communication and cooperation (Fuchs, 2008). Some scholars like to
designate this transformation as the emergence of ‘[[Internet 2.0]]’ and ‘[[Web 2.0]]’, although the main purpose behind using these terms seem to be a
marketing strategy for boosting investment. The most characteristic
example of Web 2.0 are the social networking platforms like MySpace or
Facebook, which allow the online maintenance and establishment of social
relationships by an integrated use of technologies like email, websites,
guest books, forums, digital videos, or digital images. So, for example,
MySpace is a Web platform that allows users to generate personal profiles,
on which they can upload pictures, text, videos, music, and keep their
personal blogs. It networks users with a friendship system (users can add
others to their friend list and post comments to their friends’ guest books),
discussion forums, interest groups, chat rooms and a mail function. Such
platforms have both a commodity form and ideological character.


The commodity form of social networking platforms
Commercial [[Web 2.0]] applications are typically free to users; they generate
profit by achieving as many users as possible by offering free services and
selling advertisement space to third parties and additional services to
users. The more users, the more profit, that is, the more services are offered
for free, the more profit can be generated. Although the principle of the
gift points towards a postcapitalist society, gifts are today subsumed under
capitalism and used for generating profit in the Internet economy. The
Internet gift economy has a double character: it supports and at the same
time undermines informational capitalism. Applications such as file-sharing
software question the logic of commodities, whereas platforms such as
Google and MySpace are characteristic of the capitalist gift economy.


'''Internet 2.0 is characterized by this antagonism between information commodities and information gifts.'''

'''The Internet gift commodity economy''' can be read as a specific form
of what Dallas Smythe has termed the [[Audience Commodity]] (Smythe,
2006). He suggests that in the case of media advertisement models the
audience is sold as a commodity. ‘Because audience power is produced, sold,
purchased and consumed, it commands a price and is a commodity. . . . You
audience members contribute your unpaid work time and in exchange you
receive the program material and the explicit advertisements’ (Smythe,
2006: 233, 238). Audiences would work, although unpaid; the consumption
of the mass media would be work because it would result in a commodity,
hence it would produce that commodity. Also the audience’s work
would include ‘learning to buy goods and to spend their income accordingly’,
the demand for the consumption of goods and the reproduction of
their own labour power (Smythe, 2006: 243ff.).

With the rise of user-generated content and free access social networking
platforms like MySpace or Facebook and other free access platforms that yield
profit by online advertisement, the Web seems to come close to the accumulation
strategies employed by capital on traditional mass media like television
or radio. The users who ‘google’ data, upload or watch videos on YouTube,
upload or browse personal images on Flickr, or accumulate friends with whom
they exchange content or communicate online on social networking platforms
like MySpace or Facebook, constitute an audience commodity that is sold to
advertisers. The difference between the audience commodity on traditional
mass media and on the Internet is that in the latter the users are also content
producers: there is user-generated content, the users engage in permanent creative
activity, communication, community building and content production.
That the users are more active on the Internet than in the reception of television
or radio content is due to the decentralized structure of the Internet that
allows many-to-many communication."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]