'''Book: Escape Routes: Control and Subversion in the 21st Century, Dimitris Papadopoulos, Niamh Stephenson & Vassilis Tsianos. London: Pluto Press, (2008)'''

(an important book, because it sees change as a process rather than event, and focuses on the role of exodus -out of a failing system -  in social change)


=Excerpts=

==Introduction==

"This book is about social transformation; it proposes a processual
vision of change. We want to move away from thinking about change
as primarily effected through events. To focus on the role of events is
to foreground particular moments when a set of material, social and
imaginary ruptures come together and produce a break in the fl ow
of history – a new truth. Much of the twentieth century’s political
thinking casts revolt and revolution as the most central events in
creating social change. But the (left’s) fixation on events cannot
nurture the productive energy required to challenge the formation
of contemporary modes of control in Global North Atlantic societies.

An event is never in the present; it can only be designated as an event
in retrospect or anticipated as a future possibility. To pin our hopes
on events is a nominalist move which draws on the masculinist
luxury of having the power both to name things and to wait about
for salvation. Because events are never in the present, if we highlight
their role in social change we do so at the expense of considering the
potence of the present that is made of people’s everyday practices:
the practices employed to navigate daily life and to sustain relations,
the practices which are at the heart of social transformation long
before we are able to name it as such. This book is about such fugitive
occurrences rather than the epiphany of events. Social transformation,
we argue, is not about cultivating faith in the change to come,
it is about honing our senses so that we can perceive the processes
which create change in ordinary life. Social transformation is not
about reason and belief, it is about perception and hope. It is not
about the production of subjects, but about the making of life. It is
not about subjectivity, it is about experience.

In the following pages, we look for social change in seemingly
insignificant occurrences of life: refusing to subscribe to a clichéd
account of one’s life story; sustaining the capacity to work in insecure
and highly precarious conditions by developing informal social
networks on which one can rely; or living as an illegal migrant below
the radar of surveillance. These everyday experiences are commonly
neglected in accounts of social and political transformation. This
might be partly because they neither refer to a grand narrative of
social change nor are they identifiable elements of broader, unified
social movements. However, this book presents the argument that
such imperceptible moments of social life are the starting point of
contemporary forces of change.

But what makes some everyday occurrences transformative and
many others not? Transformative processes change the conditions of
social existence by paving the way for new transformations (rather
than by creating fixed identifiable things or identities). We can trace
social change in experiences that point towards an exit from a given
organisation of social life without ever intending to create an event.

This is why we talk about ways of escaping. The thesis of the book
is that people escape: only after control tries to recapture escape
routes can we speak of ‘escape from’. Prior to its regulation, escape is
primarily imperceptible. We argue that these moments where people
subvert their existing situations without naming their practice (or
having it named) as subversion are the most crucial for understanding
social transformation. These imperceptible moments trigger social
transformation, trigger shifts which would have appeared impossible
if described from the perspective of the existing situation. You can
never really know exactly when people will engage in acts of escape.

The art of escape appears magical, but it is the mundane, hard and
sometimes painful everyday practices that enable people to craft
situations that seem unimaginable when viewed through the lens of
the constraints of the present. The account we give of social transformation
does not entail cultivating faith in the event to come,
rather it involves cultivating faith in the elasticity and magic of the
present. Another world is here.

Escape routes are transformative because they confront control with
something which cannot be ignored. A system of power must try to
control and reappropriate acts of escape. Thus, the measure of escape
is not whether it avoids capture; virtually all trajectories of escape will,
at some point, be redirected towards control. We are trained to think
that the end product of political struggle is all about a transformative
end point, a revolt, a strike, a successfully built up organisation, a
revolution. However, this perspective neglects the most important
question of all: How does social transformation begin? Addressing
this question demands that we cultivate the sensibility to perceive
moments when things do not yet have a name.

There is nothing heroic about escape. It usually begins with an
initial refusal to subscribe to some aspects of the social order that seem
to be inescapable and indispensable for governing the practicalities
of life. In other words, the very first moment of subversion is the
detachment from what may seem essential for holding a situation
together and for making sense of that situation. Escape is a mode of
social change that is simultaneously elusive and forceful enough to
challenge the present configuration of control.


'''...'''


In this book we introduce escape not because we are looking for
either a principle behind people’s actions or the hidden principle of
historical change. Rather, focusing on escape allows us to imagine,
see and interrogate those ordinary moments when people’s actions
put processes in motion, processes which are effective in confronting
the social order with a force of change that cannot be avoided,
silenced, neglected, erased. In retrospect, such moments can be
explained in many different theoretical ways: as resistance, revolt,
refusal, revolution, as an event. Rather than draw on these concepts
inherited from twentieth-century political theory and practice,
attuning ourselves to escape allows us to work with transformation
that is more pertinent to process than to event, to skilfullness than
to anticipation, to togetherness than to sublimation, to imagination
than to logic, to joy than to seriousness.

Joy is crucial to this book. The joy of escape defies seriousness and
this, as we try to show, is the most crucial condition for revealing
truth. Paraphrasing Bakhtin’s (1984, p. 285) reading of Rabelais’
concept of truth, we could say that behind the sanctimonious
seriousness of many exalted and offi cial concepts of social transformation
of the traditional left (and beyond) we find barking instead
of acting and laughing. Rather than succumbing to barking out the
fi delity to the coming event or to the new truth we prefer to enjoy
the ways in which truth erupts out of the present. The emergence
of ‘a truth inwardly free, gay and materialistic’ is made possible by
the kind of laughter and hilarity that pervades the atmosphere of
the carnival banquet (Bakhtin 1984, p. 285; see also pp. 94ff.). And
it is the collective joy of eating and drinking in a ‘banquet for all the
world’ (Bakhtin 1984, p. 278) which opens the possibility to partake
in the world instead of being devoured by it. The laughter and joy
of those who partake in the world defies seriousness, disperses fear,
liberates the word and the body and reveals a truth escaping the
injustices of the present. This laughter is the prime mover of escape.
Escape is joyful. This is not an intellectual argument we are advancing
in order to resist the ubiquitous melancholy and mourning of the
left. Rather we are pointing to an embodied political practice which
contests a dominant understanding of social change as the result
of a response to suffering. Casting action as the force of pain is a
terribly Eurocentric view. It demands that we become, or worse wheel
in, a victim whose capacity to act is reduced to a mere response to
pain. With Oswald de Andrade we prefer to talk about the pleasure
of anthropophagy (Andrade, 1990, p. 51). Joyfully devouring the
sacred enemy in order to create a new body and new conditions for
seeing and acting in the world, anthropophagy triggers processes of
transformation which simultaneously act at the heart of and escape
the practices underpinning modernity and postmodernity in Global
North Atlantic societies. Joy marks the routes of social transformation.

Joy is the ultimate proof."


==Postliberal Sovereignty: Network and Grid==

The BMW plant in Leipzig Germany started production on 1 May
2005. In the medium term, the plant will produce up to 650 vehicles
per day and has the capacity to manage the planned growth in sales
of up to 1.4 million vehicles per year. According to the architect,
Zaha Hadid, the building enables innovative working-time models
and operating times of 60 to 140 hours per week, and because of
this the plant can react quickly to specific changes in the market.

The BMW plant is a strange building. You don’t really know if
it is modern or postmodern, Fordist or post-Fordist; it is a mixture
of Piranesi’s multi-level scaled structure and the breathing porosity
of Libeskind’s construction. It is simultaneously a network and a
grid. Despite the similarities to both Piranesi’s and Libeskind’s
visions, the BMW plant does not represent a totality, as in Piranesi’s
hermetic environment, nor does it reproduce the transversal design of
Libeskind’s garden. The BMW plant is a highly contingent and closed
structure, inherently fl uid and simultaneously inherently stratifi ed.
From the worker on the production line to the managers, all share
the same space; they seem to belong to the same group of people.

In fact, social stratification in the form of classes or subjectivities is
reversed here and reincorporated into a virtual but effective matrix
of a new commonality, into a vertical aggregate. And this vertical
aggregate attains its strength precisely by placing all actors on a
common horizontal corridor of action. The BMW plant is an interactive
order, neither open nor closed, but open as soon as it incorporates
the actors necessary for its functioning, and closed as soon as it can
protect and sustain its functionality. The plant is not maintained
by its exclusivity nor by an internally generated authenticity, but
rather by a fluid belonging of different independent trajectories to an
effective system of production. It is an aggressive structure, opposing
everything that sets limits to its own internal interests or tries to
infuse it with impurity. The BMW plant reacts aggressively to the
fear of viruses, it is aseptic, clean, pragmatic: Western oblivion at the
highest level; immunity is its major concern.

We use this image as the paradigmatic figure for the emergence of
a new mode of political power, postliberal sovereignty, which breeds
in the core of the dominant transnational sovereignty. Postliberal
sovereignty is neither a substitute, nor an alternative, nor the next
stage of transnational sovereignty. Transnationalism is an integral
component of postliberal sovereignty. The concept of postliberal
sovereignty allows us to recognise the formation of emerging
hegemonic projects which make up the space of transnationalism
in the beginning of the twenty-first century (Greven and Pauly,
2000). The commonality between transnationalism and postliberal
sovereignty is that both deal with the aporias of constitutionalism,
that is, they both attempt to solve, on a global level, the national
crisis of the double-R axiom. The difference between them is that
transnationalism is inherently apolitical; it pretends to solve the
problem on a simply horizontal level, while postliberal sovereignty
inserts hegemonic political claims into the global horizontal space.
Transnational sovereignty presents a solution for the problem of
rights and representation by adding dynamism to the borders of
national sovereignty. Historically borders were lines of demarcation
between national sovereignties. Transnationalism implodes these
demarcation lines and reinterpellates, on a global scale, the
participating actors of national sovereignty in many different ways
(Brenner, 2004). Transnational sovereignty merges national spaces
and their actors with other international players into a unified
horizontal plane by asserting arbitrariness in the way borders are
established (Castells, 1997). Borders are no longer by definition
the limits between national sovereignties; rather – as discussed in
Section IV – they are erected wherever there is a need to solve and to
organise social space and political governance (Larner and Walters,
2004; Rigo, 2005). Consider, for example, the emergence of the
new virtual European borders in North Africa – borders erected to
control the flow of migration into Europe by maintaining aspiring
migrants in externalised camps or internal borders erected in the
heart of metropolises of Global North Atlantic countries. Making and
remaking borders in a contingent way was the strategy transnationalism
deployed to solve the crisis of the double-R axiom.

Postliberalism appropriates this solution – and in this sense postliberalism
is also the heir to the crisis of sovereignty and relies on the same
organisational substratum as transnationalism. But postliberalism
attempts to initiate a strategic rearrangement of the transnationalist
horizontal and networked organisation of space: in the midst of an
even plane of global action it establishes vertical aggregates of power.
The break occurs when postliberalism leaves nationalist imperialist
geopolitics behind irrevocably. Instead it uses the global transnational
space to install dominant hegemonic alliances which cannot be
simply reduced to the imperialist geopolitics of entire nation states.

Rather these new postliberal aggregates reconnect different segments
of nation states and different social actors who have emerged in
the phase of transnational governance into new condensations of
power. Although postliberal sovereignty feeds on the horizontal
transnational order of power, it introduces a new hegemonic strategy
with a project of global corporativism. Postliberalism involves the verticalisation
of horizontal transnational geopolitics. Transnationalism
is the legal algorithm of post-Fordist, neoliberal globalisation. And
in this sense, transnationalism is hegemonic on a global scale. What
postliberal sovereignty does now is to hegemonise hegemony, that is,
to insert and realise conflict in the hegemonic project of transnational
neoliberalism. In the years from 1970 to 2000, we used to think of
the neoliberal globalisation which transnational governance made
possible as a more or less unifi ed project of domination on a planetary
scale (Held, 1995; Urbinati, 2003). However, the concept of postliberal
sovereignty is an attempt to contest this position and to trace the
internal conflicts and ambivalences of this project.

The globalisation of transnational neoliberalism can no longer be
characterised as a bloc of global power; this notion does not help us
to understand or to gain any purchase on the political constitution
of the present. Although it is the hegemonic form of geopolitics
today, the globalisation of transnational neoliberalism is not unified.
Rather it contains conflicting alliances of diverse interests which try
to dominate the process of transnational neoliberal globalisation. In
this sense, postliberal vertical aggregates attempt to appropriate the
space which was created by transnational governance and in so doing
they conflict with other vertical aggregates attempting to do the
same. The concept of postliberal sovereignty gives us the possibility
to move beyond a simplistic understanding of globalisation as a
matter of dominant neoliberal forces being opposed by the rest of
the world. Rather global domination is itself a diverse and conflicted
process. The conflict emerges through the formation of vertical
aggregates which try to seize more power with the global unfurling
of transnational neoliberalism.


'''The Making of Vertical Aggregates'''

The figure of the BMW plant in Leipzig illustrates this verticalisation
of horizontal relations and terrains. The social is not only constituted
out of horizontal layers of different actors, whether these be social
classes, interest groups, or social subjectivities. The social consists of
vertical aggregates containing and intermingling segments of social
classes, groups or subjectivities into large formations which coalesce
along an imagined commonality. These social bodies condense
economic, technoscientific, political and cultural power and control
decision-making processes. They are unlike the social structures
we have known up to this moment. There are no clearcut social
institutions, social classes or associations of civil society interacting
in the making of polity. There are no people (Volk) in the BMW plant
(Figure 9). We rather observe the emergence of legitimate players
consisting of many different bits of all these various actors and which
together constitute social bodies vertically traversing society and
its institutions.

There is nothing left over from the base–superstructure formation
of political power. There is nothing left over from the politics of
difference and subjectification. Neither ideology, nor discourse. The
politics of difference of the 1980s and 1990s intervenes in the given
conditions of representation, renegotiating and rearticulating them
under the imperative that resistance is possible. Cultural politics,
post-feminist positions, queer mainstreaming, radical democratic
approaches – all have revealed that the given systems of representation
generate the effacement of certain differences (the migrant, the
queer, the subaltern, the excluded) and they have introduced a new
subversive strategy of visibility. But these times are over. The crisis
of multiculturalism, the difficulties of aligning queer politics with
other social movements, the occupation of postfeminist positions by
neo-essentialist understandings of what women are, the obsession
of radical democratic approaches with the question of formal rights,
all these mark a phase of stagnation of subversive politics and its
absorption into the vortex of neoliberal thinking. The politics of
difference fails to grasp how actors participating in vertical aggregates
are detached from their original indexes. These actors do not refer to
themselves as members of collective interest formations (social class,
ethnicity, gender, etc.). Their self-understanding and their agency are
not derived from what they are but from their position in particular
vertical aggregates. For instance, in Chapter 8 we discuss the vertical
alignment of the transnational pharmaceutical company, Baxter, and
the Indonesian Ministry of Health. Because this alignment arose in
response to the seeming acceptance of unequal access to vaccines
for pandemic influenza on the part of those most deeply involved
in coordinating global preparedness for a pandemic, there has been
considerable sympathy for Indonesia’s move from countries of the
South. However, Indonesia does not represent the collective interests
of these countries in their alliance with Baxter; in fact the alliance
excludes them, and potentially poses a risk to the health of those
living in countries which cannot pay for vaccines.

Vertical aggregates are by no means solidified, unchangeable,
closed systems. They are rather interactional entities, neither open
nor closed. They are open to the extent that they can assimilate
the actors necessary for their functioning and the retention of their
power, and closed as much as is necessary to protect their existence.
In the previous chapter we identified the network as the functional
principle of transnational sovereignty. The figure of a network
promises unlimited potential for connectedness. But the promise of
the vertical aggregate lies more in its becoming and holding together
a series of different actors, akin to the pluripotence of stem cells
which might develop into a valued body part or into a cancerous
growth (Waldby and Mitchell, 2006). Stem cells entail the possibility
of transforming into almost any other cell, but engage in this transformation
by creating ‘colonies’ made of different kinds of cells, colonies
which close their porous boundaries, and by creating a tight division
between their becoming and all that is excluded by it (Figure 10).


The cultures of assemblages of stem cells serve as a paradigmatic
figure of how artifi cial postliberal aggregates arise to be able to respond
to the ad hoc needs of a certain situation. If the network was the
emblematic image of the political organisation around the turn of the
new millennium, cultures of stem cell lines now become the image
of political organisation as we move towards postliberalism.

Postliberal aggregates carry neither the modern fetish of wholeness,
nor the postmodern obsession with partiality. It is not so much that
the state disappears or that transnational processes and institutions
take control. We know that states play much harder now than at
many other times in history. And we also know that patriotisms,
fundamentalisms, new nationalisms play a crucial role in the makeup
of current geopolitics. The difference is that the state ceases to
act as representing itself, it splits itself, and certain parts of the state
participate in broader social aggregates. It participates by articulating
interests, wills and political views and by linking with many different,
selected segments of social classes, social groups, associations of civil
society (such as trade unions, customers organisations, pressure
groups), local business companies, transnational companies,
non-governmental organisations, international governments,
transnational organisations. These aggregates use the cultural politics
of patriotism, nationalism and fundamentalism in an arbitrary way,
not because these politics refer to a nationalist ideology, but because
they help to maintain the coherence of the aggregate. The main
objective of postliberal sovereignty is to articulate, in a positive way,
a not-yet-represented commonality of the actors participating in a
postliberal aggregate.

The emergence of vertical aggregates of this kind constitutes a
renewed form of corporativism, a form which attempts to get rid
of totalitarian ideas and of any commitment to a liberal democratic
organisation. Here we do not mean corporativism as the domination
of local or multinational companies and economic trusts in decision
making. Rather, we use it in the Gramscian sense, to denote a form
of social organisation which attempts to resolve the crisis of state
power and its inability to govern effectively by developing new modes
of regulating social institutions (Gramsci, 1991; Sternhell, Sznajder
and Asheri, 1994). Such neo-corporate social regulation cuts across
established social interests vertically aligning segments of distinct
class, interest and social groups with each other.

This mode of organisation can be illustrated by comparing how
neoliberal and postliberal modes of social regulation function.

Neoliberalism responded to the nation state’s inability to deliver on
its promises of rights and representation through the centralising
powers of the state, by introducing the need for actors to demonstrate
responsibility before they could make claims on the double-R axiom
(Bayertz, 1995). The neoliberal imperative to demonstrate responsibility
works to break the coherence of distinct social groups or
class: individuals’ attempts to claim rights are dissociated from their
belonging to segments of a particular group or class. Neoliberalism can
be understood as a doctrine of governance that opposes protectionism,
interventionism and central economic planning in the modern state,
and rehabilitates the individual as the historic subject of the modern
era, combating conservative preference for traditional collectives
or socialist humanist visions (Wallerstein, 1995). Milton Friedman
summarised it as early as 1962, saying that ‘a liberal is fundamentally
fearful of concentrated power’ (Friedman, 1962).

In contrast, postliberalism takes distance from this doctrine. In
postliberal conditions neither the centralised government of the
state nor the individualising principle of neoliberalism are seen as
effective ways to organise polity. The principal figure of postliberalism
is neither state nor individual; rather, it is new aggregates of power
which articulate and incorporate particular segments of the state
together with certain individuals or segments of social groups. Isaiah
Berlin’s (1958) two concepts of liberty are turned upside down and
fi nally neutralised in postliberal conditions with the emergence
of a new concept of political organisation which neither wants
to minimise state intervention nor to maximise individual selfdetermination.

This is the reason why we call the current condition
postliberal. It moves beyond the liberal principle of the individual
and beyond any form of political organisation which finally sees state
institutions as the guarantors of individual freedom. Hence, in the
scheme of postliberal power we have neither state supremacy and
omnipotence (as in national sovereignty) nor self-governed actors (as
in transnational sovereignty). How have we come to this? How has
postliberalism evolved out of these two forms of political order?
As the constitutionalist structure of modern national sovereignty
retreats, the practices of neoliberal governments create the conditions
for the emergence of transnational governance. In transnational
neoliberal conditions, connecting and realigning particular segments
of social groups on a horizontal plane on the basis of common global
normative principles becomes the predominant mode of governance
(Commission of the European Communities, 2001; Rosenau and
Czempiel, 1992; Castells, 1997). In transnational sovereignty,
governance signifies the erosion of the boundaries which delineate
individual self-governed actors as well as the limits of constitutionalism.
Governance is post-constitutionalist, that is, in a scene populated
by many different self-governing actors, governance is the way to
achieve a common mode of functioning. In other words, global action
and the coordination of multiple self-governed actors is not made
possible by common observation or by following some predefined
or abstract principles imposed by a central authority. (Such organisational
processes pertain to government in conditions of national
sovereignty.) Rather, in transnational sovereignty, governance involves
regulating the search for and allocation of normative principles and
this occurs in the absence of any predefined authority which holds
on to some foundational principles. These normative principles
are developed ad hoc through intensive processes of negotiation
between participating self-governing actors. It is through the process
of governance that self-governing actors are able to co-exist and
operate effectively in conditions of transnational sovereignty. Thus,
we can now sketch two modi of polity: first, national sovereignty,
which operates through the process: state – foundational principles
– government; second, transnational sovereignty, which operates
through the process: self-governing actors in relation to state and
non-state institutions – ad hoc normative principles – governance.
With the emergence of postliberal sovereignty there is no longer

either a centralised statist apparatus or a fl uid network of negotiation
and regulation. In other words, neither government nor governance.
The project of postliberal sovereignty attacks the search for ad hoc
normative principles. For example, zones of exception in which
human rights are deactivated or are only partially extended are
sanctioned or created without prior negotiation; wars (Afghanistan,
Iraq) are fought despite the fact that they are not grounded in a set
of normative principles which legitimise them (here, the second
Gulf War is an emblematic event of a postliberal vertical aggregate
of power). Such attacks serve to install hegemonic claims into
the geopolitics of governance. In fact vertical aggregates bypass
governance. They interrupt the process of governance and instead
they impose a series of actions whose sole legitimisation is the simple
fact that vertical aggregates have the power to do them. Consider,
for instance, how the ‘coalition of the willing’, refusing the UN, split
transnational space (incorporating some actors, such as Halliburton
and Blackwater) and split nations (with military forces being sent
to Iraq despite the strong opposition of the majority of people they
are supposed to represent). Not only does postliberalism interrupt
the horizontality of power by installing vertical aggregates at the
horizontal level, as we described earlier. It also renounces the liberal
foundational principles of polity and strives to install a set of eclectic
principles whose only aim is to solidify the internal coherence and
alliances of the vertical aggregate.

Of course this leads to paradoxical political configurations which,
if we were operating in conditions of national or transnational
sovereignty, would result in non-government: consider for example
the mix of economic liberalism and neo-conservatism in the
United States, or the new white supremacist politics of Howard’s
Australia, the blend of democracy and Western fundamentalism in
European societies, etc. Vertical aggregates close down the horizontal,
‘open’ social spaces occupied by self-governing actors involved
in transnational governance, and consolidate new hegemonic
modalities of power which come to colonise these spaces. Postliberalism
employs a strategic selectivity as it works on the level of
horizontal geopolitics installing dominance in the, by definition,
unstable and decentralised global space of geopolitical operations.
At the beginning of the twenty-fi rst century and after more than 30
years of neoliberal transnational sovereignty, postliberalism changes
the political constitution of the present. This shift occurs in tandem
with a second, the radical reorganisation of global social actors and
of the way they enter into and sustain global postliberal vertical
alliances. We want to show this in two examples, one from Europe
and one from the United States.


'''Postliberal Sovereignty and the Question of People in Europe'''

The 2005 debates about the European constitution refl ected some
of the main features of the crisis of constitutionalism. These
debates make apparent the need for a post-constitutional solution
to the tension between national sovereignty, on the one hand, and
transnational governance of the European space as a whole, on the
other. To a certain extent both the failure of the 2005 referenda for the
European constitution (which were supposed to establish for the fi rst
time a post-constitutional Europe) in France and in the Netherlands,
and the resulting Euro-scepticism, address an issue which has been
circulating in the dispute about the future of Europe for many years,
namely if there is a state in Europe (Balibar, 2004b). A peculiar
alliance of left and right souverainistes celebrates this failure, seeing
in it the reappearance of the European people of different nations
on the political scene. They proclaim that this reappearance answers
two questions. Firstly, it addresses the absence of representation of
European people in the constitutional initiatives, and, secondly,
it responds to the neoliberal support of this constitution. But the
invention of ‘European people’ is just another European myth. We
argue that the reason for the failure of the referenda is not the result
of the inherent weakness of post-constitutionalism to revitalise the
double-R axiom, as souverainistes assert. There are no people (Volk) in
Europe, and it is good that it is so. And there are no people because
Europe can be neither a state nor a confederation of states (Beck and
Grande, 2004; Nicolaïdis and Howse, 2001).

Modern national sovereignty is finished in Europe and transnational
sovereignty cannot yet solve the problem of a common European
vision. It is true that transnational sovereignty and governance
created the ground for a common European space. And here we
know that this transnational space is by definition a hegemonic
project (Chakrabarty, 2000; Mezzadra, 2005). But this horizontal
governmental space of European unification has not answered the
question of a unified hegemonic European bloc on a global scale
– the territory of the debate is left confused. So, even people who
supported the ‘No’ to the constitution cannot hide their peculiar
form of Eurocentric euphoria that actively calls for a new planetary
hegemonic role for Europe:

To put it bluntly, do we want to live in a world in which the only choice is
between the American civilisation and the emerging Chinese authoritarian–
capitalist one? If the answer is no then the only alternative is Europe. The
third world cannot generate a strong enough resistance to the ideology of the
American dream. In the present world constellation, it is only Europe that can
do it. (Žižek, 2005a)

The moment when postliberal sovereignty could emerge never
crystallised: without a firm strategy for a hegemonic Europe the
referenda could not convey a common global vision for Europe. Such
a strategy is needed to transform current transnational Europe into
a global postliberal project and to instigate a European attempt to
hegemonise the hegemony of the globalised transnational space.

Instead, the referenda were used by different political forces in order
to articulate their opposition to the ongoing transnationalisation
of European institutions. For example, many traditional left social
movements and organisations, such as national and European trade
unions, the Association for the Taxation of Financial Transactions to
Aid Citizens (ATTAC), and most of the left parties represented in the
European parliament, that is the Confederal Group of the European
United Left – Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL), used the internal
political contradictions in single nation states, especially in France
and the Netherlands, to oppose the ratification of the proposed EU
constitution. Fear was the dominant element circulating in the public
debates leading to the European referenda. This was mobilised by the
phantasms of an omnipotent neoliberal hegemony, of a Europe with
permeable borders, of a multiculturalism out of control.

However, there is nothing subversive about fear, it only solidifies a
transcendent relation between people and the polity by reactivating
the double-R axiom. It encapsulates people within the national
territory and confines them to its institutions of representation. Fear
excludes everything which threatens this transcendent mediation
between people and nation. That is, it excludes all these political
actors who are external to national sovereignty, but are nevertheless
crucial players in a transnational Europe. The EU constitution was
not rejected because this was either an effective means to oppose
neoliberal policies (as if European national governments are not
enforcing such policies) or a means to intervene in the freedom of
movement in Europe (as if the Schengen Agreement is not in force). It
was rejected because of the fear of new social actors entering the terrain
of local national politics: other groups and communities of Europe
(remember the Polish plumber in Aix en Provence), the new Muslim
citizens of Europe (remember the painful negotiations between the
EU and Turkey), illegal migrants (remember the Mediterranean Euro-
African space).

The target of the ‘No’ campaign was to prevent the ongoing transnationalisation
of European states. But this proved to be a weak
strategy, because blocking the ratification of the European constitution
did not question the process of transnationalisation at all. The left
social movements and organisations which participated in the ‘No’
campaign had neither the power nor the will to effectively oppose
a series of major policies which have already made transnational
governance in Europe a reality; such as the Schengen Agreement for
the creation of common migration, border and surveillance policies
across Europe, the Bologna process for the creation of the European
higher education area, the Lisbon Agenda for innovating Europe’s
economy, etc.

The politics of fear simultaneously dissects the European
transnational space into nationally regulated segments and negates
the postcolonial constitution of this one Europe. As Balibar (2004a)
notes, the denial of the postcolonial condition of Europe disrupts
any possibility for understanding the meaning of otherness and the
problem with the ongoing make-up of European citizenship today
(Balibar, 2004a, p. 46). Although the failure of the referenda did not
have any serious effect on the transnationalisation of Europe, the
‘No’ campaign celebrated this failure in the name of the European
people as a univocal synthesis which, they claimed, was absent in
the proposed constitution. But the very form of the referendum is
the moment at which political sovereignty mobilises people as a
nation; the referendum is, par excellence, the materialisation of the
idea of national coherence.

And exactly this reinstatement of a nation-centred logic in left
politics was heavily critiqued by a series of other left social projects
and movements across Europe, such as the Eurowide network against
precarity (EuroMayDay), various border activist campaigns and
migrant groups. These movements remind us that politics which
refer to European people as a Volk come to forget that it is impossible
to think people outside of nation, i.e. without deploying a notion
of a political subject bounded to national sovereignty. Euro-sceptic
political movements and traditional left organisations return us
to the terms of national sovereignty. In so doing, they undercut
the possibility for creating a common European social space which
operates beyond the institutions of the nation state and creates a
viable alternative to transnational neoliberal governance (and neither
do they offer any tools for thinking about or beyond the regime of
control which concerns us in this book – postliberal sovereignty).

Moreover, Euro-sceptics invoke a notion of European people through
the discourse of a betrayed European nation. And it is on the basis
of this betrayed univocal notion of European people that otherness
is constructed in and expelled from the current political landscape.
Consider for example the ‘moral panic’ which shook the Netherlands
after the assassination of Theo van Gogh in 2004 (Mak, 2005). The
declaration of the state of emergency and the pogrom-like raids which
followed these events questioned thoroughly and irrevocably the
established status of inclusion of migrants in Dutch society. A new
form of exclusion of otherness is underway in current European
politics. This exclusion is not primarily organised as a form of white
supremacy (although in many cases this is happening) but it is the
result of the creation of the illusionary paranoia of the univocal
category ‘European people’. The fiction of the notion of European
people, which is nothing other than the annulment of the colonial
and postcolonial past and present of Europe, manifests in confl icts
around the Eurocentric limits of integration (as the rebellion of
the banlieues during the French riots of October–November 2005
showed), and in conflicts over the freedom of movement across the
new borders of Europe (consider the September 2005 crisis in Ceuta
and Melilla, which is literally the fi rst collective attack on a European
border wall by transiting migrants from Africa).

In conclusion, the resulting picture of the situation in Europe after
the 2005 ratifi cation failure has two aspects. Firstly, the dominant
neoliberal forces did not manage to create a postliberal global project
for Europe out of the ongoing process of European transnationalisation.
And secondly, the traditional European left failed to challenge
neoliberal transnationalisation: rather, fancying the logic of national
sovereignty, they returned to a melancholic Keynesianism, or better,
‘left conservatism’ (Connery, 1999).

=Chapter Summary=


"What is the contemporary configuration of control? 

Section I addresses this question. Historically, sovereignty has transformed
itself in response to the continual emergence of new modes of
evading control. We start by considering how national sovereignty
(Chapter 1) culminated in the attempt to bind the ‘people as One’
to the nation state with promises of rights and representation, i.e.
the promise of the double-R axiom, as we call it. The impossibility
of such an all-inclusive nation state (plainly evident today) started
to become clearer in the 1960s and 1970s, when excluded social
groups contested the inclusiveness of so-called ‘universal’ modes of
political representation. During this same period there was a shift
from national towards transnational modes of control. Together these
changes triggered a crisis at the heart of national sovereignty. In
response, transnational governance (Chapter 2) emerged as a distinct
form of sovereignty.

Transnational governance is marked by its attempt to create a global
horizontal space of control; others call this project globalisation, neoimperialism,
or empire. Of course this is no level playing fi eld and the
creation of a global unified, horizontal geo-space is, in itself, a means
of domination. Nevertheless, there is something different in this mode
of domination: the winners and losers of globalisation cannot be
conceived as nation states. Nor is it the case that nation states in their
entirety participate in the processes of globalisation. Rather, particular
segments of different nation states, certain institutions, social groups,
local or transnational companies and cultural and technoscientific
bodies align together in the attempt to dominate global transnational
space. 

In Chapter 3 we discuss the formation and function of these
postliberal aggregates. Postliberal aggregates represent a distinct form of
sovereignty which arises as a contemporary response to the limits of
the double-R axiom in national and transnational governance. Their
raison d’être is to build powerful, vertical composites lying beyond
the liberal axiomatic of the double-R principle. The rest of the book
investigates where we can locate sites for intervention and subversion
in these postliberal conditions.

Power functions by rendering individuals the actors of subjectification and/or by rendering populations the objects of biopolitical
control. This is a common explanation of the productivity of power;
however in Section II we argue that this understanding of power does
not help us to grasp or intervene in some fundamentally important
aspects of power. From this vantage point, social transformation
always appears as the effect of people’s response to their regulation.

Instead we argue that people are often moving, creating, connecting,
escaping the immediate moments and given conditions of their lives,
and that it is only after the imposition of control that some of these
actions come to be seen as responses to regulation. Escape comes
first! People’s efforts to escape can force the reorganisation of control
itself; regimes of control must respond to the new situations created
by escape.

We cannot understand escape as a decontextualised, overarching
form of social transformation; it is always historically and culturally
situated. In fact there is never escape as such, there are multiple ways
of escaping: escape routes. In Chapter 4, ‘Vagabonds’, we consider
how people’s mobility in the late Middle Ages forced the transformation
of feudal power and the adoption of a new, early capitalist,
system of control. Capture, in this instance, saw the vagabonds’
mobility translated into the subjectivity of the wage worker.

Chapter 5, ‘Outside Representation’, traces the contours of escape
across different struggles in the post-Second World War period (e.g.
feminist and workers struggles). In each case, escape is a betrayal
of existing forms of representation, forms of representation that
regulate everyday life through the co-option and domesticisation of
people’s struggles. With Jacques Rancière, we understand representational
politics as policing. Possibilities for breaking this closure lie
in what we call imperceptible politics (Chapter 6). 

Politics (as opposed
to policing) arises when those who remain unrepresented and whose
capacities remain imperceptible emerge within the normalising
organisation of the social realm. Imperceptible politics does not refer
to something which is invisible, but to social forces which are outside
of existing regulation and outside policing. Imperceptible politics is
first and foremost a question of deploying a new perceptual strategy;
the senses are honed less to refl ection and more to diffraction –
perception now involves tracing disturbance and intrusion instead
of mirroring existing conditions. Here we can say that the process
and ‘method’ of researching this book has involved cultivating this
same perceptual strategy. Together, we have subjected our material to
this perceptual experimentation: fi lms, autobiographies, interviews,
our own experiences of political activism, ethnographic accounts,
historiography, legislation, maps and existing attempts to make
sense of and/or fi nd ways out of the terrain in which we tread. An
attunement to diffraction underpins the interpretations and analyses
of existing and possible routes of escape in the following pages. And
it is the diffractive quality of imperceptible politics that allows us
to see political struggles which strive to evacuate the terrain of a
given regime of control. These struggles are overlooked when viewed
through a lens attuned to practices of and claims for representation.

Rather than giving an exhaustive account of imperceptible politics, in
Part II of the book we investigate a contemporary itinerary of escape
through three important fi elds in which we can fi nd departures from
the given regime of control – the fields of life, mobility and labour.

Our discussion of escape in the field of life begins with considering
transformations in the regime of life control, the life/culture system
(Chapter 7). 

The early twentieth century saw the first pervasive
attempt to employ the concept of life as a powerful tool for initiating
social and political change. At this time, ideas about the uncontrollability
of life were celebrated for both their cultural and their
political potence. Formed around a masculinist and violent ideology,
the life/culture system of control was finally appropriated by the
fascist project. After the Second World War, life’s uncontrollability
figured as a threat to be suppressed, in part, with the patriarchal
welfare state’s promises of democratic tranquillity. But statist control
was resisted with increasing intensity (e.g. the events of 1968, the
proliferation of different sexualities, new biomedical discourses
of the body). The erosion of a sense of security brings a renewed
interest in life, and risk and its pervasive government are called forth.
As risk goes transnational, a new network of life control comes to
the fore. 

The formation of emergent life (Chapter 8) envisages life as
inherently amenable to recombinant formation on a genetic or
cyber-carnal/robotic level. This vision of life’s potential has been
celebrated because it breaks with traditional dichotomies which have
framed understandings of life, such as nature/culture or sex/gender.

Despite this break, the formation of emergent life is central to the
ascendance of postliberal sovereignty. The regime’s alignment with
postliberal power occurs as its vision is mobilised and embedded not
only in high-tech laboratories but in the everyday, when it becomes
ordinary.

Possibilities for subverting this regime of life control lie in
mobilising new modes of experience. The formation of emergent
life is interrupted, diffracted, undone on the immediate level of the
everyday. 

In Chapter 9, ‘Everyday Excess and Continuous Experience’,
we examine how attempts to work with ‘the politics of experience’
can be easily reinserted into the control and regulation of the private
sphere. However, in this chapter we develop an alternative account
of experience. The escape from postliberal attempts to canalise and
order life occurs in the continuous refusal to reflect on or represent
oneself as a set of congealed, solidified experiences produced through
political projects, in entering into a process of unbecoming in order
to repoliticise, not oneself, but the present. As experience unfolds
on the level of the everyday it creates processes of escape, what
we call continuous experience, which escape the policing practices
of subjectivity. 

With A. N. Whitehead, we argue that this form
of experience does not belong to a person, it is dispersed in the
multifarious connections between people, animals, things and
occasions. Continuous experience is the ultimate ingredient of any
escape route. In this sense, escape in not a human privilege or a
human capacity; rather it is the matter of social transformation and
social transformation is a process which is shared by people, animals
and things.

The regime of mobility control – the second field of our
contemporary itinerary of escape – plays a key role in the political
constitution of postliberal conditions. 

Chapter 10, ‘Liminal Porocratic
Institutions’, explores the formation of the contemporary regime of
migration control through the lens of migration policies in Europe.
The different institutions partaking in the regulation of European
migration are all evolving, merging and disseminating throughout
transnational European space. These institutions contribute to the
development of specific postliberal aggregates in European space,
liminal porocratic institutions. Their liminality stems from the fact
that they are in constant transition, continually adjusting to the
European Union’s rapidly changing borders. Liminal porocratic
institutions are beyond open democratic control. Their main
function is to regulate mobility fl ows and to govern the porosity of
borders (hence porocratic). Now, instead of controlling populations
or individuals at geographic borders the focus is on creating various
levees far beyond, on, and inside the borders in order to manage
migratory flows.

In Chapter 11, ‘Excessive Movements in Aegean Transit’, we trace
the main techniques of postliberal migration control at work in one
of the most permeable and heavily policed lines of border crossing
in Europe, the Aegean sea. We consider how migration evades its
regulation, creates new conditions for mobility and movement and
challenges the liminal porocratic institutions’ regime of mobility
control. For instance, when we examine how migrants incorporate
camps into their overall tactics of movement, we can see that the
disciplinary and biopolitical functions of the camps only evolve by
following the escaping and moving masses. 

In Chapter 12 we draw
on a theoretical approach, the autonomy of migration, to jettison
the ubiquitous notions of the migrant as either a useful worker or
as a victim. Instead of conceiving of migrational movements as
derivatives of social, cultural and economic structures, the autonomyof-
migration lens reveals migration to be a constituent creative force
which fuels social, cultural and economic transformations. Migration
can be understood as a force which evades the policing practices of
subjectivity.



Finally, in turning to the third field in our itinerary of escape
routes, the regime of labour control, we explore the conditions for
value creation in contemporary, embodied capitalism. Drawing on
our analysis of the formation of emergent life in Section III, we argue
that the production of value in postliberal capitalism is based on the
recombination of matter: humans, animals, artefacts and things.
The recombination of matter includes also the recombination of
the worker’s body (Chapter 13, ‘Precarious Life and Labour’). The
postliberal regime of labour control does not try to dominate by
training the body; it tries to fracture it, to reorder its material,
affective, social potentials in unexpected ways, to harness the body’s
own capacities for creative recombination. Notably, as workers’ bodies
are recombined, only some parts of a worker’s body, capacities and
potentials are dissected and exploited. This form of exploitation
is precarity.

Sociological accounts of precarity point to its connection with the
post-Fordist rise of insecure labour conditions, or they cast precarity
as another instance of broader transformations in labour (such as
the feminisation of work, de-industrialisation, immaterial labour).

But these kinds of sociological descriptions tend to misrecognise
precarity as the emergence of a unified category of workers (i.e. as
an actor like ‘the working class’, for example). They gloss over the
very different ways in which precarity is lived. Neither do they grasp
how people’s embodied experiences of precarity expand far beyond
the immediate conditions of labour and colonise one’s whole life
time-space. How, then, can we recognise and understand the politics
of precarious workers if invoking a new unifi ed category of workers
does not suffi ce? What routes does escape take here? 

Chapter 14, ‘Normalising the Excess of Precarity’, considers the limited relevance
of three forms of political organisation which have proved effective
in the history of labour and social movements: the political party, the
trade union and micropolitics. None of these forms of organisation
impels the confl icts of precarity to the point of destabilising embodied
capitalism. Traditional party and trade union politics is both anchored
in and seeks to augment normalising rationalities and practices of
employment. It fails to address the inequalities emerging with the
new regime of labour control (e.g. it does not extend to representing
illegalised workers). Social movements which operate on the newer
terrain of micropolitics seem to be equally ineffective at addressing
precarity. Micropolitics contests prevalent representational practices
by claiming new forms of extended belonging or citizenship. Micropolitical
calls for the inclusion of social actors have been important
responses to the embodied experience of precarity. Nevertheless, they
reterritorialise precarious workers’ subjectivities in the matrix of a
new postliberal statism.

However, the embodied experience of precarity can and does escape
reterritorialisation. Embodied capitalism necessitates the creation of
sociability (think of the sociability required to find the next contract
or to deflect questions about one’s work visa). Sociability produces
value that cannot be completely commodified and appropriated by
embodied capitalism. Much of this sociability generated in precarious
conditions is inappropriate to the current regime of labour regulation
and cannot be represented within it. 

Inappropriate/d sociability, as we
call it in Chapter 15, is the excess generated by workers’ experience
of precarity; it simultaneously operates within the heart of embodied
capitalism and it exists in a vacuum of control. This is the movement
of escape; inappropriate/d sociability is the means through which
precarious workers do imperceptible politics."




=Review=

Excerpt from Stephan Scheel:

"The central question of Escape Routes sounds quite simple: ‘How does social transformation begin?’ But the answer that the book provides is provocative and contests many dominant explanations of social change: according to the authors it is not the brimming revolutionary events occupying the imagination of the left that capture the mechanics of social transformation but the seemingly ‘insignificant occurrences of people’s daily actions’. It is in the everyday practices and imperceptible moments which make up people’s ‘escape’ from a given social order that we can find the beginnings of social transformation. While sovereign power relies on what the authors call the ‘double-R axiom’ to control and stabilize a given social order by granting rights and offering forms of representation to particular social groups, people do not always confront or resist a given regime of control but evacuate and escape existing modes of rights and forms of representation and thereby force a given social order to transform itself:’Sovereignty manifests in response to escape…Control is a cultural-political device which comes afterwards to tame and eventually to appropriate people’s escape. Social struggle comes first’(p. 43).

Based on this thesis the authors describe the ongoing transformations of sovereign power from the perspective of people’s escape (Part I, pp. 1-82). While national sovereignty relied on the first ‘R’ of the ‘double-R axiom’ and tried to include subverting subjects, groups and interests in the Fordist welfare state by gradually expanding the distribution of cultural, social and political rights, this logic was challenged by the emergence of new social actors in the fields of migration, gender and queer politics, antiracist movements, worker’s autonomy which couldn’t be conceived within the existing framework of citizenship and therefore forced sovereign power to move beyond national boundaries. According to the authors’ main thesis cited above, the emergence of transnational neoliberal sovereignty is not primarily the outcome of the determining laws inherent to capital accumulation or the result of a successful attempt of some elites to expand their power on a global level, but comprises a ‘response to the necessity to tame the reappearance of imperceptible and escaping subjectivities in the post-Second World War period’ (p. 18).

The central hypothesis of the book is provocative because the theoretical conception of ‘imperceptible politics’ involves a harsh criticism of mainstream social sciences and left ideologies alike. As the authors write, ‘imperceptible politics is first and foremost a question of deploying a new perceptual strategy, [that] involves tracing disturbance and intrusion instead of mirroring existing conditions’ (p. XV). The authors reject positivist approaches of the social sciences as a form of maintenance of existing regimes of control. While these regimes of control work by employing the process of representation, escape relies on the ‘knot of fictionality and literality to construct and materialise new forms of experience’ that evade existing forms of representation. Control regimes react to these attempts of escape by interrupting the connection between fictionality and literality through representation: while the former is delegitimized as ‘impossible, quixotic or impracticable’ control tries to render the later productive by making it representable in current polity. In this sense positivist accounts of the given social order are one of the main instruments for ‘policing the border between the fictional and the real’.

Moreover the authors try to break with the two most influential schools of thought in the discourses of the contemporary left: the different varieties of Hegelian neo- and post-Marxism and Foucault’s conception of power. Because ‘imperceptible politics’ operate in the present, the authors break with ‘the faith in the event to come’, that is usually cultivated by the adepts of Marxism. According to them it is neither the future ‘revolution’ nor the state-centred ‘melancholic Keyenesianism’ of many contemporary left groups that is going to liberate people from control, suppression and exploitation. While the calming belief in the liberating event to come only served to justify the silencing of deviants and the enforcement of party discipline in the present the melancholic call for the paternalistic welfare state only resembles a variety of ‘left conservatism’ that reifies the nation-state. It is neither the belief in a redeeming future event nor the melancholic longing for the past but the potency of the present situation that initiates social change. This leads the authors to paraphrase the slogan of alter-globalisation movements of 90’s by claiming: ‘Another world is here’.

By asserting that escape precedes the formation of control Papadopoulos, Stephenson and Tsianos break with the circular relationship of power and resistance in Foucault’s conception of power. While Foucault thinks resistance as a constitutive element of a power relation and thereby assumes an omnipotent control regime that encompasses the whole of society, which is only refined by acts of resistance, the authors of Escape Routes draw on Nicos Poloulantzas state theory to ascribe a relative autonomy to social struggles. Because Foucault’s concept of power only allows to think resistance as an effect of and complicit to control the authors replace resistance with the notion of subversion to designate a desire that betrays given orders of control. These theoretical innovations make it possible to think resistance not only in negative terms – that is as a force directed against regulation – but as a positive force that strives to move beyond a given control regime by evacuating its terrain. Consequently, the authors say ‘adieu Foucault!’ without melancholy.

These provocative theoretical innovations are likely to trigger defensive reactions. Moreover the authors develop terminology which oppose the common understanding of the vocabulary. For example ‘escape’ is usually conceived as a weak and sometimes forced reaction to severe circumstances like war or political prosecution but not as a creative and initial force that is capable of triggering social change. The concept of ‘imperceptible politics’ which is composed by the non-intentional everyday practices of the people is even more suspicious to a reader who is used to regard social movements, trade unions and other forms of identifiable political organisations as the decisive initiators of social and political change. Doesn’t this neologism just romanticize people’s daily struggles for survival as radical acts of subversion? Aren’t the authors just inventing something which is not there at all when they demand from us to ‘deploy a new perceptual strategy’ in order to perceive these ‘imperceptible moments’ that supposedly lead to social transformation? Aren’t the authors just inviting us to participate in a passivity that results in the apolitical affirmation of the given when they call for the overcoming of established forms of political organisation? And isn’t the call to leave behind ‘the left’s fixation with events’ just another variety of reformism in new clothes that tries to diminish the belief in the possibility of radical change? Such objections are countered in the second part of the book (pp. 85-300) by examining the role of imperceptible politics and escape in three distinct ’social-material fields’: the material field that is constituted through attempts to remake the composition of life processes (pp. 85-161), the global field that is traversed by migrants’ mobility (pp. 162-221) and the reorganisation of the structure of production and employment relations through precarious labour (pp. 222-300)."
(http://www.darkmatter101.org/site/2010/04/21/escape-routes-control-and-subversion-in-the-21st-century/)

=More Infromation=

* reading notes: http://www.facebook.com/notes/stevphen-shukaitis/below-the-perceptible-the-political/180420892002144






[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Books]]