
'''* Article: Contemplating the More-than-Human Commons. by ZACK WALSH. The Arrow Volume 5, Issue 1 | March 2018'''

URL =  https://arrow-journal.org/dharma-degrowth-and-climate-change/ [https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf]


=Description=

Zack Walsh:

"THE STERN REVIEW on The Economics of Climate Change
claims that reducing emissions by more than 1 percent annually
would generate a severe economic crisis, and yet, climate analysts tell
us we need to reduce carbon emissions by 5.3 percent annually to limit
global warming to 2°C. Moreover, there is no evidence that decoupling
economic growth from environmental pressures is possible, and
although politicians tout technical solutions to climate crisis, efficiency
gains from technology usually increase the absolute amount of energy
consumed. The stark reality is that capitalist accumulation cannot
continue—the global economy must shrink.

Fortunately, there exist many experiments with non-capitalist
modes of assessing and exchanging value, sharing goods and services,
and making decisions that can help us transition to a more sustainable
political economy based on principles of degrowth. One of the
best ways to generate non-capitalist subjects, objects, and spaces comes
from systems designed to manage common pool resources like the atmosphere,
ocean, and forests. Commons-based systems depend upon
self-governance and reciprocity. People rely on and take responsibility
for each other, finding mutually beneficial ways to fulfill their needs.
This also allows communities to define the guidelines and incentives
for guiding their own economic behavior, affording people more autonomy
and greater opportunity for protecting and cultivating shared
values. Commons-based systems cut across the private/public, market/
state dichotomy and present alternative economic arrangements defined
by communities."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)

=Excerpt=

==The [[More-than-Human Commons]]==

Zack Walsh:

"In other words, there are
no commons without commoners to enact them. From an enactive
perspective, commons are not objects, but actions generated by many
different actors in relationship. Whereas the prior notions assume that
individuals need to be regulated and punished to prevent overconsumption
(an assumption known as the tragedy of the commons), an
enactive perspective on commons conceives the individual in relation
to everyone (and everything) involved in co-managing the more-thanhuman
commons. It therefore diverges from the prior two notions in assuming
a relational epistemology rather than being premised on a liberal
epistemology based on the individual. From a Buddhist perspective,
one could say that the commons emerges co-dependently with a field 
of objects, forces, and passions entangling the human and nonhuman,
living and non-living, organic and machinic.

The more-than-human commons thus does not dualistically separate
the material and immaterial commons, the commons (as object)
from the commoners (as subjects), nor does it separate humans from
nonhumans. Instead, the commons are always understood as a morethan-human
achievement, neither wholly produced by nature or culture.

Commoning becomes, as Bayo Akomolafe points out, a material-discursive
doing shaped by practices and values that engage humans
with their environments. In Patterns of Commoning, David Bollier and
Silke Helfrich argue that all commons exceed conceptual distinctions,
because they are not things; rather, they are another way of being,
thinking about, and shaping the world. Commoning is about sharing
the responsibility for stewardship with the intent to construct a fair,
free, and sustainable world—a goal that is all the more important given
the unequal distribution of risks posed by intensifying climate change."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)


==Creating interspecies commons-based subjectivities==

Zack Walsh:

"Commoning not only creates sustainable systems—it also has the
potential to birth entire new lifeways and worldviews premised on relationality
and reciprocity. It generates worlds where we commune with
each other and with the environment, as if every object is also a subject—a
being worthy of our respect. To avoid civilizational collapse,
Bhikkhu Bodhi says, we need to accept a relational worldview that
affirms subjectivity across all life forms and indeed the cosmos itself, so
that we view everything as a subject with its own experience and intrinsic
value. To move beyond the notion of the commons as an object,
either of nature (material) or culture (immaterial), one must critically
examine present-day definitions of nature and culture—what we may
alternatively call nature-cultures—and reassess the human-nature relationship
in light of its history and our contemporary predicament."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)


==[[Hyper-Objects]] are distributed, non-local assemblages of human and nonhuman objects==

Zack Walsh:

"In contrast to the separation and management of nature by humans,
an alternative relational understanding of nature-cultures has
emerged from discourses on the Anthropocene. Enlightenment views
of Man and Nature are clearly breaking down and new lenses have
appeared that view the Earth as a product of civilizational history, as
much as natural history, and that view humanity as inhabited by other
species and technologies. Posthumanists like Donna Haraway and
Rosi Braidotti as well as new materialists and process thinkers like
Jane Bennett, Karen Barad, and Bruno Latour have become particularly
interested in understanding the co-production of nature-cultures.

For instance, Timothy Morton uses “mesh” as an apt metaphor for
the entanglement of human and nonhuman objects, whether at the
micro-level of gut bacteria or the macro-level of climate change.11 The
defining environmental objects of our time, he argues, are hyper-objects
which are distributed, non-local assemblages of human and nonhuman
objects."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)


==Relational worldviews and ontologies are increasingly relevant for our understanding of humanity’s role in the Anthropocene; towards an [[Ethics of Intrasubjectivity]]==

Zack Walsh:

"It is not surprising then that relational worldviews and ontologies
like those found in Buddhism are increasingly relevant for our understanding
of humanity’s role in the Anthropocene. The complexity of
life in the Anthropocene not only questions the relationship between
humans and nature; it also demands the development of an ethics that
respects the dignity and agency of nonhuman actors, both living and
nonliving. Extending commoning beyond peer-to-peer economics, so
that we extend care to every being, becomes possible if it is enacted
by commoners who follow an ethics of what I call intra-subjectivity.
An ethics of intra-subjectivity demands understanding that nature is
not an element separated from us, but co-produced in our daily interactions."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)

=More information=

From the same author, i.e. [[Zack Walsh]]:

* For further information and publications, please connect: 

#https://cst.academia.edu/ZackWalsh, 
#https://www.facebook.com/walsh.zack, and 
#https://www.snclab.ca/category/blog/contemplative-ecologies/.

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]