
=Discussion=

Sander Tideman:

" This field, first postulated by Francesco Varela (1992), gained popularity through the research conducted by medical researcher Jon Kabat-Zinn (1990) whose program
called Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) turned out to diminish
the suffering experienced by people with chronic pain, and neuroscientist
Richard Davidson, who has shown that contemplative practices
such as meditation and other forms of mind-training, can be observed in 
measurable change patterns in the brain (Davidson & Begley, 2012).

Since then, multiple research studies have shown that this process of contemplation
results in positive effects on one’s mental and physical health
and well-being. Most interesting is the fact that, when these practices are
complemented with other educational methods, they become more than
tools for people’s sense of well-being: they help people to expand their
awareness of one self and one’s environment—in other words, they
expand our frames of reference. MIT researcher Otto Scharmer (2013)
describes this shift as a transition from ego-system consciousness to ecosystem
consciousness.

Continued research in this field shows that contemplation is not merely
an internally oriented process: it is both embodied and interpersonal, which
means that it is shared in and through relationships and with the world
(Siegel, 2016). The process of contemplation, over time, is set to evoke the
discovery of one’s natural interconnectedness with the world around oneself.
Such recognition will inevitably lead to a shift in the perception of
one’s role in the world, ultimately to the point of recognizing one’s interdependence
with the world around oneself, which typically results in an
adjusted sense of purpose. At that point, one can no longer see oneself as a
disconnected isolated homo economicus, but rather as a full co-creative
member of the human family and the sacred natural world.

While this mind-state has been recognized as a possibility for individuals,
the question is if it can be applied to the field of economic policy. For
example, when people become overly greedy/fearful when confronted by
the ups and downs of markets, can policies be envisioned that help people
to make more balanced choices by not giving in to the ‘primal’ fightflight-freeze
response? Can governments design economic policies that
discourage mindless consumption, and instead empower consumers to
make sustainable purchasing choices? Currently, many policies achieve
the opposite: they reinforce a vicious cycle of desire and fear, with countless
negative impacts on nature and society.

Thus, the crucial question is as follows: Can the groundbreaking
insights of the emerging contemplative science be translated to the level
of policy making? Can we learn to develop policies that help people to
transform negative mental states into constructive and compassionate
action, replacing negative economic incentives into more positive ones 
xvi Foreword: Toward Contemplative Social Science
that stimulate sustainable economic behavior of individuals and institutions?
These are excellent questions to ask in this new field of science,
which we can call contemplative social science.

In conclusion, while there are many initiatives add
ressing the crisis in capitalism directed at changing political-economic systems from the ‘outside’—such as ecological footprint reduction, the circular economy, green
product innovation, sustainable investing, new governance and accounting
systems—this book makes the argument that equally important is
changing the ‘inside’ realm of the mind-sets and worldviews underlying
the outer economic systems. Contemplative science has ascertained that
these mind-sets can be developed through education and mind training
(they are available to us because they are integral to our human nature).

This argument is not just theoretical: it may be the most important work
that we need to do in order to sustain human life on this planet.

Contemplative social science can now take this further by exploring how to
develop the mind-sets, beliefs, assumptions and mental models that can
help us create sustainable economic systems that are in line with actual
human nature and respect planetary boundaries."
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Co-Designing_Economies_in_Transition)

==Source==

From the Foreword: Toward Contemplative Social Science in the book: [[Co-Designing Economies in Transition]]: '''Radical Approaches in Dialogue with Contemplative Social Sciences'''.Ed. by Giorgino, Vincenzo Mario Bruno, Walsh, Zachary David. Palgrave/Macmillan, 2018
[https://www.palgrave.com/de/book/9783319665917]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]