
=Discussion=

From Wouter Tebbens of the Free Knowledge Institute, focusing on the people involved:

"Regarding Barcelona. We have fromed a strategic working group called
"[[BarCola]]" - Barcelona Collaborative Economy, where we have a few dozens
of representives from the commons actors and the collaborative economy.

From FKI to Ouishare to people from FabLabs to Wikipedia to open design
and social/ecological proponents of collaborative tourism. Last year we
produced together the Commons Collaborative Ecomomy conference with some
400 participants. During the event David Gomez and Mònica Garriga
encouraged people to collaborative document on the Teixidora.net
platform. They then fed the outtcomes back to Procomuns.net and you can
find it nicely documented at there.

Barcola: http://procomuns.net/en/about-2/barcola/ 

Mayo Fuster together with several city council key people (from
Barcelona En Comú) take the lead in BarCola. Alvaro Porro is a key
person here, he leads the Other Economies Department (newly created
after BCN en Comú won the elections) and strategically impulses various
new initiatives.

In parallel, in the first semester of 2016, I was hired by the First
Deputy Mayor,Gerardo Pisarello, to conduct a strategic study of the
"smart city", with a strong focus on the commons, to orient policies in
that direction. In fact in the study I cited some of your work, of both
of you (ref is made to Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Niaros). 

See here an executive summary plus: http://freeknowledge.eu/article/smart-city-barcelona-commons-report

Out of this whole process came our proposal to run a commons start up
support programme for the Commons Collaborative Economy. With FKI we
ideated that, Barcelona Activa (the city's local dev agency) took it
under her wings and coproduced it together with Olivier Schulbaum from
Platoniq/Goteo and under executive leadership by David Gomez (who joined
FKI). One thing we did was invite the commons ecosystem as much as we
could to contribute, as mentors for projects and otherwise. A very very
interesting experience. 

See: http://freeknowledge.eu/article/la-comunificadora-story-continues

All proposals (some 130 or so I believe) from Procomuns.net were
channeled into the citizen deliberation and decision platform
Decidim.Barcelona. Enric Senabre did a lot of work there. He joined Mayo
in her research group Dimmons at the UOC (Open Uni Catalunya)

Decidim.Barcelona platform is now led by Xabier Baradiaran (you'll
remember him from the FLOK Society project in Ecuador).

Mònica Garriga and David Gómez joined the FKI team in Barcelona; while
Mònica is also doing the communication strategy at the Decidim team.

My Commons Smart City report was also used to inform newly contracted
Digital Innovation Commissioner Francesca Bria (you'll know her from
NESTA and "digital social innovation") to understand the local ecosystem.

She also participates in BarCola and in a newly created working group on
Technological Sovereighnty, concept which she has defined as the title
of her political mission. This group was proposed by Marco Berlinguer
(Mayo's partner) and Joan Subirats, founder of he IGOP, the policy
research unit at the Autonomous university of BCN, Joan is also
co-founder of Barcelona en Comú.

The Social and Solidarity Commision at the City also invests a lot
of resources in supporting the SSE, for example with studies, support to
events and the reform of old factories in the city for SSE
expermientation. Interesting in this context are the XES.cat - the
network of SSE in Catalunya - and the Ciutat Invisible cooperative and
their incubation programme Coopolis. Ivan Miró is a key person here, as
well as Hernan Cordoba (for Coopolis)."
(email, April 2017)

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Spain]]