'''= "focuses on alleviating internal poverty, the poverty of heart, mind and soul".''' 

URL = https://www.contentment.org/


=Description=

Ivo Valkenburg, citing Daniel Cordaro:

“Fortunately, many organizations are focused on alleviating external poverty, a lack of essential necessities such as food, water, shelter, education and security. We differ from these organizations in that the Contentment Foundation focuses on alleviating internal poverty, the poverty of heart, mind and soul. We help children and adults to cultivate an indestructible power inwardly that is not influenced by anything in the outside world. We envision a world where people realize that they are complete and perfect as they are,” according to Cordaro.

“We focus primarily on providing evidence-based, whole-school wellbeing transformations that support the entire educational ecosystem from the inside out,” says an enthusiastic Cordaro. He sees childhood education, adult development, and scientific research as the basis for the transfer of knowledge in the field of human wellbeing.”

“We have developed an extensive online library with the very latest and most advanced practical accessible scientific knowledge. The library is provided with a curriculum around 48 themes concerning the physical, mental and emotional well-being of people. All aspects of wellbeing are discussed and a wide range of practical exercises in skills teaches how the knowledge can be integrated into the daily practice of life.”
“We also help schools, organizations and governments with measuring well-being. We work together with researchers from some of the best universities in the world to continuously study the impact of our work. In addition, we publish our own research and popular articles about the universal philosophies that unite all cultures.”
(https://medium.com/new-financial-magazine/well-being-as-a-benchmark-for-a-human-society-8e9e50a380c6)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Education]]