

=Contextual Citation=

"Performance	instead	is	assessed	relative	to	what	an	organization’s	impacts	on	Vital	Capitals		 must	be	in	order	to	be	sustainable	–	socially,	economically	environmentally	–	with	the	units	of	 measurement	being	determined	by	each	capital."	
(http://www.multicapitalscorecard.com/MultiCapital_Scorecard_Intro.pdf)
	

=Description=

'''1. Mark W. McElroy:'''

"A compelling approach to corporate sustainability
management that:

∗ Assesses performance relative to organization-specific
norms or standards of performance

∗ Defines such standards relative to thresholds in the carrying
capacities of vital capitals

∗ Measures and reports performance in terms of an
organization’s impacts on capitals, but only in cases for
which there are corresponding duties or obligations owed
to stakeholders 


A hallmark of CBS is its specification of organizationspecific
standards of performance

∗ Takes thresholds in the carrying capacities of vital capitals
organizations have (or should have) impact on (e.g.,
natural, social and economic ones), and then …

∗ Defines or allocates fair, just and proportionate shares of
the responsibility to produce and/or maintain them to
individual organizations – be they shared or exclusive"

(http://www.sustainableorganizations.org/Essence_of_CBS.pdf)


'''2. Bill Baue:'''

"CBS is focused on measuring, managing and reporting sustainability performance at the organizational level — primarily, corporations. And CBS is rooted in capital theory, or the idea of multiple areas of capital stocks (natural, human, social, constructed and financial) that yield flows that ideally are harnessed for human well-being and managed to sustainably preserve their so-called carrying capacity. Of course, many (if not most) of these capital stocks are based in the commons as resources shared jointly by diverse individuals and entities.

My sense is that the commons movement could benefit from deeper engagement with the corporate community, including activists who advocate for corporations to take full accountability for their impacts on capitals that are vital to stakeholder well-being. And I know that the sustainability context movement would benefit from expanding its advocacy base beyond the core of the corporate accountability community.

Right now is an opportune moment to mobilize, as there are currently three major new standards being established in the corporate community, and all of them are adhering to capital theory, which arguably compels them to take account of impacts on the commons — or on capital resources that are shared amongst stakeholders. 


These three are:

* [[International Integrated Reporting Council]] (IIRC)

* [[Sustainability Accounting Standards Board]] (SASB)

* [[Global Initiative for Sustainability Ratings]] (GISR)"

(http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/new_metrics/capitals-commons-dialogue-david-bollier-part-one)

=Discussion=

'''1. David Bollier:''' 

"I don't think the commons would mesh very well with Context-Based Sustainability, at least so far as I understand it. It sounds as if it is trying to quantify or monetize everything into capital stocks so that it can be put on the same discursive plane. But the commons is precisely about breaking up such "universal grid" approaches to understanding the world, including nature, and eschewing standard economic calculuses. Commoners generally insist upon the inherent diversity and localism of resources, people and social systems, and therefore resist quantitative, top-down, purely scientific approaches to nature (a term that itself connotes that nature is objective and separate from humanity).

From the perspective of my work and that of my colleagues, the commons are not simply resources or capital stocks that are shared; they are distinct social communities with their own self-organized governance rules, management practices and cultures that matter, especially in counterpoint to markets and the state. A commons is not the resource alone, in other words. So treating "the commons" as a capital stock would be seen by commoners as a category error and a misunderstanding of what the commons is truly about.

Finally, I am a bit skeptical about the willingness of the corporate community to voluntarily assent to standards that would truly empower commoners to manage resources in the ways they see fit. There would be too many power shifts and "inefficiencies" for most public corporations to accept. For all I know, there may be some constructive middle ground or points of mutual engagement between Context-Based Sustainability and commoners as I know them, but I am skeptical. You can get a better feel for the commons movement and their views from the website of a recent conference that I co-organized in Berlin, the Economics and the Commons Conference."
(http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/new_metrics/capitals-commons-dialogue-david-bollier-part-one)


'''2. Martin Thomas:'''

""Ever	since	the	term	Triple	Bottom	Line	(TBL)	was	first	introduced	by	John	Elkington	in	1997,	managers	in	organizations	have been	looking	for	ways	to	do	it	–	that	is,	to	operationalize	the	measurement	and	reporting	of	organizational	performance	in	all of	its	dimensions:	social,	economic	and	environmental.

Many	attempts	have	been	made	to	implement	the	TBL,	including	the	Global	Reporting	Initiative	(GRI),	the	world’s	leading sustainability	reporting	standard.	Most	such	efforts	have	fallen	short,	however,	largely	because	of	their	failure	to	adequately address	Sustainability	Context.	GRI	itself	suffers	from	this	shortcoming.	Indeed,	Sustainability	Context	is	indispensable	for measurement	and	management,	too,	not	just	reporting.	It	requires	that	social,	economic	and	ecological	thresholds	in	the world	be	taken	explicitly	into	account	when	attempting	to	assess	the	performance	of	organizations.	Integrated	reporting,	that is,	must	be	context-	and	thresholds-based.

The	sustainability	of	water	use,	for	example,	cannot	be	ascertained	without	first	determining	how	much	water	is	available	in	a particular	place	and	how	much	of	it	should	be	assigned	to	a	specific	user.	A	rate	of	use	can	then	be	compared	to	a sustainable	rate	of	supply.	Sustainability	thresholds	can	similarly	be	defined	for	other	areas	of	impact,	including	social	and economic	ones.	Performance,	in	turn,	can	then	be	assessed	in	consistent	integrated	terms.	The	MCS	makes	this	possible." (http://www.multicapitalscorecard.com/MultiCapital_Scorecard_Intro.pdf)

3. '''Mark McElroy'''

David Bollier couldn't be more wrong about the nature of Context-Based Sustainability (CBS), especially his view that CBS tries "to quantify or monetize everything into capital stocks so that it can be put on the same discursive plane."  As a general rule, monetization is anathema to us.  The only thing we monetize in CBS is financial or economic capital itself.  Everything else is quantified in its own native terms using its own native units of measurement.  And to that extent, yes, we do quantify things, but not only in terms of stocks but also flows.  We see noting wrong with that and make no apologies for it.  Capital resources in the world are limited and we ignore them (the limits) at our peril.  Our quantifications are conservative, admittedly imperfect and fallible, but at least we try to live within our means and ensure the means to live rather than pretend that resources are unlimited or in some way not quantifiable at all.

=More information=

* Book: [https://www.routledge.com/Corporate-Sustainability-Management-The-Art-and-Science-of-Managing-Non-Financial/McElroy-van-Engelen/p/book/9781844079117 Corporate Sustainability Management]
* Book: [[Six Capitals]]
* Book: [https://www.chelseagreen.com/product/the-multicapital-scorecard/ The MultiCapital Scorecard]





[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]