'''= A conference and summit to restore the true p2p nature of the internet, social media, and all that it enables in culture and society, initiated by [[Douglas Rushkoff]] '''

URL = (dead link) http://contactcon.com/

==Introduction==
{{RightTOC}}
* Excerpted from [[Motivation for the Contact Summit]], by Douglas Rushkoff:

"Contact will seek to explore and realize the greater promise of social media to promote new forms of culture, commerce, collective action, and creativity. I'm inviting technologists, artists, activists, businesspeople, funders, and other stakeholders in the networked future, to come together to hatch new ideas, connect with new collaborators, and forge an ongoing community for innovating social media and beyond.

From the development of a new non-hierarchical Internet to the implementation of alternative e-currencies, the prototyping of open source democracy to experiments in collective cultural expression, Contact will seek to initiate mechanisms that realize the true promise of the networking revolution.

The first summit, to be held October 20, 2011 as a MeetupEverywhere and centered at the historic Angel Orensanz Center in New York City, will be a participatory festival for ideas and action, consisting primarily of meetings convened by attendees. Featured participants will deliver brief "provocations" on stage, sharing the greatest challenges they are facing in their particular fields. But their primary contribution to the day will be to join in the meetings convened by other participants, sharing their experience, insight, and even connections to help bring these ideas into reality."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-evolution-will-be-socialized)

"At the epicenter of CONTACT will be the Bazaar - a free-form marketplace of ideas, demos, haggling, and ad-hoc connections. If you have visited the Akihabara, Tokyo’s ultra-vibrant open-air electronics market, or the under-the-highway open-air jade market of Kowloon, or even the Burning Man festival, you understand the power of combining commerce, physical location, and serendipity. A decidedly unstructured counterpart to the convened meetings, solo provocations, and the MeetUpEverywheres, the Bazaar will bring p2p to life, encouraging introductions, brokering, deal-making, food-tasting, and propositions of every kind. It is where the social, business, political, and spiritual agendas merge into one big human agenda."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-evolution-will-be-socialized)

==Participants==

Organizational pages:

#[[ContactCon List of Participants]]

==Projects==

See: [[List of ContactCon Related Projects]]

==Discussions==

[[Potential Discussion Topics at Contact]]

Contact forums here: 

* the Contact Summit Group webpage at http://groups.google.com/group/contactsummit 

to participate in threaded discussions about p2p currency, open government, networked culture, and more. This is the place to begin working on ideas and projects that you might want to develop at Contact, to educate yourself about these ideas, or to suggest anything for the conference itself.

* The Next Net at http://groups.google.com/group/building-a-distributed-decentralized-internet 

dedicated to discussions about actually building the next net - a distributed, decentralized version of the Internet, as described in Douglas Rushkoff's piece, "The Next Net" on Shareable.net. This conversation is more technical in nature.

==Global Network==

Message from Contact:
From now until the Contact Summit in NYC on October 20, we'll be networking with communities, projects, and initiatives focused around the development of non-hierarchical distributed p2p Internet infrastructure, alternative e-currencies, open source democracy, social enterprise, and tools of empowerment and collective action.

Organize [[Global Contact Meetups]] in your area, and keep us posted on your project's developments, challenges, and needs through the [https://groups.google.com/group/contact-global?hl=en Contact Global Meetups Google Group]. 

We'll be aggregating links to everyone's work on the [[Global Contact Meetups]] section of this wiki, which will be hosted on the P2P Foundation site. In the meantime, let us know who and what we should be connecting to by emailing us at info@contactcon.com

If you're unable to join us in person for Contact this October, we hope you'll create a Meetup that day in your own area so that this becomes a truly global event.

*San Francisco: http://www.meetup.com/Contact/San-Francisco-CA/86976/

==More Information about related topics==

*[[Building an Economic Ecosystem for New Business Models and Ideas]]
*[[Introduction to Citizen Intelligence Sources and Methods]]
*[[Concept for Crowd-Sourcing: a Strategic Analytic Model]]
*[[Concept for Participatory Policy-Budget Outreach]]
*[[Internet Work-Around for Egypt and Others]]


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:NextNet]]