'''= involves building up the structure of the building in horizontal layers by squeezing out quick drying cement from a nozzle.''' 

URL = http://www.contourcrafting.org/  [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contour_Crafting Wikipedia]

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Contour Crafting (CC) is a layered fabrication technology developed by Dr. Behrokh Khoshnevis of the University of Southern California. Contour Crafting technology has great potential for automating the construction of whole structures as well as sub-components. Using this process, a single house or a colony of houses, each with possibly a different design, may be automatically constructed in a single run, embedded in each house all the conduits for electrical, plumbing and air-conditioning."
(http://craft.usc.edu/CC/modem.html)


'''2.'''

"Computer controlled flexible manufacturing methods can even be applied to constructing buildings. [[Contour Crafting]] is a technique that has been developed by Behrokh Khoshnevis of the University of Southern California that involves building up the structure of the building in horizontal layers by squeezing out quick drying cement from a nozzle. By the time first layer has been drawn out, the first part to be laid will have solidified enough to take the second layer. This is much like the 'fused deposition modelling' printing method but on a huge scale.

Walls of building constructed using these methods do not have to be straight, on either the horizontal or vertical axes, so complex organic curved and domed buildings can be made, perhaps mimicking biological structures.

Houses can be designed completely on computer, then the automated constructor gets to work with no human labour involved. Pipework and cabling could even be laid inside walls as they are being built."
(http://www.adciv.org/Virtual_designs_into_physical_objects)


=More Information=

#[[Freeform Construction]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]