
* Book: The Contractionary Revolution. Frank Rotering.

URL = http://needsandlimits.org/PDFs/Contractionary_Revolution_1st_Edition.pdf


=Description=

Frank Rotering, from the preface:

"Humankind's economic activities over the last few centuries have driven 
the biosphere into overshoot, resulting in a looming cataclysm for life on 
earth. To reverse this overshoot condition our species must rapidly reduce 
its population, lower the consumption of the rich, and increase its 
ecological efficiencies. However, this solution cannot be implemented by 
growth-dependent capitalist economies, including China’s state-directed 
version. The unavoidable implication is that the system must now be 
historically superseded. Because this conclusion seriously threatens the 
powerful, it has been placed beyond the boundary of permissible thought 
and discourse. Severe penalties, both personal and professional, await 
those who stray into the forbidden territory. As a consequence, current 
discussions about the crisis are largely meaningless, and efforts to resolve 
it are futile. If the world's ecosystems are to be salvaged, this taboo must 
be shattered. In this book I attempt to do so, and then draw my 
conclusions about the way forward."


=Contents=

"The book is organized as follows: 
 
Chapter 1 (Overshoot) clarifies the nature of the ecological crisis by 
distinguishing between resource overshoot, which is typified by peak oil, 
and impact overshoot, which is best represented by climate change. 
Impact overshoot is identified as the clear priority, and the urgency of 
reversing it – particularly its climate change component – is emphasized. 
The chapter places the crisis in historical context and discusses the roles 
played by human nature and capitalism. 
 
Chapter 2 (Economy) presents an economic plan for resolving the 
overshoot crisis: the rapid contraction of the world’s rich economies 
through a process called organic change. As a central aspect of this 
process, a distinction is made between capitalism's economic logic, which 
determines the system's outcomes, and its institutions, which help 
implement this logic. Whereas the logic is transparently ecocidal and must 
be quickly replaced, the institutional features should be selectively 
retained. The core feature of this approach is a new economic rationality 
called the Economics of Needs and Limits (ENL). This is my proposed 
replacement for capitalism's discarded logic in guiding contractionary 
economies. The chapter also takes a critical look at the innocent-looking 
word "we", which causes immense confusion in environmental thought 
and discussions. 
 
Chapter 3 (Power) examines the political obstacles to implementing 
the economic plan. It proposes a model that describes how the capitalist 
class exercises social control and thus maintains its power. Particular 
emphasis is placed on the "democratic illusion" - the pervasive but false 
perception that power is held by government and the populace it 
represents rather than by the capitalist class. The chapter’s aim is to 
provide potential leaders with the conceptual tools required for an 
autonomous understanding of capitalist power, thereby permitting the 
formation of an effective revolutionary movement. 
 
Chapter 4 (Revolution) presents the theoretical basis for overcoming 
the political obstacles identified in chapter three. It defines a 
contractionary revolution, identifies the latter’s potential agents, and 
proposes a strategic approach to shift popular support to the 
contractionary cause. It also reviews the lessons to be learned from the 
Russian Revolution, and outlines a post-revolutionary scenario for a 
specific country (Canada) so that the reader can envisage what 
contractionists might do once in power."

=Excerpt=

Frank Rotering, from the preface:

"My intended audience consists of independent thinkers who are 
deeply troubled by the ecological crisis. Some, like me, have avoided 
institutional attachments to remain intellectually unencumbered. Others 
now chafe under institutional constraints, but could break the golden 
chains if a coherent plan for overshoot reversal appears. Still others are 
hiding in the interstices of capitalist societies, wondering if the fatally 
constricted thought that now ensnares the environmentally concerned will 
ever be transcended. The common thread among these independents is 
that their commitment to humankind and the natural world is stronger 
than their ties to the prevailing order. 

The book's central message is that the world's rich economies must be 
fundamentally transformed, that such transformations will be fiercely 
resisted by those in power, and therefore that reversing overshoot is a 
revolutionary task. I have come to this conclusion reluctantly given the 
social disruption it entails, but it follows inexorably from the reality of our 
global situation. Anything less, even the most far-reaching policies and 
reforms by the world’s governments, will leave the ecocidal logic of 
capitalism in place and ensure the biosphere's catastrophic degradation. 
I should immediately state that the revolutions I propose are distinct 
from the socialist revolutions of the past. The goal is not to redirect the 
purported benefits of increased production from capitalists to workers, but 
to transform expansionary economies into contractionary economies. This 
objective should appeal not just to progressives, but to conservatives as 
well: business cannot be conducted on a dead planet, and contractionism 
does not reject private enterprise in principle. A related point is that the 
historical supersession of capitalism does not imply that all components of 
the system will be consigned to the dustbin of history. Some features of 
capitalism are extremely useful, and others have a firm basis in human 
nature. I therefore propose a revolutionary process that is based as much 
as possible on historical continuity and social evolution, but that attempts 
to meet the time constraints imposed by our ecological predicament. 

My specific purpose in writing this book is to present the conceptual 
basis for the global contractionary movement. My fervent hope is that 
talented leaders will soon emerge to initiate this movement and to 
spearhead the required revolutions, thus giving concerned humankind a 
chance to salvage what remains of the biosphere.

Chapter 5 (Criticism) outlines the differences between the 
contractionary movement and its main alternatives: green reformism, 
ecosocialism, and radical environmentalism. Green reformism refers to the 
numerous initiatives that seek to reduce the economy's ecological impact 
through policies and reforms, thereby leaving capitalist logic in place. 
These approaches, which are widely preferred because they do not 
threaten the powerful, are serious impediments to the required economic 
transformations. Ecosocialism is the environmentally aware version of 
socialism, and radical environmentalism is the adoption of direct action to 
protect the environment. Both are rejected because of their inadequate 
strategies for resolving the ecological crisis. 
 
Chapter 6 (Summary) is a recapitulation of the book's message. It is 
intended to stand on its own as a condensed explanation of 
contractionism's response to overshoot. 
 
Because the book introduces a number of new terms and redefines 
several existing ones, a glossary is included as an appendix. 
 
This book has a companion, The Economics of Needs and Limits, which 
describes ENL in detail. It is intended for those who have a technical 
orientation or a background in economic thought."


=More Information=

* http://needsandlimits.org/


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]