
'''* Article: From Socialism to Open Cooperativism: Convergences and Divergences in the Work of Castoriadis, Olin Wright and Bauwens & Kostakis. By Dr. Papadimitropoulos Evangelos. Global Journal of HUMAN-SOCIAL SCIENCE: Volume 18 Issue 4 Version 1.0 Year 2018'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/37534400/From_Socialism_to_Open_Cooperativism_Convergences_and_Divergences_in_the_Work_of_Castoriadis_Olin_Wright_and_Bauwens_and_Kostakis?




=Abstract=

"This article attempts at integrating core socialist elements, analyzed through the prism
of Castoriadis’s and Wright’s work, into a model of open cooperativism between Commonsbased peer production, ethical market entities and a partner state, introduced by Bauwens and Kostakis. It concludes with a critical appraisal of Bauwens and Kostakis’s model." 

=Description=

"I build on Castoriadis’s and Wright’s work by
introducing Bauwens and Kostakis’s model of open
cooperativism, which, I argue, integrates some core
socialist elements penetrating both Castoriadis’s and
Wright’s work. I make the case that, in comparison with
Castoriadis’s project and Wright’s socialist
transformation strategy, Bauwens and Kostakis’s model
of open cooperative ism carries the advantage of
sketching out some more concrete pathways towards a
post-capitalist society built on the premises of
information and communication technologies. The
Internet and free/open source software/hardware can
mutatis mutandis sustain glocal mutual coordination of
Commons-based peer production that has the potential
to force capitalism to adjust to a Commons transition in
the long run. However, Bauwens and Kostakis’s model
does not come without deficiencies. They seem at times
to stick to a technocratic and economistic vision of selfinstitutionalization. To address this limitation, it is crucial
to give a more vibrant political spin to their technical and
bio-economic rationality with the aim to reverse the
current tide of individualism towards a voluntary
cooperative political ecology. It is essential to reinvent
the political to face the big challenges lying at the
intersection of technology, economy, and society"
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Convergences_and_Divergences_in_the_Work_of_Castoriadis,_Olin_Wright_and_Bauwens_and_Kostakis)



[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]