

=Directory=

Compiled by Nathan Schneider [http://open.therowboat.com/commons/doku.php/enterprise]:

* Alexandria Union Cab Cooperative [http://alexunioncab.com/]

* [[California App-Based Drivers Association]] [http://www.cadateamsters.org/]

* Flywheel, an app for traditional taxi companies [http://www.flywheel.com/]

* [[La'Zooz]]

* RideWith: Teig, Amir. “Google's Waze to launch worldwide carpooling pilot in Israel.” Haaretz. July 6, 2015. [http://www.haaretz.com/business/1.664577]

* Transunion Car Service - app-based in Newark, NJ [http://www.ridetcs.com/]: 



=Articles=


* Ackerman, Seth. “How to Socialize Uber.” Jacobin. April 7, 2015. [https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/04/uber-exploitation-worker-cooperative-socialize/]

* Cassano, Jay. “Taxis Unite: Denver Taxi Drivers Are Forming Their Own Cooperatives.” FastCoExist. February 4, 2015. [http://www.fastcoexist.com/3041808/taxis-unite-denver-taxi-drivers-are-forming-their-own-cooperatives]

* DePillis, Lydia. “Can taxi unions build an app to take on Uber?.” The Washington Post. January 19, 2015.

* Hansen, Mary. “What If Uber Were a Unionized, Worker-Owned Co-Op? These Denver Cabbies Are Making It Happen.” YES! Magazine. April 10, 2015. [http://www.yesmagazine.org/new-economy/uber-unionized-worker-owned-co-op-denver-cabbies]

* Harris, Kyle. “Cabby-owned Taxi Cooperatives on the Rise.” Shareable. January 5, 2015. [http://www.shareable.net/blog/cabby-owned-taxi-cooperatives-on-the-rise]

* “Montgomery County Council Approves Bills to Improve Taxi Service, Compete With Companies Like Uber.” NBC Washington. July 21, 2015. [http://www.nbcwashington.com/news/local/Montgomery-County-Council-Approves-Bills-to-Improve-Taxi-Service-Compete-With-Companies-Like-Uber-317946951.html]

* Shu, Catherine. “Korea’s Daum Kakao Prepares To Launch Kakao Taxi As Uber Faces Legal Woes.” TechCrunch. January 13, 2015. [http://techcrunch.com/2015/01/13/kakao-taxi/]

** Delli Santi, Angela. “From Organizing to Mobilizing: United Transportation Alliance Launches App-Based Taxi Service.” AFL-CIO Now. March 25, 2015.

** Nix, Naomi. “Union-backed taxi service starts in Newark, amid regulatory debate about Uber.” NJ.com. March 20, 2015.




[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Transportation]]