If Forward Foundation creates a method for distribution, then we could
partner with Michel, and P2P foundation, as well as potentially others
interested, in the co-governance of the project as it lives in
multiple places, but is archived in a uniform/open archive method.

Forward Foundation would be glad to take the ownership and
responsibility. Both Paul and myself helped work on the site code, the
summaries, and the blogging/community/etc and we're both very
intimately familiar with the content within. We are also both familiar
with many of the people in the community that emerged around CoCo. FF
is working now on contributing more to the pool of research for CoCo
as part of regular Forward Found activities.

Further growth will likely depend on multiple people, rather than just
one person. I think that OK, P2P foundation, and FF could all easily
partner and collaborate on co-governance of the project, on helping to
grow and promote, and on growing it in distributed ways.

I propose a networked partnership between our groups, assuming all are
interested, in carrying out the co-governance, promoting, growing, and
creating a way to distribute the content.

So, this means that it could live on P2P wiki, OK wiki, and FF, plus a
revised version of the site itself, which now aggregates from those 3
wikis, when a category is placed on a new summary, or when it is
changed to type "Publish CoCo" in OK and FF, and all could be synced
with an archive which itself is output in a standard archiving format.
Co-governance could be handled by way of timed consensus polling of
partner groups (we could establish a simple constitution first) <--
Howard could be involved in as much or little of this as he wishes.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Consensus_polling

Furthermore, both P2P foundation in europe, and FF in US could seek
funding or donation for the ongoing maint. of CoCo and it's archives,
and the added value from distributing it and making it available in
multiple formats.