
'''* Report: Co-operation in the Age of Google. By Robin Murray. Co-operatives UK, 2010'''

URL = http://www.uk.coop/ageofgoogle [http://www.uk.coop/sites/storage/public/downloads/co-operation_in_the_age_of_google_for_consultation_1.pdf pdf]

See also our entry: [[Cooperatives in the Age of Google]]


=Description=

"What is the way forward for the co-operative sector? Commissioned by Co-operatives UK, Robin Murray – a co-operative innovator and key thinker behind Fairtrade, Twin Trading and much more besides – has produced a radical vision of the how the co-operative sector can expand in the 21st Century. 


=Discussion=

Robin Murray in discussion with Jeremy Gilbert and Andrew Goffey:

'''"* Jeremy Can you say something more about the arguments in your 2010 paper ‘Cooperation in the age of Google’?'''

'''Robin:''' I was asked to offer some perspectives for the co-operative movement
in the coming decade. The co-operative economy in this country had been
inspired by the 1844 Rochdale Pioneers, and the working-class co-operative
network that grew from it, to become by the 1880s one of the largest set of
enterprises in the world. Many of the co-ops from the early period had had
difficulty in keeping pace with scale-based Fordism, but over the past twenty
years there has been a new wave of co-ops that have some of the features
of the Italian industrial districts like the one in Poggibonsi. The question I
looked at was what the future holds for the new and older strands of the UK’s
co-operative economy.

My starting point was the potential for more lateral and democratic forms
of production and circulation as the result of the internet and growing civil
socialization. The potential for co-operation is startling. If anyone says to
me, ‘co-ops are over’, the response has to be ‘What about Linux?’. Open
source is a contemporary form of cooperation. With open source projects
you don’t need to set up a coop, because there’s nothing bought or sold. But
if you think that the majority of software in the world is now dependent on
open source, co-operation has now reached a scale that William Morris could
scarcely have dreamt of.

How does this translate into the material world of food and energy or
expanding services like education, or health and social care? All these have
the potential to develop as distributed post-post Fordist systems. Already 
Germany’s remarkable growth in renewable energy has been driven by local
energy co-operatives (as was Denmark’s wind industry). Similar patterns have
emerged in social care (in Italy over 14,000 social co-ops involving families, care
workers and volunteers have been established in the last twenty-five years). In
Japan, food co-ops, based on box schemes, now involve 12 million households,
organised around local cells of 6-12 households. These food co-ops have now
diversified into health, social care and a myriad of worker co-ops.
In all these systems, and in similar ones in the wider social economy,
platforms, grids and common services are crucial to the effectiveness
and economy of the constituent parts. What marks them out is that the
infrastructure and support services are directly controlled by the productive
‘cells’ they are there to service. So the first recommendation of my study
was to move away from the pyramidal structures that marked many of the
larger twentieth-century co-ops, and towards developing such platforms and
common services for distributed co-operative systems.

 
Secondly, if co-ops are driven by wider social and environmental goals,
what holds everyone together and ensures that democratic structures remain
inclusive and constructive? This has been a problem for the co-op movement.
As co-ops grow in size, you can see a common tendency: after initial
enthusiasm and expansion, pyramids based on knowledge often develop,
with power moving to technicians and managers. In Fordist co-operatives,
the managers tend to be sucked in to the methods and ideologies of their
corporate competition. The economies of system clash with the economies
of cooperation. How to marry the two?

The distributed systems of German energy or Japanese food are one
answer. Another is ideological. The Mondragon network of 220 worker coops
(with 85,0000 workers) has a Lego-like structure, with the individual
co-ops encouraged to remain small and specialise, and spin off operations
as they grow. But their distinguishing feature is their emphasis on education,
or ‘formacion’ as they put it. Launched in 1956 from a training course,
Mondragon now has a university serving its members, whose purpose is both
technical and ideological, so that the values of co-operation are embodied
in all its parts. Its founder, the priest Jose Arizmendierreta, when asked why
they place such importance on education in an economic project, replied
‘No, no - this is an educational project with an economic component’.

Another post-post Fordist feature of the co-operative landscape is the
appearance of co-operative platforms as a way of marrying autonomy and scale.
The One-Click platform allows you to set up a co-op or other social venture
in ten minutes, and then enables members to come in and out of discussions
normally reserved for a Board according to each person’s time and interest.

What is fascinating about how it works in practice is that there’s rarely a nonconsensus
decision. If there are differences those involved are encouraged to
sort it out offline and return online to take formal decisions. Charles Armstrong,
who developed One Click, describes it as ‘emergent democracy’.

One way of looking at these developments is to focus on how knowledge
and information are generated and shared. One of my arguments in ‘Cooperation
in the Age of Google’ was that co-ops with social and environmental
goals have an incentive to share their knowledge with other social organisations
with similar goals. We can think of it as a potential co-operative commons
of information. This is one element of the economics of co-operation, and
it gives co-ops, like others in the social economy, a decisive advantage over
private corporations,

I suggested a number of ways in which the movement as a whole could
establish systems for the collection and sharing of their information and
knowledge, as one part of a wider strategy for the British co-operative
movement to embrace the emerging features of post-post Fordist production
- distributed systems, platforms, formation, and open information.

I also raised the issue of developing a cooperative currency. As Amazon
and Google have both recognised, currency is a great tool for socialisation.
As with ‘open source’ collaboration and its socialisation of information and
knowledge, so a co-operative currency is a way of directly connecting (that is
‘socialising’), the different parts of a co-operative system."
(https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/sites/default/files/nf8485_11murray_gilbert_goffey.pdf)


=More Information=

* More details at: [[Cooperatives in the Age of Google]]; and: [[Reviews of Co-operation in the Age of Google]]

* Video: [[Robin Murray on the Future of Co-operation]]


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Articles]]