
=Description=

Ektimo:

"A co-opoly is a co-operative monopoly. It is created to join enterprises (companies) and people together in a purpose and values (not profit) driven cooperative model that reduces waste (enabling ephemeralization) from a meta-perspective and proves that competition is not supporting people or the planet and that "sharing is having more”. Ephemeralization is a term coined by Buckminster Fuller to define the evolutionary process of increasingly doing more and more with less and less. A big part of the ephemeralization is created by removing competition and the win/lose dynamic in the market place and replacing it with a cooperative win/win dynamic. The idea of a co-opoly is to transition the current fear based extrinsically profit motivated organizations to a love based intrinsically purpose motivated organizations. A co-opoly is like a living organism that can synergistically operate with other co-opolies in a co-operative and symbiotic ecosystem. Synergy cannot work in a competitive environment." 

=Discussion=

Matthew Heskin :

“Competition does not support sharing. Competition suggests that there is scarcity and supports a scarcity mindset.

History has already proven that the “pie” is not a fixed size. Our “know how” changes the size of the pie even in the face of rapid population growth.
We like to look at the world as one big house. We have a deal of chores that need to be done. If this was your home would you get all your kids to compete with each other or would you get them all to work together? Would you want them to share the best way of getting things done with their siblings or would you like them to keep their “know how” to themselves?

Buckminster Fuller identified and showed us that the world is going through a process called ephemeralization. This is the process of “doing more and more, with less and less”. He also created the counter intuitive statement “sharing is having more”.

If you agree that ephemeralization is happening then sharing of our “know how” will create “more” as it rapidly supports the doing more with less.
It is a common misconception that competition creates innovation. Thinking and doing creates innovation, not competition. The question is does competition create optimal thinking and doing? Competition is an extrinsic motivator. People will only do so much for extrinsic reasons; they will do anything and everything for intrinsic reasons.

If there were a sliding scale between competition and cooperation we would see that humanity is very close (maybe 95%) to the cooperation end of the scale. If you think of all that is required for you to have your breakfast, you will see that 99.999% of the work is performed by others (Your toaster, breakfast cereal, electricity, light bulbs etc.) If you were to try and make your $50 Kmart toaster from scratch, without cooperation, it would be your life’s work and I doubt it would be up to scratch.

Pushing that slider that last 5% is going to have a bigger impact on humanity and the planet than the previous 95%. Why is this? This is because the previous 95% occurred somewhat unconsciously and the last 5% is going to require conscious action. A holistic view of the world and the issues we face will be required by the global citizenry. Removal of sovereign fences, country divisions, transformation of educational theory and economics are all part of this final 5%. It is also going to require not only an acceptance of cultural and religious difference but a deep sense of gratitude for all diversity (both human and non-human).

It seems to us that competition is no longer the healthy option for our abundant world. When Buckminster Fuller showed us that “sharing is having more” he saw the earth as a whole with no boundaries and no divisions......... “
(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/sharing-having-morewhy-compete-matthew-heskin)


==The theory behind co-opoly==

“To join enterprises (companies) and people together in a values (not profit) driven cooperative model that reduces waste (enabling ephemeralization) from a meta perspective and proves that competition is not supporting people or the planet and that "sharing is having more". The theory behind the co-opoly is that there is a specific theory behind creating an optimal business model. This theory is an integration of Deming’s, Fuller’s, Thurber’s and Heskin’s thinking. If there is a specific optimal theory that is across ALL business then sharing this theory will make any business’s results improve and become more predictable. The theory creates the operating context for all businesses in the model. A comprehensive understanding of systems, statistical variation, pokayok (mistake proofing) and in particular intrinsic motivation of the team will support in creating optimal processes that remove operational variation. The total business network grows every time a new entity and team is added. Network science shows that any business will increase their client base as long as they are adding value by utilising an optimal theory because they are exposed to an ever-increasing network. This is not true for low value offerings. Low value offerings can damage the network and will eventually decrease their client base. We will be focussed on our ongoing dynamic value (DyVal), our processes and our network with the aim of creating appreciative clients with minimal variation utilising Deming’s plan, do, study, act (PDSA) cycle. “

[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]