
==Directory==

Compiled by [[Kevin Flanagan]], 2018:

* Davie Phillips, Cloughjordan Ecovillage, has being doing great work these past few years promoting commons and cooperative alternatives. His email is davie@cultivate.ie

* Rebekah McCabe who works at http://www.placeni.org/ rebekahmccabe@gmail.com

* Peter Doran in Queens has been an active promoter of the Commons approaches  p.f.doran@qub.ac.uk

* Brendan Murtagh from Queens also gave an excellent presentation in Maynooth on the potential for solidarity economics in Belfast. b.murtagh@qub.ac.uk

* Anthony McCann has also written extensively on the Commons info@anthonymccann.com
https://independent.academia.edu/AnthonyMcCann

* Martina Finn here in Galway has been organising events on Cooperative and Commons alternatives for a number of years. martinafinn@gmail.com

* Orla Donovan in UCC has organised two three important gatherings the 'Thinkery' that brought people like Gustavo Esteva, Silvia Federici, George Caffentzis and last years thinkery on the water commons. 
http://www.feasta.org/2017/06/27/water-commons-thinkery-report/
O.odonovan@ucc.ie

* The Thinkery was co-organised with Mark Garavan of Feasta (mark.garavan@gmit.ie) and Patrick Bresnihan bresnip@tcd.ie. I consider Patrick one of the best scholars and writers on the subject of the commons in the country.

* Rachel O Dwyer is also an expert on digital commons currently with a strong focus on blockchain technology. rachel.odwyer@gmail.com

* Colm Massey from the Solidarity Economics Association UK. https://www.solidarityeconomy.coop/aboutus/our-directors
Colm is from Dublin but based in Cambridge.
colm@solidarityeconomy.coop

* Sam Toland is based in Dublin and is an advocate of platform cooperatives and a member of social.coop a cooperative social network and alternative to twitter. I'm also a member. I think he is from Belfast.
https://twitter.com/samtoland
sam@resonate.is
He is on the board of this cooperative streaming service https://resonate.is/

* Aine Treanor and Jacinta Fay two activists and community development workers here in Galway who are working on plans to start a coop.
aine.treanor@gmail.com jacintafay@gmail.com

* Gabriella Avram is based in University of Limerick and  is doing research on platform coops she was also involved in the fab lab there.
gabriela.avram@gmail.com


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Ireland]]

[[Category:Northern Ireland]]