
'''* Article: Breakdown of the capacity for collective agency: The leitmotif of our times. By Korkut Alp Ertürk. real-world economics review. Issue no. 62, 15 December 2012'''

URL = http://rwer.wordpress.com/2012/12/14/rwer-issue-62/

=Abstract=

"The essay argues that a crisis of collective agency is at the root of the global 
economic crisis we face today. The secret of prosperity during the so-called golden 
age, was the ability of the state to uniformly impose welfare enhancing restrictions on 
the market that made it possible to invest in common pool resources. As this ability 
has waned during the neoliberal era so did the ability to keep in check the externalities 
created by forces of competition, generating long term collective costs that have 
become increasingly harder to address. This is reminiscent of classical capitalism’s 
main weakness with respect to organizing collective action to correct for the negative 
externalities market competition creates. Marx’s view of competition as a war like 
process that militates against mutually beneficial coordination (not to mention 
cooperation) among individual capitalists especially resonates today. '''Because 
coordination failure is endemic in the absence of effective collective agency, what is 
profitable at the micro level ends up being at variance with human welfare as well as 
the long term collective interest of capitalists. The result is that the two different ways 
for accounting for economic performance, one, based on profits and the other on 
human welfare, become increasingly divergent'''." 


[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]