
URL = http://corkfoodpolicycouncil.com/


=Description=

"The Cork Food Policy Council has been formed to work towards the achievement of a fairer, healthier, more secure and sustainable food system within the City and throughout the region. We pride ourselves that Cork is the food capital of Ireland. 

However:

* Increasing numbers of families across Cork are finding it difficult to put good nourishing food on the table.

* Eating cheaply might explain why our waistlines are expanding – and is likely to result in health problems later.

* We are importing more and more of our food leaving us exposed to rising prices.

* We are increasingly disconnected from producers in the region."


=Discussion=

George Hook:

"A Food Policy Council to be set up in Cork will be a first for Ireland. As part of the new Cork Healthy City initiative, the Council will work to promote and prioritise sustainable food production and consumption in the city and recommend food policy development.

It will be made up of an organised group of community members, business people, farmers, advocates, and other stakeholders in the food system, and will follow the lead of councils already established in Bristol and Toronto.

Healthy Cities co-ordinator Denise Cahill stated that with the “growing effect of global warming” and “potential for future food shortages”, a Food Policy Council is one of a number of measures that cities can take to become sustainable. “The development of the Council could also have great benefits on the health of the citizens of our city, the development of sustainable food supplies for Cork and economic investment in the long term,” she said."
(http://thecorknews.ie/articles/city-establish-first-food-council-11172)



[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Ireland]]

[[Category:Policy]]