
'''* Article: Spooky Business: Corporate Espionage Against Nonprofit Organizations. By Gary Ruskin
Essential Information, 2013.'''

URL = http://www.corporatepolicy.org/spookybusiness.pdf

report on corporate espionage/surveillance of nonprofit advocacy groups


=Executive Summary=

"This report is an effort to document something we know little about: corporate espionage
against nonprofit organizations. The entire subject is veiled in secrecy. In recent years,
there have been
few serious journalistic efforts –
and no serious government efforts
to come to terms with the reality of corporate spying against nonprofits.

Much of what we
do know about this subject has been uncovered by accident. So the
picture we have is fragmen
tary at best: just a few snapshots, taken
mostly at random,
arising from brilliant strokes of luck, giving a mere inkling of the full range of espionage
activity against nonprofits.

There are, however, a few things we can say for certain.
The corporate capacity for espionage has skyrocketed in recent years. Most major
companies now have a chief corporate security officer
tasked with assessing and mitigating “threats” of all sorts
– including from nonprofit organizations. And there is now a surfeit of
private investigations firms willing and able to conduct
sophisticated spying operations against nonprofits.

The use of former intelligence, military and law enforcement officers for corporate
espionage appears to be commonplace. Especially prevalent is the use of former Central
Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency and Secret Service agents, as well as current
or former police officers, and other former military, intelligence and law enforcement
officials. These current and former government employees, and current government
contractors, do their spying
against nonprofits with little regulation or oversight, and
apparently with near impunity.

Many of the world’s largest corporations and their trade associations
including the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce, Walmart,
Monsanto, Bank of America, Dow Chemical, Kraft,
Coca Cola, Chevron, Burger King, McDonald’s, Shell, BP, BAE, Sasol, Brown & Williamson and
E.ON have been linked to espionage or planned espionage against nonprofit
organizations, activists and whistleblowers.

Many different types of nonprofits have been targeted with espionage, including
environmental, antiwar, public interest, consumer, food safety, pesticide reform, nursing
home reform, gun control, social justice, animal rights and arms control groups.
Corporations have been linked to a wide variety of espionage tactics. The most prevalent
tactic appears to be infiltration by
posing a volunteer
or journalist, to obtain information
from a nonprofit. But corporations have been linked
to many other human, physical and
electronic espionage tactics against nonprofits. Man
y of these tactics are
either highly unethical or illegal.

Corporations engage in espionage against nonprofits with near impunity. Typically, they
suffer nothing more
than minor adverse media coverage if their espionage is exposed. The
lack of accountability may encourage other corporations to conduct espionage.
Corporate espionage against nonprofit organizations presents a threat to democracy and to
individual privacy. Democracy cannot function without an effective civil society. But civil
society and its nonprofit organizations depend crucially on their ability to keep some ideas,
information, and conversations private.

Individual citizens and groups do not los
e their right to privacy merely because they
disagree with the activities or ideas of a corporation. The right to privacy dovetails with
our First Amendment rights to speech, public debate, and full participation in the
“marketplace of ideas.” It is especially unjust that corporations sabotage Americans’
fundamental rights through actions that are unethical or illegal.
Many things can be done to protect nonprofits from corporate espionage. Congress should
investigate and hold hearings on corporate espion
age against nonprofits. Congress and
state legislatures should enact legislation
to criminalize the theft of confidential,
noneconomic information
held by their critics.

Law enforcement – especially the U.S.
Department of Justice –
should prioritize investigating
and prosecuting corporate espionage."


=Discussion=

David Bollier:

"“The corporate capacity for espionage has skyrocketed in recent years,” writes Ruskin.  “Most major companies now have a chief corporate security officer tasked with assessing and mitigating ‘threats’ of all sorts – including from nonprofit organizations.  And there is now a surfeit of private investigations firms willing and able to conduct sophisticated spying operations against nonprofits.”  Many of these “security” personnel are former intelligence, military and law enforcement officers who once worked for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), National Security Agency (NSA), US military, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Secret Service and local police departments. 

None of this should be entirely surprising.  The early labor movement in the US was often illegally attacked and infiltrated by Pinkerton thugs.  In 1965, General Motors notoriously hired private detectives to investigate Ralph Nader’s private life and try to dig up incriminating information about him.  Nader, then a 31-year-old unknown, had just published a book, Unsafe at Any Speed, which exposed the designed-in dangers of automobiles.  The revelation of GM’s tactics and its awareness of its cars’ defects unleashed a ferocious backlash, enough to make Nader a famous crusader and to spur enactment of a new federal agency to regulate auto safety.  More recently, police and corporate infiltration of the Occupy movement has occurred."
(http://bollier.org/blog/corporate-spying-against-citizen-activists)





[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Security]]