
= concept and article


=Concept=

"a shared resource whose sustainability depends on the participation of multiple
constituencies in its governance (not just shareholders, but employees, core suppliers
and customers). The idea of the commons better describes the legal structure of the
business enterprise than does the shareholder primacy model: the firm’s various
stakeholders have overlapping property claims in relation to its assets, including rights
of access, withdrawal, management, exclusion and alienation. Furthermore, as in a
commons, the right of alienation is not the most salient right in a corporation.
Applying to the corporation the property rights and institutional design associated
with the commons would help sustain the corporate enterprise and deliver benefits for
all of its stakeholders and for society as a whole." 
(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)


==[[Typology of Property Rights in Common-Pool Resources]]==

Simon Deakin:

"Access: A right to enter a defined physical property

Withdrawal: A right to harvest the products of a resource such
as timber, water or food for pastoral animals

Management: A right to regulate the use patterns of other
harvesters and to transform a resource system by
making improvements

Exclusion: A right to determine who will have the right of
access to a resource and whether that right can be
transferred

Alienation: A right to sell or lease any of the above rights "

(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)



==Discussion==


===Is the Model of the Commons a Good Descriptive Fit for the Modern Business Enterprise?===

Simon Deakin:

"The answer to this should be a qualified yes. Naturally
occurring resource systems have physical manifestations, while
the resources tied up in the organizational structures and routines
of a business firm often (indeed, increasingly) take a non-physical
form. Analytically, however, there is a high degree of continuity
between the business firm and the commons. As we have seen, it
is descriptively false to analyze the business enterprise in terms of
shareholders’ ownership of the firm or its assets. At the same
time, the business firm is not “ownerless”: the firm is a resource
which is subject to multiple, overlapping and sometimes
conflicting claims on its use.95 Different stakeholder groups have
claims or rights of various kinds to use the resources produced in
and by the firm, in return for the inputs they make into the
creation and maintenance of those resources. These claims are
defined in a residual or default sense by the different components
of the legal framework of the firm (corporate law, insolvency law,
employment law and fiscal law, among others), and in a more
complete sense by the sum total of explicit and implicit contracts
and social norms present within a given enterprise. Many of the
social norms governing the position of the different stakeholders
with regard to the resources of the firm will be tacit and implicit,
and so may operate in tension with the more explicit rules set out
in articles of association, loan covenants, collective bargaining
agreements and so on. These rules and norms together serve to
define the rights of access, withdrawal, management, exclusion
and alienation identified by Ostrom and her colleagues.

The literature on the commons stresses the sense in which
rights of alienation are often the least salient, in practice, of the
property rights present in a common resource pool. This idea is
highly relevant to the analysis of the business enterprise.
Historically, corporate law has placed at least as much stress on
the idea of shareholder lock-in, or limited alienation rights, as it
has on shareholders’ rights to sell their claims to third parties.
The joint stock company form, in which shareholders’ alienation 
rights are most clearly expressed, is only one variant of the basic
corporate structure. It may be contrasted with other forms, such
as closed or privately-held companies, in which alienation rights
are constrained as a matter of law, contract or practice. Even in
the case of the joint stock company, the shareholders’ right of
alienation consists of a right to sell their continuing voice and
income claims to a third party, and does not take the form of a
right to the return of the capital originally invested.

If we consider the case of employees, it is clear again that
rights of alienation are highly restricted. Only very rarely do
employees have job rights that can be treated as the basis of an
alienable claim. In a free labour market they can remove their
labour power or capacity from the firm, but when they do so,
they generally cannot take with them complementary physical
assets or intellectual property belonging to the employer, which
remain in the firm’s asset pool. Yet employees, like shareholders,
have a range of access and withdrawal rights, and in many
national systems they have voice rights which can be analogized
to property-like claims to participate in the management of the
firm.

Restrictions on alienation of assets in the context of a
common-pool resource are a widely employed means of
preserving interdependencies between the assets in the pool, and
thereby sustaining the resource over time. In this respect, natural
resources such as irrigation or forest systems are no different from
the resources tied up within the organizational structures of
business firms. In a natural commons, the lifting of restraints on
alienation for one or more of the user groups can lead to the
depletion of the resource, both directly when assets are removed
from the common pool, and more generally through a loss of
legitimacy for rules aimed at ensuring the participation of all users
in the maintenance of the resource. In the context of company
law and corporate governance, the power of certain actors
(shareholders and the board) to remove and redeploy the assets of
the firm against the wishes of others (employees), through the 
mechanisms of takeover bids and corporate merger and
acquisition activities, poses a set of fundamental questions for
courts and policy makers. Different systems currently provide a
wide range of answers to those questions." 
(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)


===What Are the Normative Implications of Viewing the Corporation as a Commons?===

Simon Deakin:

"For legal scholars, as well as for judges, regulators and policymakers,
models of the business enterprise have never been seen
simply as aids to understanding social phenomena; they have also
been deployed to justify and critique legal and policy
developments. The claims that directors are the shareholders’
agents and that the sole purpose of the corporation is the
maximization of shareholder wealth (claims which have done
much to shape the recent evolution of corporate law and
corporate governance not just in the Anglo-American world but
on a global basis), owe much to the intellectual revolution in law
and economics, specifically the institutional economics which
began in the 1970s and came to fruition in succeeding decades. In
this context, the normative implications of seeing the corporation
as a commons may well be as far-reaching as the methodological
implications.

Commons research stresses, as we have seen, the complexity
and heterogeneity of property rights regimes and the relatively
subordinate role played by alienation rights, particularly in
comparison to access and management rights. From this
perspective, the emphasis on the importance of shareholders’
alienation rights in current corporate governance theory and
practice looks misplaced. Shareholders’ alienation rights are at the
core of the operation of the market for corporate control and the
functioning of a liquid capital market in which claims on the
corporation’s assets are transparently priced and corporate
performance is efficiently evaluated. The exclusion of other
stakeholder groups, especially employees, from participation in
managing the firm is frequently justified by reference to agency cost
considerations, or more simply, by appeals to the importance
of shareholders’ property rights.101 We saw above that normative
claims for shareholder primacy are based on a misdescription of
the legal structure of the firm; the theory of the commons helps
us to see that their application in practice may be destructive of
long-term value in the corporate economy. Viewing one user 
group as having priority over the others in the use it can make of
common resources and in its power to hold the managers of the
resource to account is not compatible with the maintenance of
the resource over time. 

In short, the design principles emerging from commons
research imply a model of corporate law based on these
considerations: multi-stakeholder governance in preference to
shareholder primacy; autonomy for rule-making processes at the
level of internal enterprise relations in the face of external capital
market pressures; and respect for local and national democratic
choices on how to regulate the business firm in the face of
pressures to condone or encourage transnational regulatory
arbitrage and avoidance. This is, self-evidently, a program of
reform of the law of the business enterprise that is radically at
odds with the shareholder-oriented, market-focused and globallydriven
model of corporate law that was the norm from the early
1980s to the onset of the global financial crisis. The shortcomings
of that model are now being laid bare by the growing evidence of
a correlation between shareholder-oriented corporate governance
laws and practices and the destruction of corporate value during
the crisis.

Whether the model of the corporation as commons
can provide a normative basis for reversing this trend will be a
major focus for corporate governance research as the crisis
unravels in the coming years. The argument presented here will
no doubt raise many objections from law and economics scholars
who will see it as incentive-incompatible, and likely to produce
distortions and inefficiencies of various kinds. For the reasons set
out above, answers to these objections are likely to be found in 
the re-theorization of corporate law that is needed to bring our
working models into line with what we know of the empirical
reality of the business firm. Developing this theory more fully
and applying its insights to further empirical work will hardly be
a trivial task. However, the start has been made."
(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)



=Article=

'''* Article: The Corporation as Commons: Rethinking Property Rights, Governance and Sustainability in the Business Enterprise. By Simon Deakin.'''

URL = http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf

"revised version of a paper originally presented as an Osler Lecture at the Faculty of Law, Queen’s University, in September 2011"


==Description==

"Shareholder primacy, or the idea that corporate managers are agents of
shareholders and should act exclusively in their financial interests, holds growing sway
over the law and practice of corporate governance. The shareholder primacy model has
its roots in economic theories which argue that it is efficient for shareholders to be
constituted as the residual owners or claimants of the firm. The model is conceptually
elegant and is effective in generating hypotheses for empirical testing, but it fails to
describe certain core features of the legal structure of the business corporation—in
particular, the autonomy granted to managers (via the board) to organize the business
of the company free from immediate control by any one of the corporate constituencies
or stakeholders (including shareholders) whose inputs are needed for the firm to thrive.

The increasing alignment of managerial interests with those of shareholders, through
corporate governance innovations such as share options and independent boards,
created incentives for excessive risk-taking, and thereby helped to precipitate the global
financial crisis that began in 2007. Partly as a result of growing evidence linking
shareholder influence before the crisis with a higher failure rate of financial sector
companies during the crisis, attention is now turning to alternative models of the
firm.

One such model, the author suggests, is that of the corporation as commons: a
shared resource whose sustainability depends on the participation of multiple
constituencies in its governance (not just shareholders, but employees, core suppliers
and customers). The idea of the commons better describes the legal structure of the
business enterprise than does the shareholder primacy model: the firm’s various
stakeholders have overlapping property claims in relation to its assets, including rights
of access, withdrawal, management, exclusion and alienation. Furthermore, as in a
commons, the right of alienation is not the most salient right in a corporation.

Applying to the corporation the property rights and institutional design associated
with the commons would help sustain the corporate enterprise and deliver benefits for
all of its stakeholders and for society as a whole."


==Excerpts==


===The Implications of Reconceptualizing Corporate Property as a Commons===

Simon Deakin:

"The analysis of the legal structure of the firm that has just
been offered has implications for the prevailing economic
theorization of corporate law, and more generally of corporate
governance. The core juridical features of the firm—beginning
with the idea of the corporation and its ancillary conceptual
devices, including the paradigmatic indeterminate-duration form
of the employment relationship and notions of enterprise liability
under both private law and statute—are simply impossible to
square with the predominant economic models, namely agency
theory and property rights theory. The legal system does not
recognize managers as the agents of the shareholders. Nor does it
view the shareholders as the firm’s owners. Ownership of a share
does not give a shareholder a pro-rata claim to the firm’s assets.

Those assets are held by a legal form, the corporation, which
cannot itself be the direct subject of ownership. Does this imply
that the business firm is “ownerless”? Such a conclusion seems at
odds with the widely held view that the specification of property
rights in productive assets lies at the foundation of a market
economy.82 Less abstractly, it is contradicted by the vocal claims
made by contemporary shareholder activists, among others, to be
acting as “owners” when they engage with the boards of listed
companies.

It is not necessary to go so far as to say that the firm is
“ownerless”. The firm as such cannot be owned, but in the
context of the modern business enterprise, there are multiple,
overlapping and often conflicting property rights or property type
claims which the legal system is meant to adjust and
reconcile. As we have seen, corporate law is largely concerned 
with one set of such rights, those of shareholders, but this by no
means exhausts the set of claims on the firm’s assets. Employment
law, insolvency law and fiscal law also identify claims of this
kind. Each of these areas of law has a dual function: specifying the
conditions under which various contributors of inputs (or as they
are sometimes called, corporate “constituencies” or
“stakeholders”) can draw on the resources of the firm while at
the same time, preserving and sustaining the firm’s asset pool as a
source of productive value. This is the sense in which the business
enterprise is a “commons”. It is the role of the legal system to
maintain this commons where doing so generates a surplus for the
parties immediately involved in the productive process and for
society at large. The “corporation” and ancillary juridical
concepts describing in legal terms the various features of the
business firm together have the function of achieving this task.

The economic theory of the commons is in essence a theory
about the conditions under which collective action to preserve
and sustain resources of value to society becomes possible. The
theory has had its main application to natural resources in the
form of “common-pool resources” such as collectively managed
irrigation, fishery and forest systems. The core insight gained
from over two decades of intensive empirical work on the
operation of these systems is that over-exploitation of shared
resources—the “tragedy of the commons”—can be overcome
through forms of collective resource use and management. The
conditions needed for the emergence of successful resource
management regimes are complex, diverse and often highly
localized. Despite this heterogeneity of observed practices, a
number of general features of successful common resource pool
systems have been identified by scholars in this field, principally
in work conducted by Elinor Ostrom and her co-researchers."
(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)


===Conclusion===

Simon Deakin:

"This paper has argued for a conceptual and methodological
repositioning of corporate governance research, and more
specifically of research in the economics of corporate law. A
repositioning of this kind is needed if corporate governance
scholarship is to respond to the challenge of understanding the
functions and consequences of the modern business enterprise,
particularly in the light of the global financial crisis. The starting
point of the analysis was a claim that models matter, not only for
the analysis and understanding of social phenomena but also for
normative purposes. Corporate law scholarship for the past thirty
years has been dominated by a model of shareholder primacy
which fits well with certain developments in economic theory,
and in the theory and practice of financial markets, but is at odds
with what we know of the legal structure of the business
enterprise. Using a model which is based on a misdescription of
empirical phenomena has the potential not just to warp our
understanding of the social world but to tilt policy in a direction
that is at odds with society’s needs. The role of the shareholder
primacy model in creating the intellectual conditions for the
global financial crisis is a case in point.

Models should be judged not just by how well they generate
hypotheses for empirical testing but also by how well they
represent the salient features of the phenomena they describe. On
this basis, the shareholder primacy model falls short at the outset,
as it fails to describe core aspects of the legal model of the business
enterprise, in particular the underpinning provided by law for
managerial autonomy, the organizational continuity of the firm
and the multi-stakeholder nature of firm-level governance. At the
core of the legal model of the firm is the apparent paradox of the
ownerless corporation: the firm’s productive assets are held 
through a legal form—the corporation—which cannot be the
subject of an ownership claim. The paradox, however, is, more
apparent than real. The firm is best seen as a collectively managed
resource or “commons” which is subject to a number of multiple,
overlapping and potentially conflicting property-type claims on
the part of the different constituencies or stakeholders that
provide value to the firm. Drawing on the theory of the
commons, this paper has argued that the sustainability of the
corporation depends on ensuring proportionality of benefits and
costs with respect to the inputs made to corporate resources, and
on the participation of the different stakeholder groups in the
formulation of the rules governing the management and use of
those resources. Viewing the corporation as a commons in this
sense is the first step toward a better understanding of the role
that the corporate form can play in ensuring wider economic and
social sustainability."
(http://www.queensu.ca/lawjournal/sites/webpublish.queensu.ca.qljwww/files/files/issues/1-Deakin.pdf)


[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Commons]]