
=Discussion=

A critique, by John Boik in: [[Creating Sustainable Societies]]: 

'The critique here focuses on for-profit, publicly held corporations,
rather than nonprofit or privately held ones.


'''Weakness 1: Profit is the prime motivator.'''

The prime motivator of the current corporate model is profit, or
more generally, narrow self-interest. Managers receive strong
incentives to maximize corporate profits and shareholder wealth.
As noted in previous chapters, human behavior can be influenced
by a wider spectrum of motivators, some of which are
more effective at encouraging pro-social behavior. Narrow selfinterest,
when over-emphasized, can be corrosive.



'''Weakness 2: The corporate model leads to hyper-inequities in the concentration of income and wealth.'''

The current system allows wealth to become hyperconcentrated
in a small minority of investors, executives, and corporations.
Concentrated wealth harms an economy, raises moral issues, and
sets up unfair political advantages.


'''Weakness 3: Corporations can become monopolies or “too big to fail.”'''

Despite regulations, corporations can grow large enough to act
as monopolies. Monopolies stifle competition and help to hyperconcentrate
wealth. Corporations can also grow large enough to
become “too big to fail.” Moral hazards can be produced when
a corporation knows it is too big to fail and will be bailed out
by the federal government. For example, analysts cite the moral
hazard produced by bailouts of large banks, making them more
likely to exhibit risky behavior.


'''Weakness 4: Corporations lack transparency.'''

The current corporate system is marginally transparent. Publicly
traded corporations are not obligated to reveal substantial aspects
of their behavior. They do produce quarterly and annual
reports, and file documents with the SEC and other regulators,
but these represent a limited form of transparency. For example,
corporations can hide information on political activities and
beneficial ownership.[88, 89] Nearly one-third of shareholder
resolutions in 2012 will ask companies for more disclosure about
their campaign spending and lobbying.[90] Corporations are
also not required to report some types of salary information, or
information on social impacts."


=More Information=

* [[Personhood of Corporations]]


[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]