
= an undergraduate course at the University of Southern California called PWNED: Everyone on Campus is a Copyright Criminal.

The complete course was podcasted at
http://feeds.feedburner.com/UscComm499Pwned


=Directory=

    
* Lecture 1: Security basics
    
Lecture, discussions and readings on the basics of information security, from Augustus Caesar to Alan Turing; from the crypto wars to the DRM wars. 

* Lecture 2: Reverse engineering
      
The legitimate case for reverse engineering in the academy and industry from a UCSD engineering prof whose award-winning work focuses on the use of reverse engineering in pedagogy and as a tool of social analysis. 

* Lecture 3: Use restriction

Stories of DRM breaks, from DVD-Jon and the DeCSS break against DVD players to Microsoft\'s Palladium and Seth Schoen\'s Owner Override proposal to restore control of \"trusted\" PCs to their owners. 

* Lecture 4: Present day DRMs

HDCP, AACS, Blu-Ray, DVD-HD, CPRM, Fair Play and beyond. 

*Lecture 5: History of copyright 1

The history of copyright and its industrial applications. Critical readings stress the dynamic tension between copyright and technology and the way that they have co-evolved. Class discussion will talk about the role of anti-Japanese sentiment during the VCR wars in setting Zaibatsu lobbying strategy in the US. 

* Lecture 6: History of copyright 2

The history of copyright and its industrial applications. Critical readings stress the dynamic tension between copyright and technology and the way that they have co-evolved. Class discussion will talk about the role of anti-Japanese sentiment during the VCR wars in setting Zaibatsu lobbying strategy in the US. 

*Lecture 7: History of copyright 2
     

* Lecture 8: Copyright and new business models

Internet-era businesses sometimes thrive in the face of copying. Readings include works on effective Internet-era business-models. John Buckman, Magnatunes Manifesto 

* Lecture 9: Copyright and new business models (cont\\\'d)
     
* Lecture 10: Standards and treaties

Standards and treaties: The actions of international consortia, treaty bodies, and standards groups have far-reaching effects on law, technology and commerce. Yet the action of these bodies is obscure and little-regarded. Recent activist participation in these bodies has shone the first light into their activities. This is public diplomacy for the rest of us, storming the gates of the UN. 

* Lecture 11: Laws: How copyright and related laws get made and passed

* Lecture 12: Laws, part 2

* Lecture 13: Command and control dystopia

Command and control dystopia: What it could mean to live in a world of ubiquitous command-and-control devices that respond to others\' wishes instead of your own. 

* Lecture 14: Modern copyright 2
     
* Lecture 15: Final presentations
     
* Interview with Chris DiBona, Part 1

Student Pierson Clair\'s final project was an interview with Google\'s Open Source Projects Manager Chris DiBona, about the mechanics and economics of open source/free software. Pierson has split the interview into two pieces, presented as enhanced podcasts with tables of contents, visuals, and chapter-breaks.

* Interview with Chris DiBona, Part 2


[[Category:Courses]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]