
'''= documentary in the making''' (circa Nov 2024)


=Description=

Mika Mattila:

"What happens when Homo Sapiens once again turns into a mobile species? How will our
lives, minds & societies look like after we’ve uncoupled our identities from places?
Cosmobility is '''a refection of a timeless life in a placeless world.'''..


Cosmobility is a visual documentary essay refecting on the mobile, cosmopolitan
experience of modern day nomads and the dawn of the Nomad Century they perhaps
herald. Through series of thematically and aesthetically linked vignettes flm will present a
vision of our planet on the move, exploring the myriad of ways in which humanity has
become mobile in our era. The beating heart of the flm is an exploration of such ground-
braking phenomenas as remote work revolution, rise of digital nomadism, pop-up cities,

parallel establishments and network states. These are some of the tentative models that are
currently being experimented with, as the mobile elites strives to re-structure humanity in
order to adapt for our new mobile environment.

The core narrative thread will be composed of observational moments that loosely follow
a cast of cosmopolitan characters around the globe. Some are digital nomads, some
barely surviving lifestyle hobos, some globally recognised literary gurus, some tech
entrepreneurs building network states... Gradually a portrait of a parallel world to the
place-bound one emerges: an ambiguous, network-rooted Cosmopolis. This is a global
neighbourhood that seems to be everywhere but not quite anywhere, an ever mutating
mirage fickering in-between the off- and on-line worlds."

(via email)


[[Category:Network Nations]]