
'''= "from the nation-state's vertical integration to the peer network's cosmo-local integration."'''

=Description=

"[[Stack Sovereignty]] is the operationalization of cosmo-localization. It is the necessary technological and governance infrastructure that allows an archipelago of regenerative projects to function as a viable, self-determining counter-economy. It transforms the archipelago from a metaphorical network into a functional, sovereign polity capable of enacting a truly regenerative and peer-to-peer paradigm.


=Details=

Summarized via DeepSeek:

"Stack Sovereignty for a Cosmo-Local Archipelago

Concept: Stack Sovereignty for a cosmo-local archipelago is the capacity for a distributed, intentional network of regenerative projects to self-govern by co-creating and controlling a shared, non-territorial technological stack. This stack enables them to manage their shared resources, coordinate production, and maintain their unique cultural and ethical identity, while remaining globally connected. It is the infrastructural enactment of network sovereignty.


'''1. Context: The Cosmo-Local Imperative'''

Cosmo-localization describes the dynamic of "what is light is global, and what is heavy is local." It posits that knowledge and designs (the "light") should be shared globally as a commons, while physical production (the "heavy") should be relocalized using that shared knowledge. The "archipelago of regenerative projects" is the emergent social form for this—a network of locally-embedded, bioregionally-attuned communities that are globally interconnected.

The primary challenge for this archipelago is to avoid dependence on the dominant, extractive stacks (corporate or state-controlled) for its vital coordination and communication. Without a sovereign stack of its own, the network's internal logic is inevitably subsumed by the external logic of the platforms it uses.


=Characteristics=

'''2. The Non-Territorial Stack: A Layer-by-Layer Blueprint'''

A cosmo-local stack sovereignty is "non-territorial" because its jurisdiction is based on shared purpose and participation, not geographical borders. 


Its layers can be mapped as follows:

* User & Identity Layer: Sovereignty begins with a self-sovereign digital identity. Each member of the archipelago owns their identity and reputation, which is portable across projects and platforms within the network. This is the foundation of individual agency within the collective.

* Interface & Interaction Layer: The user-facing tools are designed for cooperation, not extraction. This includes platforms for democratic deliberation, mutual credit clearing, task management, and shared digital workspaces—all built on open-source principles and designed for interoperability.

* Address & Registry Layer: This is the critical "catalog" of the archipelago's commons. It includes:

* Registry of Shared Designs: A globally accessible library of open-source, cosmo-local blueprints (for agriculture, construction, energy, etc.).

* Registry of Projects & Capabilities: A dynamic map of the archipelago, showing which projects exist, what they produce, and what resources or skills they need.

* Registry of Commons-Based Reciprocity Licenses: Managing the legal and accounting frameworks that enable ethical and reciprocal economic exchange within the network.

* City & Network Layer: This represents the archipelago itself—the tangible, physical nodes (the regenerative projects in their specific bioregions) and the social fabric that connects them. The stack must serve the metabolic needs of these places.

* Cloud & Protocol Layer: This is the shared "backbone" of the network. Instead of relying on AWS or Google Cloud, the archipelago would ideally be served by a federated cloud of cooperative or commons-based hosting providers. The core coordination happens through open, sovereign protocols (like those for mutual credit, verifiable credentials, or supply chain tracking) that any project can implement, ensuring neutrality and freedom from platform capture.

* '''Earth & Bioregion Layer: This layer is explicitly ethical and metabolic'''. The stack's fundamental "first principle" is not efficiency or profit, but regeneration. Its design and operation must be aligned with the health of the living planet. This means the stack's energy consumption must be sustainable, and its primary function is to facilitate economies that enhance, rather than deplete, ecological and social capital."


[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]