
=Principles=

Marc Halevy proposes: Three domains and six extremizations.


"Cosmosophy posits that the cosmology of the Real rests on three pillars (trialist vision of the Real):

 

* '''A topology which is the study of "places",''' that is to say ''the study of volumes, distances, masses and their distribution, fields of forces'', in short: the geometry of the cosmic Territory is that is to say of cosmic Matter, of the Universe.

* '''A dynamology which is the study of "powers",''' that is to say ''the study of movements, tensions, transformations, dynamics, processes, evolutions'', in short: the power of the cosmic Intention , that is to say of cosmic Life, of Nature.

* '''An eidology which is the study of "forms"''', that is to say ''the study of structures, organizations, negentropies, complexities, emergences, processes of tensional dissipation'', in short: of the logic of Cosmic order, that is to say of the cosmic Spirit, of the Cosmos.
 

Classical physics (the physics of material points in space) was mainly concerned with topology and a little dynamology (with thermodynamics); but it remained fairly foreign for a long time to any eidology (quantum theories are its first stammerings).

 

The metabolic motor of the Real is extremization.

Thereby :

 

#The maximization of '''territorie'''s is driven by the force of expansion (expansiveness): universal expansion, for example.
#The minimization of territories is driven by the force of individuation (reclusiveness): universal gravitation, for example.

#The maximization of '''intentions''' is carried by the force of accomplishment (intentionality): ???
#The minimization of intentions is driven by the force of conservation (conservativeness): the mechanical inertia of all matter, for example.

#The maximization of '''organizations''' is driven by the strength of complexion (constructiveness): electronuclear interactions, for example.
#The minimization of organizations is driven by the force of uniformity (homogeneity): the effects of the law of maximum entropy, for example.
 

I call "electronuclear force" the force of complexion which manifests itself in four aspects: electric, magnetic, hadronic (strong nuclear) and neutronic (weak nuclear).

''I call force of accomplishment, this omnipresent force that physicists have not recognized, but that philosophers have called "entelechy", "conatus", "will to power" or "elan vital"...”''

(https://www.noetique.eu/billets/2020/principes-cosmosophiques)

[[Category:P2P Theory]]