'''* Book: Cosmos and Transcendence Breaking Through the Barrier of Scientistic Belief. By Wolfgang Smith. Angelico Press, 1984 (reprint 2008)'''

URL = 


=Description=

"In the present work, Wolfgang Smith presents an insider's critique of the scientific world-view based upon the sharp but often overlooked distinction between scientific truth and scientistic faith. With elegance and clarity he demonstrates that major tenets promulgated in the name of Science are not in fact scientific truths but rather scientistic speculations - for which there is no evidence at all. Step by step the reader is led to the astonishing realization that the specifically 'modern' world is based intellectually upon nothing more substantial than a syndrome of Promethean myths. But this is only half of what the book accomplishes. Its primary contribution is to recover and reaffirm the deep metaphysical and religious insights that have come down to us through the teachings of Christianity. And herein lies the true worth of this remarkable treatise: having broken the grip of scientistic presuppositions, the author succeeds admirably in bringing to view great truths that had long been obscured."

(https://philpapers.org/rec/SMICT-5)


=CONTENTS=

1 The Idea of the Physical Universe 7 

2 The Cartesian Dilemma 21 

3 Lost Horizons 39 

4 Evolution: Fact and Fantasy 64 

5 The Ego and the Beast 95 

6 The Deification of the Unconscious 115 

7 'Progress' in Retrospect 141



=Excerpts=


==FOREWORD==

HARRY OLDMEADOW: 

"As THIS BOOK makes compellingly clear, the Scientific Revolution of 
the seventeenth century heralded the triumph of a particular philosophical outlook (rationalistic, materialist) with its attendant epistemology (empiricism) and procedures (the 'scientific method'). 

Contrary to popular assumption, modern science is not simply 
a disinterested, detached, and value-free mode of inquiry into 
the material world: it is a complex of disciplines and techniques 
anchored in culture-bound assumptions about and attitudes to the 
nature of reality and the proper means whereby material phenomena might be explored, explained, and, perhaps most tellingly, con- 
trolled. It is, in fact, impossible to separate the methods of modern 
science from its theories and the ideologies which provide its motive 
force, and it is to this tangled skein— or as he puts it: to the unverifiable assumptions which the 'verifiable' propositions of science 
presuppose— that Wolfgang Smith applies the term 'scientism'. 

As the book likewise makes clear, the modern scientistic outlook 
is, in principle, unable to countenance God (by whatever name), 
who is either repudiated as an obsolete 'hypothesis' or altogether 
ignored— which amounts to the same thing. Likewise, scientism 
cannot allow any sense of the sacred, the absence of which is one of 
the defining characteristics of modernity as a whole. Needless to 
say, the much-misunderstood issues at stake in the conflict of 'science' and 'religion', or 'modernity' and 'tradition', are immense: our 
view of what constitutes 'reality', 'human nature', 'life' and 'death', 
transcendence and immanence, and the relationship of the material 
world to higher spiritual realities, to mention only some of the most 
salient. It is to an inquiry into these issues— an interrogation of the 
orthodoxies of modern science in the light of a traditional wisdom, 
informed by immutable principles and truths which are neither 
'old' nor 'new' but timeless — that Cosmos and Transcendence summons us.



Wolfgang Smith brings to his task a rare combination of qualities 
and experiences, not the least his ability to move freely between the 
somewhat arcane worlds of contemporary science and traditional 
metaphysics. Alongside Dr. Smith's imposing qualifications in 
mathematics, physics, and philosophy, we find his hard-earned 
expertise in Platonism, Christian theology, traditional cosmologies, 
and Oriental metaphysics. His outlook has been enriched both by 
his diverse professional experiences in the high-tech world of the 
aerospace industry and in academia, and by his own researches in 
the course of his far-reaching intellectual and spiritual journeying. 

Here is that rare person who is equally at home with Eckhart and 
Einstein, Heraclitus and Heisenberg! Dr. Smith is no obscurantist, 
rejecting well-attested scientific facts, nor a sentimental reactionary 
seeking to 'turn back the clock'. He is a sober-minded scientist and 
philosopher who has confronted some of the most daunting issues 
of the age, refusing to surrender to the shibboleths and complacencies of modernity. 

In this book Wolfgang Smith excavates the very foundations of 
modern thought in order to explain the cracks and fissures that are 
everywhere appearing in what was thought to be the impregnable 
edifice of 'science'. He also traces the pedigree of some of the most 
mesmerizing of modern prejudices (the belief in Progress, for 
instance) and analyzes the intellectual legacy of figures such as Des- 
cartes, Newton, Darwin, Freud, and Jung, all the while rendering 
the most abstruse ideas and principles into lucid and elegant prose, 
intelligible to any receptive reader. Cosmos and Transcendence, 
which first appeared a quarter of a century ago, is the fruit of many 
years of fearless intellectual exploration, of deep rumination, and of 
seasoned judgment. Our era stands in urgent need of the truths and 
insights yielded by Wolfgang Smith's wide-ranging inquiry, Sophia 
Perennis is to be commended for bringing a new edition of this profound and exhilarating work within the purview of a new genera- 
tion of readers."


==PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION==

Wolfgang Smith:

"This book has a twofold purpose, a twofold content: first, it 
presents a critique of the modern world, and based upon this critique, it seeks to expound a timeless metaphysical wisdom. The sec- 
ond end presupposes the first: so long as we have not 'broken 
through the barrier of scientistic belief,' as the subtitle has it, that 
timeless wisdom — that veritable sophia perennis — remains for us 
inaccessible. 

What I object to fundamentally in the scientistic world-view is 
that it conceives the external universe to be unperceived and unperceivable. The concrete world, made up of sensory elements, such as 
color and sound, and indeed of innumerable qualities, is thereby 
subjectivized, which is to say that it is relegated to the sphere of 
mind, or if you will, of brain-function. Now, in keeping with major 
philosophic trends (beginning with Husserl and Whitehead), I 
regard this subjectivization as both illegitimate and grossly deceptive. My concern, in Cosmos and Transcendence, has been to show, 
on the one hand, that the subjectivization of the qualities is not a 
matter of scientific discovery, as one is nowadays prone to assume, 
but constitutes in fact an unfounded philosophical assumption stipulated by Rene Descartes, and to demonstrate, on the other, that this 
Cartesian premise contradicts the perennial wisdom of mankind. 

On this double basis I could proceed to carry out the twofold intention of the book, as defined above. 

And so the matter stood until, a few years later, I became interested in the so-called quantum reality' debate, which had been 
ongoing since about 1927. What has disturbed physicists and philosophers of science for all these years is that the discoveries of quan- 
tum theory do not accord with our accustomed notions concerning 
physical reality, to the point that these findings strike us as paradoxical. What particularly interested me was to ascertain whether the 
resources of traditional philosophy— I was thinking especially of the 
Platonist schools— might have something of value to contribute to 
the debate; and what I discovered, after a period of considerable 
confusion, came as a surprise: the key to an understanding of quantum theory, 1 now perceived, lies precisely in the recognition that 
the qualities are not after all subjective, as everyone engaged in the 
debate had all along assumed. It turns out that once this unfounded 
Cartesian premise is jettisoned, everything falls into place, and I 
could write, in The Quantum Enigma, that 'Quantum paradox 
proves to be Nature's way of refuting a spurious philosophy.' 

Thus it came about that what, in Cosmos and Transcendence, had 
served as the means of disqualifying the scientistic Weltanschauung, 
has become key to a philosophic understanding of contemporary 
physics. The fact is that physics can be interpreted on a non-Cartesian basis, and that this reinterpretation constitutes the mandatory 
rectification which enables us to integrate its positive findings into 
higher realms of knowing. The very science, thus, which since its 
inception in the seventeenth century had presented itself as hostile 
to the traditional wisdom, proves now to be in a way supportive of 
its claims. 

There is however more to be said, for it happens that the afore- 
said reinterpretation of physics has a vital bearing on just about 
every fundamental domain of contemporary science. At the risk of 
speaking in overly condensed terms, and thus incomprehensibly, 

I  will cite a few examples: 

The new understanding of quantum 
theory reveals a principle of Vertical causation' — a causation which 
is instantaneous and not determined by antecedent events — which 
proves to be operative, not only in what physicists term state vector 
collapse, but in every domain— e.g., that of human art — to which 
the notion of 'intelligent design' is applicable. The ontological 
distinction of the physical and the perceivable environment entails a 
distinction between the terrestrial and the sidereal cosmos, which
fundamentally disqualifies the reductionist claims of contemporary 
astrophysical cosmology. In a universe endowed with real qualities, what has been termed the anthropic principle assumes an 
entirely new and unsuspected significance. The deconstruction 
of the Cartesian premise vitally affects the problem of how we perceive, and supports the empirical findings of James Gibson, the 
Cornell University scientist who astounded the erudite communities with his so-called 'ecological' theory of visual perception. 
The aforesaid deconstruction likewise affects the mind-body prob- 
lem in the context of neurophysiology — the so-called 'binding 
problem'— and permits an integration of neurophysiological findings into the traditional anthropologies. 

Let this much suffice to indicate that the removal of the Cartesian 
premise, and the resultant return to metaphysical normalcy, proves 
to be seminal in the extreme. What I wish to convey to the reader in 
this updated Preface is that the book at hand is to be viewed, not so 
much as the completion of an inquiry, but as a new beginning, a 
point of departure in the quest for truth."

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]