
'''= the Counter Cartographies Collective (3Cs), propose a specific form of counter-mapping, autonomous cartography, to understand and intervene in processes'''

URL = http://countercartographies.org


=Description=

"The Counter Cartographies Collective (3Cs) combines research with critical
mapping to produce alternative ways of visualizing and inhabiting the world and
our university. This paper advocates for an autonomous cartography, 3Cs’
combination of militant research and autonomous politics with critical
cartography’s counter-mapping genre. 3Cs’ autonomous cartography, a form of
cartographic militant research, begins from our own situation to create a mapping
of and for political change without the aim of becoming a singular, dominating
(cartographic) power. It is committed to an autonomous politics that emphasizes
the creativity of labor over that of capital, and that works for political change
beyond elections or state-centered activism. Autonomist theory recognizes the
importance of knowledge in political struggle and in today’s global economy. As
militant research, it simultaneously produces knowledge and serves as a political
intervention. In this context, knowledge production is a political task from the
beginning. Mapping has an especially important role: understanding the changing
landscape of labor when production is geographically diffused.
Within critical cartography, 3Cs’ specific practice of mapping as militant
research differentiates autonomous cartography from other forms of counter-mapping."
(http://www.acme-journal.org/vol11/CCC2012.pdf)


=More Information=

* Article: Counter (Mapping) Actions: Mapping as Militant Research: Counter Cartographies Collective
[http://www.acme-journal.org/vol11/CCC2012.pdf]

* [[Autonomous Cartography]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]