=Description=

'''1. Cathryn Townsend:'''

Cognitive psychologists Whiten and Erdal (2012) use the term “counterdominance” 
to describe the practice whereby coalitions come together to curb dominant individuals, 
thus creating more egalitarian social conditions. 

They argue that the unique selection 
pressure involved in human evolution was the formation of a socio-cognitive niche that 
included multiway positive feedback loops between five elements: 

(1) cooperation, 

(2)  egalitarianism, 

(3) theory of mind, 

(4) language, and 

(5) cultural transmission. 


Within  this adaptive niche, which the authors call “deep social mind,” there is tight interlinkage between egalitarianism and cooperation, which allowed hunter-gatherers to successfully pool together to procure and share resources. Cooperative egalitarianism in  turn supported cultural transmission of knowledge. The acquisition of language and 
mind reading that could then be created through sharing knowledge in turn allowed 
for interpersonal coordination of activities and ultimately for the reinforcement of the 
egalitarian cultural ethos. They argue that maximum egalitarianism was achieved during the period from the origins of Homo sapiens up until the emergence of farming at 
the end of the Pleistocene. "

(https://www.academia.edu/29417676/Egalitarianism_the_evolution_of)



'''2. Chris Knigt et al. :'''

Symbolic revolution as ‘counterdominance’:

"Current models associate the rapid evolutionary expansion of the hominine brain with greater Machiavellian
intelligence (e.g. Dunbar 1993). An authoritative recent suggestion is that hunter-gatherer type
egalitarianism was eventually established because the capacities of dominant individuals to exploit
subordinates became increasingly well matched by group members’ ‘counterdominance’ capacities; under
such conditions, a strategy of ‘playing fair’ — resisting dominance by others while not fighting for
dominance oneself — became evolutionarily stable (Erdal & Whiten 1994).

There are grounds for linking counterdominance with an increasing reliance on low-cost vocal-auditory
communication in place of energy-expensive gesture and manual grooming (cf. Aiello & Dunbar 1993). We
have seen how, in conflict situations, low-cost signals are mistrusted and ignored by listeners precisely on
account of their low costs. If we accept that Pleistocene humans nonetheless did rely increasingly upon
efficient vocal-auditory communication (e.g. Lieberman 1991), we can only assume that through
counterdominance strategies minimizing such sources of conflict as inter-male reproductive differentials
(Turke 1984; 1988; Power & Aiello in press), humans were establishing unusually extensive, stable, kinbased coalitions fostering corresponding levels of mutual trust. Provided internal deception remained
relatively rare, conditions for the evolution of conventional signaling might have been established, yielding
a growing ‘proto-language’ of coded terms for social/environmental reference (cf Bickerton 1990).
Darwinian theory, in any event, locates the evolutionary roots of speech in selection acting upon cooperative
individuals. Over the generations, listeners in the human case have evidently needed to know: otherwise they
would not have evolved such specialized neurophysiological adaptations for decoding messages accurately
at low amplitudes, requiring minimal redundancy and at astonishingly high speeds (Lieberman 1991; Pinker
& Bloom 1990 and refs; Pinker 1994). Admittedly, the system can be used for lying; indeed, reliance upon
speech renders listeners highly vulnerable. But in view of the low-cost, conventional design features of the
system, internal deception can be ruled out as a factor driving its evolution.

By contrast, ritual in human cultures demands seemingly disproportionate energetic investments (Sperber
1975). Like their animal counterparts, human rituals are loud, multi-media displays, stereotyped and prone to
massive redundancy (Rappaport 1979, 173-246). They are also characteristically illusion-inducing or
‘deceptive’ (Sperber 1975; Lattas 1989). The difference is that animal manipulative displays are
individualistic and competitive, whereas their most potent human counterparts in traditional cultures are
quintessentially collective performances. They demarcate social relations of power, identify84 -ing groups with common interests and setting them in opposition to other groups (Leach 1954; Cohen
1985). But despite this collectivity, they are also highly manipulative performances. Human groups
throughout recorded history have exploited others by using elaborate ritual to overcome their victims’ ‘sales
resistance’. To the extent that such performances convey honest information, it is in ostentatious display of
their very costliness — demonstrating the organizers’ ability to bear such costs (cf Zahavi 1987). We might
infer — in view of the energy expended in relation to the paucity of reliable information conveyed (Sperber
1975, 8) — that such rituals arose as coalitions of conspirators strove to ‘exploit the muscle power’ of others
who tended to resist the message."

(http://radicalanthropologygroup.org/wp-content/uploads/pub_knight_power_watts.pdf)

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]