
'''* Article: Counter (Mapping) Actions: Mapping as Militant Research: Counter Cartographies Collective. Craig Dalton and Liz Mason-Deese. CME: An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies, 2012, 11(3),439-466'''

URL = http://www.acme-journal.org/vol11/CCC2012.pdf


=Excerpt=

From the Conclusions:

"Autonomous cartography opens up possibilities for new forms of knowledge
production and political change. As [[Colectivo Situaciones]] and [[Precarias a la Deriva]] show, militant research offers radical, situated methods of producing
knowledge as political practice. Hackitectura's work demonstrates how social
movements use mapping as part of a political project. In this paper, we lay out the
theoretical foundations, cartographic practices and experiences of 3Cs, with the
hope that it proves useful to others wishing to engage in similar projects of
autonomous cartography.

By producing maps as militant research, autonomous cartography constitutes
a conceptual framework for understanding and creating geographic and political
change in the post-Fordist economy.

This work is premised on the idea that
geographic knowledge and spatial innovation are created from movements and
people engaged in struggle, thus giving rise to autonomous politics within the
collective. 3Cs' experiences with autonomous cartography illustrate how mapping
can function as a form of militant research, producing new knowledges and
subjectivities, while also
investigating and instigating political change. The
mapping process itself enacts a different form of knowledge production that creates
new social relations and geographies. In short, it is the initial cartography of an
autonomous university. For 3Cs, this means not only producing new maps, but
also creating new forms of social organization within and beyond the collective.
These experiences highlight the importance of collaboration, trust, and careful
consideration of the social context and ethics of t
hat mapping research.

As autonomous cartography spreads to other organizing contexts, 3Cs
worked with students at Queen Mary University in London to produce a counter
map examining the relationship between international migrant flows and cognitive labor.

In recent months, 3Cs has led a series of workshops to share mapping skills
with activists within and beyond the university on themes of gentrification and
food justice. Around the world, new spaces of resistance and knowledge
production are emerging as
universities and communities face budget cuts and
economic crises.

Simultaneously, the make-up of 3Cs itself is changing.

Several members are moving to different locations around the world, forcing us to rethink
the locally-situated nature of our resear
ch and develop new methods of
collaboration across space and time.

Despite new contexts and challenges, 3Cs and
others continue to explore the political possibilities of and, and, and... "
(http://www.acme-journal.org/vol11/CCC2012.pdf)



[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]