=Discussion=

Joseph Livni:

"The  covenant is  not  an  Israelite  invention. Covenants  existed  in  Israel’s  ancient world (e.g.   the   Hittite   covenant   in   Mendenhall   1955:   29);   the   Israelites’persuasion only slightly modified the concept; instead of signing it with a mortal sovereign, the Israelites preserved their egalitarian ethos by “signing” a covenant with   an   immortal   one. And   instead   of designating   someone   with   power   of attorney, the  Israelites believe that  each one  of  the signatory  party to  the covenant and so are his/her descendants: “Face to face the LORD spoke to you on the mountain out of the fire"[Deut. 5.4].

Israel   was   surrounded   by   strongly   stratified   societies;   maintaining   an egalitarian  ethos  next  to  pharaonic  Egypt  and  oligarchic  Philistine  or  Canaanite city-states required strong cohesion forces. Typically  egalitarian  societies settle disputes  by  mediation;  they need neither a   clear   distinction   between   right   and   wrong, (Sillitoe   1998:159)nor   a consequential allocation of guilt (Dickson-Gilmore 1996:101). However in Israel, the  egalitarian  ethos  absorbed from  hierarchical neighbours concepts  of  penal norms like   guilty,   innocent,   justice, and   punishment; penal   norms restrict arbitration to  disputes  that  do  not  involve  violation  of  norms.  The  encounter  of egalitarian  societies  with hierarchies was  not  unique  to  Israel;  for  example, the Celtic  tribes  of  Iron  I  also bumped  into Roman rule (Luley  2016).  However  the outcome  of  the  two  encounters  was  different:  Israel  maintained  its  egalitarian ethos while the Celtic people became stratified. By  hypothesis, the Israelites  squared  the  circle  using  the  notion  of covenant.  Reasonably,  the  faith in a God  sanctioning  a  covenant  with each  member  of  the community  was  the  spiritual  projection  of  the  covenantal polity. After  all,  “every religion  is  to  be  found  in  juxtaposition  to  a  political  opinion  which  is  connected with it by affinity” (Tocqueville  2000:241). Scholars  note  that  the  covenant  is  of the suzerainty type(Mendenhall 1955:29). One cannot sign such a covenant with more  than  one sovereign.  That  does  not  necessarily  imply  subscribing  to  full monotheism  of  current  times  and  denying  the  existence  of  other  gods.  At  that stage  the  covenant  only  forbade serving other  gods (Bright  2000:160).  Bright observes that neither the term henotheism nor monolatrism would fit because:“... the existence of other gods was not expressly denied, neither was their status granted. Because of these difficulties many scholars seek some     compromise     word     like incipient   monotheism, implicit monotheism, practical monotheism, or the like”(Bright 2000:159).Regardless of the terminology, my contention is that a covenant allowing serving other gods undermines itself. Therefore, from this point of view the monotheistic nature  of  such  a  faith stems  fromits  covenantal  arrangement  and  not  the  other way  around  as  inferred  by  Knohl’s  hypothesis  linking  Israel’s  monotheism  to Pharaoh Akhenaten (Knohl 2008:110).In  socio-political  terms, the  egalitarian  notion  of  covenant  gave  rise  to  an egalitarian societal type called covenantal society (Elazar 1998;McCoy, Baker, and Bullinger 1991;Smith 2008)."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/958045dp)


=Example=

==The [[Sabbath as an Equality-Maintaining Institution in Ancient Israel]]==

Joseph Livni:

"The  Sabbath  assemblies  started  before  the  exile.  Since  local assemblies   obstructed   the   central   authority   of   the   monarchy,   these assemblies  were  tolerated  only  because  they  were  inherited  from  the pre-monarchic settlements. Cultural  evolution  explains  how  a  random  habit  of  a  seventh  day  of  rest facilitated   a   covenantal   pre-monarchic   Israel   and   led   to   its   current cultural descendants. .In  a pre-monarchic  settlement farming was  prohibited on  the  seventh day; the   day   was   consecrated to   public   affairs   like   enforcing   the covenant. The seventh day of rest and its linkage to the covenant is the reason why “whatever  its  origin  was,  the  Sabbath  took  on  a  peculiar  meaning  which made it an institution peculiar to Israel.”

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/958045dp)


=More information=


==Bibliography==

Elazar,  Daniel  J.1997. Covenant  &  Constitutionalism:  The  Great  Frontier  and  the Matrix of Federal Democracy. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Elazar,  Daniel  J.  1998. Covenant  and  Polity  in  Biblical  Israel.  New  Brunswick,  NJ: Transaction Publishers

[[Category:Israel]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]