'''= "a group of volunteers supporting local community groups organising mutual aid throughout the covid-19 outbreak in the UK".'''


URL = https://covidmutualaid.org/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Covid Mutual Aid UK is '''a group of volunteers supporting local community groups organising mutual aid throughout the covid-19 outbreak in the UK'''. We focuss on providing resources and connecting people to their nearest local groups, willing volunteers and those in need.

We recognise that injustice doesn’t affect everyone equally and whilst we’re all at risk of covid-19, there are some people who are more vulnerable and need greater support from the community. 

The basic idea is to coordinate care efforts for people who are self isolating, especially if they are part of a more at risk demographic including the eledery, disabled and people with other pre existing health issues. 

We’re also trying to offer support to those people who are feeling most isolated/anxious throughout the pandemic. For people with mental health conditions this scale of panic can be overwhelming and so community support is vital."



2.'''
'''
"Covid-19 Mutual Aid Local Groups are small groups of people setting up independently in communities to support vulnerable people in their local area through the outbreak. 

Groups are not being set up in a uniform way and each community is advised to do what is best for them. These resources are here to give you some advice and pass on ways of working.

You can volunteer in a group whether you are fit and able to run errands or self isolating. A lot of coordination is being done through Facebook and WhatsApp group so if you’re self isolating but feeling well enough to support, you can help with coordination of your local group whilst other people are out doing the physical activities."
(https://covidmutualaid.org/resources/)

=More information=

* Resource directory: https://covidmutualaid.org/resources/

* The most up to date list is currently here: https://covidmutualaid.org/local-groups/

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]
[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]
[[Category:UK]]