'''* Book: COVID-19 and the Left. The Tyranny of Fear. , eds. Elena Louisa Lange, Geoff Shullenberger. Abingdon-New York: Routledge, 2024.''' 

URL =


=Contents=

Vladan JOVANOVIĆ:

"This edited volume is divided into
three parts that explore various dimensions of authoritarianism during the “pandemic era”. 

The first part addresses the
ideology of fear, exploring the left’s support for pandemic authoritarianism and
its totalitarian aspects. It presents the
crisis as a hyper-realistic simulation and
an Orwellian dystopia, where pandemic
ideology distracts from an unprecedented transfer of power. In his chapter, Lee
Jones investigates how the neoliberal system has weakened democracy, alienating
the left from its historic base and causing
it to eagerly endorse authoritarian policies
in the name of protecting the most disadvantaged populations. On the other hand,
Geoff Shullenberger uses Jean Baudrillard’s concept of “hyperreality” to analyze how the left has maintained a politics
of panic and crisis during the pandemic,
boosting exclusivity and silencing alternative voices. Shullenberger highlights
the distorted leftist perception of reality,
based on simulated graphic abstractions
(viruses), and continuous monitoring as a
key issue. He insists that this “hyperreal”
understanding of crisis politics, emerging
from climate change discourse, foreshadows a further entrenchment of authoritarianism and the manipulation of public perception in response to perceived threats. 

In her chapter inspired by Orwell’s concept, Elena Louisa Lange examines pandemic propaganda and argues
that contradictory information regarding masks and vaccines was not due to incompetence but rather a deliberate strategy to suppress independent judgment and autonomy. She claims that by creating an
environment where nothing can be trusted or questioned, those in power maintain
control, producing a climate of uncertainty that stifles critical thinking and dissent,
much like the tactics in Orwell’s fiction.

The following section delves into
the material processes and reasons driving the pandemic in a capitalist environment, including the expansion of the industrial complex, the bureaucratization of the pandemic narrative, and how the
state of emergency hastens the demise of
financial capitalism. Thomas Fazi analyzes how the pandemic accelerated the concentration of power and wealth, harming small businesses while benefiting tech monopolies and pharmaceutical giants.

He describes the formation of a state-corporate symbiosis aimed at constructing a
“biosecurity state” for profit and control
through digital surveillance. In her chapter, Leila Mechoui discusses the institutional incentives behind state responses
during the declared pandemic. Drawing
on Marxist and Weberian theories, she argues that state bureaucracies, with weak
working-class representation and formal
left dominance, used rational means for
irrational goals to achieve “bureaucratic self-preservation”.

Finally, Fabio Vighi’s analysis examines the dynamics of “implosive capitalism,” exacerbated by the aftermath of
the 2007/8 financial crash. He asserts that
the controlled shutdown of the economy
and the rise of biodigital surveillance were
motivated by capitalism’s need to sustain
growth through artificial liquidity injections. The “lockdowns” not only aimed to
inject liquidity and temporarily shield the
real economy from inflation but also provided a pretext for enforcing authoritarian
control. Vighi concludes that capitalism,
confronted with a fragile and unsustainable debt-based system, seeks to migrate
from a liberal to an authoritarian model
through a series of emerggencies to maintain its power structure.

The third section of the book evaluates national case studies, focusing on
Commonwealth countries and Germany,
and delves into the absurdities of Canada’s political establishment, the British
managerial elite’s pandemic response,
Germany’s shifting anti-fascist paradigm
during the state of emergency, and Australia’s middle class’s relationship with
pandemic policies. Gord Magill discusses the 2021 Canadian truckers’ protest
against forced pandemic measures, concentrating on aggressive state propaganda and the left’s withdrawal of support
for this worker-led rebellion, which reveals deeper social and political dynamics
in Canada during the state of emergency.

George Hoare identifies the professional-managerial class as the main political
force in Britain’s pandemic response, rising from the working class’s defeat under
neoliberalism. This class, including bureaucrats with questionable degrees (as
seen in Serbia), made use of crises like
Brexit and the pandemic to consolidate
technocratic control and suppress dissent. Michael Burkhardt’s chapter looks
into the German left’s support for pandemic authoritarianism as part of the “anti-fascist struggle”, outlining the manner
in which its opposition to neoliberal austerity distanced itself from the working
class and steered it toward a populist base.

This transformation resulted in a cosmopolitan “lifestyle leftism” that stigmatized
skeptics and critics of official pandemic narratives using similar rhetoric that
simulated class struggle themes. In the final chapter, Nicolas Hausdorf investigates
Australia’s severe pandemic measures,
which amounted to state terror, focusing on the role of the new middle “laptop” class, whose status anxiety and detachment from production made them compliant, uncritical supporters of state policies and scientism."

(https://tokovi.istorije.rs/lat/uploaded/3-2024/Tokovi%20istorije%203%202024%20PRIKAZI%20JOVANOVIC.pdf)


=Review=

Source: CURRENTS OF HISTORY 3/2024

Vladan JOVANOVIĆ:

"Since March 2020, the global
phenomenon known as COVID-19 was
bound to become a legitimate subject of
scholarly study as independent judiciaries still hesitate to react in many instances.
Its potential involvement in the controlled
demolition of the existing social, economic, and political order, as well as orchestrated “emergencies” and crises such as
health, climate, food, migrants, energy,
and regional wars, guarantees that it will
remain a central focus in both natural and
social sciences across various disciplines.

As skilled interpreters of the past and contemporaries, historians, along with social
scientists and other humanities researchers, are in charge of responding promptly to current events and, at the very least,
providing valuable records to assist future
generations in understanding recent developments.
However, beyond professional
duty and ethical responsibility, personal courage is still essential. Elena Louisa
Lange resigned from her comfortable position at the University of Zurich due to
moral concerns and chose to pursue the
uncertain path of a free intellectual, opposing the passive observation of the decline of educational programs shaped by
unelected, obscure entities. Something
similar happened to David A. Hughes of the University of Lincoln, who is a fierce
opponent of the expansion of “techno-feudalism” and “biodigital totalitarianism”, both of which opened the door
for unconventional class conflict that he
termed “omniwar”. Meanwhile, Fabio Vighi continues to resist at Cardiff University despite his heresy regarding the
convulsions of “senile capitalism”, sustained only through a permanent state of
emergency.

The book’s editors, Elena Louisa Lange and Geoff Shullenberger, argue that
authoritarian measures like lockdowns,
mandated vaccinations, and enforced
mask-wearing have led to the biopolitical
disenfranchisement of human rights and
allowed state-corporate institutions to encroach on private life and individual freedom. Paradoxically, by supporting these
forceful techniques, the left has veered
away from its traditional role as a critic
of capital and state power, eventually reinforcing existing hierarchies and exacerbating suffering for “vulnerable groups”
it aimed to protect. Thus, the major focus
of this book is to unpack the paradox of
the left embracing authoritarian methods,
unfettered capital growth, digital transformation, biopolitics, and social discrimination while conforming to a distorted
neoliberal consensus. The significance of
panic and psychological blackmail as tools
of dominance in late capitalist society is
only one aspect of the debate over whether the left was a passive victim or an active
player in the creation and execution of the
“tyranny of fear”. With insights from several fields and perspectives, the authors
explore the pandemic’s ideological, sociocultural, and economic impacts, advocating resistance to biopolitical technocracy, intimidation, and tyranny that
restrict individual freedoms. 

...

Now we get to the major point of
this edited volume: a surreal quiet and
indifference of most of the Western leftist academic community towards an authoritarian reaction to the alleged health
crisis. Influential philosophers like Slavoj
Žižek, Noam Chomsky, and Judith Butler supported radical restrictions on personal freedoms, reducing individuals to
mere statistics while ignoring social, ethical, and psychological considerations. This
book critiques the “moral bankruptcy” of
the current left and the inversion of the
leftist perspective, which stems from the
blurring of class consciousness, superficial critiques of capitalism, and the neglect
of class dynamics in favor of an imposed
technocratic approach. The authors identified four epistemic inversions in the leftist paradigm during the crisis, focusing on
huge dread and awe of the virus, similar
to religious fetishism, with the “invisible
enemy” exalted to near-sacred status in a
perverted reality.

The book editors attempt to reconstruct the virus’s social dynamics by comparing it to a natural disaster but are still
surprised by the left’s response. Instead
of pragmatism, the left preached fetishization, panic, and hysteria, which governments effectively exploited for control.

...

Both editors believe that the emergence of collectivist cults stimulates ahistorical thinking, erodes traditional structures, and blends political power with
disinherited beings who are detached
from history and algorithmically predictable. The authors contend that internet
censorship restores disconnection, legitimizes policies that erase previous struggles for freedom of speech, and strengthens the biopolitical-technocratic health
regime, eventually promoting a collectivist approach that weakens personal autonomy. In other words, the decrease of
historical consciousness and the normalization of repressive health practices indicate an alarming tendency of sacrificing individual dignity for a homogenized collective identity."

(https://tokovi.istorije.rs/lat/uploaded/3-2024/Tokovi%20istorije%203%202024%20PRIKAZI%20JOVANOVIC.pdf)

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Politics]]