==Description==

[[Tine De Moor]]:

"Following Lourens and Lucassen, craft guilds are defined here as
‘‘organizations that – with the agreement of the local authority – unite
members of the same occupational group, with as their most important
goal the furthering of their economic interests, but not without taking
into account the general well-being of their group as well’’. Due to a
lack of sources, it is often impossible to discover whether late medieval
guilds would have corresponded entirely to that definition from their
first foundation, and they might indeed have developed from relatively
informal institutions eventually to be recognized by local authorities.
Guilds were mainly urban institutions, but in some cases the densely
populated setting in which they developed had, even so, not yet been
awarded the legal title of ‘‘city’’."
(https://www.ris.uu.nl/ws/files/20096187/_PUB_SilentRevolution_IRSH_53_Suppl.pdf)

==History==

[[Tine De Moor]]:

"Given the urban character of guilds, it is quite natural then that
we should see their origins in relation to the process of urbanization
that occurred in western Europe between 900 and 1300. One of the
prerequisites for the emergence of guilds is a certain concentration of
members of the same occupational group in the same location.

If we consider the Netherlands, Lourens and Lucassen claim that in about 1400
a city needed to have reached a population of at least 2,500 inhabitants
before more than a single craft guild would become established, so that
small towns of fewer than 500 inhabitants could not usually support craft
guilds. Although there are exceptions to their rule, there did seem to be a
certain population threshold for guilds to be able to develop. There was,
too, an upper limit to the number of guilds per urban centre, with an
apparent maximum of about 50 guilds per city. Cities such as Amsterdam,
with a much larger than average population, had only a single guild per
4,000 inhabitants (1670: 52 craft guilds per 200,000 inhabitants), but, as a
form of compensation perhaps, each of those organizations included on
average many more members.

The literature offers two interpretations of the rise of merchant and
craft guilds in the centuries between 950 and 1300. The first constructs
a link with the collegia developed during the Roman period; these protoguilds
disappeared in western Europe, whereas they continued to be
important in Byzantium, although by the thirteenth century they had
gradually disintegrated there too.35 Most of them were, like the Roman
collegia, closely supervised and monitored by the state, which contributed
to undermining the ‘‘serviceability of the guild system’’.

The model spread to western Europe via southern Italy, through the
Byzantine link to Amalfi in the tenth century, typically mentioned as the
first site of a ‘‘modern’’ merchant guild. Hickson and Thompson describe
how the ‘‘guild model’’ reached French and Flemish cities from the south,
where the merchants with whom the Italians traded at the Champagne
fairs lived, followed by a spread to western Germany and England in the
twelfth century, to Spanish trading centres around the middle of the
thirteenth century onward, and in the late thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries to the East.

The alternative view contends that guilds developed from informal
groups of merchants – or indeed other social groups – who in northwestern
Europe organized themselves spontaneously in the ninth and
tenth centuries, the first examples being Saxon gegildan known from
tenth-century England,38 or the famous Frisian merchant guild from
Tiel, known from an early eleventh-century reference by Alpertus van
Metz. That body settled disputes between merchants, arranged for the
mutual exchange of credit, and organized the obligatory drinking and
feasting."

(https://www.ris.uu.nl/ws/files/20096187/_PUB_SilentRevolution_IRSH_53_Suppl.pdf)

[[Category:Guilds]]

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Solidarity]]