
=Discussion=

Jay Weinstein:

"We focus here on Sorokin's work at the
Research Center in Creative Altruism at Harvard
University to examine his concept of creative
altruism and to indicate how it can be used by
applied sociologists today. Also relevant are
Sorokin's contributions as viewed by his biographer, Barry V. Johnston. Johnston has stated
that, by the end of his long and productive
career, Sorokin had arrived at an integrated theory of social action and reform. (Johnston 1995:
127-28)

[Sorokin's paradigm] frames a universe of discourse, produces an ontological and epistemological consensus on the nature of social reality and
knowledge; sets malleable boundaries for doing
sociology; and emphasizes the application of
knowledge to practical problems of existence.
(Johnston 1998: 17)

Guided by these principles, applied sociologists are currently in a position to influence
the movement toward a species consciousness
by practicing what Sorokin preached. That is,
the study of creative altruism and the methodologies to put it into practice are key steps in
developing a program for our global village that
works. (Weinstein 2000a: 6)

Following the founding of the Research
Center for Creative Altruism at Harvard
University in the late 1940s, Sorokin explored
the principles of a social science based on an
integral philosophy and a new applied science,
which he called amitology. (see Sorokin 1954a;
b) His integral philosophy, or integralism, is presented as the solution to problems associated
with the most recent stage of a long historical
cycle. This cycle is comprised of three alternating types of cultures: the sensate, the dominant
type in the contemporary Western world; the
ideational, characterized by spirituality and
altruism; and the idealistic, a transitional stage
that occurs between the other two. These are
described and illustrated extensively in his comprehensive four-volume study, Social and
Cultural Dynamics. (Sorokin 1962; also see
Johnston 1995: 143-49) Sorokin believed that
the present stage, which he further defined as
cynical or late sensate, is on the verge of
decline and that a new, idealistic stage might be
emerging (if it could be helped along).

According to Sorokin, each type of culture
is characterized by a particular way of knowing
about reality. The sensate stage is characterized
by the core belief that truth is based on the
senses alone. This is opposed to both the truth
of reason and a supersensory truth, which permeate the idealistic and ideational types of cultures. By the rule of "logico-meaningful" affinity,
whereby specific cultural traits reflect the master values, the sensate stage is dominated by
materialism, greed, and egoism.

With the help of philanthropist Eli Lilly and
others, Sorokin founded the Center to combat
the exclusive role played by sensate beliefs and
practices in contemporary society. In their
place, he sought to promote behavior based on
altruistic values and integralism, which combines all three ways of knowing reality. (the sensory, the rational, and the super-rational) This
combination is the hallmark of idealistic culture.
To Sorokin, the time had come to do something about transforming society through the
application of integralism, to act in a reconstructive way. (Johnston 1995: 127, 128, 240)
As Johnston (1995: 204) observes, however, "the research of the Center failed to start a
significant mass movement or to institutionalize
the study of altruism in the social sciences." The
sociological community showed little interest in
altruism, integralism, or the reconstruction of
society. 

In fact Sorokin's work, especially the
earlier volumes of Dynamics, was criticized as
metaphysical. Johnston (1995: 174) suggests the
reason for this negative reaction:

- Sorokin's methods simply will not sustain his arguments with the precision he desires...what he has
produced in Dynamics and the works that follow
is a broad and valuable philosophy of history. It is
a start, not a science...

As Johnston also points out, the critics
failed to see that in the fourth volume of
Dynamics Sorokin had arrived at integralism, a
theory of social reform. It appears that by then
the intellectual community was no longer interested. Nevertheless, many sociologists now
believe that the time has come to continue the
work that began with Sorokin's explorations."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)


=More information=

See the article:

'''* Creative Altruism: The Prospects for a [[Common Humanity]] in the Age of Globalization. By Jay Weinstein. Journal of Futures Studies, August 2004, 9(1): 45 - 58'''

URL = https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]