
From an article in Kosmos Journal, entitled Collective Boddhisattvas, by Jean-Francois Noubel, at
http://www.thetransitioner.org/Kosmos_Journal_Spring_2008_JF_Noubel.pdf


=Excerpts=

==Part One: The importance of Invisible Architectures==


"Collective Intelligence,
Wisdom and Consciousness (CIWC)
as a discipline provides complementary paths
and a new understanding of how collective
wisdom can emerge. It observes and describes
how social collectives operate as
wholes; how consciousness expands through
evolution by creating new forms in which to
manifest; and how the judicious combination
of architectures can help individuals and organizations
enter into and remain in wisdom.


'''What is the Purpose of Architectures?'''

Architectures are structured spaces in which
we evolve individually and collectively. They
provide initiatory contexts of constraints and
freedom for consciousness to confront itself,
generate creative energy, and overcome limits
through quantum leaps and thus take possession
of new, wider spaces. More
experience and mastery will certainly be
realized within new architectures.
Some architectures are directly accessible to
our senses (building architecture, space occupation).

Others are only partially perceived
(language, money, social conventions, time).
In the first case we will refer to visible
architectures and in the second to invisible
architectures. We will use architectures in
the plural to refer to this broadest sense that
includes both.


'''Physical Architecture'''

The easiest, most intuitive and pragmatic way
to understand how architectures work is via
architecture itself. Physical architecture (for
buildings) and space occupation is the science
of designing three dimensional spaces
and relational configurations among people
for specific individual and collective outcomes,
liberating certain possibilities and
diminishing others. Offices, stadiums, theaters,
city halls, jails, hospitals—different outcomes
for different architectures. The same
group of people will manifest different individual
and collective behaviors depending on
which physical architecture they are placed.
For instance, we all know that placing a
group of people either in rows or in a circle
shifts the whole context.


'''Invisible Architectures'''

Invisible architectures are more challenging
to grasp because they operate mostly in
worlds that are not directly perceivable to our
biological senses. The role of invisible
architectures is as important—even more
important in many cases—than visible architectures.
Examples of invisible architectures
are language, money, social codes, time,
cultural beliefs and the law. Let's take a quick
look at the first three of these in order to
become more familiar with them.


'''Language is generative as well as descriptive.'''

Words and grammar can expand consciousness
or leave it trapped in disempowering
spaces. When Michelle says, “What Allan
said hurts me,” the grammatical structure
suggests the words pronounced by Allan
have an intrinsic property that can create
pain. Ordinary language does not invite
Michelle to step into sovereignty by becoming
accountable for her own pain. Ordinary
language keeps Michelle trapped in the ordinary
consciousness of the society in which
she lives, thus producing conditioned outcomes.

When it is time for Michelle to shift to
stages of consciousness, beyond that of her
society, she will experience difficulties with
ordinary language. It takes some practice to
say “I have created some pain for myself after
Allan said these words.” She will need to
build a new language architecture to express
her new reality."


=Part Two: Money as an invisible architecture=


Although money
has taken digital form, its fundamental
dynamic has remained the same since the
Victorian age. Its built-in architecture is
based on artificial scarcity and centralization
and works like a seed from which wealth and
power concentration, ownership, usury, and
secrecy unfold. The emerging planetary consciousness,
observable through the arising of
the free/open source economy, is about to
invent its own appropriate new monetary
systems that will support its body structure.
In the coming years, anyone will be able to
create currencies. There will be millions of
them. Money is about to follow the path of
distributed networks.

Social codes have emerged through generations
of social interactions. They have become
so natural and deeply embodied that
we are, for the most part, unaware of them.
They serve practical purposes for a given society
in a given culture at a given time. Just
like language and other invisible architectures,
the architecture of social codes can be
redesigned in order to attract wisdom.

Today, organizations can learn how to become
sovereign architects that design whatever
is empowering. Language, money, social
codes, software, law, food, time, cosmogonies—
leave whatever is disempowering;
adopt whatever attracts wisdom in a given
context. Use the clothes appropriate for the
activities you are performing. As an empirical
discipline collective intelligence, wisdom
and consciousness helps us build maps, tools
and technologies for a wisdom-driven social
life. 

Individuals, no matter how highly developed,
will not be able to embrace and respond to
the challenges humanity is currently facing. It
seems now that evolution is seeking the
emergence of global wisdom-driven
organizations. It is now time for collective
Bodhisattvas to emerge."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]