'''* Article: [[Creative Altruism]]: The Prospects for a [[Common Humanity]] in the Age of Globalization. By Jay Weinstein. Journal of Futures Studies, August 2004, 9(1): 45 - 58'''

URL = https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf


=Abstract=

"This essay examines some of the ways in which applied sociology can contribute to the repertoire of
responses that are available to those seeking to maximize the social benefits and minimize the social costs associated with the phenomenon commonly referred to as "globalization." Based on the later work of Pitirim A. Sorokin – founder and first Chair of the Department of Sociology at Harvard University, we propose to revitalize
the concept of creative altruism and to promote its widespread adoption as a tool of planned sociocultural
change. In the course of this discussion, we focus on the relationship between altruism and "coming to species
consciousness," as understood by classical philosophers and the earliest sociologists, by Sorokin himself, and by
contemporary researchers – especially Kristin Renwick Monroe. We conclude that the ideal of one world at
peace can be achieved – and, indeed must be achieved when the alternatives are considered – through the conscientious application of altruistic thought and practice."


=Excerpts=

Jay Weinstein:

"For better or worse, humanity is now becoming a
unitary whole in an important and unprecedented way.

Many names have been given to this process; and
because names create realities, it matters very much
which one we use. Some, beginning with the sociologist Harold Innes and his student Marshall McLuhan, see
it as a movement toward a global village. Architect and
futurist Buckminster Fuller referred to the Spaceship
Earth. Now current in many quarters is the term globalization. Some, with good reason, speak of capitalist
imperialism. Others say modernization, Westernization,
Postmodernization, or internationalization. Sociologist
George Ritzer has influenced many with his evocative
term, McDonaldization.

For the purposes of this discussion, we have chosen an alternative formulation, one that might help us
to avoid some of the unwanted connotations that "globalization" and the other terms carry. This is the process
of coming to species consciousness. The phrase characterizes an evolutionary movement toward a state in
which every member of the species Homo sapiens is
aware that – beyond all secular differences – a common
humanity exists and demands to be treated as
one."


==[[Species Consciousness]]==

Jay Weinstein:

"Highlights in the History of the Idea
The idea of species consciousness has
been expressed in many different cultures and
historical eras. One of its most powerful statements is found in the Ethics, written in 1677 by
the Dutch-born philosopher Baruch (Benedict
de) Spinoza. According to Spinoza, underlying
all of the diversity that characterizes the various
nations and ethnicities of the world, there is a
fundamental "harmony." He believed that this
harmony could be understood if we think clearly about the nature of humanity, and that it
would be realized if and when people act reasonably toward one another. "Nothing can be in
more harmony with the nature of any given
thing than other individuals of the same
species," Spinoza wrote. "Therefore for man in
the preservation of his being and the enjoyment
of the rational life there is nothing more useful
than his fellow-man who is led by reason"
(Ethics Part IV, Appendix: proposition IX).

Spinoza and those who embrace his viewpoint believe that a species consciousness is
possible; in fact, they assume that it is inherent
in human nature. They also realize, however,
that it is not automatic. For there are many
forces arrayed against it, including habit, superstition, and prevailing public opinion, that must
be overcome before we can understand ourselves "under the form of eternity."1 This is an
important point to remember as we consider
the possible outcomes of the rapid sociocultural
changes now underway. That is, if we are going
to achieve species consciousness, something
must be done: a program must be created and
implemented to bring it about.

Spinoza chose to emphasize a program
that involved a turn toward what he called "reason." This concept suggests that if one thinks
about the human condition in a clear and orderly way it becomes apparent that every individual
person is part of a larger, effective whole. To
paraphrase the words of the poet John Donne:
No one is an island. No one stands alone.
Unfortunately, from a contemporary standpoint, "reason" is an outmoded term that now
can mean just about anything one chooses. For
example, it can be argued that it is reasonable
for a person or group to commit genocide, provided that the deed is planned clearly and systematically (logically).2 Today, the program that
will help us realize our common humanity must
give directives that are far more specific than
"be rational," even if we do understand what
Spinoza really meant in his arguments against
irrational philosophies and theologies.

The German philosopher Immanuel Kant
(who lived during the era of the American and
French Revolutions) was not the first writer to
attempt to improve upon Spinoza's program,
but he is certainly among the best remembered
and most widely read. Kant believed that there
exist certain moral standards - rules of right and
wrong – that allow people to understand themselves "under the form of eternity." These rules
are absolute, or "categorical," in that they are
valid everywhere and always. In addition, such
rules are expressed in the form of a command,
as an "imperative," because one cannot avoid
acting in the way(s) they stipulate and still be
considered an ethical person.

...

In recognizing the importance of eternal,
moral rules in the movement toward a species
consciousness, Kant goes beyond the assertion
that "reason" is all that is required to understand
and achieve a common humanity."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)


==[[Altruism]]==

Jay Weinstein:

"Comte coined the terms
whereby we still refer to these contrasting
modes of action: altruism and egoism. Using
Comte's word, then, the Golden Rule and the
categorical imperative counsel altruism. Thus
the essential connection was made between
altruism, on one hand, and the movement
toward species consciousness."

- "Comte considered altruism and egoism to be two
distinct motives within the individual. He did not
deny the existence of self-serving motives, even for
helping; the impulse to seek self-benefit and self-gratification he called egoism. But Comte believed
that some social behavior was an expression of an
unselfish desire to "live for others." It was this second type of motivation to benefit others that he
called altruism."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)




==[[Common Humanity]]==

Jay Weinstein:

"The concept of a common humanity with
a consciousness of itself is very old and widely
discussed. In fact, for many centuries in
Western and Eastern philosophy the idea was
believed to be self evident to anyone who could
reason properly. Ultimately, such beliefs were
dismissed as too vague and/or ambiguous.

However, in several instances, such as in
Immanuel Kant's writings on morality, philosophers attempted to make the quest for a common humanity more specific. In the early 19th
century, Kant in particular proposed in his
moral imperative a certain kind of thought and
action that would be an effective means to
achieve the goal of species consciousness. At
about the same time, Auguste Comte, founder
of the discipline of sociology, coined the term
to refer to such thought and action that is used
to this day: altruism. In this way, the links
between a common humanity, species consciousness, reason, moral imperatives, and
altruism were forged.

In Karl Marx's revolutionary program to
create a common humanity, one finds the key
principle of a group in-itself. This indicates that
group-consciousness, including in this context
species-consciousness, is the product of common life conditions plus a shared understanding
by members of the group (species) that they
have common interests - that the wellbeing of
each depends on the wellbeing of all. Also necessary is a common "other" against which the
group (species) can identify itself. In the case of
the human species, in particular, this other is
nature, with which humanity as a whole can
and must cooperate in order to survive and
prosper. Because, it appears, the achievement
of species consciousness is neither automatic
nor inevitable, the need for a program to guide
the quest is once more apparent."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)


=Discussion=

From the Conclusion:

==Altruism and the Global Village==

Jay Weinstein:

"Popular culture and perspectives like
rational choice theory would have us believe
that altruism as something dangerous, impossible or, at best, of little practical value. Yet, a considerable amount of research in several fields
has demonstrated that it is real and that it has
an important role to play in human relations. In
fact, the theories of Sorokin, Monroe, and others have suggested that altruism can mitigate if
not solve many of the social problems encountered today, including such controversial issues
as religious and ethnic intolerance, family crisis,
health care, and homelessness. More than a
century after Comte's death and decades after
Sorokin's, the study of altruism is now beginning to make inroads into our educational system, while people everywhere are beginning to
take altruism seriously as a behavioral option to
"rational selfishness."

Sociology in general and applied sociology
in particular has a major role to play in these
changes. For there is obviously a close connection between prosocial behavior and the belief
that all humans have common needs and interests. Moreover, the existence of a common
humanity is a core belief among sociologists.

Indeed the sociological enterprise is premised
on the view that as a species humanity is essentially one, but that socialization and other sociocultural forces create profound differences
among us. Those who teach sociology have
nothing to teach if it isn't this: Whereas there
are degrees of altruism, the idea of "degrees" of
humanity, from less to more, higher to lower,
etc. has no scientific basis.

In this light, all of us, experts and laypersons alike, would benefit substantially from further study of Monroe's observation that perspective promotes altruism. The perception
that a common humanity exists and the type of
thinking related to this perception can lead to
altruistic behavior. This is an especially important task because intolerance, homelessness,
and many other of today's social problems are
caused or intensified by egocentric, self-interested behavior and the perception of some
people that others are less than human. Many
problems can be solved if we follow Kant's categorical imperative. We know that people in situations of conflict often do forget that we are all
human. They tend to deal with others in terms
of stereotypes or as enemies. The failure to recognize our common humanity does stand in
the way of effective resolution of a large proportion of the problems faced in today's society.
The mission to insert into our practical
work the imperative that others are no less
human than ourselves is both timely and potentially effective. And it may be an important step
toward improving human relations before it
really is too late. Of course, as is true of other
well-intended programs, this is much easier said
than done. In this case, there are several obstacles to putting these sound - but not especially
novel - ideas into practice. One is the tenacity of
egoistical models in the social sciences and in
culture generally, and the consequent failure to
grant altruism a serious role in human affairs.
Strong opposition to altruism exists in beliefs
such as those outlined above. That is, in our
type of culture altruism is understood to be
deviant behavior.

"Good neighbors" and saints are deviants who
rise above the level of moral conduct demanded
by the official law. Their actions are "superlegal."
Some of these superlegal actions do not conflict
with the official law; others result in conflict
between the good-neighbors and saints on the one
hand, and the official law and government on the
other (Sorokin 1950: 208).

Sorokin believed that the more altruistic a
person is, the more likely he or she is to come
in conflict with society's prevailing norms. He
also thought that altruistic people are more likely to come in conflict with others who, for one
reason or another, feel uncomfortable about
altruistic behavior. Thus, learning about altruism also entails trying to understand why altruism is viewed as a threat.
Can there be a pure and lofty altruism, not generating collision and conflict...tentatively, the answer
is that there is such a way, but that it requires
among other conditions, an extension of our "ingroup" feelings to all humanity; and this extension
must be real, manifested not only in our speech
reactions but in our entire behavior...Jesus rightly
said that he brought not only peace but also the
sword. So does any unselfish person or deed!
(Sorokin 1950: 83-84)

As we gain a better understanding of why
some people are more altruistic than others
and what shapes altruistic acts may take, stereotypes will cease to limit our ability to resolve
many of today's problems such as sexism or ethnic conflict. Learning about "good neighbors" as
deviants may reveal much about the moral values and ethical boundaries of ordinary people.
By insisting that we are all human beings, all
part of one world, we may be able to be more
effective actors. We would then be prepared to
meet the challenges of this late sensate era and,
at last, to realize the promise sensed by the first
sociological students of altruism, especially
Comte. That is, the promise of what Sorokin
(1948: 225) called "the ennoblement of human
personality."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Articles]]