

=Description=

Will Kraft:

"The Creative Commons foundation recently released the CC+ protocol,
which allows authors and other content makers to release their work
for free (under the Creative Commons noncommercial license) and charge
a fee for commercial use at the same time.

CC+ is an option for those who wish to dual-license their work. It's
not a new license in and of itself. Rather, it's an extension that may
be applied to the existing Creative Commons license.

A project that is already under the Creative Commons noncommercial
license does not have to be relicensed to invoke CC+. Instead, an
author may add a licensing clause that causes commercial usage
conditions to be governed by CC+. Under CC+, authors may reserve other
rights in addition to commercial usage, such as access to warranties
and permission to use without attributing.

CC+ has many uses and advantages for both commercial and noncommercial
users. For example, an artist may record a song or create digital
artwork that may be freely distributed across the Internet, but
remixing or derivative works are forbidden under the free license.
With CC+, the artist may make provisions for those interested in
creating derivative works by allowing such actions in exchange for
licensing fees. CC+ accommodations of a work may be handled directly
by the artist or by an approved affiliate.

According to a document released by Creative Commons, CC+ is intended
to compete with commercial content by allowing artists and authors to
have the best of both worlds. It's sort of a middle ground between
open source and commercial licensing. In this way, the Creative
Commons foundation predicts that content makers will continue to adopt
Creative Commons licenses instead of making their own."
(http://campustechnology.com/articles/57103/)


=More Information=

#[[Creative Commons]]


[[Category:IP]]