
'''= intended for activists and culture workers in situations of distress as a result of their professional work.'''

URL = http://creativeresistancefund.org


=Description=

The Creative Resistance Fund is intended for activists and culture
workers in situations of distress as a result of their professional
work. Distress situations may include verbal threats, imprisonment or
legal persecution, violent attack, professional or social exclusion,
or harassment. In assessing potential cases, freeDimensional confirms
the validity of the persecution faced with trusted outside sources and
conducts its own independent research. We also consider the extent to
which our limited resources can be effective in relation to the
urgency of the situation. Download the application form here.


The Creative Resistance Fund provides small distress grants to people
in danger due to their use of creativity to fight injustice. The fund
may be used to evacuate a dangerous situation; to cover living
expenses while weighing long-term options for safety; or to act on a
strategic opportunity to affect social change. The first round of
grants was underwritten by Freedom to Create. The Fund works with the
Festival Against Censorship in Bilbao, Spain to  make one travel and
accommodation grant annually.

Grants are typically made within two weeks from the time of
application if approved by the Creative Resistance Fund committee,
which is made up of the Executive Director and two to three board
directors. The committee is currently recruiting additional members.

'''Partners:'''

The Creative Resistance Fund is made possible by a start-up grant from
Freedom to Create; in-kind support from the Bilbao Festival Against
Censorship / Producciones Serrano; and freeDimensional’s general
operating support from the Sigrid Rausing Trust."


[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Culture]]