

=Description=

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


"In digital design communities Creative Commons licenses were already
in use at a rather early stage, e.g. for sharing clip art images,
graphics or photos on platforms such as flickr.com. Yet what is really
interesting are the first steps out into the material design world
of real objects. More and more projects, experiments and examples
for how the open source idea can be carried over into the real world
can be subsumed under the notion of “open design”.

Creative Commons is a US-based non government organization
that has been publishing standardized license texts for copyrighted
content since 2001. What is so special about it is the fact that
these licenses have meanwhile been adapted to the respective national
copyright laws in more than 50 countries and their clauses
and freedoms are in force everywhere. The person who takes center
stage is the creator, who can grant certain freedoms to use his or her
work. With the help of a license kit the creator chooses if the work
can be used commercially or non-commercially, if it can be remixed
or not and if the same conditions shall apply for the remixes (i.e. any
resulting copies or adaptations are also bound by the same licensing
agreement) as specified in the copyleft principle from the world
of free software. The only condition in all six Creative Commons
licenses is the following: The creator must always be named as a
source. Free software with its manifold licenses has been the model
for the idea of Creative Commons licenses. “All rights reserved” of
classic copyright has turned into “Some rights reserved”. So creators
can enter their works into a large shared pool of knowledge and
creativity, and in the best case scenario, the works can be further
processed without any further inquiry and additional agreements."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)




=Discussion=

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


"In digital design communities Creative Commons licenses were already in use at a rather early stage, e.g. for sharing clip art images, graphics or photos on platforms such as flickr.com. Yet what is really interesting are the first steps out into the material design world of real objects. More and more projects, experiments and examples for how the open source idea can be carried over into the real world can be subsumed under the notion of “open design”.

Creative Commons is a US-based non government organization that has been publishing standardized license texts for copyrighted content since 2001. What is so special about it is the fact that these licenses have meanwhile been adapted to the respective national copyright laws in more than 50 countries and their clauses and freedoms are in force everywhere. The person who takes center stage is the creator, who can grant certain freedoms to use his or her work. With the help of a license kit the creator chooses if the work can be used commercially or non-commercially, if it can be remixed or not and if the same conditions shall apply for the remixes (i.e. any resulting copies or adaptations are also bound by the same licensing agreement) as specified in the copyleft principle from the world of free software. The only condition in all six Creative Commons licenses is the following: The creator must always be named as a source. Free software with its manifold licenses has been the model for the idea of Creative Commons licenses. “All rights reserved” of classic copyright has turned into “Some rights reserved”. So creators can enter their works into a large shared pool of knowledge and creativity, and in the best case scenario, the works can be further processed without any further inquiry and additional agreements." (http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design) 



=Examples=

==[[Ronen Kadushin]]==

URL = ronen -kadushin .com

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


"The Berlin-based designer Ronen Kadushin is one of the pioneers of
open design. Already quite early he experimented with publishing
his raw data under a Creative Commons license. This is what motivated
him: “It should encourage designers to share their creativity
and to create a collection of high quality products.” Thus he shares
the objects he designed such as furniture or lamps online under
a non-commercial CC license. Owners and users of a laser cutter
can manufacture the products using the digital template, e.g. laser
machining them from a steel sheet and manually forming the final
product. In this way computer-controlled production technologies
and manual work go hand in hand.

The CC-BY-NC license grants the right to use for private (non-commercial)
purposes if all derivative works are shared under a license
identical to the license that governs the original work. If you want
to commercially produce the objects, you have to conclude a contract
with the designer.
 
Yet Kadushin mainly produces and distributes his objects in a conventional
manner. Publicly sharing the designs under a CC license
is just an additional distribution channel. Along with the creations
of other designers his works are available on platforms such
as “Movisi – The inspirational furniture store”. The raw designs
can be found on his website, but also on platforms such as “flexible stream”.

Digital distribution of the designs under a CC license facilitates decentralized
production and distribution. Thus the designs can be
found in countries where designers otherwise would have never exported
their products nor would have advertised for themselves. So
if somebody finds a design there and is interested in producing it, he
or she can experiment with the design for a start and then possibly
agree on jointly producing it with the designer.

...


The examples illustrate that CC licenses are used for
different reasons and for different uses in the field of
the design of physical objects. Some share their designs
in addition to traditional local production, as a source
of inspiration for others, to advertise themselves in
order to maybe establish new contacts this way etc (as
is the case with Ronen Kadushin or the fashion label
Pamoyo). Others aim at improving a design by means
of collaborative work, as is the case with many designers
of 3D printers or Arduino hackers. Design projects
that are collaboratively laid out from scratch,
like Makerbot perhaps, are not yet that widespread.


What we see now are tentative first steps and open
design pioneers are drawing additional attention due
to a still small market which can easily be kept track
of. But more and more young designers are taking the
philosophy behind open design, sharing and collaboration,
for granted. Open design has come to stay."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==Pamoyo .com==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


"The Berlin-based label Pamoyo introduces
the ideas of open design into
the world of fashion. It aims at creating
sustainably produced fashion based on
public domain patterns and designs.
“Live green, look good“ is Pamoyo’s
motto, and Pamoyo wants to be more
than just a fashion label. “For all those
who want to create their own fashion
patterns instructions are available as
to produce one’s own favourite Pamoyo
style; e.g. to breathe new life into the
worn-out T-shirt you simply cannot
live without” – this is how the makers
of the label explain one of their motives.

The goal is to build a community
of designers and people with a sense of
style in general who are interested in
the philosophy of openness and sustainability.


When they use CC licenses for their
patterns the people behind Pamoyo
want, among other things, to acknowledge
the creative process and make
it visible – a process that started out
a long time before me, the designer,
and still is a long way from completion
when I have completed my design.
Further activities such as clothing upcycling
events shall encourage users to
reveal the producers in themselves to a
greater extent. Is it the designer’s role
to sketch out or deliver finished products
or rather to provide help and advice
for other people in their aesthetic
work and to inspire these people’s own
creativity with his or her designs?"
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==openwear .org==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


"Openwear is a platform
experimenting with new collaborative
and open approaches to both the production
and distribution of fashion.

For this openwear worded their own
license, which is similar to the CC licenses,
but in addition aims at establishing
an open and collaborative
openwear brand. For example, you are
obliged to publish a derivative design
in the openwear community. This is
part of this specific agreement (http://
openwear.org/info/license)."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)

==Arduino==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


The Arduino project is becoming
more and more popular among designers
and artists. The platform consists of
hardware and software and has been
developed further as an open source
project since 2001. Its core elements are
a simple microcontroller which can be
triggered with a rather simple development
environment. While the development
environment was licensed under
the GNU GPL, the hardware design
was published under the Creative Commons
ShareAlike license, which grants
extensive freedom of usage, so that the
CAD files can be developed further and
shared.

Arduino products are extensively
used at art schools for creating interactive
installations and the hacker community
too has quickly accepted the
project and contributed its share to its
success in recent years."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)

==Fritzing==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:


Building on Arduino the Fritzing
project at the Fachhochschule Potsdam
– University of Applied Sciences
is developing software and a community
with the help of which users can
document and collaboratively develop
further prototypes. Moreover, Fritzing
is said to facilitate the creation of PCB
layouts for professional production.

At the same time this platform serves
as a possible application scenario for
hands-on electronics teaching.

Software and platforms for documentation,
sharing and collaborative
further development of designs for objects,
hardware and fashion are vital
tools in the open design process. A lot
is still up-and-coming. Such software
tools and platforms should, on the one
hand, enable us to come up with documentation
of a plan that facilitates
its full reproduction but, on the other,
allow for the creation of derivative designs.
Last but not least, they should
be able to handle authorship issues.
(Which change was added by which
user?)"
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==Makerbot==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:

The Makerbot project offers another
outlook on future trends. The company
of the same name produces an opensource
rapid prototyping 3D printer.

With this device it is possible to produce
plastic objects up to maximum
dimensions of 10x10x15 cm at affordable
prices and thus print out 3D designs
in plastic. The Makerbot printers are
sold as assembly kits (and they are, by
the way, themselves open design products,
i.e. they are permanently developed
further by a community). A large
community of designers has gathered
around 3D printing technology who
share their designs and further develop
the technology. The company-owned
platform Thingiverse enables users to
publish their documentation and raw
data and to collaboratively develop
them further."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==Thingiverse==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:

"The designs on the Thingiverse platform
are published under CC licenses.
People experiment with new possibilities
of 3D printing and the creation
of modified and technically improved
works is more often than not clearly
welcome. The more people deal with a
design and check out how an object can
be technically improved, the more fully
developed a printing template eventually
becomes. E.g. already on the homepage
you can find the category “Newest
Derivatives”."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==Daily Dump==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:

"Another illustrative example for the
use of CC licenses for open design in
practice comes from a small business
in India. The Daily Dump offers composters
made of Terracotta, plus plenty
of information on the subject of composting.
The entire business model, the
design of the pots, info material and all
sorts of other items used in the business
process, such as aprons etc, are publicly
available on the Internet under a CC
license. Prospective business partners
can experiment with the material; if
they want to open their own shop and
enter a business relationship with Daily
Dump, they have to make a contract
with the parent company.

If this business is successful it can
achieve much more than only one single
small composting business. 

So what
can be achieved?

* Pots and info material are permanently
improved – and thus of the working
basis for all people involved

* It inspires many people to work in the
composting business

* It tackles the waste problem in India
on a much broader basis

Nevertheless there will be still enough
work on the local level.

But the idea of open design also penetrates
further into other communities.
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


==Open Draw==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:

"OpenDrawCommunity wants to create
a shared pool for the creation of etch
templates for model railways which
can be made available for private use
under a Creative Commons license."


==FabLab==

Markus Beckedahl/ Andrea Goetzke:

"In contrast to open source software,
where everybody can work on a computer
at home, the production of design
objects always requires materials and
in many cases specific tools, from soldering
irons and sewing machines to
laser cutters and 3D printers. Thus,
along with the open design movement,
we have also seen the emergence of
places where tools can be collaboratively
used. In many countries of the
world there are meanwhile so called
Fab Labs, which make tools for the
production of open design objects
available. Open Design City in Berlin
is one such example."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)




[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Licensing]]