
'''= "The focus of the group is to promote credentialing innovations based primarily on their technical merit".'''

URL = https://www.w3.org/community/credentials/2014/08/06/call-for-participation-in-credentials-community-group/


=Description=

"A “credential” is a qualification, achievement, quality, or piece of information about an entity’s background such as a name, government ID, payment provider, home address, or university degree.

The purpose of the Credentials Community Group is to discuss, research, document, prototype and test credential storage and exchange systems for the Web. This work is done in order to make progress toward possible future standardization and interoperability of both low and high-stakes credentials. The goal of this Group is to forge a path for a secure, decentralized system of credentials that would empower both individual people and organizations on the Web to store, transmit, and receive digitally verifiable proof of qualifications and achievements. In addition to documentation, this Group collaborates on and shares various proof-of-concept solutions and components through open source methods, unencumbered by patents or royalties.

In general, this Community Group provides an inclusive venue where credentialing solutions, regardless of their origin, can be incubated, evaluated, refined, and tested. The focus of the group is to promote credentialing innovations based primarily on their technical merit. This approach invites competing technical designs to be submitted and incubated in the same group. The hope is that this strategy will lead to either the merging of the best aspects of each technical design, or a clear differentiation emerging between alternative designs."
(https://www.w3.org/community/credentials/2014/08/06/call-for-participation-in-credentials-community-group/?)

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Movements]]