
'''* Article: Massimo de Angelis, Crises, Movements and Commons. Borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012.'''

URL = http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf


=Abstract=

"Commons movements’ first goal is addressing directly different needs of reproduction by mobilising the natural and creative resources at their disposal. On the other hand, movements of protest mobilise these resources to put forward claims to the state so as to prevent the cut in these resources or their extension. 

For this reason, it is possible to find ideological and class divisions between commons movements and protest movements, which provide a fertile ground for capital to use these divisions and further its livelihood and ecological, crisis-ridden agenda. It is therefore becoming a vital necessity to develop paradigmatic horizons that favour an epistemic decoupling from capital, and a sense of how it is possible to link the formation of resilient alternatives that address the problems of ecology and livelihood posed by these crises, while at the same time building social movements that favour these alternatives and open more spaces for their development. We therefore face the double problem of how to link together the positive movement for commons to the negative movement of class. This paper seeks to shed some light on the relation between commons and capital today in the context of current crises, the patterns and risks of commons ‘cooptation’ by market mechanisms, and the potentials and opportunities for decoupling from capital."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.htm)


=Excerpts=

Massimo de Angelis:

"We can postulate the 
development of four phenomena. 

First, the growth of struggles of different sectors within the global 
society throwing a spanner in the wheel and resisting the reduction in 
rights and entitlements necessary for further neoliberal governance of 
the crisis, against debt and demanding some form of re-distributive 
justice to the state. This is what we will refer to as social movements. 


Second, the growth of collective self-help solutions to the problems of 
social reproduction faced by communities. This corresponds to what 
we call the development of the commons. 

Third, the development and 
refinement of capital’s commons cooptation strategies, or what I have 
elsewhere (De Angelis 2012) called  commons fix. 

Fourth, the
development and refinement of strategies of repression of struggles 
and enclosures of commons. 

In this paper I will not discuss in detail
these four postulated developments, but problematise the interrelation 
among the first three for the purpose of contributing to the debate over 
the establishment of alternatives to capitalism. 


Indeed, what underpins this analysis is an attempt to answer, or at 
least develop a framework with which to start to answer an important 
naïve question. The role of naïve questions, Socrates taught us, is to 
problematise the systems of knowledge at the basis of our certainties, 
of our mental schemes through which we give meaning to the world 
around us and thus intervene in it. In this paper I want to address very 
big and naïve questions, in fact, meta-questions at the basis of what 
we may call a critical theory of the commons.  How  can social 
movements and struggles change the world? And how can they do it 
in the direction of a far better place for all (or at least the ‘99%’), more 
convivial and cohesive, socially economically and environmentally 
just, where dignity, peace, freedom, autonomy, solidarity, conviviality, 
equality are not so much articles of faith, but guiding values of an 
orienting compass of ongoing social transformation? I do not intend 
nor aspire to provide a firm answer, as this can really be generated 
through praxis. 

Here I only want to discuss few points that I believe 
must be considered as part of the answer. 

I begin by arguing that first, in order to ground this question in the 
broad field of power relations, we must have an understanding of the 
systemic forces we are up against. Second, the fact that these are 
systemic forces implies that struggles—even if they seek a radical 
transformation of the system and even when ‘victorious’—can be 
absorbed and become part of the system (co-opted), thus renewing it 
and sustaining it. This gives rise to the first fallacy we have to guard 
from, what I term the  fallacy of the political. This is the belief that a 
political recomposition following sustained social movements could 
generate and sustain, through any sort of political representation, a 
radical change in social relations and systems of social reproduction. I 
argue this is not possible given the (adaptive) nature of capitalist 
system. Together with two other fallacies that I briefly discuss (of the 
model and of the subject) the fallacy of the political points crucially at 
the need to distinguish between social and political revolution or, in 
terms of the systems that need to underpin these in order to sustain 
social and political revolution, between commons and movements. 

This paper thus discusses the relation between these two 
(correspondent to the first two contemporary development I have 
identified above). 

Commons have as a first goal that of addressing directly the various 
needs of reproduction of different communities by mobilising the 
natural and creative resources at their disposal or that they are able to 
identify and reclaim from other social forces. Often these resources 
may be pooled across a community (an association for example), but 
they can also be reclaimed from the detritus left by capital’s 
accumulation (such as Argentinean cooperatives in factories 
abandoned by their owners, or empty buildings or land left aside for 
speculative purposes) or by mass movements against their 
privatisation (like the Bolivian ‘water war’ in 2001 that saw the 
mobilisation of grassroots water associations initiating a mass 
movement). If commons have a long tradition of turning  into 
movements, on the other hand social movements of protest mobilise 
resources to put forward claims to the state so as to prevent cut in 
entitlements or demand their extension. Recent movements such as 
the Arab Spring in 2011 and the Occupy movement in  2011-2012 
showed that movements do this by pooling resources and 
coordinating actions and decisions through inclusive and horizontal 
decision making processes. Movements therefore are based on 
commons—without which they could not have materiality—and 
commons require movements to keep capital’s claims at bay and 
extend their organisational and productive reach. 


In the literature on social movements or commons this broad 
relationship between commons and movements is insufficiently 
problematised and theorised. To offer an example from the literature 
on commons, the seminal extensive work of Elinor Ostrom so much 
focused on the sustainability of commons, offers little guidance on the 
need for commons to organize vis-à-vis external social forces such as 
capital  in order to be sustainable.

In what follows, by discussing 
some relations between commons, movements, and capital, I aim at a 
first tentative answer to the meta-question: our world can be changed 
by developing a new mode of production (social revolution through 
commons) while keeping at bay the old one and reclaiming resources 
from it (political revolution, through movements)."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf)


==Three Fallacies==

===The Fallacy of the Political===

Massimo de Angelis:

"We are facing here the first of the three methodological fallacies I am 
going to discuss in this paper insofar as the development of a 
framework addressing our meta-question is concerned. 

This is the  fallacy of the political, that is, the idea that a political 
recomposition could generate and sustain, through any sort of political 
representation, a radical change in social relations and systems of 
social reproduction. My stand is that political recompositions are 
certainly necessary to create momentum for change by initiating chain 
reactions of sociality and channelling social energies into particular 
directions with efficient thrust. In this sense, phases of political 
recomposition and the correspondent forms of political representation 
are important for opening up opportunities for the radical development 
of new social relations and systems. However in themselves they do 
not radically change social systems like capital into something else: 
they can only  perturbate them. Capital reacts and adapt to these 
perturbations, developing new forms, absorbing, enclosing, 
channelling, co-opting and repressing, and the mix of these will 
depend on the cost and benefit calculus in given situations. 

 
Let us take for example the case that a major ‘victory’ is acquired 
following a moment of strong political recomposition. Say that a new 
system of welfare entitlements is introduced, as it has been in the post 
World War II period in different forms and it is now auspicated by 
many sections of the European movement. How do we understand 
this victory in terms of a fundamental change in social relations?  
Does it bring us a step ‘in the right direction’? My claim is that the 
introduction of a new system of generous entitlement is not a change 
in capitalist system per se, nor a step in the right or wrong direction 
towards this change, but a moment of a feedback loop, a perturbation 
that capital will attempt to interiorise and adapt to. Whether this will be 
possible or what this adaptation will amount to  concretely we cannot 
anticipate. What we can say with certainty though is that adaptation 
will involve capital searching for ways to reproduce itself in the new 
situation it faces. This is what we call capital’s strategies. Thus, true, 
the introduction of this system of entitlements would begin to favour 
one side of the capitalist social relation—say, the working class—but 
within the overall acceptance of the systemic relations that ties it to 
capital. And since capital is fundamentally made of social relations 
and processes that must, in the totality, bring about accumulation of 
wealth, and since this is based on exploitation of labour and 
expropriation of natural resources, this adaptation would require the 
active participation of the ‘working class’. How capital’s concession is 
articulated to a particular process of capitalist development depends 
on the nature of the deal that is institutionalised in particular historical 
contexts among different classes and strata in society, and on how 
some parts of the global working class are perhaps more eager than 
others to accept the deal as it  put them in far better position than 
others. It also depends on how effective are strategies of 
marginalisation and domestication of those sections made invisible 
and excluded by the deal.


This has some crucial implications. Everybody knows since the early
opening shots of political economy in the seventeenth century that to 
provide the working class with the means for security (‘welfare’ 
disconnected from work) is to increase the power for its refusal of 
capital’s discipline, unless of course a ‘work ethic’ is assumed in the 
cultural DNA of the working class. But this assumption is possible only 
if we postulate processes of subjectification and domestication of the 
working class to capital’s norm, which depends on disciplinary 
mechanisms involving rewards and punishments (De Angelis 2007). 


However, at any given time, rewards may become short (demands for 
rewards higher) and punishments inadequate (they do not deter from 
particular anti-accumulation actions) in relation to the particular 
working-class aspirations. And working class aspirations can change 
as easily as generations do in the course of life. As radicals engaged 
in the confrontation with capital in a particular historical moment, we 
regard the possibility to refuse capitalist work as a good thing. 


However, as radicals who problematise transformation of social 
systems, we know that this refusal, this ‘no!’, is only a precondition to 
the development of alternative social systems and it does not 
automatically in and by itself develop alternatives social 
arrangements, new forms of sociality and cooperation on the basis of 
this refusal. Alternatively, if they do develop them at some scale, they 
seem unable to effectively contrast the hegemony of capital. Precisely 
because of this, capital is able to use the new reforms for its own 
ends, gain some time, and wait for the right moment where it can 
decompose the working class and take the entitlements away. The 
alternatives therefore are organisationally outflanked. For example, 
the postwar period the concession of a welfare state following the 
cycle of struggle that begun with the Soviet Revolution, major 
movements of political recomposition following the Soviet Revolution 
has turned into a means of discipline and conformity (through for 
example threats of  welfare withdrawal, policies and cultures that 
promote patriarchy in nuclear families) and growth (divisive of the 
working class and environmentally catastrophic consumerism). At the 
core of these concessions there were the ‘productivity deals’ bringing 
together representatives of the workers (unions), state and employers. 

It was only within the framework of these deals—what I termed the 
social microfoundations of economics (De Angelis 2000)—that 
profitability could be made compatible with growing wages, full 
employment policies and a system of welfare entitlements. All the 
same, it was only within the framework of the neoliberal deal following 
the 1970s cycle of struggle (individual lifestyle freedoms, declining 
real wages, cheap products due to globalisation and cheap and easy 
credit in exchange with your active engagement within the market) 
that profitability was made compatible with the maintenance of 
standards of living of a working class with middle-class expectations. 


When these deals collapse due to the inability of the adapted system 
to bring about further accumulation within the framework of the deal, 
or due to the fact that the excluded from the deal are launching a new 
phase of political recomposition and perturbates the system, an 
impasse is generated. The process of capital’s adaptation to its own 
concessions is the process of capitalist development, like when in 
order to bypass working-class struggle against the length of the 
working time it is forced to introduce automation.

One could argue that from the perspective of true radical 
transformation beyond capitalism, the problem is the deal, because 
the function of every deal for capital is to allow its reproduction as a 
social system. While formally true (deals do allow the reproduction of 
capital), this position fails to recognise that social reproduction (in 
households, communities, or in ‘services’ such as care, health and 
education) is to a large extent at given times also coupled to the 
reproduction of capitalist social system. This means that deals with 
capital also make it possible to reproduce life in given circumstances. 
The problem posed by our meta-question therefore is now clearer and 
becomes: how do we at the same time set a limit to capital while 
allowing the reproduction of alternative systems that disentangle us 
from it? 

Although political recomposition—cycle of struggles—do not bring 
victories that lead us into radical change  per se, the deals that they 
may ensue (‘victories’) —especially when they are ‘good’ deal—create 
new conditions for refusing market discipline and therefore may create 
momentum for developing new social relations and modes of 
production. For example, many movements in Europe today seem to 
converge towards the demand for a citizen income. It is of course 
possible to claim it as a ‘human right’ or spin it as a new form of social 
charity made necessary by increased poverty and social insecurity, or 
even as a way to save money for state finances, as it would be borderlands 11:2
accompanied by restructuring of other sources of entitlements. In all 
cases, welfare is framed functionally in such a way to correlate some 
aspects of the crisis of social reproduction to capital’s needs for its 
own reproduction. The challenge instead is how we frame this 
demand within a strategic horizon for the development of alternatives. 

A first moment of this is, as many argue, to frame the demand for 
citizen’s income as a compensation for the social cooperation that 
occur beyond the market and that is freely appropriated by capital. 
That is, starting from the labour of care and reproduction in the home 
to production of culture and fashion in the public sphere, the claim to 
capital would be a sort of ‘reproduction debt’, or ‘cooperation debt’. 


However, it will never be possible to live on citizen’s income if the 
latter is the result of a deal with capital, and certainly it will not be 
possible to live with it as citizens with middle-class aspirations. 

However, it may be possible to find ways to make citizen’s income 
‘dysfunctional’ to capital’s reproduction process insofar as it becomes 
a condition for the development of alternatives founded through a 
commoning that creates new subjectivity while meeting needs. For 
example, it would be necessary to think how to pool together part of 
this income and use it to reinforce cooperative forces (commons) that 
satisfy needs and at the same time are founded on radically different 
value practices. 


The  fallacy of the political involves therefore a conception of radical 
change, of ‘revolution’ that is aligned to Marx’s conception of  social
revolution (rather than of Lenin’s  political revolution).


In the first 
place, a social revolution is not the ‘seizure of power’ engineered and 
lead by a political elite (whether through reformist or political 
revolutionary means), but the actual  production of another form of 
power, which  therefore corresponds to the ‘dissolution’ of the old 
society and of the old ‘condition of existence’ (Marx 2005 [1848], p. 
19) or a change in the ‘economic structure of society’ that is 
constituted by ‘the totality of the [social] relations of production’ (Marx 
1977 [1859]). Secondly, precisely for its characteristics of being 
constituent of new social relations reproducing life (and dissolving old 
relations), social revolution cannot be reduced to a momentary event, 
a ‘victory’, but it is epochal and configured by a series of ‘victories’ 
and ‘defeats’. Marx thus speaks of the ‘beginning’ of the ‘epoch of 
social revolution’ (Marx 1977 [1859]), but how long is this epoch, none 
can say (although climate change and the massive crisis of social 
reproduction are putting some constraints and urgencies on the 
horizons).  This distinction between social and political revolution does 
not imply that social revolution is not itself ‘political’. Social revolution 
is political in the sense that it acts as a crucial perturbation of 
established political systems that seek to discipline, order, and 
channel or draw resources from socioeconomic systems. In this 
sense, the old feminist dictum that ‘the private is political’ was spot on, 
in the sense that the  social revolutions the women movements 
managed to produce (or aimed at having) had a crucial impact on 
political systems."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf)


===The Fallacy of the Model===

Massimo de Angelis:

"This priority of social (rather than political) revolution also implies that 
to bring about radical transformation we do not need to have a 
worked-out system to replace the old one before dreaming or wishing 
its demise. Quite the contrary, and indeed, we have here the second
fallacy that I think underpins discourses on radical social change. The 
fallacy of the model is a fallacy of the widespread idea according to 
which in order to replace the current system (model), another system 
(model) needs to be ready to take its place. Unfortunately, this is not 
the way history works, nor systems, any systems. Alternative systems 
can certainly be imagined and problematised, but it is not through 
their ‘implementation’ that the development history of the modes of 
production occurs. Systems are not implemented, their dominance 
emerges, and their emergence occurs through the related processes 
of social revolution and political revolutions, with the former creating 
the source upon which the latter get their power to perturbate capital 
while at the same time develop its autonomy.

The process of  social revolution is ultimately a process of finding 
solutions to the problems other existing social systems cannot solve 
(most likely because they have been generated by them). This implies 
the establishment of multi-scalar systems of social action that 
reproduce life in modes, systemic processes, social relations and 
guiding values and senses that seek an alternative path from the 
dominant ones and that are able to reproduce at greater scale through 
networking and coordination. What has become increasingly clear 
from the various movements in the last few decades, from the 
Zapatistas in the mid-1990s to the Occupy movement in 2011, is that 
whatever alternative put forward by an idiosyncratic section of the 
movement—whether micro or macro, whether participatory budgets, 
reconfiguration of social spending by the central state, transitions 
towns, renewable energy cooperatives, self-managed factories, noncriminalised cyber-activism, defence of traditional communities along 
a river bed threatened by enclosures, general assemblies, selfmanaged public squares and so on—they all depended on some form 
of commons, that is, social systems at different scales of action within 
which resources are  shared, and in which a community defines the 
terms of the sharing, often through forms of horizontal social relations 
founded on participatory and inclusive democracy. These two 
elements of commons come to life through concrete life practices 
developed on the ground, their systems of values quite distinct from 
the value practices of capital and that develops and reproduces the 
social power necessary to sustain and give forms to the commons 
system. This social labour and correspondent forms of cooperation 
located within commons and that (re)produce them is what we call 
‘commoning’. 

The relation between social and political revolution is thus the relation 
between the social systems that underpin them, that is commons and 
movements, and I suggest we should take Marx’s warning about 
radical transformation beyond capitalism very seriously, when he says 
in the Grundrisse that ‘if we did not find concealed in society as it is 
the material conditions of production and the corresponding relations 
prerequisite for a classless society, then all attempts to explode it 
would be quixotic’ (Marx 1973 [1859], p. 158).


Commons are these concealed, latent material conditions in which a 
classless society  can be given form.  In fact, commons are latent 
within society and channel all the support and resources through 
which we reproduce our lives and knowledge. We are generally born 
into one, even if it only consists of interactions with our parents or 
careers, and siblings or friends. As soon as the process of 
socialisation begins,  we reproduce our subjectivities in bodies and 
spirit through engagement in networks of social cooperation which 
confront us with the need to develop values and measures that are 
truly alternative to the subordination of life to profit or that push us to 
learn to adapt to it while keeping a distinct identity. As soon as these 
networks of social cooperation develop into systematic patterns, we 
have all the elements of commons: pool of resources, communities 
and commoning. 


We have therefore that 

1. Commons are diffused and pervasive within the social body. 
They are truly everywhere even if often invisible to us. 

Commons are everywhere because all forms of social 
cooperation, even capitalist forms, require spaces in which 
people pool  recources and engage in non-commodified 
practices. It goes without saying that this also imply that many 
commons are inserted as part of larger non-commons social 
systems that constrain and channels their selection and 
motivations, thus limiting and shaping their autonomy and 
autopoiesis.


2. They are multi-scalar, that is, present at different scales, 
because non-commodfied cooperation can occur at different 
scales, thanks to a large extent to information technology and 
social networks. There are however many social, economic 
and environmental reasons linked to the production of 
commons, social care, food, education and many other 
‘services’ that must be developed locally first. But the very fact 
that commons are multi-scalar implies that these ‘local’ 
commons can be put in networks, so as  local systems of 
reproduction can be enhanced with combined social powers. 

 
3. They are also present at the interstitial level within other, more 
hegemonic and larger, social systems. Just look at the classic 
history of the labour movement (i.e. of a working class inside 
factory systems). We would not be able to understand this 
history as that of a social force without thinking about the 
practices of commoning, of sharing resources, of solidarity, of 
gift that allows the workers as social body to express this force 
(in strikes, in support, in patterns of mutual aid, etc.). More so, 
the labour movement could be a movement, sustain epochal 
strikes, often by socialising the work of reproduction, by 
bringing together (i.e. ‘structurally coupling’) families’ ‘microcommons’, by opening up relations with other social subjects 
that until then were ‘foreign’ to them. 


However, commons cannot be reduced to the stereotypes of 
commons theories, and they do not have a glove fit with  any model 
put forward by any romantic or radical versions of what constitute 
good or socially just systems. We do not have to fall into the fallacy of 
the model. To modern cosmopolitan urban subjectivities, many 
contemporary urban or rural commons are often messy, 
disempowering, claustrophobic,  patriarchal, xenophobic and racist. 
These are obviously not the commons we want for an emancipatory 
perspective, and the strategic intelligence we need to develop should 
really learn to deal with this. But it would be dishonest and dangerous 
to select these out of our theoretical radar just because these are not 
desirable characteristics of the commons we want. The more our 
postmodern condition facilitates subjective nomadism (to escape 
relationships, jobs, places to live, group identities), the easier it is to 
escape the entrapment of these reactionary commons. People do this 
all the time. However, although nomadism allows subjectivities to 
change their  situations, it does not necessarily change the social 
systems through which subjectivities are articulated and it does not 
prevent the reemergence of these reactionary traits in new social 
systems. So, for example, in many parts of Africa, women are 
escaping the commons while demanding land reforms to change 
communal practices embedded in  customary laws that  have often 
discriminated against them, both with respect to land inheritance and 
even land use. In these commons only men have control over land, 
and land rights are required for empowerment and providing 
livelihoods for their children. The risk however is that ‘this movement 
can be used to justify the kind of land reform that the World Bank is 
promoting, which replaces land redistribution with land titling and 
legalisation’, unless of course the demise and/failure of a patriarchal 
form of commons is met with ‘the construction of fully egalitarian 
commons, learning from the example of the organisations that have 
taken this path, like Via Campesina, the Landless Movement in Brazil, 
the Zapatistas’ (Federici 2008, pp. 13-14). Reactionary traits however 
can easily resurface even in ‘politically correct’ commons as soon as 
commoners seek shortcuts to decide questions of system’s 
boundaries (who is part of the commons?), of division of labour and 
distribution of payoffs, or have to deal with the perceived free riding of 
one group of commoners, and so on.


The solutions that commons can offer to tackle problems depend 
obviously on particular  situations, on specific cultural mix of existing 
communities for example and on particular resources available for 
pooling. However, in a situation in which capital and commons are 
both pervasive systems that organise the social, it is clear that often a 
solution  will imply a particular deal between these two, that is a 
particular form of their structural coupling. If together with others I set 
up workers’ cooperatives to sell commodities on the market in order to 
provide a form of income to a community, and I ground this on 
horizontal participation and self-management, I still have to meet 
particular standards, use money, I enter particular institutions that are 
given to me. Also, I will have to engage with the problematic of 
profitability (of competitiveness, of efficiency, of cost minimisation and 
so on), problematic that frame my competing commons (coop) also as 
an individual capitalist system articulated to others via the market, and 
this  in spite of the social objectives and values of the coop.


Any  contemporary  institution located within broader fields of social 
relations, therefore, is the realm in which structural coupling between 
quite different social systems (commons and capital) present 
themselves in particular forms. 


Does recognising ‘deals’ with capital 
as a necessary part of what constitute the real step towards selling 
out? 


No, it only means that whatever deal we are able to cut in 
particular phases of movements is never enough because: 

a) it excludes something or someone from benefitting it, thus it contributes 
to the reproduction of hierarchies and hence it is the basis for the 
need for new phases of perturbation (struggle); 

b) it is the basis upon 
which capital will develop new forms. It is however also; 

c) the basis 
upon which commons can develop new  forms and try to outflank 
capital.


Precisely for this reason, the development of alternative social 
systems like commons (with their local rules and networked 
structures), do not necessarily only involve the creation of new 
institutions (with a lower degree of structural coupling with capital), but 
also the advancement of commons within existing institutions. Indeed, 
even the setting up of new commons-based institutions and 
associations depend on some structural coupling with capital, be it the 
conformity of a building with ‘health and safety’ regulations, the need 
to issue invoices of some sort in some activities of fund-raising, or the 
signing of a work contract. 


However, this advancement of commons implies sooner or later a 
collision with other social systems governing them, the challenge to 
existing local rules, of capitalist ways to measure and give value to 
social action, its value practices, and other networked structures, 
especially if their development—like the analysis of enclosures and of 
abstract labour demonstrates in the case of capital—depends on 
seizing the human and natural resources mobilised by these 
alternatives. And it is also clear that the force that alternative systems 
can sustain in this collision course with other social systems (their 
system’s resilience) is proportional to the degree of the multiple social 
powers they are able to mobilise. By social system’s resilience I mean 
the ability of a social system to retain function and a sufficient degree 
of prosperity, reproducibility and social cohesion in the face of the 
perturbation caused by the shocks and crises of capital’s systems. 


Since capital and commons are to a large extent structurally coupled 
social systems, these shocks and crises (such as the loss of income 
due for example  to unemployment and economic crisis, or state 
victimisation criminalising particular struggles) have put to test the 
commons’ resilience, forcing commons to adapt and evolve. The path 
of this adaptation however is open, and it can lead to a greater 
domestication of the commons within capital’s loops (like for example 
the patriarchal nuclear family in the post-WWII period) or, on the 
contrary, the development of autonomy and resilience of the 
commons in spite of capital’s circuits (like for example the experience 
of social centres in Italy from the 1970s). 


My approach here seems at odds with the narrative of classical 
Marxism. In classical Marxism a class, the proletariat, is the social 
force that brings capitalism to its knees, that abolishes this system 
and replaces it with a new one. Social force and social systems were 
somehow two distinctive entities, the former was instrumental to 
abolish a social system of one kind and establish another one. My 
underpinning hypothesis instead is that a social force only emerge, 
expand and create  effective transformative powers vis-à-vis other 
social forces as a social system’s manifestation of it own powers, and 
this is so only to the extent it is necessary for its preservation and 
reproduction (and the preservation and physical/cultural/emotional 
reproduction of the people comprising it). In order to problematise 
social change, therefore, we need to problematise social forces, and 
to do so implies we understand social systems, in particular the 
commons.


The transformative journey that commons have in front of them as 
social force share some features with the journey capital undertook in 
the last few centuries of its expansion. The development of capital has 
occurred through this twofold terrain: the terrain of the positing of new 
methods to organise social cooperation under its own value practices, 
as a way to provide answers to current social problems (often selfgenerated by capital itself), and the struggle against other modes of 
production and orienting senses, measures and value practices. In the 
first case, for example, the imposition of capitalist measure in the 
factories (as local rules) offered temporary ‘solution’ to the masses of 
the poor and the dispossessed created by previous iterations of 
enclosures. It also developed on the terrain of struggles against 
alternative value practices alternative ways to coordinate social 
reproduction. Whether these alternative ways were the methods of the 
old (feudal) ruling class, or whether they were the self-organised 
methods of the communities they enclosed and destroyed (whether in 
the home country or along the paths of empire with their stench of 
murder and genocide), or whether they were the emergent patterns of 
mutual aid and solidarity inside the factories and working-class 
communities fighting for shortening of the working time, increasing 
wages and labour rights, the key is that capital developed through 
struggle, accommodation, alliances, strategic timing pursued by a 
variety of elements, movements and organisations of the bourgeoisie. 


In the various phases of world capitalist development in the last 500 
years, power blocks have alternated their government of stratified 
power relations and class conflict, to reabsorb this conflict and turn it 
into the mechanism of accumulation and  therefore for the 
development of its  form. The struggle against other modes of 
production and organising senses did use intellectual tools to help 
rationalise and prefigure the workings of the desired system, but these 
tools never ended up to predict the forms actually developed. So for 
example, the world capitalism we live in today would have been 
certainly unintelligible to Adam Smith. Yet, Smith’s metaphor of the 
‘invisible hand’ is still today, in  spite of the oligopolistic powers of 
modern transnational corporations, an evocative image, one that can 
still inspire and give confidence to the planners of market expansion 
and privatisation in spite of all experience. 


The analysis on the continuous character of enclosures opens thus 
the door for its mirror image: the continuous character of the 
commons, their construction in a variety of ways, depended on 
different subjectivities and situated realities. Indeed, new forms of 
capital enclosures often correspond to capital’s attempt to close down 
previously achieved forms of commons (however inadequate, 
bureaucratic and instrumental to capital accumulation we may have 
regarded them, like the ‘welfare state’)."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf)



===The Fallacy of the Subject===

Massimo de Angelis:

"The fallacy of the model thus leaves us with the problematic of the 
development of alternatives as latency, as a period between the 
presence of alternatives and their explosion as dominant forms or 
modes of production. But this explosion of alternatives till the point of 
hegemony is not possible if these latent alternatives do not overcome
existing divisions within the social body, within the working class, 
corresponding to the middle-class hegemonic sense of what 
constitute ‘betterment’, and therefore constituting ‘social order’ along a 
wage hierarchy. Not only capital’s systemic forces create divisions of 
power but the deals we cut with capital reproduce or reorganise 
divisions. A world in which these divisions are overcome is part of the 
puzzling equation that need to be solved in order to address our ‘how 
do we change the world’s meta-question.

These divisions cannot be overcome through ideological appeal to 
unity—as often these divisions are based on material condition, and 
ideologies do not constitute ground for hegemonic unity. To the extent 
the crisis intensifies and proletarises in conditions and prospects, it 
creates the condition for the flourishing of reproduction commons, 
domains of social action in which communities of all types, religious 
creeds, national or ethnical groupings and political persuasions pool 
or seize resources together and develop ways to increasingly meet 
their needs articulating their differences. It goes without saying that 
this is not automatic, as the crisis also pushes for  divisions along 
these traits. Where it goes depends on organisational resources put 
on the ground. In many countries of the Global North, this depends on 
the ability of radicals, cosmopolitan commoners to mesh with the 
‘mainstream’ and sustain productive interactions that give rise to 
reproduction commons and advance value practices that push open 
the boundaries of commons. 

To develop such an attitude for strategic problematisation requires 
however that we come to term with the fallacy of the subject: the idea 
that somehow the ‘working class’ can be thought of as a unified body 
vis-à-vis capital, or if divided, could be recomposed through some sort 
of ideological terrain or some other cultural or income homogeneity or 
representational affinity. Instead, I want to pose its existing division—
both objectively and subjectively—as a founding condition of the real, 
and problematise this division in terms of the radical transformation of 
the present. In another place (De Angelis 2010) I have problematised 
power hierarchies within the social body in terms of the ‘middle class’, 
which I define not as a homogeneous social group, with a given level 
of income, but as a stratified field of subjectivity disciplined to a large 
degree to the norms of behavior of a modern society in which capital 
has a fundamental role in organising social production through 
disciplinary markets, enclosures, governance and its profit-seeking 
enterprises. In other words, ‘middle classness’ is constituted through 
an idea of betterment and order achieved within the boundaries of 
capitalist system. I claim that from the point of view of radical 
transformation, one basic conundrum is that alternatives cannot be 
achieved neither with, nor without the middle class. And it is for this 
reason that I proposed the thesis of the ‘explosion of the middle class’ 
as a necessary element of this process of radical transformation. I 
understand this explosion as  a sudden increase in the volume of 
social cooperation and correspondent release of playful energies, in 
such a way as to create a socio-cultural shock wave and corresponds 
to the emergence of commoning across borders and through the 
wage hierarchy, a commoning through which both borders and wage 
hierarchy are problematised and dissipated as result of social 
cooperation. The problematic of organisation is all inside the 
problematic of this explosion of commoning in ways that articulate 
three middle-class subversions existing in latent state: the subversion 
that goes on daily in terms of micro-practices of refusal of alienation; 
the subversion of middle-class condition brought about by the system 
in terms of its own proletarisation and economic and environmental 
impossibility of universalising betterment qua Middle Class; the 
subversion of middle class community when engaged in 
communication  with the  other  as the foreigner, the migrant, the 
marginal."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf)

==Some conclusions about the relations between Commons and Movements==

Massimo de Angelis:

"To embark on a project of radical transformation of the present, we 
must ask not just how this creative ‘explosion of the middle class’ is 
possible—something of which every cycle of struggle reassure 
ourselves by bringing always new forms and modes of cooperation, 
democratic grassroots participation and commoning—but how can it 
be sustaining itself, how can it contribute to give rise to a new world? 
To address this question, we must briefly further explore the relation 
between commons and movements. These are two modalities of 
social systems within what we call society, the social broth that 
includes all social systems. Within this social broth we find social 
systems that reproduce themselves or die out all the time. The former 
give rise to a social fabric, the latter to any form of material or 
biographic detritus. By social fabric I mean the social space 
constituted by the multiplicity of social systems in their structurally 
coupled interactions, or  deals. We can have structurally coupled 
interaction among individual capitals (through market exchanges, 
partnerships, collusions, etc.) or among commons (networks of 
households, associations, etc.), and across capital and commons (for 
example a deal between a company and a trade union). One of the 
key political projects of social revolution is to constitute a social fabric 
of a particular quality, resistance and resilience, something we are 
accustomed to call a new mode of production. From this perspective a 
social movement is a wave in the social broth that results in a change 
in various degree, in the quality of the social fabric. Ultimately, there 
are four ways to change this social fabric: through systems’ 
perturbation; through changes in the patterns of structural coupling; 
through decoupling and autonomisation of systems; through 
destruction of systems. None of these ways are more ‘politically 
correct’ than others; as they all depend on the particular situation and 
balance of forces in which social movements find themselves. But 
what we can say is that social movements acquire a class meaning 
when the change in the social fabric that they give rise to provokes a 
change in the way capital has to strategise its own reproduction.  
Each social movement as a succession of waves and cycles is a 
recomposing and decomposing force, it favours certain types of 
connections and destroys others, and it creates sociality and creates 
alien differentiations with the ‘enemy’ while at the same time 
overcoming alien relations among commoners.  But if social 
movements favour connections and sociality, it does not mean that 
they create a new social fabric that can reproduce and sustain itself in 
characteristics that we may recognise as fundamentally alternative to 
the current one dominated by capital.  This is because, as we have 
discussed in section 2, the cycles of social movements, the waves 
they are made of, mirror capital’s movement in terms of class 
decomposition and recomposition following the ups and down of 
economic cycles.

Precisely for their own limited characteristics, social movements can  only contribute to the making of alternatives; they themselves are not the alternative. The latter require different types of cycles, cycles with  different objectives and rhythms. It is thus worthwhile to reflect  analytically on some distinct characteristics between social  movements and commons. 

In the first place, from the perspective of 
their pre-conditions, they both presuppose one another. Social 
movements cannot be conceived without a commons basis for the 
reproduction of the lives of the subjects participating in them as well 
as the form of their sociality. As discussed in section 3, we would not 
be able to understand the labour movement,  without thinking about 
the practices of commoning, of sharing resources, of solidarity, of gift 
that allows the workers as social body to express their force in the 
struggle against capital. All the same, the occupy movement in New 
York City or the Arab Spring in Cairo or Tunisia would not be possible 
without a commons basis in which material and immaterial resources 
are shared in different modalities. 

Correspondently, the reproduction of commons and correspondent 
communities is often predicated on particular deals with capital, 
obtained as a result of struggles that have occurred in the past and 
given rise to particular institutional forms and cultures. 


In the second place, social movements and commons sequences 
have different starting and ending points. Their cycle intertwines, and 
coincides often, but they are not always identical. The starting point of 
a social movement expresses itself as a concentration of forces in a 
point, a clashing event, that then opens up to a series of events 
moving in waves, the end of which is a sort of deal with other social 
forces of power whether it does bring or does not bring advantages. It 
goes without saying that the type of deal depends on the web of 
power relations. 


The starting point of commons in contemporary capitalism instead, is 
always a given pact with the devil, a deal, and the resources that can 
be pooled at that given time. The end point of the commons instead is 
its reproduction, and this passes through an event that allows it to do 
so: the harvest, the payment of a social wage, the sharing of a meal. 

The process of social revolution therefore must seek ways to couple 
social movement and commons, to synchronise their respective 
sequences, to make more clearly the subjects of movements 
commoners and make commoners protestors. Historically speaking, 
social revolution can be illustrated as (a process) in which each iteration of the movement produces a value  for  the  commons. 


This relation between commons and movements points to one thing: it 
is not a question of whether we should prioritise movements through 
commons or commons through social movements. In its general 
character, the question of  organisation is the question of how it is 
possible to facilitate their co-evolution in a direction that can lead to a 
radical transformation of the social fabric that can sustain new forms 
of livelihood’s reproduction. Given the location of reproduction 
commons within a field of power relations, both commons and social 
movements are fundamental, hence a novel form of organisation must 
keep both in  mind. 


However, capital gives rise to three ways  for 
commons and social movements to be either co-opted or repressed, 
and all these are actions upon subjects: 
 
a) criminalisation: the state and discursive strategies that use 
organised violence and control of  mass media to reproduce 
capitalist markets, the correspondent regime of corporate 
property and interactions among commons. 

b) temptation: the micro-ludic capital strategies that re-create 
subjects as atomised free subjects, as opposed to 
commonised free subjects, i.e. subjects in association with 
others: marketing, mortgaging, commodified fields of desires, 
constitution of subjects and status as consumers. Temptation 
is at work if, in spite of other existing ways to construct and 
actualise desires or meet reproduction needs, subjects act as 
market agents to acquire money, status, identities, and means 
of reproduction. 

c) reproduction need (socially determined). The preconditions to 
one’s own existence and preservation must be met. If no other 
ways are present or conceived but through an engagement as 
productive node within capitalist market, then subjects are 
compelled to embrace capitalist markets.


The sustainability of commons and social movements of course 
depend on the extent to which these capitals’ strategies upon subjects 
create divisions and decompose movements and commons. 

Thus  listed, they point at three objectives for the political organisation of the 
commons:

a) struggle to de-criminalise movements and legitimise the 
extension of commons and growing sustainable relations 
among them: critical pedagogy, education, media, 
communication, critical mass. 

b) reconfiguration of ludic energies, motivation and identity 
through commoning: doing, sharing, valuing, deciding, 
designing. 

c) extending the realm of the non-commodified field of 
reproduction. This is the starting point and centre of gravity of 
the commons organisation: our bodies (care, nurture, health, 
happiness), our energies (food and water, heat, power), our 
communications (media), our environments (earth). 


However, put in this way, these objectives of the political organisation 
of the commons seem to be ranked to correspond to the powers faced 
by commons that either enclose them or compete with them. In terms 
of the problem of long-term  organisational thrust however we must 
revert this ranking. The starting point of strategic undertaking and 
centre of gravity is c), followed by b) and a). Only starting from a 
problem of reproduction (c), and contributing to the development of 
inclusive, convivial and resilient forms of commoning to reappropriate 
the conditions of reproduction (b), that de-criminalisation and 
legitimacy can be obtained, hence critical mass achieved (a). 


Ultimately, the latter may coincide with commons at a new scale of 
social action, a larger circle of cooperation and mutual aid, engaging 
in social movements that are stronger and wider in scope. The bottom 
line is that the material basis of the power from below is given by the 
degree of autonomy in reproducing the commoners’ bodies and social 
bonds. The movement from c) to a) therefore is a moment of a 
generative loop, like the rotary movement of engines and pistons that 
give thrust and ultimately provide linear movement. Or, to follow an 
organic metaphor, like each individual cells that seek reproduction 
and only by doing so in structural coupling with other cells, gain 
strength, develop immune systems and resilience, even giving rise to 
new forms of life—organisms and species — as emergent properties of 
their interaction."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/deangelis_crises.pdf)



=Source=

Special issue of borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012: Commons, Class Struggle and the World. Editors: Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison.

See: [[Commons and Class Struggle]] [http://www.borderlands.net.au/issues/vol11no2.html]


=More Information=

* Introduction by Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison, [[Commons, Class Struggle and the World]], http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/yanghowison_commons.pdf


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]