
'''= a 'horizontal' consulting company which open-sourced its organizational model'''

URL = http://dna.crisp.se/

=Characteristics=

" Crisp is a consulting company based in Stockholm, Sweden. But we aren’t a very typical consulting company. 


For example:

* None of the 30+ consultants are actually employed by Crisp (although we do have a few employed office staff).
We have no managers, not even a CEO. Instead we rely on self-organization and transparency. Almost everything is bottom-up, and anyone can drive any decision.

* Crisp’s main purpose is to enable consultants to be happy, and Crisp Happiness Index is our driving metric. Strong revenue and delighted customers are a side effect, not a goal.

* Crisp doesn’t want to earn money from it’s consultants. It is in practice a non-profit company (although not formally so). Consultants keep most of what they earn.

* Our ownership model is designed to keep our stock financially worthless. There is no incentive to “cash in”.

* Consultants are 100% autonomous. They can do whatever they want (as long as they don’t hurt the brand or our house), and work as much or as little as they want.

We get a lot of questions about how this works in practice, especially from other consultants looking to create something similar. After many years of experimenting we’ve converged on a model that works well, basically the sweet spot between being an independent consultant and being an employee. So we decided to open source it."
(http://dna.crisp.se/docs/index.html)


[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]