=Description=

'''1. Janosch Sbeih:'''

"The etymology of the word ‘crisis’ tells a lot about the characteristics of such an event. According to
the Oxford English Dictionary Crisis comes from the Greek word kerein, meaning to separate or cut,
to make fixed, settled (Williams, 2012). The earliest registered use of the word, dating back to the
1500s, is in relation to medical and also astrological events, which were believed to be closely
related. In this context, crisis describes “the point in the progress of a disease when an important
development or change takes place which is decisive of recovery or death; the turning-point of a
disease for better or for worse” (OED, 2014). Crisis is defined in contrast to ongoing progress –
initially progress of an illness, and by the seventeenth century, “of anything” (Williams, 2012). A
crisis can be understood in two ways. First, as an obstacle to be overcome, a bump in the road of
progress that that needs to be dealt with in order to return to the “normal” state of affairs.

Alternatively, a crisis can be understood as the convulsion in the transition from one system to
another, as a deciding phase in a change of systems. Media and governments universally frame the 
current crisis in the first sense, as a temporary turbulence which needs to be addressed through
technical fixes in the current system. Every response is geared towards the reinstallment of a
functional pre-crisis system. As we live in a growth-dependent economic system, the central
question of the mass-media and policy-makers is “how do we get the economy to grow again?”. In
contrast, people who are critical of the current economic system and work towards structural
change tend to conceptualise the crisis in the second way, namely, as a moment that marks the
transition into a new system. Long-term critics and grassroots activists often feel that their views are
being validated through the crisis, as the economic system proves to be inherently unstable and
governments look out only for the needs of the banking sector. People on the ground thus need to
rely on each other and take matters in their own hands to save themselves and each other through
the crisis. Many decide that it is time to change how the society works and push for political and
economic change. The former takes shape in occupations, demonstrations and practices of direct
democracy while the latter can be found in the establishment of and participation in alternative
economic networks. Both are prefigurative in the sense that the movements embody the values
people want to see in politics and the economy. On a small scale in the individual initiatives, they are
thus already practising the changes they want to bring about in society at large. The political and
economic ideas that people advocate in these movements are not necessarily new and many have
been practising them already for years before the crisis. It has been argued that severe downturns
tend to accelerate deep economic shifts that are already under way which is why these ideas that
have been around for a while suddenly gain traction through the crisis (Williams, 2012).

Edgar Morin (1976, 1984) who advocated in the mid-1970s the development of the scientific
study of the crisis as such (“crisology”) suggested that a crisis can be an event that both reveals and
has an effect. It reveals what usually remains invisible; it forces us to see things that we are usually
unwilling to confront. The crisis reveals aspects that are inherent to reality and are not merely
accidents; it constitutes a moment of truth. In the current case, it can be said that the crisis reveals
unbridled capitalism, in particular financial capitalism, in all its brutality and its extreme injustice
(Wieviorka, 2012). Above all, it reveals the dynamics of debt which structure our global economy to
a large extend while at the same time destabilising it and stripping it of resilience. It is interesting to
observe that in this context the Bank of England published for the first time a report that openly
states that money is created ex nihilo as loans by private banks (Graeber, 2014). The crisis thus
reveals threatening dynamics that have been going on long before 2008. As an event that has an
effect, Morin considers that a crisis sets in motion not only forces of decomposition, disorganisation
and destruction, but also forces of transformation (Morin, 1976, 1984). In these cases it is also a
critical point in a process that includes dimensions of construction, innovation, and invention. The 
focus of my dissertation is the transformational dynamics of alternative economic practices that this
particular crisis fuels and set in motion. Continuing the idea that a crisis both “reveals” and “has an
effect”, Edgar Morin invites us to admit that the crisis demonstrates that what a matter of course
was is in fact a source of difficulties and presents problems: what worked had its limits, its
drawbacks, and its inadequacies. The crisis therefore constitutes an incentive to invent something
new; but an incentive that is imperative as the system that previously helped us structure our lives
became deeply dysfunctional and cannot further be relied on."


'''2. Roman Krznaric:'''

"Let’s get one thing straight from the outset: '''John F Kennedy was wrong when he said that the Chinese word for ‘crisis’ (wēijī, 危机) is composed of two characters meaning ‘danger’ and ‘opportunity’.''' The second character, jī (机), is actually closer to meaning ‘change point’ or ‘critical juncture’. This makes it similar to the English word ‘crisis’, which comes from the ancient Greek krisis, whose verb form, krino, meant to ‘choose’ or ‘decide’ at a critical moment. In the legal sphere, for example, a krisis was a crucial decision point when someone might be judged guilty or innocent.

The meaning and application of this concept has evolved over time. For Thomas Paine in the 18th century, a crisis was a threshold moment when a whole political order could be overturned and where a fundamental moral decision was required, such as whether or not to support the war for American independence. Karl Marx believed capitalism experienced inevitable crises, which could result in economic and political rupture. More recently, Malcolm Gladwell has popularised the idea of a ‘tipping point’ – a similar moment of rapid transformation or contagion in which a system undergoes large-scale change. In everyday language, we use the term ‘crisis’ to describe an instance of intense difficulty or danger in which there is an imperative to act, whether it is a crisis in a marriage or the planetary ecological crisis.

Overall, we can think of a crisis as an emergency situation requiring a bold decision to go in one direction rather than another. "

(https://aeon.co/essays/what-turns-a-crisis-into-a-moment-for-substantive-change)


==Etymology==

Victor H. Mair “Crisis” Does NOT Equal “Danger” Plus “Opportunity”:

The word “crisis” enters the English language around 1425 with the meaning of “turning point in a disease,” in a translation of Chauliac’s Grande Chirurgie (Major Surgery). It was borrowed from Latin crisis, which in turn comes from Greek krisis (“a separating, distinguishing, discrimination, decision, judgement”), from krinein (“separate, decide, judge”). Chauliac’s first translation gives it as Old French crise, while the second translation has Latin crisis. The sense of “decisive moment” is first recorded in English in 1627 as a figurative extension of the original medical meaning. In Latin, crisis signified: 1. a (literary) judgement, 2. a critical stage in one’s life; climacteric. Since, in the Hippocratic-Galenic medical literature, “crisis” signified “a turning point in a disease; sudden change for better or worse,” this old Greek usage would be somewhat better positioned to serve as a justification for the “danger + opportunity” meme than does Chinese wēijī, which is, from the very beginning, always something worrisome and unwanted. The earliest occurrences of the Chinese expression wēijī occur in the 3rd century A.D., at which time, and for centuries thereafter, they convey the notion of “latent danger.” It was not until the late 19th and early 20th centuries that wēijī came to mean “crisis,” as in “financial crisis,” “economic crisis,” and so on. How did this happen? It was almost certainly the result of matching up the old Chinese word wēijī (“latent danger”) with the Western concept of “crisis,” and carried out through the intermediary of Japanese, where it is pronounced kiki. This would make it another of the hundreds of modern Chinese terms that I refer to as “round-trip words” (see Sino-Platonic Papers, 34 [October, 1992]). Many coinages that made it into twentieth-century báihuà (vernacular Mandarin) are based on traditional uses of words. That is to say, new compounds using jī draw on traditional uses of jī. There is no traditional use of jī that means “opportunity” per se. Jīhuì is a neologism coined to translate the English word “opportunity.” To say that jī means “opportunity” is like saying that the zōng of zōngjiào means “religion” (N.B.: jiào here means “doctrine, teaching”). Zōng traditionally means a line of orthodox transmission, or a clan lineage. It is anachronistic to say that zōng by itself means “religion.” For numerous examples of such calques and neologisms, many (such as those for “economics” and “society”) involving an initial borrowing into Japanese, and then a reborrowing into Chinese with a completely new, Westernized meaning, see Victor H. Mair, “East Asian Round-Trip Words,” Sino-Platonic Papers, 34 (October 1992). Traditional senses of jī include: mechanism, inner workings (and by extension secrecy), germinal principle, pivotal juncture, crux, or a witty turn of thought. This is the same jī that was used in the coinage yǒujī (organic), but we can hardly say that jī in and of itself means “organic.” As examples of recent coinages using jī in innovative ways, we may cite jīzhì, which means “mechanism” or “machine-processed / produced.” There's also another jīzhì meaning “quick-witted” where the zhì syllable is written with a different character than the zhì syllable of the jīzhì meaning “mechanism.” The latter jīzhì is based on the same sense of jī which is used in the expression dǎ Chánjī — to employ the gnomic, witty language of Chan (Zen) Buddhist teaching stories. If anyone is truly interested in sharpening his or her mind to meet the crises of the future, engagement with this kind of challenging wisdom might be a good place to begin.”

(https://pinyin.info/chinese/crisis.html)

=Discussion 1=

Steven Connor:

“Crisis is related to Greek krinein, to judge, determine, or decide. In Greek, krisis could mean both the act of judging and the actual judgement – the event or issue of the judgement – to which it leads. As such, it is first cousin to words like criticism and critique. This makes phrases like ‘the crisis of criticism’, which used to abound in literary and cultural publishing, immaculately tautological – all criticism is both the effect and effecting of a kind of crisis. Medicine preserves the link between crisis and the idea of a decisive turning point: to be in a ‘critical condition’ is not to disapprove of your treatment plan or consultant’s bedside manner, but to be at the point at which something will be decided. The earliest citation given by the OED for crisis used in this sense, from a medical text book of 1543, tells us baldly that ‘Crisis sygnifieth iudgement’ (Vigo 1543, sig Z4v). The judgement in question is a judgement that we are not necessarily going to be able or called upon to make, or may be as Larkin calls it, ‘what something hidden from us chose’ (Larkin 1988, 153). In a medical crisis it is often the body that will make its own judgement on itself.  The word crisis has also been used to mean a sign, symptom or determining feature, even a criterion, which shares its Greek root. A seventeenth-century entomologist uses the word in this way in commenting that the beauty and vigour of certain flies is ‘a Crysis of their youth, not their idleness’ (Purchas 1657, 12).

The time of crisis is an exceptional time, a time of change, renewal, revolution or even revelation – the time not of chronos, the hickory-dickory-dock of one thing coming after another, but of kairos, that which breaks into or breaks out in ordinary clock or calendar time. Michel Serres proposes in his book Temps des crises that crisis must accordingly always imply a breakthrough into the absolutely new and irrevocable: ‘If we are really going through a crisis, in the strong medical sense of the term, then a return backwards is no good. The terms “stimulus” or “reform” are irrelevant. If we are really dealing with a crisis then no “recovery” is possible’ (Serres 2015, xii). So a crisis always in a sense is a matter of life and death, a choice between the life of the new and the death of the old. As such, it may seem exhausting, painful, stressful, and so in almost all cases to be averted or avoided.”
 
(https://www.torch.ox.ac.uk/article/emergency-imagination-management)
 



=Discussion 2=

==Crisis as Opportunity==

Janosch Sbeih:

"Crises offer the opportunity to implement policies that lead to profound political and economic
changes on the fast track as societies are in turmoil and unable to organise themselves against these
implementations. Naomi Klein (2007) explains in her book, “The Shock Doctrine”, how proponents of
neoliberalism unable to convince people by means of argument, use situations of shock such as
coups d’état, dictatorships or natural disasters to proliferate neoliberal policies. These entail a
stripping of the welfare state and general public services as well as the privatisation of public assets.
Rather than “free economies” going hand in hand with democratic societies, as it often tends to be
represented, the “liberalisation” of economies historically depended on the shocking of populations
through extreme state violence and terror or the seizing of opportunities that had an equally
traumatising and paralysing effect on civil society. Naomi Klein shows through a rich array of case
studies of the last 50 years how neoliberal policies are incompatible with constitutional democracy if
no repressive measures are taken against the own population. Neoliberalism was tested first as an
experiment in Pinochet’s dictatorship in Chile where the population was held in check through
widespread torture and disappearances. After the experiment was repeated in other military
dictatorships like the Argentinean junta, Margaret Thatcher’s Great Britain became the first Western
democracy that adopted neoliberal policies. After initially dismissing neoliberalism as “incompatible
with constitutional democracy”, she created domestic conditions that enabled her to push forward
with the neoliberal agenda at home. These conditions were created through the Falkland War
abroad and a violent suppression of unions at home. In Thatcher’s Great Britain, downsizing of the
welfare state and far-reaching privatisation programs came along with the curtailment of labour and
demonstration rights and an increase in repressive measures. Such developments can also be
observed in Spain and Greece today.

In direct resemblance to Thatcher’s TINA (“There is no alternative”) narrative, the media and
politicians of both Spain and Greece adopt a discourse of “we have lived beyond our means and now 
we have to cut back, there is nothing we can do about it, we have to cut social services and privatise
in the name of fiscal balancing” (Reich, 2013). One of the main objectives of the Shock Doctrine, as
explained by Klein (2007), is to sweep away autonomous narratives and inoculate people with fear
to diverge from the prescribed plan of action; in other words, to create an experiential
understanding that there really is no alternative to what the central powers say and do. Similarly,
David Graeber interprets neoliberalism less as an economic program than a political program
“designed to produce hopelessness and kill any future alternatives” (Graeber & Solnit, 2012). It is
thus telling that the Greek mass media create horror scenarios of what happens if the congress does
not pass Troika’s austerity memoranda. “Economic experts” literally tell the Greek people on
national TV that “there will be chaos. Greece will become a Third World Country. The supermarket
shelves will soon be empty. There will be ration coupons” (Chatzistefanou & Kitidi, 2012). Similarly, a
special “Citizen Security Law” is crafted in Spain to quell the new forms of citizen protests and
politics that defy the austerity programs, create autonomous narratives and form the Spanish
indignado movement (Fernandez-Savater & Martin, 2014). These anti-protest laws take such
repressive measures as criminalizing passive resistance, uploading police violence on Youtube or
Tweeting about a protest which can be punishable by fines as high as 600,000€ (The Guardian,
2013). Members of the indignado movement identified the objective of these laws as an attempt “to
proscribe politics by criminalizing it, and withdrawing anything other than politics by politicians from
circulation” (Fernandez-Savater & Martin, 2014). It is thus directly aimed at the citizenry’s capability
to create their own narratives and to make sense of the events around them without having to rely
on the information propagated by the political elite and the mass media.

While civil society is educated towards learned helplessness, a psychological state in which
there is no more perceived capability to effect changes on the personal environment and complete
submission to any external changes that are inflicted on the person, comprehensive privatisation
programs transform public goods into private wealth (Soy Publica, 2014). Before the privatisation
program in Greece could begin, however, the necessary governmental positions needed to be
staffed by the appropriate personnel favourable to the plans. When former Prime Minister George
Papandreou stepped down from his post in 2011 due to vehement popular opposition to the
conditions of the Troika’s bailout plan, he made way for the former Vice President of the European
Central Bank, Lucas Papademos, to lead the new interim-government until elections in 2012 (The
Guardian, 2011). Papademos then staffed governmental positions with people from the private
Greek Bank Eurobank which made negotiations with the Troika essentially into an interbank deal
(Chatzistefanou & Kitidi, 2012). It is important to note that this interim government had no
democratic legitimacy while passing comprehensive austerity and privatisation bills that would 
shape the country’s future for years to come. In the light of the massive vocal opposition to the
neoliberal policies passed, this interim government can be viewed as a direct cancellation of
democracy where sovereignty is given to experts from the banking sector. One Greek citizen
summarizes the feeling of the time in the Greek documentary Catastroika: “The political system we
have now in Greece resembles that of a junta. It is a banker’s junta with no more popular
legitimation than the 1967 junta” (ibid.).

In order to facilitate a speedy privatisation process, the Greek privatisation fund “Hellenic
Republic Asset Development Fund” (commonly known under the Greek acronym TAIPED) has been
founded to undertake the most extensive privatisation program ever implemented in an EU country
(Mavroudi, 2013). The stated mission of the private fund is “to restrict governmental intervention in
the privatisation process” (TAIPED, 2014). Public assets ranging from islands to public utility
companies and motorways are handed over in escrow to the fund for it to be sold off to private
bidders. A special law prohibits assets once handed over to be given back to the state, and the Greek
public sector has legally withdrawn from any financial claim over revenues which are committed to
go towards debt-service (Mavroudi, 2013). Only two out of the six board members are approved by
a parliamentary committee and there are a range of international experts and observers from the
Troika advising the fund. Critical observers argue that the Greek privatisation process resembles that
of occupied countries where external agents come to the country, run the sell-off of the country’s
assets, while the costs of the whole operation are carried by the local population whereas the profits
which are expected to amount to 50 billion Euros go to the creditors (Chatzistefanou & Kitidi, 2012).

It is a large scale transfer of public wealth into private property outside of any democratic control.

As in other privatisation cases, the value of the public assets are vastly underestimated and
therefore sold far below actual value (Klein, 2007). To take an example, the old Hellenikon airport
has been estimated by independent pre-crisis valuations to be worth $6.8 billion (Baboulias, 2014).
Recently, however, it has been sold to the private entity of Lamda Development for $1.2 billion who
as the sole bidder for the site has been exempted “from any tax, duty or fee, including income tax in
respect of any form of income derived from its business, of transfer tax for any reason, [or] capital
accumulation tax” (The Press Project, 2014). To make matters worse, the Greek newspaper To Vima
calculated that the Greek state will have to make at least another $3.4 billion in administrative and
infrastructural expenses before it can deliver the property to its new owner (Roos, 2014). The Greek
state thus accumulates further public debt by subsidizing the multi-billionnaire Latsis family through
this purchase while poverty-inducing fees and taxes are imposed on ordinary citizens who survive on
less than 500 Euros per month. This is but one example to show how the privatisation process is first
of all a transfer of public wealth to the capital class and not necessarily helping in fiscal balancing."


==Crisis as Community Builder==

Janosch Sbeih:

Crises do not only cause material hardship and an opportunity for the powerful to privatise public
wealth, but they can also spur the fast building of communities and a sense of solidarity between
those who are affected by it. Rebecca Solnit (2009) provides in her book A Paradise Built in Hell: The
Extraordinary Communities that Arise in Disaster a rich array of case studies where people came
together as a response to natural disasters in order to help each other through the difficult times.
From earthquakes in San Francisco and Mexico City to floods in New Orleans and the terrorist
attacks of 9/11, what Solnit found time and again was that in these times of external disruptions to
social life, people who usually lived individuated lives suddenly came together for cooperative
disaster relief. On the ground, people were there for each other, helping their neighbours and fellow
citizens who they mostly did not know, and people reported a great sense of belonging and
solidarity. At the same time, individuals respond emotionally in surprising ways: rather than being
overwhelmed by fear and confusion, they report an intense joy of working together for a greater
cause, and of getting intimate with people instantly who lived in their vicinity for years without ever
having personally interacted with them. Furthermore, as external structures and institutions break
down and individuals respond to them in cooperation with others, they start to feel in control of
their own lives again; they feel to have more power and agency than in their uninterrupted everyday
lives. Solnit describes this spirit of mutual aid always in great contrast to the response of the central
powers – governments – who often militarise disaster zones expecting people to behave in savage
Hobbesian ways as “the social order” is expected to break down through the external havoc. The
only way the prevailing social order breaks down however, is in the sense that people stop relying on
external institutions and start taking responsibility for their own lives by interacting in spontaneously
emerging decentralised networks for dispersed decision making. Solnit recognises how threatening
disasters are for political elites as power is being devolved to people on the ground as they are the
first responders who assemble impromptu kitchens and networks to rebuild their neighbourhoods.
She argues that centralised powers are structurally incapable of dealing with such situations and that
“only the dispersed force of countless people making countless decision is adequate to a major
crisis” (Solnit, 2009, p. 305).

My hypothesis is that economic crises like the one we are currently living through have a
similar effect on people as the account Rebecca Solnit (2009) provides of natural disasters. As great
parts of the population lose their employment and some even their home, and they feel they cannot
turn to the state for help, they start to rely on each other again. In such times of widespread shared
economic distress, people begin to build networks of solidarity and mutual aid. As hierarchical
institutions fail and cannot further be relied on, people build their own decentralised networks of 
provision and decision-making on the ground. This can take the form of widespread social
movements or collaborative economic projects. As the formal economy breaks down, people start
building their own parallel economy on the ground based on values they view should be embodied
in economic interactions. The question is though whether these alternative economic networks
persist longer than the spontaneous reactions of disaster relief which vanish again as their
environment is rebuilt and many think only warmly back to it as an episode they once lived through.
If these new economic networks are built for the purpose of social transformation rather than
surviving through the times of a dysfunctional formal economy, then they can lead through a
genuinely different economic culture that continues to flourish even outside the times of crisis.
Either way, through the convergence of various ecological crises that can be expected to seriously
disrupt the economic system in a not too distant future, the experience of having built a grassroots
economy increases the resilience of these local communities who are better prepared for the crises
still to come. The more these alternative structures are developed, the less hard will be the
transition to a new economy when we are forced to. For this, it is important to strengthen a new
economic culture now that relies on cooperation, mutual aid and solidarity within ecological limits."


==Beyond the Crisis: The Emergence of Alternative Economic Practices==

Janosch Sbeih:

"Economies are inherently cultural. The way things are produced, distributed and consumed is
strongly shaped through cultural norms and practices (Zelizer, 2011). When there is a systemic crisis,
this indicates also a cultural crisis: the existence of certain values as the guiding principles of human
behaviour that are non-sustainable (Aitken, 2007; Akerloff & Shiller, 2010). Thus, the transition
towards a new sustainable economy based on social and environmental values is strongly dependent
on a fundamental cultural change if we are not to wait on external resource pressures that force us
in that direction (Nolan, 2009). It may very well be that we are currently in such a period of cultural
transition. Since culture is a material practice, it should be possible to observe signs of new protocultural
forms in the spontaneous adaptation of peoples’ lives to the constraints and opportunities
arising from the crisis. This dissertation investigates new economic practices as an indication of such
a cultural transition.

The financial crisis has been brought about through a combination of deregulation and
individualism as a way of life which manifested in corporate managers focused on their own shortterm
profits as the guiding principle of their increasingly risky decisions (Tett, 2009; Zaloom, 2006).
The “me first” culture is a key-ingredient of business management, manifested in the self-interested,
rational, utility-maximising “homo economicus” (Sennett, 2006; Moran, 2009). This culture can be 
designated as “networked self-interest” (Cardoso & Jacobetty, 2012). On the other hand, across the
world, there are movements of protesters that condemn this “me-first” culture in economic and
political networks of power and the results it has brought about. Gustavo Cardoso and Pedro
Jacobetty (2012) research the culture of these oppositional movements and argue that although we
live in a network society under network individualism, an underlying cultural shift is taking place
towards the adoption of a paradigm less centred on self-interest and more on the ability to adopt
common interests and belong to a group that shares objectives within a given network. Such a
cultural transition is fuelled by a change in values and belief in cooperation, free sharing,
transparency, and open source production. Cardoso and Jacobetty identify these traits in the
political and economic movements for social change and term them “cultures of networked
belonging”. A description that I find very appropriate as a sense of belonging is one of the most
valuable features that these networks offer to their participants. The sense of belonging to a wider
movement, contributing to a bigger cause, to be looked after and to be able to care for other people
are some of the most valuable psychological support mechanisms that save its participants through
the time of crisis. This has always been the case with catastrophes as Rebecca Solnit (2009) makes
abundantly clear in her book A Paradise Made in Hell, but the difference with the support systems
that flourish in this particular crisis is that they are created to stay on afterwards and continue to
provide these benefits as they embody exactly the social change that people are aiming for. As one
writing on a wall in Madrid puts it: “Nothing would be worse than getting back to ‘normal’” (Biliris,
2012).

The crisis creates a profound cultural challenge for many as it throws them into an identity
crisis as consumers (Chatzidakis, 2014). Since the crisis leads to a severe drop in income for many
people who are also not able anymore to consume on the basis of credit as they used to for the last
decade, large parts of the Southern European population find themselves in a position where they
cannot consume as much as they used to and would like to. Some try desperately to revive
consumer fantasies by visiting gifting bazaars or paying small deposits in stores to reserve items,
pretending not to know that it is no longer possible for them to return and buy them (ibid.). Others
try to find fulfilment in something else than consumption and in order to do so need to change their
values and generate from within a new culture in order to overcome consumerism (Castells, Caraca
& Cardoso, 2012). Since new values do not generate in a vacuum, this non-consumerist culture may
only grow on the basis of actual social practices that exist in societies around the world, often first
enacted by drop-outs of the current economy because of their rejection of what they consider to be
a destructive way of life (ibid.). The rise of a new economic culture may thus result from the
historical convergence between a cultural vanguard searching for a different way of life, and the 
disoriented masses of ex-consumers who no longer have the opportunity to consume anything but
themselves – “people who have nothing to lose but their cancelled credit cards” (ibid., p. 12). In this
light, they need to make the shift Erich Fromm (1976) advocated almost 40 years ago “from having
to being”. In the context of the crisis, the identity of an affected person framed through “having” is
likely to be that of a “defective and disqualified consumer” for whom “non-shopping is the jarring
and festering stigma of a life un-fulfilled” (Bauman, 2011). To create a dignified identity in this new
context, it thus remains the frame of “being” which places greater emphasis on a person’s
relationships, belonging and processes someone is involved in (Fromm, 1976). The alternative
economic practices that currently proliferate in Southern Europe’s crisis-ridden societies offer
exactly this kind of identity-creation through practical affiliation.

A Catalan research group, including the eminent sociologist Manuel Castells, conducted an
empirical research project to study the universe of conscious alternative economic practices in
Catalonia (Conill et al., 2012). On basis of seventy filmed interviews of individuals involved in such
networks and organisations, the research group created the documentary film “Homage to Catalonia
II” which subsequently was used to stimulate debate in eight focus groups. From this qualitative
research, a questionnaire was created which was used to conduct 800 interviews with a statistically
representative sample of the population of Barcelona. The survey tried to measure the extent of
diffusion of each one of the identified alternative economic practices in society at large, and
determine the factors inducing or restraining the diffusion of these practices during the economic
crisis. To be sure, economic activities that do not fit within the pattern structured by the rules of the
capitalist market permeate throughout the entire society, and society only functions because
everybody performs every day countless acts of generosity that defy market logic (Graeber, 2011). In
some cases, however, there is a deliberate attempt to connect these practices to an alternative
vision of how social interaction and especially economic activities should be organised (Conill et al.,
2012). The research team attempts to map the diffusion of these conscious non-capitalist practices
in Catalonia and has categorised the diverse activities in a typology that is displayed in Figure 1.

The researchers have found that alternative economic practices have grown considerably
since the onset of the crisis, but are due to their methodological setup – a one-time survey and not a
longitudinal study – not able to quantify this growth (Conill et al., 2012). Nonetheless, one
remarkable quantitative finding is that 97% of the surveyed people have engaged in some kind of
non-capitalist economic practice since the start of the crisis 2008. The fact that virtually every
participant of the representative sample of Barcelona’s population is engaged to some degree with
these practices shows that there is a strong resonance between a conscious alternative economic
culture and the culture of a mainstream society shaken by the economic crisis. While everybody,
regardless in how intensely they are involved in alternative economic practices, is fully aware of the
severity of the economic crisis, people differ widely in their perception and evaluation of the crisis.
The first group, which the research team terms “culturally transformative” feels reaffirmed in their
analysis and rejection of a consumerist lifestyle and feels vindicated to have set up an alternative
way of life before the crisis hit. They position themselves ideologically and aim for social change that
treats the root causes of the crisis rather than adapting to its effects. For the second group, who the
researchers term “alternative practitioners”, the crisis has shaken their beliefs and their
understanding of life. It affects everything they used to do or think, so that adapting to the new 
environment is difficult and confusing. In order to get by in these hard times, they change their
practices: they consume less, they share and barter, they participate in solidarity networks and a
number of other practices that help them to deal with the economic unpredictability in which they
currently find themselves, but often without knowing exactly why, how and for what kind of future.
While the practice of the first group is mostly value-driven, the motivation of the second group to
engage with such alternative economic practices tends to be to meet their needs in a new way as old
patterns do not suffice anymore. While the culturally transformatives had anticipated the crisis, the
alternative practitioners are reacting only now and are learning by doing, slowly discovering a new
world of alternative economic practices through gradual involvement. In contrast, the third group
that the researchers term “culturally adapted” are unable or unwilling to accept the new
circumstances, are waiting, enduring the hard times, and hoping for the best, which is often
vocalised as a return to the ‘normal’ pre-crisis conditions. The research team speculates that as the
crisis deepens, the shift from being culturally adapted to becoming alternative practitioners may be
one of the most decisive trends in ongoing social change (Conill et al., 2012).

The research team has identified 26 practices which they grouped in three categories: self-sufficiency,
altruistic and exchange and cooperation (Conill et al., 2012). Table 1 depicts the
percentage of the total population that has engaged in each of these practices since the beginning of
the crisis in 2008 until the research was conducted in 2011."


===Source===

* M.A. Thesis: The Transformative Effects of Crisis: A Hitchhiker’s Guide to the [[New Economic Cultures in Spain and Greece]]. Janosch Sbeih. Schumacher College, 2014


=More information=

* [[Crisis Response by Governments]]


[[Category:Collapse]]

[[Category:Existential Risk]]

[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Politics]]