
'''= Report: Crisis of Commons'''

URL = http://actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/actionaid_pasture_report_english.pdf

==Abstract==

"Pastoral system and pastoralism as a way of life and viable economic system find little space in development discourse. The issues relating to pastoral communities and their dependent resources get rare notice of policy makers and planners in national development agenda. The importance and interconnectedness of pastoral system and pasture commons, the resource base, has been missing from public consciousness and policy discourse as a result of which it has been an all time area of negligence from development planning and policy making. Such critical interconnectedness between dependent communities with their resources is largely misplaced while framing the policies of governance.

One of the ultimate objectives of this study is to facilitate an environment engaging the key stakeholders in alliance building and policy advocacy of pastoralists and their community leaders, civil societies, policy makers and state level actors for a legal and policy space for recognition of rights of dependent communities and better use of pasture commons."

==Executive Summary==

"Common Property Resources (CPR) constitute
all such resources meant for the common use
of villagers, collectives or a community without
any exclusive individual ownership or access
rights. In India pasture commons, as a part
of larger CPRs, contribute significantly to the
rural economy in multiple ways. For the last
several decades, such resource base has been
eroded mainly due to diversification of land use,
inadequate legal and policy support, non-eliciting
the community institutions for their protection and
management, non-regulation of encroachments,
non-recognition of rights of pastoral communities,
state development interventions and its dominant
control regime, among others. Such factors have
restricted the community’s right to access, use
and conserve the commons. Chapter One deals
with understanding the concept of commons and
pasture commons, as part of larger commons,
analyses its importance and examines the
existing legal and policy space for governance
of village common land including the process of
dispossession from pasture lands.

Chapter Two deals with the methodology adopted
for the study with short and long term objectives.
The former has generated knowledge and
information, as pre-requisites, in understanding
the issues to complement the later in building
alliance and striving for policy advocacy. The study
covered five states including Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan
with 500 sample HHs. The primary information
was collected through HH surveys, Focus Group
Discussions (FGDs) and case studies, covering
ten sample villages of each State. The selection of
districts was made on the basis of major grazing
animals present such as sheep and goats. It has
also experimented on a pilot basis using GPS/
GIS mapping of the routes of migratory graziers in
Himachal Pradesh identifying different indicators.

Chapter Three focusses on the status of pasture
commons and profiles of sample states by
analysing the information on land use data status,
status of pasture and other land categories. It
also uses primary baseline information like the
demography and gender based educational and
occupational status of sample HHs in the analysis.

The study found highest area of pasture land in
Himachal Pradesh (33%) and the lowest in Punjab
(only 0.08%) of their respective geographical
areas. Such situation in Punjab is created due
to massive focus on agriculture (82.6% of the
geographical area) coupled with faulty land use
laws of the state. In other states like Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Rajasthan the pasture land is
not exceeding 5 percent of their geographical
areas despite significant partaking in pastoral
system. The literacy rate of the pastoral HHs in
all five states is very low. Further illiteracy among
women in this community is much higher. The
contribution of women to pastoral occupation is
also found very significant across the states.

Chapter Four focusses on the analysis of village
level information on pasture land, pastoral
communities, nomadic and local pastoralists,
the status and trends of livestock, income
generated by HHs from livestock, their access
to grazing, nomadic or migratory pastoralists
and their issues related to grazing permits. The
analysis and interpretation relates to factors such
as changing livestock, reduced areas of pasture
land, status of grasslands, impact on pastoral
communities, contribution of women in pastoral
occupation, problems and plight of pastoralists
related to healthcare, insurance, theft,
harassment, conflicts including their problems
during mobility in the routes. Chapter Five deals
with conclusion and recommendations emerged
from the study.

===Major findings===

Pastoralism is a healthy and viable economic
system that has a lot of potential to reduce poverty
and promote prosperity of the rural poor. It is a 
significant source of revenue for rural HHs and can
ensure a better livelihood for them. The declining
pasture commons has led to decline in the number
of sheep and goats, affected income level of the
pastoral HHs. The reservation of gochar lands only
takes into account, cattle and not the sheep and
goat population.

The shrinking of pasture lands and depletion
of vegetation due to encroachment on pasture
lands by vested interests, cultivation by landless,
diversion for development projects, agriculture
expansion and land grabbing – are some of the
major factors. This has affected the livelihood and
economy of pastoral communities.

An effective institutional arrangement for
protection and management of commons is
required. Though the Gram Panchayat is endowed
with the formal responsibility of management
and protection of pasture land, it is largely
non-functional or non-effective, and not consulted
for any initiative on pasture land.

The lack of a comprehensive land use policy
and regulation, creates serious challenges in the
governance of common land, a crisis in vital land
use for commoners.

The plantation undertaken by the Forest
Department over traditional pasture land,
minimises the community’s access to grazing
commons.

The restriction by local villagers caused due to
the reduced area of pasture lands and scarcity of
quality grasslands, has brought down the number
of nomadic graziers and led to conflict between
local and nomadic or migratory graziers.
The lack of grazing permits has led to the
harassment and exploitation by forest officials
and the police, which impacts the morale of the
pastoralists, alienating them from their traditional
occupation.

The rush for individual accumulation of property,
the impact of the current development agenda,
coupled with the increasing value of land has
led to “individualisation” and “corporatisation”
of common land and resources. Thus these are
factors promoting encroachment and grabbing of
pasture land.

The non-recognition of CFR of the nomadic
pastoral communities under FRA 2006, has been
due to vast and complex process and overlapping
use of areas across districts without any proper
strategy by the government.

Water bodies close to the pasture lands have dried
up as a result of which quality grasses and fodder
are not being grown.

Despite the significant contribution of women to
pastoral economy, they are not recognised as
pastoralists.

The lack of proper market arrangements at local
levels has created problems for sale of livestock
products. Facilities are required at the district and
state level."

==Source==

Received from Sandeep Chachra, Executive Director. ActionAid India and Managing Editor, Agrarian South: Journal of Political Economy (SAGE)

==More Information==
* [[Pasture Commons]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Articles]]