
'''= self-organizing volunteers: "a free, ready-to-use, open source application that connects disaster recovery organizations with the people who need help".'''

URL = https://www.crisiscleanup.org/

=Description=

How do you direct 30,000 volunteers from 100 organizations to 5,000 locations across a 500-mile arc in 8 weeks?

You don't. You let them organize themselves.

Crisis Cleanup empowers relief organizations to instantly coordinate response efforts in real time, redirecting thousands of volunteers from to waiting lines to survivors' basements.


Crisis Cleanup was developed by and for field volunteers, team leaders, canvassers, and the people who work one-on-one with survivors whose homes have been affected by flood, tornadoes, earthquakes, wind, fire, or other disaster. Crisis Cleanup can respond to a new disaster the same day, permitting relief organizations to instantly coordinate efforts.

Crisis Cleanup implements a "Craigslist" philosophy to recovery efforts– organizations that are aware of work orders enter them into the system, and organizations with capacity to help can claim and perform the work. The system is not public, but it is open and transparent among participating organizations. No centralized organization is "in charge." This non-threatening approach minimizes duplication and maximizes communication, coordination, and efficiency.

While entering a client into Crisis Cleanup does not guarantee that he or she will be served, it guarantees visibility and maximizes the chances for assistance, while helping relief organizations prioritize their limited resources."
(https://www.crisiscleanup.org/home)

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]