
'''* Book: Christian Fuchs. Social Media. A Critical Introduction. Sage, 2014.''' 

URL = http://fuchs.uti.at/books/social-media-a-critical-introduction/


=Description=

"Now more than ever, we need to understand social media - the good as
well as the bad. We need critical knowledge that helps us to navigate
the controversies and contradictions of this complex digital media
landscape. Only then can we make informed judgements about what's
happening in our media world, and why.

Showing the reader how to ask the right kinds of questions about social
media, Christian Fuchs takes us on a journey across social media,
delving deep into case studies on Google, Facebook, Twitter, WikiLeaks
and Wikipedia. The result lays bare the structures and power relations
at the heart of our media landscape.

This book is the essential, critical guide for understanding social
media and for all students of media studies and sociology. Readers will
never look at social media the same way again.


=CONTENTS=

1. What is a Critical Introduction to Social Media? 1

==I. FOUNDATIONS==

2. What is Social Media? 31

3. Social Media as Participatory Culture 52

4. Social Media and Communication Power 69


==II. APPLICATIONS==

5. The Power and Political Economy of Social Media 97

6. Google: Good or Evil Search Engine? 126

7. Facebook: A Surveillance Threat to Privacy? 153

8. Twitter and Democracy: A New Public Sphere? 176

9. WikiLeaks: Can We Make Power Transparent? 210

10. Wikipedia: A New Democratic Form of Collaborative Work and
Production? 235

==III. FUTURES==

11. Conclusion: Social Media and its Alternatives ? Towards a Truly
Social Media 253


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Media]]