

=Characteristics=

Excerpted from Dick Bryan and Akseli Virtanen:

* '''1.''' "Programmable organizations enable production to be organized in a way that makes social criteria the rationale for production; not a constraint on it."
[https://medium.com/econaut/what-is-a-crypto-economy-155bdbc4ab1d]

* '''2.''' "The rise of ‘networks’ as modes of corporate organization breaks down the conventional means that differentiate one corporation from another and challenges the principle of ‘competition’ as the driver of corporate rationale. These are both issues that feature prominently in decentralized applications."
[https://medium.com/econaut/what-is-a-crypto-economy-155bdbc4ab1d]


'''* 3. Mechanisms, like tokens, that allow surplus value to be retained by the workers, not capital.'''

" Changes in the nature of work (precarization, casualization, subcontracting, the rise of the gig economy) see workers carrying greater risks and break down the attachment of work and living standards to employment. There is growing interest in alternative ways of organizing work."
[https://medium.com/econaut/what-is-a-crypto-economy-155bdbc4ab1d]

'''4.''' "the real potential is cryptocurrencies as units of account: as modes of measuring economic activity that are conceived differently from those intrinsic to fiat money. Fiat money has become tied to conventional framings of profit and loss, income and expenditure, and a market-centred calculus. Non-fiat monies have the potential for developing new ways to calculate economic activity; ways that represent different social and economic values, and measure performance by criteria other than profit. Think about it for a moment. The unit of account potential signals the importance of the crypto economy developing ways (not a singular way, but coin-specific ways) of accounting and measuring the activities supported by each token. We see this as central to giving tokens a material basis in the crypto economy; not just leaving them as speculative stores of value. .... "Exchange is often between parties of unequal power, so mutual gain cannot be presumed. An important issue of the crypto economy is how blockchain can and cannot countermand asymmetrical power in trade. We see blockchain not facilitating frictionless markets but rather frictionless capital: distributed capital."
[https://medium.com/econaut/what-is-a-crypto-economy-155bdbc4ab1d]

Source: https://medium.com/econaut/what-is-a-crypto-economy-155bdbc4ab1d


[[Category:Commons Economics]]