
* Book: H. STUART HUGHES. Oswald Spengler. A CRITICAL ESTIMATE. Scribner's 1952. 

URL = [https://archive.org/details/oswaldspenglercr0000hugh/ read only]


=Contents=

CHAPTER I. 1918: A Portent 1

CHAPTER II. 1911: The Intellectual Temper 14

CHAPTER III. 1911: The Historians and the World Outlook 27

CHAPTER IV. The Decline: Sources and Influences 51

CHAPTER V. The Decline: The Morphology of Culture 65

CHAPTER VI. The Controversy: From Germany to the United States 89

CHAPTER VII. The Twenties: The Political Phase 98

CHAPTER VIII. Spengler and National Socialism 120

CHAPTER IX. The New Spenglerians 137

CHAPTER X. Spengler and His Detractors 152


=Excerpts=

Some background on The Decline of the West's writing and publishing history:

"Originally the book was to have been entitled “Conservative
and Liberal” and was to have been a political work primarily
concerned with Germany. Twenty-one years later, in 1932, Spengler recalled how he had been “terrified” by the “folly” of his
country’s foreign policy, “which was calmly accepting the complete encirclement of Germany,” by the “blindness” of everyone
around him, by the “criminal and suicidal optimism” then pre¬
vailing. 

As his ideas matured, however, their scope broadened.
The emphasis began to shift from politics to the rhythms of cul¬
ture. In 1912, the sight in a bookstore window of a history of the
fall (Untergang) of the ancient world at length gave him the idea
for the title of his own book.

Two years later, when the war broke out, the first draft of the
Decline was completed. During the war years, Spengler revised
and added to his manuscript. By 1917, it was ready for publication. But then began the “endless difficulties” of finding a publisher. After most of the prominent German houses had turned
it down, it was finally accepted by Wilhelm Braumiiller of Vienna.

Of the original single-volume edition (the contents of a promised
second volume were announced), only fifteen hundred copies
were printed."" (p. 7)


==Spengler's Morphological Method==

"Spengler called his method “morphological.” That is, it
represented an application to history of the biologist’s concept
of living forms. Each culture, in this view, was an organism, which
like any other living thing went through a regular and predict¬
able course of birth, growth, maturity, and decay. Or, in more
imaginative language, it experienced its spring, summer, autumn,
and winter. This biological metaphor provided the conceptual
frame giving unity and coherence to the rest.

Within each culture, Spengler insisted, certain basic attitudes
permeated all of life and thought. Properly defined and under¬
stood, these attitudes would give the key to the history of the
whole culture. While they could most readily be identified in the
realm of aesthetics — in the plastic arts and music and, above all,
in architecture — they exercised an equally pervasive influence
over the forms of economics, war, and politics, and even over so
unlikely a field as mathematics. To the historian who knew what
to look for, the most amazing correspondences among all such
fields of activity would suddenly spring to view. Taken together,
these basic attitudes formed what one of Spengler’s critics has
called a “master pattern” — a characteristic cast of the human
spirit working itself out in the history of every culture of which
any record remains."

(pp. 10-11)

All of these “master patterns” were different, and every culture formed a distinct bloc of spiritual and physical reality, clearly
delimited from its predecessors, contemporaries, and successors.
Yet each one went through the same morphological stages.

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]