

=Discussion=

Craig Dalton and Liz Mason-Deese:


"We begin the paper with a review of critical cartography, its counter-mapping
genre and the basis of autonomous cartography in geographical literature. As a
type of counter-mapping, autonomous cartography
utilizes critical cartography’s
points about maps and power, but does so in a new way to promote forms of self-organizing that use autonomous politics and militant research practices. To clarify
these ideas, we introduce the concept of autonomy and the autonomous militant
research practices of Colectivo Situaciones, Precarias a la Deriva and Hackitectura.

The works of these groups are historical preconditions for our own research
practices and intended outcomes. In the second half of the paper, we review
3Cs’founding conditions and two of our maps. Finally, we conclude by examining the
methods and impacts of our mappings.


Autonomous cartography is part of the critical turn in cartography and that
literature’s critiques of power in mapping and
forms of geographic knowledge.

Citing Foucault’s understanding of power as productive, critical geographers point
out that mapping is always a situated, political process with a social context,
purpose and effects (Foucault, 1995; Wood and Fels, 1992; Edney, 1993; Harley,
2001; Pickles, 2003; Crampton, 2010).

A second part of critical cartography shows the many legitimate forms that
this power-knowledge can take beyond standardized, professionalized cartography.
For example, the Critical GIS literature
shows how GIS is not just a material
technology, but also a set of social practices. These practices can include the
agency of users with different kinds of subject positions. Finally, GIS can be used
for many different kinds of research including less p
ositivistic, qualitative work (Kwan, 2002: Kwan and Knigge, 2006; Sheppard, 2005; Elwood, 2010).
In light of critical cartography’s points, several recent publications
investigate fundamental, even ontological reworkings of mapping as a social
process (Crampton, 2003; Pickles, 2003; Chrisman, 2005; Kitchin and Dodge,
2007; Leszyzynski, 2009). Pickles proposes a Deleuzian-inspired theoretical
framework that is particularly useful for conceptualizing the role of mapping and
social change. He argues that a map is an “inscription that does (or does not do)
work in the world” (Pickles, 2003, 67). Practicing mapping is an important part of
complex social processes that dually construct both material geographical worlds
and visual understandings of them (Chrisman, 2005; Sparke, 2005). Pickles calls
on geographers to support and engage in many different kinds of mapping to help
create other, alternative spaces and worlds, a logic he describes as “and, and, and” (Pickles, 2003).


Among the many kinds of critical mapping, we focus on one genre, counter-mapping. Harris and Hazen define counter-mapping as “any effort that
fundamentally questions the assumptions or biases of cartographic conventions,
that challenges predominant power effects of mapping,
or that engages in mapping
in ways that upset power relations” (Harris and Hazen, 115). Even a cursory
glance at the twentieth century reveals a number of examples from the Surrealists
to the Situationists to Bill Bunge’s geographical expeditions into 1960-70’s Detroit
to Doug Aberley’s low-tech mapping for community organizing (Wood, 2010;
Bunge, 1971; Pickles, 2003; Aberley, 1993).

Nancy Peluso introduced the term “counter-mapping” to geography journals
to describe mapping practices by indigenous people
in Kalimantan, Indonesia as
they made maps to contest Indonesian state land-use plans (1995). The concept of
counter-mapping not only resonated with indigenous mapping but also the then -
emerging GIS and Society/Critical GIS literature (Schuurman, 2000; S
heppard,2005). Partly coming out of that literature, Public Participatory GIS (PPGIS)
initiatives put the power of GIS technologies in the hands of community members,
often in connection with urban planning and development. These initiatives
highlight how counter-mapping practices can cartographically and politically
represent marginalized groups in relation to governments (Craig et al., 2002). Even
with these strengths, Elwood finds that people in the marginal groups sometimes
use GIS mapping to replicate the mapping practices of states, such as surveillance.
In a reflexive move, she points out that an oppositional dynamic of
cooptation/resistance is not always an appropriate framework to understand the
multiple dimensions and purposes of GIS use by co
mmunity organizations (Elwood, 2006). Other studies of counter-mapping also encounter weighty
problems including conflicting priorities, how to practice community organization,
integrating mapping into larger movements and the limitations of Cartesian mapping in representing local geographic knowledges (Hodgson and Schroeder,
2002; Walker and Peters, 2001). Bryan in particular points out the dangers of
indigenous counter-mapping that is subsumed into state and colonialist discourses
(2009). Any reflexive counter-mapping initiative must be prepared to deal with
these issues. 3C’s autonomous cartography offers a new approach to counter-mapping that brings critical cartography together with theories and practices of autonomous politics and militant research.


Autonomous cartography builds on the insights of critical cartography and
counter-mapping using practices of militant research and ideas of autonomous
politics, two traditions which we explain in the following section.

Research shows that some people self-consciously make political counter-maps not only for tactical
purposes, but explicitly to create new kinds of maps and geographies (Holmes,
2004; Cobarrubias, 2009). The fact that groups across the political spectrum create
these sorts of maps illustrates that counter-mapping itself is not necessarily
politically progressive, but that geographical imaginations are important sites of
struggle (Wood, 2010). Given these observations and a commitment to
autonomous politics, 3Cs uses what Deleuze calls a “new cartography,” a practice
that creates new (political geographic) possibilities and other (political geographic)
realities, rather than representing already existing geographies (Deleuze, 1988). In
practice, 3Cs draws inspiration from the independent, self-consciously political,
European counter-mapping described by Holmes, Cobarrubias and Pickles
(Holmes, 2004; Cobarrubias, 2009; Cobarrubias and Pickles, 2008). Parallel to the
movements they describe, we seek to create change through the power of migrants,
students and workers independent of institutional or state powers by using counter-mapping. From another direction, 3Cs’ autonomous cartography also draws on the militant research of Colectivo Situaciones and Precarias a la Deriva. 3Cs’ respective combination of counter-mapping with these particular forms of militant
research render autonomous cartography as new and distinct. Our purpose is not to
disallow or discount other forms of mapping or cartography. Instead,
we apply the proliferating logic of “and, and, and...” to disseminate multiple additional ways of
mapping, helping to open up different possibilities and alternatives (Pickles, 2003;
Deleuze and Guattari, 1987).

This theoretical trajectory marks 3Cs’ purpose for and approach to
autonomous cartography as somewhat different from better documented forms of
counter-mapping. PPGIS and indigenous mapping can facilitate democratic
geographic decision-making through the state (Craig et al., 2002). While this
strategy can work in local planning, mapping can do more and different things.

Autonomous cartography excels at creating new geographic knowledges and
related critical, militant organizing. Moreover, this political approach to mapping
is not an abstract framework applied by outside researchers (Elwood, 2006). 3Cs
maps intentionally and explicitly in terms of a struggle. This strategy of social
change, the “autonomous” in autonomous cartography, draws on literatures of
social struggle and research that are less focused on maps."
(http://www.acme-journal.org/vol11/CCC2012.pdf)


[[Category:Geography]]