

=More Information=


==Directory of Researchers==

Source: http://www.nicklally.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Revisiting-Critical-GIS.pdf; maintained by Nick Lally

* Jim Thatcher, University of Washington -Tacoma, Division of Urban StudiesLuke Bergmann, University of Washington, Department of Geography
* Britta Ricker, University of Washington -Tacoma, Division of Urban Studies
* Reuben Rose-Redwood(Landscapes of Injustice Research Collective), University of Victoria, Department of Geography
* David O’Sullivan, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Geography
* Trevor J Barnes, University of British Columbia, Department of Geography
* Luke R. Barnesmoore, University of British Columbia, Department of Geography
* Laura Beltz Imaoka, University of California, Irvine, Program in Visual Studies
* Ryan Burns, University of Washington, Department of Geography
* Jonathan Cinnamon, University of Exeter, Department of Geography
* Craig M. Dalton, Hofstra University, Department of Global Studies and Geography
* Clinton Davis, Temple University, Department of Geography and Urban Studies
* Stuart Dunn, King’s College London, Department of Digital Humanities
* Francis Harvey, Leibniz Institute for Regional Geography and University of Leipzig
* Jin-Kyu Jung, University of Washington-Bothell, School of Interdisciplinary Arts & Sciences
* Ellen Kersten, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management
* LaDona Knigge, California State University Chico, Department of Geography & Planning
* Nick Lally, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Geography
* Wen Lin, Newcastle University, School of Geography, Politics and Sociology
* Dillon Mahmoudi, Portland State University, Urban Studies and Planning
* Michael Martin, Simon Fraser University, Department of Geography
* Will Payne, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Geography
* Amir Sheikh, University of Washington, Department of Urban Design and Planning
* Taylor Shelton, Clark University, Graduate School of GeographyEric Sheppard, UCLA, Department of Geography
* Chris W. Strother, University of Georgia, Department of Geography
* Alexander Tarr, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Geography
* Matthew W. Wilson, University of Kentucky, Department of Geography
* Jason C Young, University of Washington, Department of Geography


==Bibliography==

* Crampton, Jeremy W. 2010. Mapping: A Critical Introduction to Cartography and GIS. Malden, Mass:
Wiley-Blackwell.

* Crampton, Jeremy W. 2008. “The Role of Geosurveillance and Security in the Politics of Fear.” In
Geospatial Technologies and Homeland Security: Research Frontiers and Future Challenges edited by
Daniel Sui, 283-300. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.

* Crampton, Jeremy W., and John Krygier. 2005. “An Introduction to Critical Cartography.” ACME:
An International E-Journal for Critical Geographies 4(1): 11-33.

* Curry, Michael R. 1998. Digital Places: Living with Geographic Information Technologies. London:
Routledge.

* Harvey, Francis, Mei-Po Kwan, and Marianna Pavlovskaya. 2005. ”Introduction: Critical GIS.”
Cartographica 40(4): 1-3.

* Leszczynski, Agnieszka. 2014. “On the Neo in Neogeography.” Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 104(1): 60-79. doi:10.1080/00045608.2013.846159.

* Leszczynski, Agnieszka. 2012. “Situating the Geoweb in Political Economy.” Progress in Human
Geography 36(1): 72-89. doi:10.1177/0309132511411231.

* Obermeyer, Nancy J. 1995. “The Hidden GIS Technocracy.” Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems 22(1): 78-83.

* O’Sullivan, David. 2006. “Geographical Information Science: Critical GIS.” Progress in Human
Geography 30(6): 783-791.

* Pickles, John. 2004. A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping and the Geo-coded World. London:
Routledge.

* Pickles, John, ed. 1995. Ground Truth: The Social Implications of Geographic Information Systems. New York:
The Guilford Press.

* Poiker, Tom. 1995. “Preface to Special Issue.” Cartography and Geographic Information Systems 22(1): 3-4.



[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Geography]]