
'''* Article: What’s wrong with the world? Rationality! A critique of economic anthropology in the spirit of Jean Gebser. By Peter Pogany. MPRA Paper No. 27221. Shenandoah Valley Research Press, November 2010'''

URL = http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/27221/

''"what follows is intended only to demonstrate why the heterodox approach to contemporary socioeconomic issues finds support and
inspiration in his thoughts"''


=ABSTRACT=

"Jean Gebser (1905-1973) was a multidisciplinary thinker
whose ideas about human consciousness and the future inspire the following
five vantage points for the heterodox critique of contemporary economic
anthropology: 

(1) Characteristic attributes of consciousness and those of the
environment surrounding the individual are equivalent, eliminating the
possibility of single-minded, seamless, rational control, especially during
macrohistoric phase transitions; 

(2) Diaphaneity as a mode of deep and
comprehensive understanding will be needed to deal effectively with
emerging global resource and environmental problems; 

(3) Costs in the form
of irreversibly accumulating inaccessible energy shadow economic expansion
that our cultural conditioning portrays as pure progress; 

(4) Rationality, as the
most laudable motivation for individuals, business firms and nations, has led
to an unfounded techno-fetish; and, for various reasons, it fuels accelerated
movement toward collective self-destruction; 

(5) Signs of chaos (not the
harmless and controllable kind found in standard economic literature)
corroborate the notion that we have entered a new period of macrohistoric
phase transition as interpreted by the thermodynamic comprehension of
universal history."

(http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/27221/)


=Excerpts=

Peter Pogany:

"He identified five structures of consciousness: Archaic, magic, mythical, mental, and
integral. These have always been simultaneously and comprehensively present in all of
us with a crucial qualification: Historically, they dominate actual consciousness in the
sequence indicated. Although with nonnegligible overlaps, each emerged, became
decisively influential, turned deficient and was gradually replaced in its epoch-defining
capacity. Currently, we live the apotheosis of mental dominance, already in its deficient
phase, struggling to ward off the fifth (integral) structure, which began to press to the
fore at the turn of the last century.

An originary perception of existence is “ever-present” in consciousness.

It had become suppressed and latent over the ages but once the integral structure defines our
relationship to “Being” it will be free again, renewed and enriched with transparency and
intensity. This final, culminating moment of consonance will usher in the age of a healthy
equilibrium among basic human propensities. The archaic deep sleep and relaxation, the
magic sense of unity; experienced, among many other ways, through music; fulfillment
of poetic inclinations that characterizes the mythical, and the cultivation of sciences that
the mental in us urges, will all have their opportunity to flourish."



[[Category:Integral Theory]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Articles]]