
'''= "a collective of researchers and writers working between technology and culture, computer science and information theory, aesthetics and politics".''' [https://www.e-flux.com/journal/123/438467/editorial-dialogues-on-recursive-colonialisms-speculative-computation-and-the-techno-social/]

URL = 


=Description=

"the Critical Computation Bureau (CCB), a collective of researchers and writers working between technology and culture, computer science and information theory, aesthetics and politics. The members—Luciana Parisi, Ezekiel Dixon-Román, Tiziana Terranova, Oana Pârvan, and Brian D’Aquino—are situated in the US, the UK, and Southern Italy, and engage with networks spanning several continents to intervene in the techno-politics of racial capitalism and its recursive regeneration."

(https://www.e-flux.com/journal/123/438467/editorial-dialogues-on-recursive-colonialisms-speculative-computation-and-the-techno-social/)


=Directory=

"Luciana Parisi’s research is a philosophical investigation of technology in culture, aesthetics, and politics. She is a Professor at the Program in Literature and Computational Media Art and Culture at Duke University. She was a member of the CCRU (Cybernetic Culture Research Unit) and is currently a cofounding member of CCB (Critical Computation Bureau). She is the author of Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and the Mutations of Desire (Continuum, 2004) and Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics and Space (MIT Press, 2013).

Ezekiel Dixon-Román is an Associate Professor in the School of Social Policy & Practice at the University of Pennsylvania. His research seeks to make critical interventions towards re-theorizing the technologies and practices of quantification that he understands as mediums and agencies of sociopolitical systems, whereby race and other assemblages of difference are byproducts. He is the author of Inheriting Possibility: Social Reproduction & Quantification in Education (University of Minnesota Press, 2017), and the guest editor of “Control Societies @ 30: Technopolitical Forces and Ontologies of Difference” (Social Text Online, 2020).

Tiziana Terranova is Professor of Cultural Studies and Digital Media at the University of Naples “L’Orientale.” She is the author of Network Culture (Pluto Press, 2004) and the forthcoming After the Internet (Semiotext(e), 2022) and Technosocial (University of Minnesota Press)."

(https://www.e-flux.com/journal/123/438467/editorial-dialogues-on-recursive-colonialisms-speculative-computation-and-the-techno-social/)


=More information=

Special issue of E-Flux at https://www.e-flux.com/journal/123/438467/editorial-dialogues-on-recursive-colonialisms-speculative-computation-and-the-techno-social/


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]