=Context=

Michael Sacasas:

"The question is not whether technology has a moral dimension, the question is whether we recognize it or not. In fact, technologys moral dimension is inescapable, layered, and multi-faceted.

When we do think about technologys moral implications, we tend to think about what we do with a given technology. We might call this the guns dont kill people, people kill people approach to the ethics of technology. What matters most about a technology on this view is the use to which it is put. This is, of course, a valid consideration. A hammer may indeed be used to either build a house or bash someones head in. On this view, technology is morally neutral and the only morally relevant question is this: What will I do with this tool?

But is this really the only morally relevant question one could ask? For instance, pursuing the example of the hammer, might I not also ask how having the hammer in hand encourages me to perceive the world around me? Or, what feelings having a hammer in hand arouses?

Below are a few other questions that we might ask in order to get at the wide-ranging moral dimension of our technologies."
(https://thefrailestthing.com/2014/11/29/do-artifacts-have-ethics/)


=The Criteria=

MICHAEL SACASAS:

#What sort of person will the use of this technology make of me?
#What habits will the use of this technology instill?
#How will the use of this technology affect my experience of time?
#How will the use of this technology affect my experience of place?
#How will the use of this technology affect how I relate to other people?
#How will the use of this technology affect how I relate to the world around me?
#What practices will the use of this technology cultivate?
#What practices will the use of this technology displace?
#What will the use of this technology encourage me to notice?
#What will the use of this technology encourage me to ignore?
#What was required of other human beings so that I might be able to use this technology?
#What was required of other creatures so that I might be able to use this technology?
#What was required of the earth so that I might be able to use this technology?
#Does the use of this technology bring me joy?
#Does the use of this technology arouse anxiety?
#How does this technology empower me? At whose expense?
#What feelings does the use of this technology generate in me toward others?
#Can I imagine living without this technology? Why, or why not?
#How does this technology encourage me to allocate my time?
#Could the resources used to acquire and use this technology be better deployed?
#Does this technology automate or outsource labor or responsibilities that are morally essential?
#What desires does the use of this technology generate?
#What desires does the use of this technology dissipate?
#What possibilities for action does this technology present? Is it good that these actions are now possible?
#What possibilities for action does this technology foreclose? Is it good that these actions are no longer possible?
#How does the use of this technology shape my vision of a good life?
#What limits does the use of this technology impose upon me?
#What limits does my use of this technology impose upon others?
#What does my use of this technology require of others who would (or must) interact with me?
#What assumptions about the world does the use of this technology tacitly encourage?
#What knowledge has the use of this technology disclosed to me about myself?
#What knowledge has the use of this technology disclosed to me about others? Is it good to have this knowledge?
#What are the potential harms to myself, others, or the world that might result from my use of this technology?
#Upon what systems, technical or human, does my use of this technology depend? Are these systems just?
#Does my use of this technology encourage me to view others as a means to an end?
#Does using this technology require me to think more or less?
#What would the world be like if everyone used this technology exactly as I use it?
#What risks will my use of this technology entail for others? Have they consented?
#Can the consequences of my use of this technology be undone? Can I live with those consequences?
#Does my use of this technology make it easier to live as if I had no responsibilities toward my neighbor?
#Can I be held responsible for the actions which this technology empowers? Would I feel better if I couldnt?

(https://thefrailestthing.com/2014/11/29/do-artifacts-have-ethics/)

[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Design]]
[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]
[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]