
= '''How does the design of digital technologies reproduce or challenge the relations of production?'''


=Discussion=

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"Design is a key ‘moment’ in the reproduction of social and economic
relationships and social control under white supremacist capitalist
heteropatriarchy and settler colonialism. At the same time, there is a
growing conversation about platform cooperativism vs. the so-called
‘sharing economy’ (Scholz and Schneider, 2016).  We need to consider the
application of design justice principles to labor market platform
development. The main point is that platform ownership is a key source
of capitalist profitability and worker exploitation, and that
counterstrategies include organic self-organization, platform organizing
by labor unions, and platform cooperativism. Examples include
Turkopticon, SherpaShare, Contratados.org, Care.com’s partnership with
NDWA, the development of apps by taxi worker cooperatives, and so on.
Design justice, applied to the development of digital labor markets,
requires that designers and developers involve workers, worker advocacy
organizations, and cooperatives from the beginning in the design of
(cooperative, worker owned) platforms in various sectors. Platform
cooperativism is an important proposal with a growing group of
adherents. At the same time, platform cooperativism will not be able to
advance as a liberatory project if it fails to fully incorporate an
intersectional feminist analysis of capitalism."
(http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup)

=More information=

* [[Design Justice]]

*  [[Notes on Design Justice and Digital Technologies]]. By Sasha Costanza-Chock. [http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup]: an introduction to: 
** [[Design Pedagogy]]‎
** [[Design Sites]]‎
** [[Design Discourse]]‎ 
** [[Design Values]]‎
** [[Design Accountability‎]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]