

=Directory=

'''= map and directory of trainings in the U.S.'''

URL = https://criticalrace.org/?

"A free resource for parents and students concerned about the negative impact Critical Race Training has on education. Search our database of over 200 colleges and universities to learn more about Critical Race Training on campuses nationwide."



=Cases=


==Units of Study, ==

Daniel Buck et al.:

"It’s hard to determine precisely how many schools use Calkins’s Units of Study. One professor of education acknowledged that publishers “aren’t very forthcoming” with this “very basic data.” The curriculum’s publisher claims that it is used in “tens of thousands of schools around the world,” and a poll from EducationWeek estimates that 16 percent of U.S. elementary school teachers use it, including, one education journalist estimates, at least 55 districts in Massachusetts. It isn’t a stretch to say that thousands of teachers rely on its lesson plans, assessments, and other materials.

One unit in particular stands out for its embrace of principles inspired by critical race theory. The opening pages of Critical Literacy: Unlocking Contemporary Fiction, meant for students in seventh through ninth grade, explain that the unit will engage with “the politics of race, class, and gender.” One activity asks students to break down “hegemonic masculinity” in the books they’re reading. Another builds “identity lenses”’ through which students can analyze various texts, including “critical race theories” and “gender theories.” References to identity pervade nearly every page of the unit. Accompanying materials declare that the curriculum is “dedicated” to teaching “critical literacies” that will “help readers investigate power.”

This unit underscores a problem far larger than a few lesson plans. It exposes a radical approach to education that pervades our schools and upends all of our former notions of what education should be, replacing the goal of fostering inquisitive, capable minds with ideologically trained readers, who already know what a text has to say. Headline-making stories of racialized “affinity groups” and “privilege walks” are only the most visible elements of this pedagogy. Other seemingly innocuous practices are also rooted in a philosophy that treats the immutable characteristics of students as their most central attributes."

(https://www.city-journal.org/critical-race-theory-in-the-classroom?wallit_nosession=1)


=More information=

* a similar resource, monitoring coures and other initiatives: [https://whataretheylearning.com/? What Are They Learning ?]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Race]]