

=Discussion=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"Cross-platform federation is important, because it enables individuals
to speak to each other without subscribing to the same service or relying on the same
codebase (and thus, the same developers). This is a critical aspect of enabling greater
agency and choice for users, because it reduces the friction of switching from one
platform to another. Instant messaging is an excellent example of this -- right now, if a
user wants to switch to a new messaging application, then it’s unlikely that they’ll be
able to communicate with their contacts who are using a different service. This wasn’t
always the case. For example, XMPP is a protocol that lets different messaging
services exchange messages. Google chat used to support XMPP, but recently opted
out, possibly due to the fact that most users were not using the federated features to
speak with their friends across different messaging services.

Today, most open source federated projects only focus on federating with other
nodes in their network, not across services, or only with the most popular social media
platforms like Facebook or Twitter. This is due in large part to the fact that federated
platforms bear the additional burden of coordinating across different clients, which
makes it tough for them to remain agile and adaptable over time. For example, Signal, a
popular encrypted messaging application, opted for a non-federated protocol, because it
proved too challenging for them to respond to user demand for new features when
using federated models. According to Signal’s lead developer, Moxie Marlinspike, “It's
undeniable that once you federate your protocol, it becomes very difficult to make
changes. And right now, at the application level, things that stand still don't fare very
well in a world where the ecosystem is moving

As a result of these challenges, open source platforms often cannot match the
usability and quality of performance of privatized platforms like Facebook and Twitter."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

=Example=

For a successful example, see [[Mastodon]]



[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]