

=Discussion=

Mentions useabrand and garmz



'„Today innovation is coming from all directions“, says law scholar
Yochai Benkler elsewhere in this publication. The two fashion startups
garmz and useabrand impressively illustrate this thesis. They
use new technologies to open up and democratize the selection, production
and distribution mechanisms of the fashion industry.

The principle behind this is called crowdsourcing and is used in
many other economic sectors too. Here the creativity and the skills
of Internet users are integrated into processes that have formerly
been reserved to specialists.

„Fashion shall be no dictatorship“, says useabrand head designer
Anna Rihl. She calls her Vienna-based startup “Mo-demokratie“
(mo-democracy). Users can upload their sketches to the online platform
and they are also involved in the decision making process as to
what is going to be produced and what not.
While at useabrand the ideas and sketches of the community flow
into the label’s collections the startup garmz, which was also founded
in Vienna, wants to help young designers to take their first
steps in the industry.

The designers present their sketches on the online platform and the
users can rate them and comment on them. Then garmz produces
first prototypes of selected fashion design. If sufficient demand is
apparent, the items go into serial production and are distributed
worldwide via the company’s own online shop. Garmz fully assumes
the financial risk and the shares the revenues with the designers.
“Concepts such as open innovation or user innovation enable us to involve
several parties directly into the creation of an item and thus to
see already at an early stage the strengths and weaknesses of a product”,
garmz co-founder Andreas Klinger explains. “The designers
get feedback already at the design level and can thus bring the product
to the market together with the future customers without taking
any risk.”

It seems that the online platform, which was launched in summer
2010, touched a nerve with its concept. The uploaded sketches have
already been rated more than 30,000 times. By the end of the year
garmz had already 6,500 users from more than 200 countries. First
products are available in the online shop, which has been available
since early December 2010. Along with production and distribution
the company also helps its designers organize their online marketing
activities in social networks.

By means of crowdsourcing concepts garmz might also be able to
estimate the demand for different fashion items and thus minimize
market risk. “By including the users in the process we can also
create stronger ties to both the platform and the brand”, says Klinger.
“garmz helps customers realize their requirements and thus
even niche products get their market”. Or, as prominently placed on
the company’s website: “Good night, fashion industry. Good morning,
designers.”
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]