
'''= The mission of Crowd Companies is to bring Empowered People & Resilient Brands together to collaborate for Shared Value.'''

URL = http://crowdcompanies.com/


=Description=

"We are creating a Brand Council to bring internal, corporate agents of change in a setting where they can further learn and engage in the Collaborative Economy.

We offer three services: 1) Connection with innovative peers in a private, real-world and online setting. 2) Get education by industry experts in centralized calls and meetings. 3) Move to action by partnering with the innovation Network of startups who want to work with large companies.

The Movement: The Collaborative Economy
The Collaborative Economy is an economic model where people are creating and sharing goods, services, space and money with each other in what is also known as the Sharing Economy. Some people are also building their own products, known as the Maker Movement. Combined, this movement means the crowd is getting what they need from each other.

The bold question we’ll ask and answer is “What role do companies play if people get what they need from each other?”

Topics we will explore:

* What is driving this movement, and what impacts does it have on society, sustainability and stakeholders?
* How does a model of sharing impact models of consumption?
* What are the benefits and challenges of local commerce in neighborhoods?
* What are the benefits and risks of crowdfunding and co-innovation?
* How can we tap new business models such as on-demand, subscription, and marketplaces?
* How can global manufactures partner with the Maker Movement?
* How does mobile sensors and the Internet of Things enable these new models?
* What are the total impacts of 3D Printing to design, manufacturing, supply chain, and beyond."
(http://crowdcompanies.com/about.html)


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]