'''= refers to the 'curating' of news events by the crowd'''


=Description=

Harry Gayner [http://www.contagiousmagazine.com/resources/Crowd_Curation.pdf]:
 
"Barack Obama's presidential inauguration
was the first 'crowd-curated'
media event in history. Understanding
how crowd-curation works may help us
to be better citizens, and even better marketers.

And that was what was so different
about Barack Obama's inauguration.
The Facebook-CNN link up that
accompanied the inauguration
broadcast created a new type of
meaning-making for the news: 'crowd
curation'.

It worked like this. You logged on to
your Facebook account and had CNN's
broadcast of the inauguration ceremony
live-streamed to your computer: TV on
your computer. But instead of having the
CNN experts comment on the
proceedings, you could comment on
what was going on yourself by changing
your status bar, opt to see what your
friends were saying, or opt to see what
everyone was saying.

The result was a very different media
experience. For me, it was certainly much
more rambunctious. You knew exactly
what people thought of the incoming and
outgoing administrations, in real-time. It
was also funnier, messier, more
immediate, and slightly less informed
than what you'd normally get on CNN.
It was also far more demanding as a
viewer. It meant that you had to listen
hard, think clearly and speak up.

The implications for politics are
startling. If you can 'crowd-curate' a
meaning, perhaps you can 'crowd-create'
a policy, or 'crowd-rule' a country- living
out the true meaning of 'democracy'. This
would turn modern politics from being
passive entertainment - showbiz for ugly
people - into a participation sport.

This co-creation of value is already
happening. This is what makes
services like designyourowning.com
and the customization engine behind
Volkswagen.co.uk so exciting. This is
why Amazon's recommendations or
Apple's Genius service are so
compelling. But these services are often
thought of as add-ons to existing brands.
The realities of 'crowd-curation' will mean
that in time, this sort of co-creation will
be the core offering of the brands that provide them.

'Crowd-curation', whether it is of a
news event, or a political issue, or of a
brand offering, ultimately means putting
people in charge of their own decisions.
This was long thought to be an
impossibility - a nice idea, but we could
never do it. Obama's inauguration has
told us: 'Yes, we can.'
(http://www.contagiousmagazine.com/resources/Crowd_Curation.pdf)



[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Culture]]