'''* Book: Crypto Anarchy, Cyberstates, and Pirate Utopias. Ed. by Peter Ludlow. MIT, 2001'''

URL = https://monoskop.org/images/4/42/Ludlow_Peter_Crypto_Anarchy_Cyberstates_and_Pirate_Utopias.pdf (full text)


=Description=

"A wide-ranging collection of writings on emerging political structures in cyberspace.

In Crypto Anarchy, Cyberstates, and Pirate Utopias, Peter Ludlow extends the approach he used so successfully in High Noon on the Electronic Frontier, offering a collection of writings that reflects the eclectic nature of the online world, as well as its tremendous energy and creativity. This time the subject is the emergence of governance structures within online communities and the visions of political sovereignty shaping some of those communities. Ludlow views virtual communities as laboratories for conducting experiments in the construction of new societies and governance structures. While many online experiments will fail, Ludlow argues that given the synergy of the online world, new and superior governance structures may emerge. Indeed, utopian visions are not out of place, provided that we understand the new utopias to be fleeting localized "islands in the Net" and not permanent institutions."

(https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262621519/crypto-anarchy-cyberstates-and-pirate-utopias/)



=Contents=

"The book is organized in five sections. The first section considers the sovereignty of the Internet. The second section asks how widespread access to resources such as Pretty Good Privacy and anonymous remailers allows the possibility of "Crypto Anarchy"—essentially carving out space for activities that lie outside the purview of nation states and other traditional powers. The third section shows how the growth of e-commerce is raising questions of legal jurisdiction and taxation for which the geographic boundaries of nation-states are obsolete. The fourth section looks at specific experimental governance structures evolved by online communities. The fifth section considers utopian and anti-utopian visions for cyberspace."

(https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262621519/crypto-anarchy-cyberstates-and-pirate-utopias/)


==ToC==

1 New Foundations: On the Emergence of Sovereign Cyberstates and
Their Governance Structures 1
Peter Ludlow


==I The Sovereignty of Cyberspace?== 

2 A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace 27
John Perry Barlow

3 Getting Our Priorities Straight 31
David Brin

4 United Nodes of Internet: Are We Forming a Digital Nation? 39
David S. Bennahum

5 HyperMedia Freedom 47
Richard Barbrook


==II Crypto Anarchy==

6 The Crypto Anarchist Manifesto 61
Timothy C. May

7 Crypto Anarchy and Virtual Communities 65
Timothy C. May

8 A Cypherpunk’s Manifesto 81
Eric Hughes

9 The Future of Cryptography 85
Dorothy E. Denning

10 Afterword to “The Future of Cryptography” 103
Dorothy E. Denning

11 Re: Denning’s Crypto Anarchy 105
Duncan Frissell

12 Hiding Crimes in Cyberspace 115
Dorothy E. Denning and William E. Baugh Jr.


==III Shifting Borders: How VR Is Claiming Jurisdiction from RL==

13 Law and Borders: The Rise of Law in Cyberspace 145
David R. Johnson and David G. Post

14 Anarchy, State, and the Internet: An Essay on Lawmaking in
Cyberspace 197
David G. Post

15 Prop 13 Meets the Internet: How State and Local Government
Finances Are Becoming Road Kill on the Information
Superhighway 213
Nathan Newman


==IV The Emergence of Law and Governance Structures in Cyberspace==

16 Virtual(ly) Law: The Emergence of Law in LambdaMOO 245
Jennifer L. Mnookin

17 “help manners”: Cyberdemocracy and Its Vicissitudes 303
Charles J. Stivale

18 Due Process and Cyberjurisdiction 329
David R. Johnson

19 Virtual Magistrate Project Press Release 339

20 Virtual Magistrate Issues Its First Decision 343


==V Utopia, Dystopia, and Pirate Utopias==

21 Utopia Redux 349
Karrie Jacobs


22 The God of the Digerati 353
Jedediah S. Purdy

23 Californian Ideology 363
Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron

24 Bit Rot 389
Mark Dery

25 The Temporary Autonomous Zone 401
Hakim Bey

==Appendix:== 

Interview with Noam Chomsky on Anarchism, Marxism,
and Hope for the Future 435

[[Category:Network_Nations]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:Books]]