'''* Book: Farewell to Westphalia. Crypto Sovereignty and Post-Nation-State Governance. By Jarrad Hope and Peter Ludlow.'''

URL =  https://logos.co/farewell-to-westphalia/

''"It explores the shortcomings of the nation state, presenting sovereign cyberstates and network states as an alternative order for the post-Westphalian era."''


=Contents=

==1 Introduction : Pursuing Decentralised-Yet-Cooperative Governance==


==2 Nation States Are Obsolete Governance Technologies== 

==3 Post-State Governance== 

==4 New Conceptual Foundations==

==5 Technical Foundations for Decentralised Cooperation==

==6 New Tools for Human Governance== 

==7 Why Centralisation is the Problem, and Crypto is the Solution==

==8 Are Cyberstates the Answer?==

 8.2 Must blockchain communities have physical territories? 136
 8.3 Should blockchain communities aspire to be diplomatically recognised by nation states? . . . . . . . . . . . 141
 8.4 Should blockchain communities strive to have national identity?. . . 142
 8.5 Network states versus blockchain communities . . . . 145


==9 Exit, Exile and Access==

==10 Rethinking Sovereignty==

 10.5 Decentralised property registries . . . . . . . . . . . 174

==11 The Rights and Responsibilities of Blockchain Communities==

 11.4 On the responsibilities of blockchain communities . . . 185
 11.5 Decentralised oversight of blockchain communities . . 190
 11.6 On the rights of blockchain communities . . . . . . . 192


==12 How Blockchain Communities Will Collaborate==


==13 When Blockchain Communities Are in Conflict==

==14 A Deeper Dive into the Technology== 

==15 Conceptual Limits of Blockchain Governance==

 15.2 Nothing is 100% trustless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
 15.3 Nothing is 100% decentralised . . . . . . . . . . . . 254

==16 Are Blockchain Communities Inevitable?== 

==17 Values and the Technology Stack== 

  17.4 Beyond Westphalia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297


=Excerpts=


==Context: The Peace of Westphalia==

From the introduction:

"In 1648, the Peace of Westphalia marked the end of the Thirty Years’
War – an event in which Catholics and Protestants had clashed across
Northern Europe. The war had certainly been grim business. Precise numbers are difficult to come by, but apart from the two million
soldiers that perished, it is estimated that rural areas of what is now
Germany lost over 60% of their population due to war, starvation and
disease. Cities lost around a third of their populations. An entry written in the margins of a family bible in Swabia recorded, ‘We live like animals, eating bark and grass. . . . No one could have imagined that
anything like this would happen to us. Many people say that there is
no God.’ By some accounts, the situation in the Rhineland had grown
so desperate that people were resorting to cannibalism.

The treaties enshrined in the Peace of Westphalia not only ended the
conflict but made sovereign nation states a permanent fixture in our
world.

It was a solution in which all parties agreed that what nation states do internally is their own business. The agreements successfully ended the Thirty Years’ War; this cannot be denied. However, in view of the wars and genocide that swept across Europe since
the Peace of Westphalia – including the Napoleonic Wars, the Franco–Prussian War and two World Wars in the twentieth century – one has to question how much was accomplished by the invention of the modern
nation state. The question gains even more bite when we query the
wisdom of European post-Westphalian colonial powers imposing their
artificial nation-state boundaries onto territories around the world
with complete indifference to previous tribal boundaries and conflicts.

Sovereign nation states are human technologies designed to facilitate
the peaceful organisation of human beings, solving for their ideological, political and religious differences. However, they are technologies that are nearly 380 years old and, like all technology of that era,
perhaps not the optimal solutions available today. To put things in
perspective, the Peace of Westphalia was reached six years after the
invention of the mechanical adding machine by Blaise Pascal and eight
years before the invention of the pendulum clock by Christiaan Huygens. These are great inventions, to be sure, but we do not consider
them to be the end of history. They have been followed by newer and
superior versions of those technologies. 

'''Why should our technologies for political organisation be set in stone? Can we not do better? We believe that we can. Our solution will involve a thorough investigation into developments like blockchain technologies and smart contracts and showing how they can be productively applied to the project of cooperative human governance."'''


'''2.'''

"Henry Kissinger echoed this take in his book, World Order:

The Peace of Westphalia became a turning point in the history of nations because the elements it set in place were as
uncomplicated as they were sweeping. The state, not the
empire, dynasty, or religious confession was affirmed as
the building block of European order. The concept of state
sovereignty was established. The right of each signatory to
choose its own domestic structure and religious orientation
free from intervention was affirmed, while novel clauses
ensured that minority sects could practice their faith in
peace and be free. Beyond the immediate demands of the
moment, the principles of a system of ‘international relations’ were taking shape, motivated by the common desire
to avoid a recurrence of total war on the Continent."


[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Network_Nations]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:Books]]