=Description=

Felix Fritsch:

"A multitude of blockchain-based projects explicitly seek to
challenge social media behemoths with decentralized platforms that leave users more control and
reward them financially for their interactions. Such Crypto Social Networks (CSNs) make a
particularly good case for the study of the effects of blockchain on society as they allow observation
both of the subsumption of social relations under the reign of capital and of the constitution of selfsustained digital communities in a new digital commons."


=Discussion=

See: the [[Political Economy of Crypto Social Networks]]


=Cases=

Felix Fritsch:

'''Three Emerging Crypto Social Networks: [[Minds]], [[HyperSpace]] and [[Steem]]'''

"Minds is a social media platform under development since 2011 which adopted the concept of a
tokenized advertisements, payments and rewards system during the blockchain boom in 2016. Minds
focuses on accommodating content producers that feel censored or demonetized by mainstream Web
2.0 platforms in spirit of “a free and open Internet where privacy is ensured and people are fairly
compensated for their efforts online” (Minds.com). All of the platform’s code is open source, and
the company encourages its use by “people to launch their own social platform, (…) integrate token
economies (…) and (…) federate between networks” (Ottman 2019). Minds seeks to obtain full
decentralization with the recently launched Minds Nomads dApp as alternative access to their
network." (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)

HyperSpace, a dApp in beta mode since February 2019, brands itself as protocol layer of a ‘New
Content Economy’ powered by an “attention economy model (...) designed to remove the middlemen
involved in content creation, distribution, and curation while enabling all value-creating parties
involved directly to benefit financially” (HyperSpace 2019). The platform organizes content in spaces
equivalent to groups on Facebook. Most of its decentralization efforts focus on providing flexible
governance tools to these spaces, thus supporting competitive differentiation and adaptation to
community needs in terms of self-administration and rewards structures.
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)

In difference to other CSNs, Steem (*2016) is an own blockchain specifically designed for social
network applications. As a unified backend accessible through different, competing frontends it
constitutes a technological antidote to the lock-in effects users face vis-a-vis data silos of big social
media platforms, upon which much of their monopoly power rests. Steem allows to build frontends,
applications and supporting infrastructure without permission and thus potentially unleashes creative
forces beyond the scale of any dedicated start-up entity. The Steem company currently develops a
Smart Media Tokens template that shall allow easy customization and integration of all kinds of
digital community interaction with the Steem blockchain.
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)

The three projects by and far share a critical stance towards existing Web 2.0 platforms regarding
exploitation of free user labour, unbounded surveillance practices and increasing propensity to
censorship. All of them (seek to) utilize cryptographic tokens as rewards for value-adding user
activities, smart contracts as transparent governance tools granting users more autonomy, as well as
decentralized data storage leaving users in control. They differ significantly regarding activities
deemed valuable, use value of tokens and governance mechanisms conveyed to users. Given their
early stage, not all dimensions scrutinized here are fully developed yet, and some crucial questions
remain to be solved. Nevertheless, in the following I seek to provide an overview of implemented
and envisaged structures that in combination result in significantly different platforms.


==Incentivizing User Behaviour through Rewards Systems==

The characteristics of rewards systems reflect different answers to the shared problem of defining,
weighting and rewarding the different sources of value creation. Differences in source, use and
exchange value of rewards furthermore allow to draw inferences about their conception of platform- community relations as well as about the role of external interests.
Minds issues rewards to users daily according to their ‘contribution score’. As each form of
interaction (active: going online, referring new users; passive: receiving upvotes, comments,
subscribers, reposts, transactions) has a fixed token value assigned, the daily rewards pool is deemed
to grow with the amount and activity of users. Rewards concentrate on content production, while
curation of content through voting, commenting or sharing is not rewarded.

Steem’s rewards stem from a fixed daily pool of tokens, of which 75% reward actors producing or
curating content, 10% pay off ‘witnesses’ that secure the blockchain, and 15% are issued as interest
on invested financial capital. In addition, the amount of STEEM a user invests proportionally
leverages influence in as well as earnings from curation. The share of the rewards pool dedicated to
content is distributed relative to the amount of staked capital each content can attract votes from. 75%
of thus attracted rewards go to the content creator, the rest is distributed between curators and
commenters relative to their staked capital. While Steem’s curation system is deemed to function as
a prediction market that rewards discovery of quality content, on average, curators earn four times as 
much if they vote for their own instead of for others’ content. Overall, the system incentivizes
particularly large token holders to freeride and maximize their returns through self-voting, ring-voting
and vote-selling strategies that disregard the purpose of curation and collectively lead to a tragedy of
the commons in terms of decreasing traffic and quality of content, which also reflects in token prices.

HyperSpace reverses the order of events by issuing tokens to users daily, to be spent on upvoting
others‘ content, after which they become sell-able by receivers. This model harnesses curating users’
affect in egalitarian fashion and grants them control over the quantity of support they give to
individual posts or comments. Incentives align the interests of diverse actors to contribute to a
community’s benefit: Content creators pay fees to spaces they publish in that is determined by space
admin(s). Content producers receive 60% of tokens spent on upvoting, 20% are distributed to
previous upvoters of that same content, and 20% to the space it is published in. 10% of all space
income reward its admins, 90% reward its top contributors. This design, referred to as prediction
market, incentivizes curators to discover quality content they deem relevant to others, space admins
to keep spaces orderly and attractive to content producers, and content producers to contribute to
selected spaces where they can reap ‘top contributor’ benefits.


==The Value of Tokens==

The promised constant cash flow to users in form of tokens requires demand from ‘outside’ the
platform economy for tokenized services the platform offers, unless one expects users themselves to
create that cash flow, which on collective level defeats the purpose of rewarding users for their
contribution.

Minds is the most straightforward in this regard as the platform both has a fixed price it sells tokens
for itself (0,15$) and clearly visible use value of a token, which equals 1000 guaranteed views for
content and serves as currency for several other services. Content producers who bring user attention
to the platform are rewarded with tokens, which they can use themselves to boost their visibility, or
sell to other users or advertisers. As peer-to-peer currency, the Minds token is used to purchase access
to premium content as well as to premium features offered by the Minds company. The resulting
economy is tailored to the needs of influencers and quality content producers seeking publicity and
monetization infrastructure much more than to the needs of content consumers.

Use and thus exchange value of Steem’s tokens are less straightforward. Staked tokens generate
interest and potentially voting rewards, that is, they accumulate over time – but this does not make
them useful. The real external use value of tokens seems to be giving capital direct influence on the
distribution of attention within the Steem ecosystem, as its different frontends all give ‚trending’ or
‚hot’ content disproportionately prominent space. Advertisers or political campaigns can get their
content attention through own or rented voting power without having to declare it an advertisement
or sponsored content. At least theoretically, this use value is the source of external market demand for
tokens beyond pure speculation. The lack of effective incentives promoting qualitative curation visà-vis vote-buying practices makes such advertising practices extraordinarily cheap: Advertisers can
marginally outbid ‘authentic’ content producers for votes, whose bids are limited by financial merit
these votes have, and can easily divest tokens after a campaign.

HyperSpace is most opaque about circulation dynamics and future demand for its token. Team
members informally referred to space registration costs and spaces incentivizing top content
producers with tokens as sources for market demand. Such merely temporary expenses seem unlikely
to absorb all tokens issued to users on HyperSpace daily. While a plethora of possibilities exists to
create external demand for tokens in the wider cryptospace, they all either target users, advertisers or
investors. If we recognize that the CSNs under comparison seek to channel funds to the former,
advertising likely remains the only continuous source of demand given that investment is not a
productive process in itself.


==Governance Beyond Tokens and Incentives==

As blockchains translate contractual agreements into self-executing code, executing rules of conduct
on the blockchain ceases to depend on actual willingness and capability of executives. This bears
potential in particular for loose, non-hierarchical digital networks hitherto limited by a lack of trust
and enforceability. Social media communities are thus prime cases for the application of decentralized
governance tools located on a blockchain. Among the CSNs under scrutiny, which realms beyond
content curation are governed by such tools, how much autonomy do these tools grant users over
what, and how is power distributed therein?

Minds seeks to empower content producers with smart contracts that regulate access to premium
channels as well as monetarization of their advertisement space. The scope of these tools is limited
to granting autonomy over the details of peer-to-peer sales contracts, while collective decisionmaking as source for dynamic community governance is not supported. Power therein, that is over the details of negotiated contracts, is based on market forces, that is, on demand and supply for
premium content on the one and advertising space on the other side.

As blockchain, Steem provides significantly more governance tools. The Steem protocol itself has
‘witnesses’ who secure the blockchain and compete for votes through placing incentives and assuring
legitimacy. The Smart Media Token (SMT) template under development shall empower unskilled
users to launch tokens and define their economic parameters. Steem Engine, a user-developed “sidechain platform for the Steem blockchain” (Steem Engine FAQ, 2019) already boasts smart contract usage, token issuance and a decentralized exchange. Its emergence constitutes a shining example of
the benefits of open architecture on top of a secure monetary infrastructure. Governing power in
Steem’s foundational protocol is located strictly in the voting power staked tokens grant. In the wider
Steem ecosystem, however, coding skills and means of attracting attention are relevant resources that
go beyond mere financial capital.

HyperSpace seeks to develop governance tools that facilitate the autonomous organization of
community within and competition between spaces. Upon payment of a registration fee, space
founders shall determine its political nature through autocratic, meritocratic or democratic attribution
of decision-making rights. Its electorate, by sanctioning (economic and other) rules, rights and
obligations as well as further tools, shall be able to develop unique governance configurations in
competition with other spaces over attention and quality contributors. HyperSpace does not envision
permission-less development of new tools by users, and thus retains control over its grand trajectory.
The project’s early state, however, cautions against taking these plans and their full realization
through smart contract architecture for granted."

=See Also=

* [[Blockchain_Social_Media_Apps]]

[[Category:Cases]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Media]]