=Description=

'''1.'''

"CubeSats, being conceptualized as FOSH-like technology from the start, can be seen as
scientific tools that space researchers often fabricate themselves. The main difference with
other experimental scientific research tools is that, once a CubeSat is finished and launched
into orbit, it is never to be seen again on Earth, while the scientists that designed and
manufactured the nano-satellite should control and evaluate the experiment from the ground.

A CubeSat is a ten centimeter cube [1U] nano-satellite with a mass of approximately one
kilogram, as it is defined in the CubeSat Design Specification (CSD) that set the open source
architecture standards for CubeSats as a joint venture between California Polytechnic State
University (CalPoly) and Stanford University’s Space Systems Development Laboratory
since the year 1999. (Swartwout 2013; Hevner et al. 2011; Mehrparvar et al. 2014; Toorian
Diaz and Lee 2008, Ampatzoglou et al. 2014) The documentation to build up a CubeSat is
freely accessible online, as the CubeSat program aims to provide inexpensive access to space
for small payloads (Mehrparvar et al. 2014; Toorian et al. 2005) mediated by collaborating
networks of students, amateurs, practitioners, small and medium size business, and with low
construction and launching costs and a reduced development time for space experiment
platforms, (Straub 2012; Shiroma et al. 2011; Woellert et al. 2011; Heidt et al. 2000)
contributing to open the access to space research for small and developing nations. (Carrara et
al. 2017; Straub 2012; Woellert et al. 2011; Toorian Diaz and Lee 2008)

According to Koenig (2004) and Zimmermann (2014), an open source initiative has better
chances to become a platform and establish an standard in its industry, although a dual
licensing represents a better starting point towards fully open sourcing hardware (ibid.), like
in the case of complex scientific tools as CubeSats that are often developed by inexperienced
amateur teams. There is no consensus on the current state of space research in the area of
CubeSats; Selva and Krejci (2012) argue that in few years CubeSats should have outgrown its
initial educational purposes to become “a standard platform for technology demonstration
and scientific instrumentation”, while for Wollellert et al. (2011) CubeSats are still in its early
stages of development.

Regarding existing academic literature documenting the use of OSH in CubeSats, Kief et al.
(2011) describe a Space Plug-and-play Architecture (SPA) concept of rapid satellite
development built completely from commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) parts over an
open-source bus architecture; Scholtz and Juang (2015) apply a theoretical framework for the
OSH application to CubeSats, describing “an increasing number of CubeSat missions that
claim to be open source” (ibid.) while they are merely integrating open source modules into
their CubeSat design, although they find a prototypical case of open-source CubeSat in
LibreCube’s design initiative that “provides information on the LibreCube framework,
recommended and applicable standards, naming conventions, and other resources” (ibid.);
Ampatzoglou et al. 2014 document the “design, structural analysis, and qualification by
analysis and experimental validation” (ibid.) of the Greek open-source CubeSat UPSat,
developed by University of Patras and Libre Space Foundation (LSF) in what seems to be, as
far as the knowledge of the author goes, the only launched open-source CubeSat that have
been documented by academic publications.

An important aspect that have helped CubeSats to become so popular is ridesharing.
Rideshares are shared ‘piggyback’ rides as secondary loads in standardized slots in space
launchers. In the same fashion that so-called ‘sharing economy’ startup companies have
developed platforms to share car rides, rideshares allow to reduce launching costs by sharing
the costs with other CubeSats or complementing primary payloads that are not using all the
payload space available in a rocket (Swartwout 2011), open up affordable options to launch
low-budget educational CubeSats."


'''2.'''

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

“A CubeSat is a one unit (1U) 10-centimetre side cube-shaped  satellite. By combining the volume of two or more 1U  CubeSats, the size of the CubeSat can be arithmetically  increased (2U, 3U, nU). CubeSats are based on an open 
source architecture standard known as '''the CubeSat Design  Specification''' (CDS; Mehrparvar et al., 2014; Swartwout,  2013; Toorian et al., 2008). CubeSats carry payloads—tech nological artefacts intended to be tested/demonstrated with  the mission, like a camera or a propulsion system.

A CubeSat is like “a box” with two distinctive features.  First, it ticks all the formal requirements to be loaded in a  rocket launcher and safely deployed into orbit. Second, it is  designed to operate in the extreme conditions of outer space,  protecting its content. Besides the protective shield of the  “space box” container, and its contained artefacts (payloads),  a CubeSat needs to perform other functions to be operative.  These operative functions (e.g., navigation, communication)  are organized in different subsystems (e.g., attitude determination and control system, communications system) based  on specific hardware (e.g., gyroscopic sensors, microstrip  antenna; Ehrpais et al., 2016; Slavinskis et al., 2016). 

As a means to safely launch the payloads that constitute  the CubeSat mission objective (test/demonstrate technology  artefacts), CDS provides a frugal platform for prototyping  space technology. Its construction, development, and launching costs are relatively low, with shorter technology development periods (Selva & Krejci, 2012; Woellert et al., 2011).  CDS is open to everyone, and it has been very beneficial to  startups, universities, developing states, and communities  (Woellert et al., 2011). In the next section, we are going to  examine what makes technology complex, and how technology complexity can be conceptualized.” 

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)


=Source=

* Master's Thesis: Lucas Barreiro Lemos. COMMONS-BASED TECHNOLOGY IN THE DIGITAL ERA: THE CASE OF ESTCUBE. TALLINN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY,  2019

URL = https://digikogu.taltech.ee/en/Download/98e8bd52-7f70-4570-8f00-3ddb9c1dcfaa/hisomandilphinevthnoloogiadigitaalajastulES.pdf

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:P2P Hardware]]
[[Category:Estonia]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:P2P Hardware]]
[[Category:Estonia]]