

=Description=

Excerpts from Wikipedia Article :

"Cultural Creatives is a term coined by sociologist Paul H. Ray and psychologist Sherry Ruth Anderson to describe a large segment in Western society that has recently developed beyond the standard paradigm of Modernists versus Traditionalists or Conservatists. The concept was presented in 2000 in their book The Cultural Creatives. How 50 Million People Are Changing the World (Harmony Books, NY), where they claim to have found that 50 million adult Americans (slightly over one quarter of the adult population) can now be identified as belonging to this group. They estimated that there were another 80 to 90 million cultural creatives in Europe in 2000."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_Creative)


=Values=

Dr. Ray and Dr. Anderson assert that "values are the best single predictor of real behavior". The below list outlines the values that dictate a Cultural Creatives behavior:

    * Authenticity, actions must be consistent with words and beliefs
    * Engaged action and whole process learning; seeing the world as interwoven and connected
    * Idealism and activism
    * Globalism and ecology
    * The importance of women

Core cultural creatives also value altruism, self-actualization and spirituality.


=Example=

'''In Business:'''


Ron Rentel named entrepreneurial cultural creatives "innerpreneurs". Innerpreneurs have the defining characteristics of an entrepreneur:

    * high need for achievement
    * high need for independence
    * low need for conformity
    * internal locus of control
    * love of ambiguity
    * propensity for risk-taking
    * obsession with opportunity

But while entrepreneurs use their business for monetary gain, innerpreneurs use their business to find personal fulfillment (creatively, spiritually, emotionally) and create social change.


==Further reading==

Lietaer, Bernard (2001) Sustainable Abundance. In The Future of Money (pp. 260-298). London: Century. Describes the connection between Cultural Creatives and new vision of the global economy.


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]