
=Example=

Peter Turchin:

"I draw a parallel between Scheidel’s central argument and recent developments in cultural evolution (Richerson and Christiansen 2013), the most relevant of which is [[Cultural Multilevel Selection]] (CMLS). The  logic  of CMLS,  applied  to  the  evolution  of  western  European  polities,  is simple  and  quite  compelling.  Cooperation  within  a  polity  imposes  costs  on  all parties.  Rulers  prefer  to  wield  absolute  power  over  the  nobles  and  commoners, which leads to despotism. Selfish elites oppress commoners but would rather de-cline contributing resources to the rulers. Commoners just want to survive and are disinclined to pay taxes or provide recruits for wars. Intense interpolity competition, however, compels rulers and their constituencies to cooperate and compromise.  Those  polities  that  fail  to  achieve  at  least  some  degree  of  cooperation  are eliminated and replaced with others that are internally more cooperative. This is what  happened  to  early  modern  Poland-Lithuania,  which  lost  its  capacity  for internal cooperation and was carved up by its neighbors in a series of “partitions” in  the  eighteenth  century.  As  time  unfolds,  the  level  of  intrapolity  cooperation needed  for  survival  grows,  as  only  the  most  cohesive  ones  survive.  This  is the essence  of  CMLS:  polity-level  beneficial  traits  can  evolve  despite  their  costs  for intrapolity  constituencies,  but  only  under  the  conditions  of  intense  interpolity competition (Turchin  2016). Note that “polity-beneficial traits” include not only cooperative social norms and institutions, but also military technologies, economic innovations, prosocial religions, and cultures of knowledge. Furthermore,  elimination  of  uncooperative  and  dysfunctional  polities  is  only one  mechanism  of  CMLS,  if  the  most  powerful.  Equally  important,  and  perhaps more common in action, is selective imitation of successful polities. This was most clearly visible in the realm of military innovations. Under the conditions of intense interstate warfare following the Military Revolution of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (Roberts  1956),  new  models  of  firearms  and  cannon,  innovations  in tactics and drill, and developments in fortification and siege warfare were eagerly sought after and copied. Similar processes were involved in other realms—econo-mics,  finance,  technology,  and  science,  of  which  many  examples  are  discussed  in Escape from Rome. Interpolity  competition  is  a  special  case  of  a  more  general  process,  cultural group selection, which is still a controversial subject among evolutionary scientists (see the programmatic article by Richerson et al. 2016 and the commentaries on it).  Curiously,  however,  the  mechanism  of  cultural  group selection  is  the  core  of many theories in economics, archaeology, and other social sciences, although they do not use this particular term. Examples include the “creative destruction” of Joseph Schumpeter, “peer-polity interactions,” first introduced by Morton  Fried (1967)and  later  formalized  by  Renfrew  and  Cherry(1986),  and,  of  course,  the central argument in Escape from Rome."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gg5q63b)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Network Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]