
'''= "SECURE THE FUTURE OF CULTURAL VENUES THROUGH COLLECTIVE LAND STEWARDSHIP"'''

URL = https://www.lamain-fonciere.coop/

=Example=

In French, followed by English translation:

<La Main, une foncière culturelle, solidaire et citoyenne

POUR PÉRÉNNISER LES LIEUX CULTURELS PAR UNE MAITRISE FONCIÈRE COLLECTIVE

D’où l’on vient ?

Les Tiers-Lieux culturels, lieux intermédiaires et indépendants, friches culturelles, affirment l’art, la culture et l’espace comme des biens communs essentiels au développement de territoires durables...

À quoi fait-on face ?

Pour autant, l’occupation de leur bâtiment-outil reste précaire : la pression foncière fragilise leurs conditions de travail et les détourne de leur objectif d’intérêt général.

Et concrètement ?

La Main, Foncièrement culturelle est née pour répondre à ces problématiques : ensemble, sortons ces lieux de la spéculation immobilière et aidons-les à se pérenniser !

NOTRE CHAMP D'ACTION

ACCOMPAGNER

Amener les structures culturelles, les collectivités territoriales et les collectifs artistiques vers la maîtrise foncière autonome des lieux qu’ils font vivre.

SENSIBILISER

Faciliter les liens et l’échange de pratiques entre le secteur culturel et immobilier par un centre de ressources ouvert et contributif.

EXPÉRIMENTER

Construire des imaginaires souhaitables pour acquérir ensemble les tiers-lieux culturels et rapprocher leurs usager·ères de la propriété commune."


==English Translation==

From DeepSeek:
La Main: A Cultural Land Trust for Solidarity and Civic Action

TO SECURE THE FUTURE OF CULTURAL VENUES THROUGH COLLECTIVE LAND STEWARDSHIP

Where do we come from?

Cultural third places, intermediate and independent venues, and cultural reclaimed spaces assert art, culture, and space as essential common goods for the development of sustainable communities...

What are we up against?

However, their occupancy of their building-tools remains precarious: real estate pressure jeopardizes their working conditions and diverts them from their goal of public benefit.

So, what's the solution?

La Main, The Cultural Property Trust, was born to address these issues: together, let's remove these spaces from real estate speculation and help them become permanent!

OUR FIELD OF ACTION

Guiding cultural organizations, local authorities, and artist collectives toward autonomous property ownership/land stewardship of the venues they bring to life.

Facilitating connections and the exchange of practices between the cultural and real estate sectors through an open and collaborative resource center.

Building desirable futures by collectively acquiring cultural third places and bringing their users closer to shared ownership.

Key Terminological Choices:

The play on words in their name "Foncièrement culturelle" (which means "fundamentally cultural" but built on the word foncière) is nearly impossible to translate directly. The best approach is to choose a strong, clear name like "The Cultural Land Trust" and then use their tagline and materials to explain their fundamental (foncièrement) mission."


[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]