'''* Book: Rosenbaum, S. (2011). Curation Nation: How to Win in a World Where Consumers are Creators, McGraw-Hill.'''

URL = http://curationnation.org/ [http://curationchronicles.magnify.net/ blog]


=Summary=

From the publisher:

'In Curation Nation, Steven Rosenbaum reveals why being a human aggregator is the key to growing an existing business or starting a new one. In fact, he asserts that curation is the only way to remain competitive in the future. Overwhelmed by too much content, increasing numbers of people are seeking a “boutique” online experience. Whether you’re a brand, a publisher, or a content entrepreneur, you can provide it. You can create a manageable, inviting online experience. You can extract value from an otherwise useless chaos of digital noise.

In Curation Nation, Rosenbaum “curates the curators” by gathering together priceless insight and advice from and extraordinary collection of thinkers from media, advertising, publishing, commerce and web technologies. Curation Nation is both a journey and a guide to a phenomenon that levels the playing field, giving businesses equal access to the content abundance that is driving consumer adoption of the web."
(http://curationnation.org/pages/aboutthebook)


=More Information=

* [[Steve Rosenbaum on the Emerging Curation Nation]] [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iASluLoKQbo]

"In a world of bandwidth and content abundance, we're overwhelmed with data, tweets, blogs, check in's and media. It used to be we surfed the web. Now the waves of the web are just too big. Curation is the new magic that makes the web work. Bringing the web back to human scale with human filters you trust and love. A powerful mix of passion and context turns noise back into signal."

* positive reviews via http://curationnation.org/pages/praise




[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]