'''The Monetary Reform Reading List''', by Thelma Weeks

From: http://www.margritkennedy.de/english/articles/thelma.html

"For further reference I would recommend the following books by authors who were present or prepresented at the workshop:

1.'''Interest and Inflation and Free Money', Margrit Kennedy''', the second edition ISBN 0-9643025-0-0 (1995) available from Seva International, Okemos, Michigan: It sets out the problem as it was first conceived by her. ( Silvio Gesell published his major work in German in 1918 called ("Natural Economic Order")

2.''''The Little Earth Book' - James Burger''' ISBN 1-901970-23-X, available from Alastair Sawday
Publishing UK. Tel: +44 (0)1275 464891 Fax: +44 (0)1275 464887 Email: alastair@sawday.co.uk
This skilfully illustrates the link between the destruction of our planet (environment and resources)and the link to the monetary system. You will find the ideas/theories of many of the participants to the conference briefly explained in this delightful little book with references to the complete texts.

3.''''The Ecology of Money', Richard Douthwaite''', (Schumacher briefings 4 ISBN1 870098 81 1).

4.'Transforming Economic Life', James Robertson, (Schumacher briefings 1 ISBN 870098 72 2)

5.''''New Money for Healthy Communities', Thomas Greco'''

6.''''The Future of Money', Bernard Lietaer''', available through www.amazon.com: This recently published book is not represented in the Little Earth Book and presents a clear, intelligent and easily understandable overview of the present system and its challenges. It introduces the concept of a global currency, the Terra, for co-operative exchange. The book was launched in the House of Commons; see Positive News Spring 2001.

7.'Beyond Globalization', Hazel Henderson (1999) ISBN 1-56549-107-6, Kumarian Press - for the New Economics Foundation.

8.''''Recreating Money', Joseph Huber and James Robertson, London 2001'''

These books offer encouraging reading - even though awareness is created about all the issues that should concern every human being. For the first time I feel that there is a solution in sight and that there are ways in which we can contribute to the outcome - in time or after the event of a collapse. If nothing else we can all help to create awareness of the existing issues and the solutions for when the world needs them and before anything else we can deal with our own emotional blocks around money and abundance consciousness!"

[[Category:Books]]