

=Introduction=

Bernard Lietaer:

"This is perhaps the least familiar of all four dimensions of this classification
system, but is nevertheless also one of the most important. Errors in designing
the issuing process are the most common reason for dramatic failures of
complementary currency systems (consider the fate of the Argentinian creditos1
for instance)."

=Typology of Issuing Procedures=


There are seven major ways of issuing a currency:


==Backed Currencies:== 

The strongest currencies are typically those that are fully
“backed” by a good or service, and are directly and legally redeemable for them.
Historically, many currencies were inventory receipts, i.e. with 100% backing
secured by a physical inventory of a good (e.g. the wheat currency in Dynastic
Egypt). Some contemporary complementary currencies are using conventional
money as backing, others some specific goods or services.


==Borrowing with legal collateral:== 

This is the way the bulk of the conventional
currency is created: through bank loan backed by collateral such as a mortgage
on a house, or inventories for businesses. It can be considered as a form of a
“backed” currency, but their redemption requires a legal action (seizure of the
collateral) and is normally an exception rather than the rule. Some
complementary currencies, most notoriously the WIR in Switzerland, are exactly
reproducing the conventional banking model in this sense.


==Purchased and Redeemable Vouchers:== 

Vouchers that are purchased
directly with national currency, and that are circulating as a medium of
exchange, and are redeemable at some pre-determined conditions into national
currency again. Examples: Save Australia vouchers; Swiss Chiemgauer, Toronto
dollars.


==Commercial Vouchers:== 

These are similar to the vouchers, except that they
are not redeemable back into conventional money. They may be given for free
(for example as coupons in newspaper ads) or could be purchased at a discount.
They are not redeemable for cash, but typically are redeemable into some good
or service instead. They tend to be used only between the issuer and the
customer, and rarely circulate as payment device among customers. The most
typical example is the commercial vouchers “give aways” by supermarkets as
discount tokens.


==Loyalty Currencies:== 

Loyalty currencies are commercial complementary
currencies that are issued by businesses to customers in proportion to their
purchases in conventional money. It is a form of corporate scrip typically
redeemable for goods or services in the same corporation or in a consortium of
participating businesses. The Frequent Flyer Miles issued by airlines was the
first large scale system; the Tesco loyalty currency in the UK is probably one of
the most successful of such systems.


==Mutual Credit:== 

Currency issued by a simultaneous debit and credit between
participants in a transaction. Examples of Mutual Credit Systems include LETS
or Time Dollars. For instance, in Time Dollars if Julia renders a service of 1
hour to James, she gets a credit for one HOUR, and James a debit for one
HOUR. They have therefore created the Time Dollars necessary for their
transaction by agreeing on the transaction itself. The main advantage of mutual
credit systems is that they self-regulate to have always currency available in
sufficiency.


==Borrowing without collateral:== 

A currency issued as a credit, but without
formal collateral of any sort (other than perhaps an informal promise to provide a
good or service in the future). In fact, mutual credit can be seen as a form of
borrowing among the participants themselves without collateral. There exist also
systems that consider the borrowing without collateral from a central office that
plays a role similar to a complementary currency bank (e.g. Bia Kud Kum in
Thailand).


==Central Distribution:== 

One of the simplest ways to issue a currency is to have
a central office distributing it to everybody or to everybody who qualifies. This is
the way major currency reforms are typically introduced when a radical
departure is necessary (e.g. the German “Währungsreform” after WW2, the
credito system in Argentina, or the purchase coupon experiment used in Japan in
1999).

==Mixed processes:== 

Some systems combine features of various issuing
approaches described above. For example WIR is issued both as mutual credit and
from a central office with legal collateral. Or some social purpose complementary
currencies are also accepted in partial payment by local businesses as a loyalty
currency.


=Discussion=


==Advantages and Disadvantages of Issuing Procedures==


Bernard Lietaer:


"Here again, one can identify some advantages and disadvantages for each one
those systems. There tends to be a systematic trade-off between the ease of
creating the currency and the effort needed to gain and maintain its credibility. An
appropriate balance between these two objectives is a key decision for a robust
currency design.

All things being equal, as one goes down the above list of the different ways to
issue the currency (from Backed Currencies to Central Distribution), it becomes
easier for its participants to create the currency; but it requires simultaneously more
discipline to maintain the currency’s credibility.


Currencies that have a legally enforceable collateral (as is supposed to be the case
for the majority of the national currencies issued), currencies that are fully backed
by a good or service that is in broad demand, or that are purchased and backed
with national currency have logically an easier time to gain credibility. But on the
downside, often the very people who don’t have the necessary collateral or cash
are also those for whom a complementary currency would be most beneficial.
Loyalty currencies have as backing mainly the reputation of the businesses that
issue them.

Mutual credit has as significant advantage that the quantity of money created is by
definition always perfectly matching its need. There are also no risks of inflation in
mutual credit systems. In contrast, the problem of over-issuing is the biggest risk
run by currencies that are created by borrowing without collateral, or by central
issue. It is important with these latter models to cautiously control the quantity of
currency issued, otherwise its depreciation and risk of loss of credibility is a
predictable outcome."
(http://www.global-community.org/gc/newsfiles/25/Community%20Currency%20Guide.pdf)


[[Category:Money]]