
=Description=

"In 2006, the Irish business
writer, Donal Reddington, constructed a map of
the social and technological developments that have
been leading toward mass-customization as a viable
business model and for which he used the term
‘Customerism,’ to better describe the attributes it
contained. 

Reddington summarized the threads
in this map as 

- “Mass Customization + Custom Marketplaces + Online Factories + Co-creation + User Innovation + Outside Innovation + Creative Commons = Customerism.”
(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-12152009-131820/unrestricted/Pfeiffer_DV_T_2009.pdf)


=Discussion=

Dianna Pfeiffer:

"In the essay and map, One Word for Many Trends,
Donal Reddington describes the confluence of
events he sees as affecting the rise of customer
control in business. For this discussion, it is
probably sufficient to highlight the time frame and
some of the connections he made for their relevance
to distributed making.

Reddington points to influential books regarding
these kinds of business strategies, the ideas of which
were largely theory at the time of their publication.
For example, with Alvin Toffler’s 1970 Future Shock
and Toffler’s concept of a ‘pro-sumer,’ - someone
actively working in concert with a producer for
more appropriate goods and services. And the 1993
publication of Joseph Pine’s Mass-Customization
- the New Frontier in Business Competition, a book
that sets out strategy for the implementation of
mass-customization in a business enterprise.

Reddington principally covers important
technology-related developments. Where for
example, after the first web browser in 1991, and
the first built-to-order products via the web in
1996, other changes quickly build upon these
advancements. These include the introduction of
Creative Commons licensing for online content
in 2001, and the development of the social
internet in the early 2000s, which combine to
encourage peer review of product designs, and
online custom marketplaces. Add the growth of
digital manufacturing to these prior examples, and
they give rise to the creation of online factories. In
Reddington’s assessment, these are all steps leading
to the maturation, and soon the mainstreaming of
user involvement in the design and production of
goods and services.

These trends show the growing potential for
individuals outside the conventional system of
production to physically create objects of their
own design. They also describe how access to
digital fabrication tools provides for individual
creativity and problem solving on a much greater
scale than has been available to most at any time
previous. These activities appear to be on the cusp
of redefining the roles of large producers while
they actively generate new types of activities and
businesses that will lead to further, and likely greater
change in the future."
(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-12152009-131820/unrestricted/Pfeiffer_DV_T_2009.pdf)



[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]