'''Book: Cyberprotest: New Media, Citizens and Social Movements, edited by Wim van de Donk, Brian D. Loader, Paul G. Nixon, and Dieter Rucht. Routledge, 2004'''

Book review from http://www.com.washington.edu/rccs/bookinfo.asp?ReviewID=362&BookID=292

'''In what precise ways does the internet benefit, or not, social movements?'''

"This book leads to at least '''nine''' other '''conclusions'''. First, at this point in their use, ICTs seem to benefit social movement efforts directed at international issues. Second, the use of ICTs does facilitate the establishment of lines of communication between people who might otherwise find it hard (the first conclusion is really a sub-set of this second conclusion). Third, new kinds of organizations -- virtual organizations -- have come into existence. Fourth, an organization's or movement's purpose and structure are more likely to influence how ICTs are used than the other way around. Fifth, ICTs are an extension of and alternative to old-style mass- and mainstream-communications that can open access to mass- and mainstream-communications to social movements wider than in the past and that some unique opportunities for action and access are facilitated by the use of ICTs. Sixth, nevertheless, social movements and organizations that adapt to the status quo are more likely to have an impact than those that use more radical means. Seventh, that the fluidity of networks and coalitions using ICTs may result in efforts the origins and effects of which are much harder to detect. Eighth, a new type of social movement may be rising that intentionally works beneath the radar of traditional media (see the quote from Borio on page 79). Ninth and finally, there will continue to be a need for intermediaries in large democracies, but who and what will serve as those intermediaries may change or be replaced."

[[Category:Books]]