
= "meaning rule by information guidance systems" (David Ronfeldt)

=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"In futurology, cyberocracy describes a hypothetical form of government that rules by the effective use of information. The exact nature of a cyberocracy is largely speculative as currently there have been no cyberocratic governments, however, a growing number prototype cybercratic elements can currently be found in many developed nations. Cyberocracy theory is largely the work of David Ronfeldt, who published several papers on the theory. Some sources equate cyberocracy with algorithmic governance, although algorithms are not the only means of processing information.


Cyberocracy, from the roots 'cyber-' and '-cracy' signifies rule by way of information, especially when using interconnected computer networks.[6] The concept involves information and its control as the source of power and is viewed as the next stage of the political evolution.

The fundamental feature of a cyberocracy would be the rapid transmission of relevant information from the source of a problem to the people in a position able to fix said problem, most likely via a system of interconnected computer networks and automated information sorting software, with human decision makers only being called into use in the case of unusual problems, problem trends, or through an appeal process pursued by an individual. Cyberocracy is the functional antithesis of traditional bureaucracies which sometimes notoriously suffer from fiefdomism, slowness, and a list of other unfortunate qualities. A bureaucracy forces and limits the flow of information through defined channels that connect discrete points while cyberocracy transmits volumes of information accessible to many different parties. In addition, bureaucracy deploys brittle practices such as programs and budgets whereas cyberocracy is more adaptive with its focus on management and cultural contexts. Ultimately a cyberocracy may use administrative AIs if not an AI as head of state forming a machine rule government.

According to Ronfeldt and Valda, it is still too early to determine the exact form of cyberocracy but that it could lead to new forms of the traditional systems of governance such as democracy, totalitarianism, and hybrid governments. Some noted that cyberocracy is still speculative since there is currently no existing cybercratic government, although it is acknowledged that some of its components are already adopted by governments in a number of developed countries."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberocracy)


=Status=

David Ronfeldt (2025):

"Reality keeps moving in cybercratic direction under other names.

* The rise of “surveillance capitalism” by U.S. business actors and the increasing use of AI (artificial intelligence) by U.S. government actors attest to this.

* China is moving farther and faster toward cybercratic rule than any other nation. Its massive installations for surveilling and monitoring public activities, its Social Credit System, and its burgeoning efforts to develop AI entities for all sorts of political, economic, social, and other controls at home and abroad exemplify this.

* Russia is moving in both noocratic and cybercratic directions. Putin has touted noocracy (meaning rule by the mind, or the select wise, as Plato said); and a close aide has touted a nooscope to monitor global trends — all with the aim of strengthening information-age autocracy and trashing liberal democracy. Meanwhile I received (and granted) a request from a Russian scholar in 2022 to translate my Cyberocracy Is Coming! (1992) into Russian, on grounds that it was gaining readers in Russia and needed translation. Which has led me to wonder whether Russian theorists and strategists are intent on fusing cyberocracy and [[Noocracy]]."

(https://davidronfeldt.substack.com/p/update-status-report-personal-asides)


=More information=

* David Ronfeldt (1991). "Cyberocracy, Cyberspace, and Cyberology:Political Effects of the Information Revolution" (PDF). RAND Corporation. Retrieved 12 Dec 2014.
* David Ronfeldt (1992). "Cyberocracy is Coming" (PDF). RAND Corporation. Retrieved 12 Dec 2014.
* Ronfeldt, David; Varda, Danielle (1 December 2008). "The Prospects for Cyberocracy (Revisited)". Social Science Research Network. SSRN 1325809.

[[Category:Network_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Class_Theory]]