
'''* Book: Labor in the Global Digital Economy: The Cybertariat Comes of Age by Ursula Huws. Monthly Press,''' 

URL = http://monthlyreview.org/books/pb4635/


=Description=

Vincent Mosco:

"For every person who reads this text on the printed page, many more
will read it on a computer screen or mobile device. It’s a situation
that we increasingly take for granted in our digital era, and while it
is indicative of the novelty of twenty-first-century capitalism, it is
also the key to understanding its driving force: the relentless
impulse to commodify our lives in every aspect.

Ursula Huws ties together disparate economic, cultural, and political
phenomena of the last few decades to form a provocative narrative
about the shape of the global capitalist economy at present. She
examines the way that advanced information and communications
technology has opened up new fields of capital accumulation: in
culture and the arts, in the privatization of public services, and in
the commodification of human sociality by way of mobile devices and
social networking. These trends are in turn accompanied by the
dramatic restructuring of work arrangements, opening the way for new
contradictions and new forms of labor solidarity and struggle around
the planet. Labor in the Global Digital Economy is a forceful critique
of our dizzying contemporary moment, one that goes beyond notions of
mere connectedness or free-flowing information to illuminate the
entrenched mechanisms of exploitation and control at the core of
capitalism.

Following on her brilliant The Making of a Cybertariat, a modern
classic in the analysis of class and gender, work and consumption,
Huws turns her sharp eye to the present crisis into which the
cybertariat ‘has come of age.’ Rich in theoretical and methodological
insights, Labor in the Global Digital Economy carefully guides us
through the world of transnational business, value chains, creative,
precarious and knowledge labor, self-service consumers, and
consumption workers. Challenging accepted thinking and providing
enough wisdom to fill several volumes, Huws has once again
demonstrated her preeminence among analysts of work and inequality in
digital capitalism."


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Books]]