
'''* Article: CyberAnthropology – Being human on the internet. Sprondel, Johanna and Breyer, Thiemo, et al.'''

URL = http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/cyberanthropology.pdf

Paper prepared for the 1st Berlin Symposium on Internet and Society, Oct. 25-­‐‑27, 2011


=Abstract=

"CyberAnthropology is an approach that submits anthropological
and philosophical questions (as well as sociological, political and linguistic
questions including questions of constitutional law arising from them) to
different fields associated with the internet – which has not been done in this
specific transdisciplinary way in previous research. We analyse changes,
developments and continuities between the lifeworld of users and new
possibilities of participation on the internet, taking into account different
methods given by different disciplines. We also raise the question of how the
interaction between us human beings and the medium of the internet can be
grasped theoretically and how human behaviours, needs and desires correlate
with it practically. CyberAnthropology thus targets the questions of how the
human being understands itself and others, how it structures its lifeworld
when embedded in virtual environments, in face of the challenges posed by the
internet as the dominating medium. Is the internet a new virtual reality or just
the representation of old norms and habits? Can we speak of a “cyber citizen”
and has the “animal socio-­‐‑politicum” changed in the light of the internet as a
primary form of communication and source of knowledge? How do interest
groups form, if one considers the fact that the internet transcends local,
regional, national, ethnical and social boundaries? How do new boundaries
and normative orders emerge?

So far, the question of how the internet changes societies and the habits of their
members has merely been tackled either in abstract terms of media philosophy
or in the context of detailed empirical studies of concrete user behaviour. In the
first case, the internet is regarded as a self-­‐‑transforming medium that has had
deep consequences on the lives of individuals ever since its emergence and
development. What remains unclear, however, is the relationship between the
materiality of the internet and its peculiar “message” – for humanity, human
responsibility and political action. In the second case, for instance in the
research of the “Digital Ethnographers” Michal Wesch and Don Tapscott, the
focus lies on the description of virtual phenomena rather than on an analysis
that would embed those phenomena in a broader theoretical framework of
“virtual reality”, which would allow for an application of the outcomes to other
disciplines and fields of research. This is intended by drafting a systematic
theory of CyberAnthropology."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Science]]