

=Characteristics=

Source: Cyberinfrastructure Inside Out. Definition and Influences Shaping Its Emergence, Development, and Implementation in the Early 21st Century. By KERK KEE, LUCY CRADDUCK, BRIDGET BLODGETT &
RAMI OLWAN. Chapter Eight of the book: Nexus. [[New Intersections of Internet Research‎]]. 2010.


"Cyberinfrastructure can be characterized as data-intensive, computationally powerful,
distributed, hierarchical, interoperable, and with second-order growth (i.e.,
generation of data about data and metadata). The first characteristic of data-intensiveness
refers to cyberinfrastructure’s capacity to hold a large amount of data in various
forms, including numbers, text, multimedia, acoustic, and nonverbal data
(Poole, 2009). The goal of combining data sets among groups of researchers was a
key driver of initial cyberinfrastructure development. Traditionally, science was
limited by regional data, human resources, and the technological capacity of small
groups of independent researchers at various locations. With cyberinfrastructure,
researchers can combine multiple datasets into one that exceeds what a traditional
small group of researchers can collect and analyze. Consequently, researchers can
undertake research at a scale otherwise not possible.


Cyberinfrastructure is computationally powerful and has the capacity to analyze
intensive data (Friendlander, 2008) via parallel and distributed computing
processes. Traditionally, researchers executed computer analyses of scientific data in
local laboratories, and research studies were limited by the processing speed and
power of individual (or a small network of ) commercial personal computers (PCs)
or local supercomputers, if available at affiliated institutions. A supercomputer is a
large network of powerful modular servers and commercial PCs run on parallel and
distributed computing algorithms. Via this technique, a data-intensive job can be
divided into small chunks and fed into individual servers and/or PCs (within a
supercomputer architecture) concurrently and recursively. The results are aggregated
at the end of the computational process, thus increasing processing speed and
capacity. Cyberinfrastructure is a network of supercomputers across the country, such
as TeraGrid, which connects 11 supercomputers across the United States. Due to
the combined computational power, cyberinfrastructure provides the fastest computational
resources available, enabling science at a speed otherwise not possible.

As alluded to in the characteristic of computational power, cyberinfrastructure
is a distributed platform. Via cyberinfrastructure, a group of researchers can submit
a computationally and data-intensive job from a remote location, and have the
job processed at multiple supercomputers, with the combined results returned back
to the initiating location. The group of researchers is only required to have access
to cyberinfrastructure through their local institution. The distributed characteristic
of cyberinfrastructure takes research beyond local constraints to virtual computational
resources at impressive speed.

Due to its complexity, it is logical to describe cyberinfrastructure as hierarchical.
Cyberinfrastructure involves a range of large and small components from a cable
modem that can be picked up by a child to a supercomputer the size of a building
basement. However, it is important to note that since cyberinfrastructure is a network
it cannot function properly without its smallest component (Friendlander,
2008). Therefore, the smallest component also holds the entire infrastructure
together, although it may be hierarchical in a physical sense.

In order for cyberinfrastructure to operate and function as a coherent whole,
the scientific data, computational resources, technological systems, and human
organizations must be interoperable. Interoperability (ACLS, 2009; Baker, Ribes,
Millerand, & Bowker, 2005) refers to a property of cyberinfrastructure wherein a
range of diverse data, resources, systems, and organizations interoperate and work
seamlessly together. Without interoperability, the former four characteristics
reviewed have no value. Data sets, computer resources, computational jobs, and technological
components will remain local, separate, and small-scale. Given the aforementioned
characteristics, cyberinfrastructure data and its subsequent analysis grow
over time, leading to second-order growth. The aggregated scientific data and the
human activities recorded on cyberinfrastructure are first-order data that can be analyzed
by researchers. Careful coding, qualitative observations, statistical analyses, and
network visualizations by these researchers yield second-order data (Poole, 2009)
or metadata added to the existing cyberinfrastructure data repositories. This unique
characteristic facilitates longitudinal research in a wide range of disciplines at a scale
and fashion never possible before. Cyberinfrastructure grows in its potential for new
discoveries by means of complex cross-referencing (Poole, 2009) to explore largescale
global challenges.

In sum, cyberinfrastructure possesses the characteristics of data-intensiveness,
computational power, distribution, hierarchy, interoperability, and with secondorder
growth. Its complex make-up requires a careful explication of its different layers.




==Layers==

The second dimension of cyberinfrastructure is constituted by its four layers of hardware,
software, agents, and interactions. The hardware layer can be further divided
into the specialized/niche hardware and the general/commercial layers. Based on
the discussion thus far, it is apparent that a key piece of the cyberinfrastructure puzzle
is a network of supercomputers. Supercomputers are mainly used for niche
research analyses as described earlier, and specialized commercial applications, such
as airplane design, automotive crash tests, and oil reservoir discovery, too big in scale
and expensive for frequent trials and errors.

The specialized/niche layer of cyberinfrastructure also includes advanced instruments
(Stewart, 2007), digitally-enabled sensors, observatories and experimental
facilities (NSF, 2007), and large-scale data storage systems/repositories (Atkins et
al., 2003). These are examples of a range of physical hardware for specialized purposes
and niche usage. Many of them, such as observatories, were uniquely built with
specific utilizations in mind. In other words, these instruments are hardware that
cannot simply be bought “off-the-shelf.”

Beyond its specialized/niche hardware, cyberinfrastructure is also made up of
a general/commercial layer of distributed personal computers (Atkins et al., 2003),
desktops (Friendlander, 2008), and portals (Poole, 2009). In addition to commercial
PCs, cyberinfrastructure also includes phone devices (landline, mobile, and smart
phones), fax machines, printers, modems, and other off-the-shelf electronic devices
researchers concurrently use for nonresearch purposes. These hardware components,
both specialized/niche and general/commercial, are tied together through a range
of software applications.

The software layer mirrors the hardware layer in terms of its specialized and
general applications. In order to process large-scale data and specialized analyses on
supercomputers, researchers need appropriate analytic tools (Poole, 2009) and
high-performance computing (HPC) applications. HPC applications are used by
highly trained researchers. Loosely generalized, HPC applications enable parallel
and distributed processing of large-scale data on supercomputers to generate scientific
results. However, these results need to be shared with collaborating
researchers and interested colleagues. This is where the next category of software
applications comes in.

A range of information and communication technologies (ICTs) supported by
telecommunication systems, the Internet, and the World Wide Web make up
another critical layer of cyberinfrastructure. Specific examples include email applications,
online meetings, personal and organizational web pages, digital libraries,
search engines such as Google (Hai, 2004), and web 2.0 technologies such as blogs
(Poole, 2009). These ICTs can be used by researchers for interpersonal, group, and
organizational communication between their scientific and nonscientific work concurrently.
We suggest that individual or collective human agents are key to an active cyberinfrastructure.
Without users, something that is called “a cyberinfrastructure” is not
a real cyberinfrastructure (Ribes & Finholt, 2009), as it is not active but static. The
notions of people (Stewart, 2007), groups and organizations (Lee, Dourish, &
Mark, 2006), and personnel and institutions (Atkins et al., 2003) have consistently
been mentioned in cyberinfrastructure literature. Human agents usually are
assumed to be independent actors in the context of cyberinfrastructure. That is, they
represent “nodes” in a network, as understood in traditional social network literature.
Next to human agents, nonhuman agents are also important in cyberinfrastructure.
Nonhuman agents refer to documents, concepts, key words, data sets, etc.
(Contractor, 2009). They are discrete entities and resources (Friendlander, 2008) in
the context of cyberinfrastructure. However, they are labeled as “agents” because they
appear to do things, or have impacts on other “nodes” in the network. The notion
of nonhuman agents departs from traditional social network literature and draws
upon actor network theory (Latour, 2005). However, human and nonhuman agents
as nodes have no impact on each other or the overall cyberinfrastructure if they do
not interact.

Human and nonhuman agents interact and are tied together through multidimensional
networks. The notion of networks concerns not only high-performance
grid networks (Stewart, 2007) and the Internet in the physical sense, but relationships
and ties as commonly defined in social network literature. Furthermore, the
notion of networks is “multidimensional,” because nodes in cyberinfrastructure are
both people and “nonhuman agents” (Contractor, 2009). Networks therefore represent complex physical connections and relational ties among human and nonhuman
agents in cyberinfrastructure.

Middleware is a specific type of multidimensional network (NSF, 2007). It is
composed of computer software that ties multiple software applications together and
allows them to interact in a parallel, distributed, and interoperable environment. We
highlight middleware because it plays a significant role in creating key processes in
cyberinfrastructure, which will be discussed next. Cyberinfrastructure consists of
hardware, software, agents, and interactions. When the four layers are in actions,
they create cyberinfrastructure processes.


==Processes==

There are two key processes of cyberinfrastructure: the virtual environment and the
virtual organization. The first key cyberinfrastructure process is the technologically
generated virtual environment (VE) (ACLS, 2009; Poole, 2009; Schroeder &
Axelsson, 2006), which represents the continuously generated virtual space in
which researchers interact with data and each other. In the present development,
virtual environment consists of visualizations (Stewart, 2007), simulations (Leonardi,
2009), and models (Monteiro & Keating, 2009). Based on HPC applications on
large-scale data, researchers are able to use visualization techniques, interactive
simulations, and computer modeling to analyze and predict complex scientific phenomena
with significant societal and global implications. One example is realtime
simulation on combined data from nearby locations that effect the development
and expansion of a hurricane threatening a local community.

The second key cyberinfrastructure process is the socially generated virtual organization
(VO). A VO brings a group of distributed researchers together for a common
purpose and allows them to interact with each other. A VO is dispersed,
diverse, and flexible while also remaining coordinated, coherent, and secured (Bird,
Jones, & Kee, 2009). For instance, the VO for the Large Hadron Collider project
brings about 2,000 researchers together across multiple countries. Embedded with
the notion of a VO is interdisciplinary collaboration (Monteiro & Keating, 2009)
and community-building (Poole, 2009). So far, cyberinfrastructure can be defined
by its unique characteristics, multiple layers, and key processes; however, it is most
importantly defined by its intended outcomes.


==Outcomes==

Cyberinfrastructure emerged to promote three specific outcomes. The first outcome
of cyberinfrastructure is that it increases productivity (Stewart, 2007). Productivity
can be understood as the ability to do more in less time. Due to its intensive data
and computational power, cyberinfrastructure can process larger data at faster speed
than traditional personal computers and local networked machines. If nothing else,
cyberinfrastructure increases the productivity of researchers.


The second outcome of cyberinfrastructure is innovation (Atkins et al., 2003).
Innovation refers to the ability to produce novel outcomes. Due to its intensive data
and computational power, cyberinfrastructure enables research at a scale and speed
never before possible, facilitating the exploration of complex phenomena at the edge
of scientific frontiers. As a result, cyberinfrastructure enables and supports innovations
in research.

The third outcome of cyberinfrastructure is that of revolution (Atkins et al.,
2003; Stewart, 2007). Revolution can be defined as the ability to cause a paradigm
shift. With increased productivity and a stream of innovations, cyberinfrastructure
stimulates a revolution in science, causing researchers to think of science differently,
explore big questions, and work in new ways. Cyberinfrastructure also generates
a new set of scientific practices (Monteiro & Keating, 2009). Once transitioned,
researchers cannot return to their previous paradigm of doing science, thus effecting
a intellectual and practical revolution."


[[Category:Technology]]