'''Book: Cyber-Conflict and Global Politics. Edited by Athina Karatzogianni. Routledge, 2007'''


Available via [http://www.routledge.com/shopping_cart/products/product_detail.asp?curTab=CONTENTS&id=&parent_id=&sku=&isbn=9780415459709&pc=]

an excellent collection of essays on cyber-conflict.


=Summary=


The abstract says that:

“This volume examines theoretical and empirical issues relating to cyberconflict and its implications for global security and politics.

Taking a multidimensional approach to current debates in internet politics, the book comprises essays by leading experts from across the world. The volume includes a comprehensive introduction to current debates in the field and their ramifications for global politics, and follows this with empirical case studies. These include cyberconflict, cyberwars, information warfare and hacktivism, in contexts such as Sri Lanka, Lebanon and Estonia, the European Social Forum, feminist cybercrusades and the use of the internet as a weapon by ethnoreligious and socio-political movements. The volume presents the theoretical debates and case studies of cyberconflict in a coherent, progressive and truly multidisciplinary way. ”

Athina has contributed the introduction: New Media and the Reconfiguration of Power in Global Politics as well as a separate essay.

My own (Michel Bauwens) contribution is a reworking and expansion of: [http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=261 Some notes on the social antagonism in netarchical capitalism].

Amongst the other contributions:

*2. War and the New Media Paradox Hall Gardner

*3. The Internet as a weapon of war? Some thoughts on radicalization Ben O’Louglin and Andrew Hoskins

*4. Transparency and accountability in the age of cyberpolitics: the role of blogs in framing conflict

* 8. The Internet and Militant Jihadism: Global to Local Re-imaginings Frazer Egerton

* 12. Electronic Civil Disobedience and Symbolic Power Graham Meikle

* 13. Decentralization and Communication: Email lists and the organizing process of the European Social Forum Anastasia Kavada

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Security]]