
'''CyberConflict Workshop''' - 9 May 2007

to be held at the Mary Ward House Conference Centre,
Tavistock Place, London


=Description=

The [[Cyberconflict]] workshop, which will be the first of its
kind to be held in the United Kingdom, will bring together
contributors from a variety of disciplines - such as
information technology, politics, sociology, media and law
- to share their perspectives on this important and highly
topical subject.
We are interested in cyberconflict in broader terms (see
for example http://www.p2foundation.net/Cyberconflict.)

Issues of cyberattacks, internet security, censorship,
surveillance, identity and community will all be
addressed. We are also keen to discuss the use of the
internet as a tool by ethnoreligious and sociopolitical
groups, varying from terrorist movements (e.g. Al Qaeda's
recruitment tactics on the web) to its use by the
anti-globalisation and anti-war movements. The programme
will also cover the activities of independent media and
blogging and the alternative modes of production and
governance of peer-to-peer networking.

If your current research falls within these parameters,
and if you are interested in presenting a paper, please
contact Athina Karatzogianni, who chairs the Programme
Committee at: akaratzogianni@aup.fr. Abstracts should be
sent to Athina by 15th February.

Or for further information regarding the CyberConflict
Workshop, please contact the Conference Organiser - email
barbara@marlbrook.com or telephone 07949 562075. A
registration form is attached. This should be returned to
the Conference Organiser, Barbara May, at Marlbrook (UK)
Ltd, 71A High Street, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire B61 8AQ.


[[Category:Conferences]]