
=Description=

David de Ugarte:

“We all have an intuitive idea of what cyberthrongs
are. 

One nonproblematic definition might be:

-	The kind of mobilisation which constitutes the
culmination of a process of social debate carried
out by personal communication and electronic
publishing media in which the divide between
cyberactivists and mobilised masses breaks down.


The main idea is that it is the social network as a
whole that puts cyberactivism into practice and makes it
grow – unlike other processes, such as the Colour
Revolutions, in which the permanence of decentralised
structure side by side with distributed ones led to the
preservation of a clear divide between cyberactivists and
the social base. As seen, there were “organising
organisations”, even if they were mere small social activist
subnetworks, rather than traditional organisations.


One of the characteristic traits of cyberthrongs is that
it's impossible to find in them an “organiser”, a
responsible, stable “dynamising group.” At the very most,
original “proposers” can be found who during the course
of the mobilisation tend to disappear within the movement
itself. Among other things, because cyberthrongs emerge
at the periphery of informative networks, not at their
centre.


The problem which such new movements as those that
we have characterised as cyberthrongs, and which have
such an influence over political agendas, is that it is
extremely difficult to discuss or analyse them without
one's judgement or perception being mediated by their
consequences, or by their position within the political
debates they open.


This was obviously the case with the demonstrations
that took place in Spain on the night of 13th March 2004. It
had happened before in the Philippines. It might seem that
the French case would lend itself more easily to a
dispassionate analysis, as the movement is so poor
ideologically and has been so universally rejected.


However, as it has become mixed up in the media with the
immigration debate, and even with the fear of Jihadi
terrorism, it isn't free of partisan conditioning either.
When we approach this kind of movement, the first
thing we notice is the existence of a clear distinction
between a deliberative, debate phase, and a later
organisation and street mobilisation phase. The former is
relatively lengthy if underground inasmuch as it is not
reflected in any traditional mirror. In fact, in the three
most recent cases, blogs played a key instrumental role,
although the “conversation” started by each one logically
involved different areas of the blogosphere. In fact, the
tendency seems to be for the web to have an increasing
importance in this phase, as personal publication
technologies spread.


Let us move from the Philippine local radios and
online fora in 2001 to the mixture of alternative digital
media, fora and relatively central, ideologised blogs in the
period of 11th12th March 2004 in Spain, and finally come
to the so-called “peripheral blogosphere” which arose in
France in November 2005 and in Spain during the 2006
Big BoozeUp.


In each case, not only the number of emitters increases
with respect to the previous one, but also the total number
of people involved.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf)

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Movements]]