URL = http://www.cybersociology.com

Webzine edited from 1997 to late 1999 by Robin Hamman. Issue 7 guest edited by Michel Bauwens. Link no longer working.


=Contents=

Here’s a list of the articles, site reviews and book reviews that have appeared in Cybersociology (http://www.cybersociology.com):

==Issue One Cyber-Romance, Cybersex, and Cyber-Eroticism==

Published Online 10 Oct. ’97. Contents: Feature articles — Researching Cybersex in Online Chat Rooms: the Ethnographic Approach (Robin Hamman); Erving Goffman, Dramaturgy, and On-Line Relationships(Nikki Sannicolas); Cyber-Charade (Cara); New To Cyber Liaisons (Sue). Site reviews — Sandy Stone, Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies. Book review — Sherry Turkle, “Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet” (Jennifer Jannuska)


==Issue Two: Online (Virtual?) Communities==

Published Online 20 Nov. ’97. Contents: Feature articles — Introduction to Virtual Community Research and Issue Two of Cybersociology (Robin Hamman); Seniors and the Internet (Joyce Philbeck); IRC on AustNet – an example of a virtual community (Cyberrdewd); QUAKE-ING IN MY BOOTS: >Clan: Community < Construction in an Online Gamer Population (Mary Anne Breeze) Special Feature -- British Universities offering courses on cyberspace (Robin Hamman). Site reviews -- Electric Minds, High Noon on the Electronic Frontier Online. Book review -- John Seabrook, Deeper: A Two-Year Odyssey in Cyberspace


==Issue Three: Digital Third Worlds and Questions of Net Access==

Published Online 07 August, 1998 Contents: Feature articles — Introduction to Digital Third Worlds and Issue Three of Cybersociology (Robin Hamman – USA/UK); The Changing Face of Society (Kirsten Smith – South Africa); The New Eldorado, or a Ticket to the First World (Nellie Lejter – Venezuela) Site reviews — Olu Oguibe, Crash Media. Book reviews — Disconnected by Willian Wresch (Andy Oram – USA).


==Issue Four: Open Topic==

Published Online 01 December, 1998 Contents: Feature articles — Cyberpunks: A Sociological Analysis With Special Interest In The Description Of Their Online Activities (Markus Wiemker – Germany). Net Ideologies: From Cyber-liberalism to Cyber-realism, (Francisco Millarch – Brazil/UK). Will the Technobabble Bubble Burst?, (Rachel Collinson – UK). What Is A Geek? (Mike Sugarbaker – USA). Interview with Sci-Fi Author Bruce Sterling (Zana Poliakov – Serbia). Ken Wilber and Cyberspace (Michel Bauwens – France). There Are No Last Words Online (Radhika Gajjala – USA). Trace Online Writing Community (Sue Thomas – UK). Bringing The Net To The Masses: Cybercafes In Latin America (Dr. Madanmohan Rao – India). Report: Manchester’s Temporary Media Lab -> Revolting (Micz Flor – Germany/UK) Notes from the Exploding Media Symposium (Robin Hamman – USA/UK) Net Art — 24 Hour Jpeg Project (Brad Brace – USA). Site reviews — Portal on Global Digitalization / The Hoechst Triangle Forum (M. Alan Kazlev – Australia). Book reviews — Knowledge Societies (Ravi Srinivas- India).


==Issue Five: Grassroots Political Activism Online==

(co-edited with Micz Flor from Crash Media) Published Online 01 April, 1999. Contents: Feature articles — The High Tech Gift Economy (Richard Barbrook – London), Labour@Cyberspace: Problems in Creating a Global Solidarity Culture (Peter Waterman – Netherlands), Internet Against Censorship (Drazen Pantic – Belgrade), Cyberpower and the Meaning of Online Activism (Tim Jordan – London), A Few Points About Online Activism (Jon Lebkowsky – USA), Punk Science (Rachel Armstrong – London), Cyborg Film-Making (Rachel Armstrong – London), The Borg: A Critique (Dave Gordan), ¿Roam-Antics on the Cyber-Horizon or Home-Wrecking for a New Millennium? (Judy Hempel – USA), Admirable Utopian World (Eduardo Duarte – Brazil), LESSONS LEARNED: SOME THOUGHTS ON THE FUTURE OF ON-LINE COMMUNITY NETWORKS (George Hunka – USA), Study of Men and Women’s Gender Display in Text-based Communication (Sema Nicole Seyedi – USA) Field Reports — INDONESIA: The Net as a Weapon (Tedjabayu – Indonesia), Introducing Radio Free Monterey (Barbara Steinberg – USA), Online Community Builders Toolkit for Activists (Robin Hamman – England), The Association for Progressive Communications (APC), Introducing the Panel Discussion of the Counter-Strategies Corporations Employ Against Campaigns (Eveline Lubbers), Computer Aid International (UK). Book reviews — Cyber-Democracy: Technology, Cities and civic networks; Processed Lives: Gender and Technology in Everyday Life; Technology of the Orgasm: Hysteria, the Vibrator and Women’s Sexual Satisfaction; Communities in Cyberspace; Virtual Futures: Cyberotics, Technology, and Post-Human Pragmatism; Station Rose First Decade: Ten Years of Native Multimedia Art.


==Issue Six: Research Methodology Online==

(Published Online: 06 Aug. 1999) Contents: Feature articles — The Digital Ethnographer (Bruce Mason & Bella Dicks, Cardiff University); Behaviour in Public? : Ethics in Online Ethnography (Allison Cavanagh, University of Manchester); Virtual Corporeality: Adolescent Girls and Their Bodies in Cyberspace (Kerrie Smyres, Arizona State University); Among the Internauts: Notes from the cyberfield (Nils Zurawski); Cyborg Diaspora and Virtual Imagined Community: Studying SAWNET (Radhika Gajjala, Bowling Green State University); Cyberspace as Everyday Life (Stephen Webb, University of North London) ; Interview with Richard Stallman, Founder of the Free Software Foundation (Geert Lovink); BIG BROTHER IS ON-LINE: Public and Private Security in the Internet (Javier Bernal, University of Lincolnshire & Humberside, England.); The Web of Life in the Life of the Web: The Philippine Internet Experience (Benjamin M.Wage, Jr.) ; Book reviews — Doing Internet Research; Researching Online for Dummies.


==Issue Seven: [[Religion Online and Techo-Spiritualism]]== 

Guest Co-Edited by [[Michel Bauwens]]. 01 Sept 1999. The Spirtual Cyborg, by Erik Davis, a San Franciso-based writer, culture critic, and independent scholar who recently published “TechGnosis: Myth, Magic, and Mysticism in the Age of Information” (Harmony Books, 1998). / Is Cyberspace a Spiritual Space?, by Margaret Wertheim, is a regular contributor to numerous magazines and is the author of “The Pearly Gates of Cyberspace: A History of Space from Dante to the Internet” and “Pythagoras Trousers” / Dialogue on the Cyber-Sacred and the Relationship Between Technological and Spiritual Development, by Michel Bauwens and Father Vincent Rossi. / Techno-Spiritual Quotes, Collected by Jeremy S. Gluck, the founder of Spiritech UK, an association that strongly believes not only the function of technology as a mirror of human consciousness but in the eventual unfolding of an original machine consciousness that will be a partner to humankind. / Cyberspace: the New Frontier for Religion, by Lin Collette, Brown University, USA. / Big Brother is Online, by Javier Bernal, University of Lincolnshire & Humberside (UK). / Is India on the Brink of a Digital Abyss?, by Venkatesh Hariharan, Knight Science Journalism Fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. / Cyborg Selves: examining identity and meaning in a chat room, by Marcus Leaning, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. BOOK REVIEWS: Holding On to Reality:The Nature of Information at the Turn of the Millennium (1999) By Albert Borgmann Review by: David Rieder, Univ. of Texas: Arlington / How We Became Posthuman : Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (1999) By Katherine Hayles Review by Nathalie Muller / Cyberville: Clicks, Culture, and the Creation of an Online Town (1998) By Stacy Horn Review by Claire Shearman.

[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]