'''= Librarian in cyberspace'''


=Discussion=


==Cybrarians and P2P==

Proposed by Dante Monson:


QUESTION : CAN THE FOLLOWING ALSO BE APPLIED FOR MUTUAL EMPOWERMENT ?

'''CYBRARIANS²''' ? , in a Peer to Peer , [http://p2pfoundation.net/Connectivist_Learning_Theory_-_Siemens Connectivist Approach ] ?  With no " Masters" , no " Students " , only "Mutual Learners" through "Learning Opportunities" ?

also see : [[Boundary Spanner]]


== New Roles for Librarians ==

*'''Navigator''': Learn to navigate and effectively search the Internet.

*'''Teacher and Collaborator''': Collaborate with teachers to design and implement authentic learning activities that utilize Internet resources.

*'''Evaluator''': Develop evaluation tools and actively integrate evaluation into the curriculum.

*'''Publisher''': Create resource guides that assist students, teachers, administrators, and parents to find quality Internet sites that are relevant to the curriculum.

*'''Program Administrator''': Work collaboratively with members of the learning community to develop program policies related to Internet use.

*'''Staff Developer''': Take a lead role in teaching faculty and administration to use the Internet effectively and to integrate Internet use into the curriculum.

*'''Family Resource''': Promote positive and creative uses of the Internet to families.


== Big 6 Technology and Information Seeking Skills for all students ==

http://www.janetsinfo.com/big6info.htm

http://www.big6.com/showarticle.php?id=175

    * Big6 Step 1. '''Task Definition''': 

[[ISTE NETS]] expects students to “use technology resources for solving problems and making informed decisions.” Students (and even some adults) often need to be persuaded that information processing and problem-solving strategies are a skill they will need throughout their lives. I use examples like buying a car or choosing a college to establish the importance of learning these skills.

    * Big6 Step 2. '''Information Seeking Strategies''': 

ISTE NETS expects students to “evaluate and select new information resources . . . based on [their] appropriateness for specific tasks.” Students typically think the Internet has all the answers, but may become frustrated at their inability to instantly locate pertinent information by typing a word or two into Yahoo. I encourage students to use a subject directory that arranges relevant, reliable sites hierarchically by subject. We also spend time evaluating Web sites for authority, accuracy, currency, relevance and objectivity.

    * Big6 Step 3. '''Location and Access''': 

ISTE NETS expects students to “use technology to locate, evaluate, and collect information from a variety of sources.” Understanding how search engines work, and how they differ from subject directories, helps students search more efficiently and effectively. I encourage students to search using synonyms and related topics, to compare the results of the same search in different search engines, and to use Boolean logic to refine their searches.

    * Big6 Step 4. '''Use of Information''': 

ISTE NETS expects students to “practice responsible use of technology systems, information, and software.” In addition to citing their sources, I encourage them to analyze sources for objectivity by identifying the sponsoring organization and comparing the information retrieved to that found in another source.

    * Big6 Step 5. '''Synthesis''': 

ISTE NETS expects students to “use a variety of media and formats to communicate information and ideas effectively to multiple audiences.” I encourage teachers to consider alternatives to the traditional research paper. PowerPoint presentations and Web pages require students to synthesize their information by using a minimum number of words for their maximum informational impact. WebQuests can also be effective synthesizing tools when students are researching authentic, challenging tasks that may have multiple points of view and no prescribed answers.

    * Big6 Step 6. '''Evaluation''': 

ISTE NETS expects students to “use technology tools to enhance learning, increase productivity, and promote creativity.” At the end of every Big6 experience, students must evaluate both their product and their process. Did the use of technology enhance their learning experience? Did they use technology to create their product?

Using a matrix that correlates the Big6 skills with national standards helps me guide my students and teachers toward achieving those standards while using the Internet for research. Future columns will focus on using each of the Big6 skills in the context of library research.

More information about ISTE at http://cnets.iste.org/students/s_stands.html

= Examples =


== Cybrarian at Schools ==


http://www.infotoday.com/MMSchools/mar00/murray.htm

by [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Janet_Murray Janet Murray]
Information Specialist  • Nile C. Kinnick High School • Yokosuka, Japan
MultiMedia Schools • March/April 2000


=More Information=

See the proposed technology literacy requirements by [[ISTE NETS]]


== Interview with Michel Bauwens , by Richard Poynder ==


http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/09/p2p-blueprint-for-future.html

extract :

Michel Bauwens: Certainly some credit me with the invention of the cybrarian concept, although I'm not sure that that is strictly correct — often new terms are independently coined by different people as and when new technology creates the need for them.


[[Category:Education]]