== Discussion ==

Branko Milanovic [http://glineq.blogspot.com/2017/04/a-theory-of-rise-and-fall-of-economic.html]:

"Van Bavel’s key idea is as follows. In societies where non-market constraints are dominant (say, in feudal societies), liberating factor markets is a truly revolutionary change. Ability of peasants to own some land or to lease it, of workers to work for wages rather than to be subjected to various types of corvées, or of the merchants to borrow at a more or less competitive market rather than to depend on usurious rates, is liberating at an individual level (gives person much greater freedom), secures property, and unleashes the forces of economic growth. The pace of activity quickens, growth accelerates (true, historically, from close to zero to some small number like 1% per year) and even inequality, economic and above all social, decreases . . .

But the process, Bavel argues, contains the seeds of its destruction. Gradually factor markets cover more and more of the population: Bavel is excellent in providing numerical estimates on, for example, the percentage of wage-earners in Lombardy in the 14th century or showing that in Low Countries wage labor was, because of guilds, less prevalent in urban than in rural areas. One factor market, though, that of capital and finance, gradually begins to dominate. Private and public debt become most attractive investments, big fortunes are made in finance, and those who originally asked for the level playing field and removal of feudal-like constraints, now use their wealth to conquer the political power and impose a serrata, thus making the rules destined to keep them forever on the top. What started as an exercise in political and economic freedom begins to look like an exercise in cementing the acquired power, politically and economically. The economic essor is gone, the economy begins to stagnate and, as happened to Iraq, Northern Italy and Low Countries, is overtaken by the competitors."
(https://notesonliberty.com/2017/05/03/the-return-of-cyclical-theories-of-history/)

== More Information ==
* [[Bas van Bavel]]
* '''Book: Bas van Bavel. The [[Invisible Hand]]? (OUP 2016)''' 
URL = https://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_2?

[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]