=Discussion=

==Cypherpunks and the failure of the [[Centralized Web]]==

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"The cypherpunk worldview, which first emerged in the 1970’s alongside significant developments in the study of
cryptography. Technological advances in encryption, such as the widely used RSA
encryption algorithm and the Diffie-Hellman key exchange, made it possible for an
individual with modest computing resources to enjoy strong privacy protections, even in
the face of governments and corporations with significantly greater resources. Many
celebrated these technological breakthroughs as a critical safeguard for user privacy in
an increasingly digital world. Still others–the cypherpunks–strove to harness
cryptographic innovations in order to drive much broader social and political changes.
The intellectual roots of the cypherpunk movement are grounded in the work of
people like David Chaum, who first proposed the use of cryptographic primitives to
create anonymous digital cash in the early 80’s. Cypherpunks took ideas like this and 6
extended them even further. For them, cryptography was a critical vehicle for individual
freedom, one that could significantly weaken the reach of governments and other
powerful institutions. The most extreme adherents to the cypherpunk worldview
embraced a philosophy sometimes referred to as crypto-anarchism, which envisioned a
world in which all laws and regulations were supplanted by mathematically verifiable
code. Important values and enforcement mechanisms could be encoded directly into
software that would carry out critical social processes through the secure exchange of
information.

Forty years later, the cypherpunk dream has not (yet) been realized. Security
scholar Arvind Narayanan argues there is simply not a high user demand for upsetting
fundamental power structures through crypto-enforced contracts, particularly in
democratic societies where governments are chosen by the people. Moreover, the 
vision of code as a functional stand-alone governance institution breaks down amidst
the reality of unpredictable and imperfect humans, messy social systems, and buggy
code. In order for cryptographic systems to be practical, Narayanan argues, they need
to provide clear paths to recourse for users when things go wrong. To do this,
technological solutions must effectively interact with other modes of governance and
enforcement, such as existing legal systems.

In spite of these struggles, the cypherpunk movement has experienced a
renaissance in recent years thanks to the rise of projects like Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a
peer-to-peer cash system that enables the secure exchange of digital tokens without the
need for a trusted third party like a bank or credit card company. Bitcoin enthusiasts
frame the potential of this technology in terms of its “decentralizing” impact. Rather than
placing one’s trust in a closed network controlled by elite financial institutions, Bitcoin
offers users an open alternative by “decentralizing” critical processes of secure value
exchange, like transaction validation and currency issuance. The decentralized
architecture of Bitcoin provides guarantees for certain user protections, such as
resistance against censorship. Bitcoin achieves censorship-resistance through two
mechanisms: First, there is no consistent mapping of digital Bitcoin identity to real-world
identity -- anyone can join the system and create as many “accounts” as they wish.

However, these accounts are pseudonymous, not anonymous, and identities can be
uncovered by carefully examining the flow of transactions. Second, theoretically,
anyone has the ability to verify and update the Bitcoin ledger by entering into a process
known as “mining.” Mining is the process by which participants in the network process
and secure new transactions. Mining is not gated, but practically, it lies in the hands of
the few who are willing to make the financial investment in the necessary hardware.
On the one hand, Bitcoin faces many of the hallmark struggles of a cypherpunk
project -- it is cumbersome to use and demand for alternative financial services has not
been high enough to push Bitcoin into the mainstream. At the same time, Bitcoin has
captured public imagination and provided the conceptual framework for a new
generation of projects that strive to distribute critical processes and services that
currently fall under the purview of large, for-profit companies. Like the early
cypherpunks, many of these projects seek to “disrupt” this new class of power elites–the
digital platform owners–by developing peer to peer protocols for the exchange of
information, and supporting crowdsourced methods for curating content and managing
user reputation."

(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)


=More information=

* The [[Cypherpunk Movement Bibliography]]

* The [[Cypherpunk Manifesto]]

'''*  Article: The Core of Crypto is Punks and Principles, Piergiorgio Catti De Gasperi, 2023:''' 

URL = https://mirror.xyz/yarak.eth/Mj6cCdR74K96AIrz3RTgANCB1L3W9jGvCwJYVO1wCfE

"The article examines how privacy-focused intellectuals, the Cypherpunks, pioneered the foundation for Web3. It highlights their concerns about centralization, privacy, and financial transparency, which led to innovations like Bitcoin and Ethereum. By understanding these ideological origins, the article underscores the significance of appreciating Web3’s potential to create a decentralized and fair digital future." ([https://academy.web3privacy.info/p/library])

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Crypto Politics]]