
URL = http://www.danaklisanin.com

==Bio==

"Dana is the Founder & CEO at Evolutionary Guidance Media in NYC.  An award-winning psychologist, professional futurist, designer, writer, and artist, Dana explores how we can use information technologies and new media to promote human wellbeing and planetary flourishing. From digital altruism to the Cyberhero archetype, collaborative heroism to cyber-kindness, Dr. Klisanin’s pioneering research has forever altered the way we think about technology and human values.  Dana’s early interest in using technology to improve human life, tackle global challenges, and transform consciousness, led her to design a framework for creating social impact media. Her transdisciplinary interests led her to the field of game design. Through forming strategic partnerships with nonprofit organizations, she's in the process of launching Cyberhero League, a locative, edtech gaming quest with real world consequences. Dana has published journal articles and book chapters on a broad range of topics, including the future of media, conscious design, mindfulness, altruism, and heroism in the digital age.  She speaks Internationally and has been quoted and interviewed by numerous radio and news outlets including, BBC, TIME, Fast Company, Psychology Today, Huffington Post, USA Today, Futurist Magazine, Harvesting Happiness, Civilination, and The New Existentialists. She is Executive Director of the MindLAB at c3: Center for Conscious Creativity and Executive Board Member of the World Futures Studies Federation serving as the President's envoy to the United Nations. In 2017, Dana received the President's Outstanding Women Futures Award from the World Futures Studies Federation, and in 2012, she received the Distinguished Early Career Award for Scientific Achievement in Media Psychology for research on digital altruism and the Cyberhero Archetype."

==Publications==

Author of numerous <!--a href="/research-cv"-->peer-reviewed journal articles, Dr. Klisanin is currently writing a new book, ''The Good Web: Hacking Consciousness in the 21st Century,'' explaining how information technologies are being used to improve human life and benefit the world. She recently contributed to a new [https://www.amazon.com/Dana-Klisanin/e/B010VWOJ3A Handbook of Heroism and Heroic Leadership] and two book series, titles include, [https://www.amazon.com/Dana-Klisanin/e/B010VWOJ3A The Future of Business; A Very Human Future; The Walking Dead Psychology: Psych of the Living Dead, Star Wars Psychology: Dark Side of the Mind, and Game of Thrones Psychology: The Mind is Dark and Full of Terrors.]  Dr. Klisanin's exploration of the use of digital technologies for advancing spirituality has been translated into Russian at [http://eroskosmos.org/english/sensuous-mystic-en/ Eros &amp; Kosmos]. Her blog is Digital Altruism at [https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/digital-altruism Psychology Today].

* Essay: [[Exploring the Emergence of the Cyberhero Archetype]]

See also her [https://danaklisanin.com/research-cv research CV] for more publications.

==More Information==

* Her website: [https://www.danaklisanin.com Leveraging Digital Technology To Promote Human Values & Tackle Global Challenges]

<!--Causes (2011b). URL http://www.causes.com/causes/607910-help-psychologist-dana-klisanin-identify-characteristics-of-the-cyberhero-archetype-->


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]