From Dan Pink's website:
<p>Daniel H. Pink is the author of several provocative, bestselling books about the changing world of work.</p> 
<p>His latest is <em>[http://www.danpink.com/drive Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us]</em>, which uses 50 years of behavioral science to overturn the conventional wisdom about human motivation and offer a more effective path to high performance.  <em>Drive </em>reached every national bestseller list in its first month of publication and is now in its fifth month on the [http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/30/books/bestseller/besthardnonfiction.html New York Times list<]. Over the next year, it will appear in Japanese, Korean, French, German, Spanish, and 18 other languages.</p> 
<p><em>[http://www.danpink.com/wnm.html A Whole New Mind: Why Right-Brainers Will Rule the Future]</em> charts the rise of right-brain thinking in modern economies and describes the six abilities individuals and organizations must master in an outsourced, automated age. <em>A Whole New Mind</em> is a long-running <em>New York Times</em> bestseller that has been translated into 21 languages.</p> 
<p><em>[http://www.danpink.com/johnny-bunko The Adventures of Johnny Bunko: The Last Career Guide You’ll Ever Need]</em> is the first American business book  in the Japanese comic format known as <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manga">manga</a> and the only graphic novel ever to become a <em>BusinessWeek</em> bestseller. Illustrated by award-winning artist Rob Ten Pas, <em>The Adventures of Johnny Bunko </em>has been translated into 14 languages.</p> 
<p>Dan&#8217;s first book, <em> [http://search.barnesandnoble.com/Free-Agent-Nation/Daniel-H-Pink/e/9780446678797 Free Agent Nation: The Future of Working for Yourself]</em>, was a <em>Washington Post</em> bestseller that <em>Publishers Weekly </em>says “has become a cornerstone of employee-management relations.”</p> 
<p>His articles on business and technology appear in many publications, including the <em>New York Times, Harvard Business Review, Fast Company</em>, and <em>Wired</em>, where he is a contributing editor. He has provided analysis of business trends on CNN, CNBC, ABC, NPR, and other networks in the U.S. and abroad. He also lectures to corporations, associations, and universities around the world on economic transformation and the new workplace.</p> 
<p>A free agent himself, Dan held his last real job in the White House, where he served from 1995 to 1997 as chief speechwriter to Vice President Al Gore. He also worked as an aide to U.S. Labor Secretary Robert Reich and in other positions in politics and government.</p> 
<p>He received a BA, with honors, from Northwestern University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and a JD from Yale Law School. To his lasting joy, he has never practiced law.</p> 
<p>Dan lives in Washington, DC, with his wife and their three children.</p>
=More Information=
==Internal Links==
*[[P2P and Human Evolution Ch 3#1.B|The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism]]
*[[Whole New Mind]]
*[[Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Motivation]]
*[[Daniel Pink on Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Motivation]]

==External Links==
*http://www.danpink.com/

[[Category:Bios]]