'''= Catalyzing transformative innovation in the face of converging crises, advising on regenerative whole systems design. Author of [[Designing Regenerative Cultures]]'''

URL = http://www.danielchristianwahl.com/

==Bio==
"Daniel Christian Wahl was born in Munich in 1971 and grew up in Germany. By the time he was 28 he had travelled in 35 different countries on six continents. His early career was as a marine biologist and scuba diving instructor, before he decided to focus on sustainability and sustainable communities in 1998. Originally trained as a biologist and zoologist at the University of Edinburgh and the University of California, Santa Cruz, Daniel also holds an MSc in Holistic Science (Schumacher College, 2002) and a PhD in Natural Design (University of Dundee, 2006).

Daniel has taught capacity building workshops on a wide range of sustainability issues to local authorities and businesses through the UN-affiliated training centre CIFAL Scotland. Among his consultancy clients have been the United Nations Institute of Training and Research (UNITAR), the British Government’s UK Foresight (with Decision Integrity Ltd.), LEAD International, CLEAR Village, and companies like Camper, Ecover (with Forum for the Future), Lush and the tourism innovation cluster Balears.t, as well as, various universities and charities.

He was the director of Findhorn College between 2007 and 2010, during which time he helped to create the MSc in Sustainable Community Design (Heriott-Watt University), co-founded the ‘Learning Partnership for Creative Sustainability’ and co-organized two international Bioneers conferences in Holland and Findhorn. Daniel has been a member of Gaia Education (since 2007) and the International Futures Forum (since 2009). He is also a fellow of the RSA (Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) and the Findhorn Foundation Fellowship.

Daniel has worked closely with Gaia Education since 2006 when he participated in the first training of trainers for the ‘Ecovillage Design Education’ (EDE) programme. He has taught EDE courses in Scotland, Thailand, and Spain. He is a co-author of all four dimensions (social, ecological, economic, worldview) of the curriculum for Gaia Education’s online course in ‘Design for Sustainability’ (GEDS), and is co-developing a new programme in ‘Bioregional Design Education’ (BDE) for Gaia Education. He also collaborates with the research working-group of the Global Ecovillage Network (GEN).

Daniel lives on Majorca, and works locally and internationally as a consultant, educator and activist. In 2012, he co-founded ‘Biomimicry Iberia’ and in 2015 co-organized the first practitioners camp of the ‘European Biomimicry Alliance’ (EBA) on Majorca. He collaborates with the Masters of Design and Innovation at the IED (European Institute of Design) in Madrid, has taught at Elisava Design School in Barcelona, and co-developed the S.M.A.R.T. UIB project of the Universidad de las Islas Baleares (Sustainable, Multi-stakeholder, Applied, Regenerative, Transformative) where he is helping to develop a series of programmes in transformative innovation. Daniel has published numerous articles and academic papers and collaborated with a number of documentary film projects. Designing Regenerative Cultures is his first book."

— [https://www.triarchypress.net/daniel-wahl.html Triarchy Press]

==More Information==
Pages on this wiki:
* [[Biomimicry]]
* [[Carbon Sequestration Through Regenerative Agriculture]]
* [[Designing Regenerative Cultures]]
* [[Daniel Wahl on Designing Regenerative Cultures for Resilience and Sustainability]]
* [[Regenerative Culture]]
* [[Fritjof Capra and Daniel Christian Wahl on the Need for Regenerative Approaches]]
* [[Eight Principles for a Regenerative Economy]]
External links
* [https://twitter.com/drdcwahl?lang=en Twitter]
* [http://edinburgh.academia.edu/DanielChristianWahlPhD Academia.edu]
* [https://springprize.org/judge/daniel-christian-wahl/ Lush Spring Prize]
* [https://www.resilience.org/resilience-author/daniel-wahl/ Resilience]
* [https://www.triarchypress.net/daniel-wahl.html Triarchy Press]
* [https://www.gaiaeducation.org/face-to-face/trainers/daniel-christian-wahl/ Gaia Education]
* [http://www.danielchristianwahl.com/ own web site]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Regenerative Approaches]]