=Bio=

"Daniel Araya got his PhD in Education Policy, Organization and Leadership at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. The focus of his research is the confluence of digital technologies and economic globalization on systems of education. He has worked with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) and the UIUC Global Studies in Education program. He was selected for the 2009 Oxford Internet Institute's Summer Doctoral Programme and the 2010 HASTAC scholars fellowship program. He is currently the co-editor of the Journal of Global Studies in Education. His newest books include: Education, Knowledge Economy, and Digital Futures (forthcoming, Routledge), [[Education in the Creative Economy]] (2010, Peter Lang) and Nexus: [[New Intersections of Internet Research]]  (2011, Peter Lang)."

=P2P Research Summary=

*Education researcher (P2P learning ecologies) 
*PhD in Education Policy, Organization and Leadership and Lead Researcher in Leadership and Policy with the National Center for Professional and Research Ethics (NCPRE) at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. The focus of his research is the confluence of digital technologies and economic globalization on systems of education. He has worked with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) and the UIUC Global Studies in Education program. In 2010 he was selected for the HASTAC scholars fellowship program and in 2011 he was selected for the Hardie Dissertation Award. He is currently the co-editor of the Journal of Global Studies in Education.
*His newest books include: ''Education, Knowledge Economy, and Digital Futures'' (forthcoming, Routledge), ''Education in the Creative Economy'' (2010, Peter Lang) and ''Nexus: New Intersections in Internet Research'' (2011, Peter Lang). 
*Contact: Site: [http://www.danielaraya.com/ www.danielaraya.com] / Email: daniel (at) jgse.org / Twitter:danielarayaXY

=More Information=

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Research]]