
'''= "DAObase is a knowledge base for the Organizational Technology (OrgTech) sector".'''

URL = https://daobase.org/

''"OrgTech is an emerging blockchain sector that digitizes the firm, unlocking exciting new capabilities for decentralized governance, work, project, and financial management."''



=Directory=

Functions taken on by OrgTech at present.

Copied from the DAObase which has direct access to the links, on 28/8/2021

==Work: Token and Reputation Incentives==

The first function is enabling organizations to incentivize and measure contributions, by defining tasks as smart contracts which pay out money, ownership tokens, and/or reputation. This is the foundation for an automated peer-monitoring system that distributes control relative to contribution.

Aragon Projects (Autark) and Rewards (Autark): Enables organizations to allocate bounties to GitHub issues and distribute rewards to highest-earners.

Bounties Network (ConsenSys): A freelancing marketplace powered by StandardBounties. Currently a networked market, but could lay the foundation for more persistent coordination.

Collective One: Integrates contribution value accounting with an interface of communication channels, Kanban boards, and docs.

Colony: Reputation rewarded to contributors based on peer evaluations. Aims to achieve a more meritocratic distribution of control than could perhaps be achieved by ownership tokens alone.

Covee: Designed to limit free-riding in remote knowledge work by incentivizing voluntary contributions.

DAOstack: Allocate contributors with reputation tokens based on their proposals to contribute.

Gitcoin (ConsenSys): The other half of StandardBounties, which integrates with GitHub for more developer-centric bounties. Also with tools for recurring donations and unique (non-fungible) compliment tokens.

IBM Patent: Patented in July 2018, this system would use smart contracts to track the collective contributions of programmers “for the purpose of credit, reward, and dispute resolution”.

Tribute: Incentivize community contributions with a new form of equity, which may represent future rewards or profit shares.

==Project Management: Directing and Dividing Labour==

Extending permissions for smart contract interactions gives contributors the control to create and allocate tasks, essentially managing the strategy and direction of the organization.

Aragon Token Manager and Permissions: Adjust voting power distributions by minting tokens and set global/local permissions for creating/casting votes, moving finances, and managing apps.

Colony: The network's task structure is abstracted to allow "manager" roles to be assigned to individuals, multi-signature contracts, autonomous agents, or crowds.

DAOstack: A prediction market helps organizations to prioritize project proposals, in a system that crowdsources the managerial role.


==Governance: Making Decisions and Resolving Disputes==

Because tasks are defined as smart contracts, they serve as reference points around which decisions can be made and disputes resolved. According to the property rights theory of the firm, firms exist to give their owners the ultimate authority in disputes with employees, where an equivalent contractor dispute might have been impossible to resolve. Blockchain-based organizations unlock novel incentive structures by distributing ownership, which along with dispute resolution mechanisms enables them to replicate this function of the firm.

Aragon Voting and Range Voting (Autark): Vote on proposals, with your influence weighted by your token holdings (ownership), or range vote to dictate percentages of allocations.

Colony: Voting only takes place if peers object to actions and a dispute arises. A permissive system that seeks to limit bureaucracy by localizing decisions to domain expertise. Ownership and control are separated by the measurement of reputation via peer evaluations.

DAOstack: Seeks to optimize decision-making scalability with a prediction market, wherein members stake on decisions they predict will succeed. Ownership and control are separated by the distribution of non-transferable reputation tokens via proposals.

Kleros: A dispute resolution service that lets you arbitrate with crowdsourced juries.

Oath Protocol: Modeled on the common law jury system. Randomly allocates jurors, evaluates them with a credit level, and motivates them with tokens.


==Financial Management: Fundraising and Budgeting==

Being able to coordinate means nothing if resources aren't available where needed. These tools would empower the crowd to be as effective at fundraising and budgeting as an elite team of financial managers.

Aragon Finance, Payroll, and Allocations (Autark): Manage an organization's cryptocurrency holdings, make payments/transfers, define persistent salaries, and propose budgeting decisions to be forwarded to the range voting app.

Colony and BudgetBox: Members with sufficient reputation can allocate funds without voting, as long as there are no objections. BudgetBox enables crowd budgeting, dynamically aggregating financial preferences via pairwise comparison games.

CONE: Focusing initially on financial management, with tools for internal marketplaces, transactions, and accounting, CONE will eventually enable you to plug other OrgTech modules (and existing ERP systems) into your corporation’s “Collaborative Network Economy”.


==Continuous Organizations:==

A continuous fundraising alternative to the ICO, which aligns stakeholder interests by setting up a bonding curve contract that manages claims to future cash-flows.

DAOstack: Funding is requested by proposals, which are then evaluated by the prediction market.

EthKan: A new funding model in which crowds fund specific tasks in a project's Kanban board.

Greaterthan Cobudget: Enables members to propose projects and vote on fund allocations."

(https://daobase.org/orgtech-and-the-networked-firm/)

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]