

=Description=

 < "an industrial chain and more like an autonomous organism." >

Chor Pharn:

"The first place where the new intelligence became visible was the factory floor.

When engineers in Shenzhen switched off the lights, production didn’t stop. Robots assembled entire vehicles in complete darkness because nothing there required eyes. The cameras were infrared, the sensors ultrasonic, the rhythm unbroken. What startled even the designers was that the machines were beginning to build other machines. The factory had turned reproductive.

Dark factory infrastructure has fused with recursive feedback systems, creating a “phase transition in industrial evolution.” In these plants, workerless systems create more workerless systems; a single factory with a six-month doubling cycle can spawn sixty-four sister facilities in three years while also producing end products like electric vehicles. At that pace, industrial capacity grows exponentially, not linearly, and the limiting factor ceases to be labour or capital expenditure—it becomes energy and raw materials. Because China controls roughly 90 percent of rare-earth processing, 90 percent of permanent-magnet production, and 80 percent of global refining capacity, whoever commands both the recursive manufacturing infrastructure and the critical-materials supply chain effectively commands exponential capacity multiplication, while rivals remain trapped negotiating export licences and compounding disadvantage each six-month cycle.

These engineers also emphasise the supporting stack: AI-powered machine-vision systems inspecting every component at microscopic scale, neuromorphic chips that run on watts rather than kilowatts, and edge-computing networks that let each robot adjust parameters locally in milliseconds without cloud latency. The Chinese approach, they note, is vertically integrated from mine to assembly line, allowing iteration speed that Western manufacturers—fragmented across dozens of suppliers—can’t match. The result is a production architecture that behaves less like an industrial chain and more like an autonomous organism."

(https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-ocean-of-intelligent-infrastructure)

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Technology]]