'''= " a politically independent ThinkDoTank based in Denmark ... to promote data ethical products and services".'''

URL = http://dataethics.eu/en/

=Description=

"DataEthics.eu  is a politically independent ThinkDoTank based in Denmark with a European (and global) outreach. We work to promote data ethical products and services, and our approach is constructive and action-oriented.  

We support knowledge exchange and creation and cooperation on a sustainable and data ethical future with individual user control at the centre."]]


=More Information=

* Book: Data Ethics - The New Competitive Advantage. By Gry Hasselbalch and Pernille Tranberg. 2016.

URL = http://dataethics.eu/en/book/

"The book describes over 50 cases of mainly private companies working with data ethics to varying degrees

Respect for privacy and the right to control one’s own data are becoming key parameters to gain a competitive edge in today’s business world. Companies, organisations and authorities which view data ethics as a social responsibility, giving it the same importance as environmental awareness and respect for human rights, are tomorrow’s winners. Digital trust is paramount to digital growth and prosperity.

This book combines broad trend analyses with case studies to examine companies which use data ethics to varying degrees. The authors make the case that citizens and consumers are no longer just concerned about a lack of control over their data, but they also have begun to act. In addition, they describe alternative business models, advances in technology and a new European data protection regulation, all of which combine to foster a growing market for data-ethical products and services.
The authors’ critical look at tech trends and the ethical dilemmas intertwined with them is sure to interest responsible key players seeking out the best way to get started with data ethics and how to use it to develop digital trust."

[[Category:Denmark]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Big Data]]

[[Category:Policy]]