
=Description=

Kastrop, C., Rodriguez, M. et al. :

"Data Agency as a Path Toward Digital Sovereignty

One of the hallmarks of Taiwan’s successful digital infrastructure solution
has been the inclusion of multiple voices, including those of citizens.
Implicit in the Taiwan example is the belief that people should have
a say in how their data is used. This is the principle of data agency. If
governments are to empower citizens to be drivers of innovation, engaged
employees, trusting consumers, and responsible members of society,
enabling data agency through digital infrastructure would seem essential.
Data agency may not be the most obvious framework that policymakers
could adopt when designing digital infrastructure. There is a compelling
argument that infrastructure, as a fundamental layer of the technology
stack, should be a building block of “digital sovereignty” – that is, the
ability of national governments, in particular, to define the rules and
standards for their geographic “slice” of the global digital economy. Data
agency and digital sovereignty, however, do not need to be at odds.
Traditionally, the quest for digital sovereignty has frequently trapped
governments in a reactive mode: responding to technological
developments after the fact and relying almost exclusively on
regulation to rein in the perceived harms or excesses of private sector
innovation. One need look no further than the current Meta antitrust
trial in the United States – more than a decade after the company
acquired Instagram and Whatsapp – to appreciate the inefficiency and
ineffectiveness that can plague governments as they try to play catch-up
with changes in the technology sector.

Intervening at the infrastructure layer – and ensuring that citizens
enjoy data agency – offers a path toward a more strategic, agile and
resilient form of digital sovereignty. By designing the physical and legal
foundations of the digital economy, governments position themselves
as shapers of technology, influencing the latest innovations as they
emerge, rather than after the fact. In addition, by empowering citizens
through basic data rights, governments can create a more inclusive
and equitable playing field for workers, entrepreneurs and small- and
-medium-sized businesses.

In essence, a focus on ensuring data agency at the infrastructure layer
of the technology stack transforms governments from reactive market
regulators to pro-active market shapers. Of course markets – and the
digital economy – are global today. To fully succeed as market shapers,
governments should be mindful of the advantage that comes from
aligning data-agency standards across multiple jurisdictions, rather than
only locally. Otherwise, the centralized, coordinated power of global
technology companies may yet deprive states of their digital sovereignty.
Fundamental, and universal, principles and rights of data agency
empower both governments and citizens.

If fully realized, the ability of governments to shape and enforce rightsbased digital regulation would reaffirm an open, competitive global market while ensuring countries retain the authority to: 

(1) promote their own tech-related specialisms, at home and abroad, and 

(2) intervene when global tech forces threaten the rule of law, public accountability,
or other national interests. This is a vision of sovereignty grounded
in resilience and shared norms, not the isolation and rigidity that
accompany quests for data localization or digital autarky. A total selfreliant infrastructure stack or “full technological sovereignty” is neither realistic nor desirable."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/Project_Liberty_Institute_Digital_Infrastructure_Solutions_Policymakers_Toolkit.pdf)


[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Big Data]]