Podcast at http://podcasts.autobloggreen.com/2007/10/16/autoblog-green-podcast-13-santa-monica-alt-car-expo-and-tokyo/

Video at http://www.autobloggreen.com/2007/10/26/alt-car-expo-2007-open-source-vehicle-project-video/

=Description=

"For the latest AutoblogGreen podcast, I got a hold of some of the people behind the OSGV, a hive-mind green car project. You can listen to our interview in the podcast, and read the transcript of the chat below. I talked to David Lee and Valerie Wilson as a way to get to know at least one of the groups coming to the Alt Car Expo in Santa Monica this weekend."
(http://www.autobloggreen.com/2007/10/16/autobloggreen-qanda-open-source-green-vehicle-project/)


=Excerpts=

"The baseline model is a purely electric vehicle. It has a minimum amount of battery storage to give you approximately 30-mile range but then there is what we call a Plug and Play Power Source Module that the owner is supposed to buy so that they will keep the vehicle more range.

Now the Power Source Module is a very flexible device. It is actually electrically coupled with the car. It is not mechanically coupled, it is electrically coupled. What that gives you is the ability to adapt to other fuel sources. For example like you have a gasoline-car source module and you want to change it to a diesel or just biodiesel, tomorrow you can do that. You can just go to a garage and have it changed out within a couple of hours. So that is one of the biggest selling points that we have."
(http://www.autobloggreen.com/2007/10/16/autobloggreen-qanda-open-source-green-vehicle-project/)


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]