A public policy entrepreneur, open government activist and negotiation expert David is retained by several governments to advise on open government and open data, by corporations and non-profits to consult, coach and facilitate around critical negotiations. He is frequently invited to speak on issues relating open government, policy making, open source, negotiation and strategy. You can find a list of David's past and upcoming keynotes and speeches [http://eaves.ca/speeches/ here].

'''Public Policy Entrepreneur'''

As a fellow, David writes on politics, foreign policy, public service sector renewal, as well as open source and network systems. He posts four times a week on [http://eaves.ca his blog], publishes regularly in various forums including the Globe and Mail website and has a chapter in the recently published [http://www.amazon.com/Open-Government-Collaboration-Transparency-Participation/dp/0596804350/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1260985587&sr=8-1-spell O'Reilly Media book on Open Government]. 

In addition to his writing and advocacy, David sits on the executive of Vision Vancouver (a municipal political party) and the board of Keeping the Door Open. He served as a sponsor and adviser of the [http://www.apps4climateaction.gov.bc.ca/ Apps 4 Climate Action competition], sat on [http://gov2.net.au/blog/2009/10/23/inquiries-2-0-part-3-0/ the International Reference Group of Australia’s Government 2.0 Taskforce], the Steering Committee of the Environics Institute [http://www.environicsinstitute.org/research-aboriginal.html Urban Aboriginal People's Survey] and the advisory board of [http://www.igloo.org/canadasworld/ Canada's World].

'''Open Activist'''

David advises the Mayor of Vancouver on Open Government and Open Data and helped draft the Open Motion. David advises a number of government on open data and open government, helping them craft strategies as well as draft and execute implementation plans.

In addition to working with politicians and government officials, he engages programmers and citizens at the local and national level to make use of, and advocate for, more open and transparent government. He frequently writes and is invited to speak on how open source methodologies and open data can help make government more effective and efficient.

'''Negotiator'''

As a negotiation consultant David advises companies, non-profits and advocacy groups on critical negotiations they are engaged in. He has developed and helped implement collaborative strategies for open source communities and Fortune 500 companies as they seek to maximize the value they generate with community members, partners, alliance members, customers, and suppliers. His work has taken him across North America and around the world in a range of industries including financial services, health-care, information technology, and the energy sector. Most recently he served as negotiation adviser to a coalition of Environmental NGO's [http://www.canadianborealforestagreement.com/ that negotiated a national agreement with Canada's forestry industry over management of the Boreal Forest]. 

'''Citizen'''

David lives in Vancouver, British Columbia. He completed a Bachelor of Arts in history at Queen’s University and a Master’s of International Relations at Oxford. He serves as an Adjunct Professor at the Centre for Digital Media.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Canada]]