
'''* Article: La démocratie des interstices. Que reste-t-il de l'idéal démocratique ? David Graeber. Revue du MAUSS 2005/2 (no 26), pages 41 à 89'''

URL = https://www.cairn.info/revue-du-mauss-2005-2-page-41.htm

=Discussion=

Reading notes from Michel Bauwens, 2006:

David Graeber rejects that democracy is a western tradition, going from Athens to its 18th cy arrival. In fact, if there is a western intellectual tradition, it was one against democracy.

- Democratic practices have existed in the whole world

- Democratic ideals are born in particular circumstances, when intellectuals re-interpret the past to found a democratic tradition.

- These ideals are always applied to state forms and result in 'republics', with few real democratic elements.

- The current crisis is one of the state, and not of democracy; true democratic practices are born outside the preview of the state.


Graeber then revisits these points, starting with a critique of Huntington's notion of western civilization. The confusion is caused by comparing a peculiar western literary tradition with 'real culture', as expressed in daily life. We can only speak of a western tradition in the former sense, and comparing it to the daily life cultures of other regions is what gives rise to anthropological eurocentric superiority.


A more realisitic view of the historical realities is this:

Until modern times there was an Eurasian world-system dominated by three centers:

    - China
    - India
    - Mesopotamia


Europe and Africa were peripheries of the latter. Europe gave raw materials and slaves, and imported sophisticated goods. The real western tradition was the Islamic domination of Western Asia, sharing the same literary, philosophical, and juridical traditiongs coming from the Greek and Judeo-Christian backgrounds. The western Middle Ages copied them, and only so became 'Western'. After this process, a new Western tradition would be born, emerging as a new North-Atlantic world-system.

Concerning the history of democracy, we must sharply distinguish between the invention of the concept (Greece), and egalitarian decision-making. The latter has existed globally, but mostly expressed consensus, not majority voting, which makes minorities 'unhappy'.

The latter actually presupposes an apparatus of coercion which can impose the decision.

Democracy was in fact a derogatory term, meaning 'violence' (=kratos) of the people, because it depended on the 'people in arms' The term was only rehabilitated after the invention of representation.

The so-called inventors of the modern system were in fact opposed to democracy (and its Athenian form), they were 'Republicans' (i.e. in favor of the Roman Republic). The American Revolution was a clever mix of monarchic (Presidency), aristocratic (Senate), and democratic (House) elements. The few 'democrats' of that epoch, such as Thomas Paine, were considered as fringe elements.

It is only in the period 1820-1830, that democracy became in favor, with a new interest for Athens, but the term in fact still meant 'Republic' for most. The supporters of the workers and small farmers started to use it in a non-elite sense. The notion of 'Western' came only in regular usage after the 1880s and 'Western civilization" after WWI.

Arrighi has shown how the 19th cy Western powers systematically fought democratic movements in the colonies. Graeber stresses how the democratically-aligned movements in the colonies used both indigenous and western derived traditions to justify their actions.

Graeber then argues that such ideals are born from the complex interactions of cultural spheres, in the 'interstices' but that is invisible to the literary traditions such writings would be embedded in. As an example, Graeber cites the constitutionalist tradition of pluralism and tolerance, existing in the Indian Ocean port cities, existing before the arrival of the Europeans, which in fact threatened their existence.

Graeber then considers the controversial 'influence theory', which says that the Iroquois Nation influenced the U.S. constitution makers. Ture or not, the influence on democratic practice seems inescapable. Graeber also stresses the remarkably democratic nature of pirate societies.

Democratic practices emerge where communities have to make decisions, in the absence of a state. And the literary and philosophical traditions equated with civilizations are in fact generally opposed to these zones of cultural creativity.

It is the widespread destruction consequent of the nascent capitalism that created such spaces which formed the new Atlantic proletariat. This pressure caused the stte and the elite to reform and to look for precedents. Hence the Republic was born and the creation of a democratic history starting in Athens.


Two examples can illustrate this:
    
- the fetish-convention practices at West-African ports are strangely akin to Hobbes' contractual theory;
    
- and the Western nation-state concept is an uncanny copy of Chinese reality.


While there are no proofs of such genealogy, Graeber stresses that the democratic theory was born at the time of imperialist mixing, and not before. This type of recuperation is universal and Graeber notes how early 20th cy Indian historians constructed a Hindu democratic history. Graeber cites the Zapatistas as a contemporary 'mix' of self-government traditions.

'''The whole tension comes from the impossibility of truly democratizing the state, as it is essentially an institution to regulate force. True democracy cannot be married to the state.'''

=Abstract=

In French:

"Dans ce texte, je vais défendre toute une série de thèses. Peut-être la meilleure façon de procéder est-elle de les énoncer d’emblée en raccourci.

* Presque tous ceux qui écrivent sur le sujet affirment que la « démocratie » est un concept « occidental » dont l’histoire débute à Athènes, et considèrent que ce qui renaît aux xviiie et xixe siècles en Europe de l’Ouest et en Amérique du nord n’en serait pour l’essentiel que le prolongement. La démocratie est ainsi conçue comme ayant pour espace naturel l’Europe occidentale et ses colonies francophones ou anglophones. Aucune de ces affirmations n’est justifiée. La « civilisation occidentale » est un concept particulièrement confus, et s’il réfère vaguement à quelque chose, c’est seulement à une tradition intellectuelle. Or celle-ci est tout aussi hostile que la tradition indienne, chinoise ou méso-américaine à quoi que ce soit qu’on puisse considérer comme relevant de la démocratie.

* Les pratiques démocratiques – les procédures de prise de décision égalitaires – existent à peu près partout dans le monde, elles ne sont spécifiques à aucune « civilisation », culture ou tradition déterminée. Elles tendent à apparaître en tout lieu où la vie sociale se déroule en dehors des structures de domination systématique.

* L’« idéal démocratique » tend à émerger lorsque, dans certaines circonstances historiques, les intellectuels et les hommes politiques – qui d’une façon ou d’une autre se fraient habituellement leur chemin en naviguant entre les institutions d’état et les mouvements et pratiques populaires – interrogent leur propre tradition (en dialogue constant avec les autres traditions) pour en extraire des exemples de pratiques démocratiques présentes ou passées afin de démontrer qu’elle contient des germes précieux de démocratie. 

* Ces moments, je les nomme des moments de « refondation démocratique ». Du point de vue des traditions intellectuelles, ce sont également des moments de récupération, au cours desquels des idéaux et des institutions – qui sont souvent le produit de formes d’interaction incroyablement complexes entre des personnes nourries d’histoires et de traditions très différentes – en viennent à être considérés comme résultant de la logique propre à la tradition intellectuelle elle-même. Au cours des xviiie et xixe siècles tout particulièrement, ce n’est pas seulement l’Europe, mais quasiment le monde entier qui a connu de tels moments.

* Le fait que cet idéal se soit toujours fondé – au moins partiellement – sur des traditions inventées ne signifie pas pour autant qu’il ne serait pas authentique ou légitime ou, du moins, moins authentique et légitime que tout autre idéal. Il présente néanmoins une contradiction : cet idéal s’est toujours basé sur un rêve impossible, le rêve d’un mariage entre les procédures et pratiques démocratiques d’une part, et les mécanismes coercitifs de l’état d’autre part. Ce qui en a résulté, ce ne sont pas des « démocraties », quelque sens que l’on donne à ce terme, mais des républiques ne recelant en général que peu d’éléments démocratiques.

* L’expérience qui est aujourd’hui la nôtre n’est pas celle d’une crise de la démocratie mais plutôt celle d’une crise de l’état. Si l’on a pu assister ces dernières années, au sein des mouvements altermondialistes, à un regain d’intérêt pour les pratiques et les procédures démocratiques, cela s’est opéré presque entièrement hors des cadres étatiques. 

* L’avenir de la démocratie se joue précisément dans ces espaces. Développons maintenant ces points à peu près dans l’ordre selon lequel je viens de les présenter. Et commençons par cette étrange idée selon laquelle la démocratie serait d’une manière ou d’une autre un « concept occidental »."

(https://www.cairn.info/revue-du-mauss-2005-2-page-41.htm)



=More information=

For the source, see: [[Mauss Review 26 on Alternative Democracy and Alternative Economy]]

* Special Issue: Alterdémocratie, alteréconomie. Edited by Alain Caillé and with Immanuel Wallterstein, David Graeber et al . Revue du MAUSS n° 26 [https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25700786-revue-du-mauss-n-26---alterd-mocratie-alter-conomie]

* La Démocratie aux marges, par David Graeber. traduit par Philippe Chanial, Le Bord de l'eau, 122 p., 12 euros [french-language review: [https://bibliobs.nouvelobs.com/essais/20140210.OBS5791/l-occident-a-t-il-vraiment-invente-la-democratie.html])

[[Category:Bauwens Reading Notes Project]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Democracy]]