

=Bio=

Graduated from Yale, with studies in Bonn, Munich and Austin. Focus: ontology in eras of social changes. Work: Setting pins in a bowling ally, IBM Corporation, The Armadillo Press publishing cooperative with IWW union print-shop in Austin, Texas. In Germany: Center for Regional Conversion of "swords to plowshares" in ecumenical church work for Justice, Peace and the Integrity of Creation with experiments in computer assisted education and participatory publishing, e.g. www.vun.org
 

'''Long:'''

"Born in Pleasantville, New York, USA June 19, 1942

Currently, 2013, retired in Berlin, Germany.

Academic efforts began with sub-nuclear physics and went on to philosophy, graduating from Yale in New Haven, USA, with studies at the universities of Bonn, Munich and Texas at Austin. Focus: ontology in eras of social changes.

Work experience includes: setting pins in a bowling ally (briefly, soon automated), IBM Corporation, The Armadillo Press publishing cooperative with IWW union print-shop in Austin, Texas, USA.

In Germany (since 1982): Liaison Office for Peace Conversion in cooperation with ecumenical church work for Justice, Peace and the Integrity of Creation in the then divided Germanies. Then Center for Regional Conversion of military facilities in Berlin and Brandenburg to civilian use. In the context of the transition from confrontation to communication, experiments with computer assisted education including participatory publishing, e.g. http://www.vun.org

Some recent publications : "Power (Grid) to the People" in The Rag Blog and interview on KOOP-FM radio, Austin, Texas, including about transitions from depleteable to renewable energy use."

=Discussion=

David MacBryde:

"Two current interests:

* 1 With literary reference to Dr. Spock of Star Trek: When is it the case, and when is it not the case that "the more you share the more you have"?
     
Or, a related question: When is competition more helpful, and when is cooperation more helpful, and how and by whom are decisions on that made about and inside economic activities?
What are good and bad practice examples? How can such issues be analytically clarified and improvements implemented?

* 2 International Cooperation Creating Youth Cooperatives Creating Infrastructures ( " ICCYCCI " )
     
e.g. Consider a situation where there is at least (1) a school (2) a medical facility and (3) some local project for open source force transformer facility and grid: What might be a cooperative communications infrastructure useful there?"


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]