
Talk video via https://fossbazaar.org/content/david-rowe-open-hardware-business-models


=Description=

"In 2005 David started working on open hardware techniques for telephony. The idea of open hardware (people collaborating to build free hardware designs just like open software) was a big experiment, especially when it came to commercial products.

Much has happened since then. New projects, and even businesses have spun out of the project. Coolest of all - open hardware products are now in volume production. People are buying and using these products - often in preference to products developed using traditional closed development models. Open hardware works!

The talk will discuss:

    * open hardware business models
    * differences with open software
    * why open hardware is better than closed for business
    * how open is open hardware
    * extreme open hardware"

(https://fossbazaar.org/content/david-rowe-open-hardware-business-models)
          
=Bio=  

"David Rowe has 20 years experience in the development of DSP-based telephony and sat-com hardware/software. David has a wide mix of skills including software, hardware, and project management including a PhD in DSP theory. He has held executive level positions in the sat-com industry (www.dspace.com.au) and has built and successfully exited a small business (www.voicetronix.com). However he has decided he is better at debugging machines than people so currently chooses to hack telephony hardware and software full time."
(https://fossbazaar.org/content/david-rowe-open-hardware-business-models)

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Business Models]]