

= interested in how open distributed systems might provide novel ways to support financial functions without the need for centralised institutions such as banks

=Bio=

"I am a senior research fellow at The Open University in the UK. I do research at the overlap between computer science and social science. I am interested in open distributed systems that include both machine and human agencies where the imposition of central control is not an option  and one can't rely on the "invisible hands" of orthodox economic (or game) theory. A synthesis is required between new kinds of social theory applicable to the artificial domain and distributed self-organising systems programming. Such a synthesis could transform,  not just technology but, human societies in profound ways.

I have explored these ideas through evolutionary cooperation theory, complex networks, agent-based modelling and peer-to-peer systems. Recently I have become interested in how open distributed systems might provide novel ways to support financial functions without the need for centralised institutions such as banks. I am also interested in the application of new approaches to collective coordination that focus on social interaction rather than traditional economics-type incentive mechanisms."
(http://cfpm.org/~david/)


=More Information=

Publications and talks via http://cfpm.org/~david/

# Hales, D. (2011) Denationalising Money: can quality emerge? Presented at the NESS  workshop at the ECCS2011  conference, Vienna, 14th Sept. PDF. 
# Hales, D. (2011) The Socio-Economics of P2P Systems. Invited talk - Warwick Business School Exective MBA programme, Warwick, UK, 16th June. PDF.
# Hales, D. (2010) Towards a Quality Financial Commons? Invited talk - Quality Commons Workshop, Paris, January 2010. PDF. Position statement PDF.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Money]]