'''= Meaningness.com is a website and proto-book maintained by David Chapman on the potential transition towards Metarationality'''

URL = https://meaningness.com/


=Principles=

Meta-rationality can help resolve rational dillemma's:

* Eternalism fixates meaning; nihilism denies it. Recognizing that meaning is both nebulous and patterned resolves this false dichotomy.

* Unity and diversity: Stances concerning connection and separateness: monism, dualism, and participation.

* Selfness: Abandoning selflessness and egoism equally, we can play with the ambiguous self/other boundary; supple, skillful selfing for successful, satisfying interaction.

* Purpose: Dividing purposes into higher and mundane, mission pursues higher ends and rejects pragmatism; materialism seeks only selfish goals. Both are mistakes.

* Personal value: Agonizing over whether you are ordinary or special—or feeling smug about one or the other—can be resolved by choosing to be noble instead.

* Capability: Resolving a false dichotomy between unrealistic views: being a helpless victim and being totally responsible for your circumstances.

* Ethics: Available ethical theories are either eternalist or nihilist; both are useless. We must recognize that ethics are both nebulous and meaningful.

* Authority: A better alternative to the dysfunctional stances of mindlessly opposing authority and mindlessly obeying.

* Sacredness: Resolving the twin delusions that nothing is sacred and that the only sacred things are those designated by some authority.

[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]