'''* Book: The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity. By David Graeber and David Wengrow. Penguin, 2021'''

URL = https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/314/314162/the-dawn-of-everything/9780241402429.html

<Dawn is  different  from  most  earlier books — and   particularly   different   from   Harari’s  and  Diamond’s  works—in '''bringing  to  general  readers  a  new  interpretation  that  is  not  evolutionist'''.  In  fact, Graeber  and  Wengrow  (from  here  on,  GW)  are  explicitly  anti-evolutionist.  That makes Dawn’s publication an event of real importance.> (Ian Morris [https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j45z2s3]


=Contextual Quote=

"Choosing to describe history… as a series of abrupt technological revolutions [Stone Age, Iron Age, Industrial Age, Information Age, etc], each followed by long periods when we were prisoners of our own creations, has consequences. Ultimately it is a way of representing our species as decidedly less thoughtful, less creative, less free than we actually turn out to have been.

It means not describing history as a continual series of new ideas and innovations, technical or otherwise, during which different communities made collective decisions about which technologies they saw fit to apply to everyday purposes, and which to keep confined to the domain of experimentation or ritual play. What is true of technological creativity is, of course, even more true of social creativity.

One of the most striking patterns we discovered while researching this book – indeed, one of the patterns that felt most like a genuine breakthrough to us – was how, time and again in human history, that zone of ritual play has also acted as a site of social experimentation – even, in some ways, as an encyclopaedia of social possibilities. (p.501)."

- David Graeber and David Wengrow [https://patkane.substack.com/p/the-dawn-of-everything-and-a-new]


=Description=

'''1. From the publisher:'''

""For generations, our remote ancestors have been cast as primitive and childlike - either free and equal, or thuggish and warlike. Civilization, we are told, could be achieved only by sacrificing those original freedoms or, alternatively, by taming our baser instincts. David Graeber and David Wengrow show how such theories first emerged in the eighteenth century as a reaction to indigenous critiques of European society, and why they are wrong. In doing so, they overturn our view of human history, including the origins of farming, property, cities, democracy, slavery and civilization itself.

Drawing on path-breaking research in archaeology and anthropology, the authors show how history becomes a far more interesting place once we begin to see what's really there. If humans did not spend 95 per cent of their evolutionary past in tiny bands of hunter-gatherers, what were they doing all that time? If agriculture, and cities, did not mean a plunge into hierarchy and domination, then what kinds of social and economic organization did they lead to? The answers are often unexpected, and suggest that the course of history may be less set in stone, and more full of playful possibilities than we tend to assume."

(https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/314/314162/the-dawn-of-everything/9780241402429.html)


'''2. Molly Fischer:'''

"Written in collaboration with the archaeologist David Wengrow, the book draws on new research to challenge received wisdom on civilization’s course. The story of humanity, as it is typically told, proceeds along a linear path. It passes in distinct stages from foraging bands and tribes on to agriculture, cities, and kings. But, surveying the historic and archaeological record, Graeber and Wengrow saw a wealth of other stories, taking humanity on varied and unpredictable routes. There were societies that farmed without really committing to it, for example. There were societies whose authority figures’ power applied only during certain parts of the year. Cities coalesced without any apparent centralized government; brutal hierarchies took shape among people who later reversed their course. The book’s 704 pages teem with possibilities. They are a testament, in the authors’ view, to human agency and invention — a capacity for conscious political decision-making that conventional history ignores. “We are projects of collective self-creation,” write Graeber and Wengrow. “What if we approached human history that way? What if we treat people, from the beginning, as imaginative, intelligent, playful creatures who deserve to be understood as such?”

(https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2021/11/david-graeber-dawn-of-everything.html)


'''3. Walter Scheidel:'''

"What  are their principal claims? 

* Unlike their present-day remnants, ancestral foragers were not necessarily confined to small bands; 

* farming matured very slowly and hybrid foraging-farming  arrangements  endured  for  millennia;  

* crude  stage  models  of social  evolution  fail to  do  justice  to  the  complexities  of  the  historical experience; 

* early   cities   did   not   immediately   spawn   autocracies   or   even   avoided   them altogether; 

* early polities were much more limited in scope than modern states; 

* one to  two  dozen  generations  ago,  some  Indigenous  North  Americans  chose  to  turn away   from   farming   and   unequal   arrangements   and   developed   a   political philosophy  that  inspired  European  Enlightenment  thinkers;  

* the  richness  of  the historical experience revealed by this book suggests meaningful alternatives to our current way of life and can therefore support social activism today."

Source: Scheidel, Walter. 2022. Resetting History’s Dial?A Critique of David Graeber and David Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity. CliodynamicsSI: Leading Scholars of the Past Comment on Dawn of Everything.Review 4, 1–27

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jj9j6z7)


=Reviews=


'''0. Chris Knight et al.:'''

"It’s not often that a book by radical authors gets reviewed — let alone favorably reviewed — in the mainstream press. The Dawn of Everything, by David Graeber and David Wengrow, is an exception. Published just two months ago, it has already received accolades from many of the world’s most influential English-language newspapers and magazines.

Even reviewers who question the author’s arguments for anarchism have hailed it as “a brilliant new account upends bedrock assumptions about 30,000 years of change,” (Atlantic) and “a dazzling array of stories about civilizations across many continents and thousands of years, all of which are grappling with what it means to be free” (Washington Post). We’ve also seen positive comments — raves in some cases! — from left-wing posters on social media.

It is certainly an enthralling book, but '''the two reviews published below, both from materialist anthropologists, argue that its account of human history ignores masses of contrary evidence, and that its political argument is idealist and voluntarist'''. Both reviews are particularly critical of the book’s failure to consider the causes of the oppression of women."

(https://climateandcapitalism.com/2021/12/17/the-dawn-of-everything-gets-human-history-wrong/)


'''1. Pat Kane:'''

"The Davids’ target is a giant Western intellectual assumption—that we tragically fell from simple, egalitarian hunter-gathering into complex, hierarchical farming society. And it is a tragedy, the assumption continues—with all the inescapable fatedness the term implies.

If we want to be organised enough to reap the bounties that come from agriculturalism and industrialism, then we’ll have to pay the price of social hierarchy and class societies. It’s a sad, inevitable fall from innocence.

Ah! Not so, say D&D. They give example after example of societies which, for instance, “play farmed” (that is, cultivating crops for medicine, beauty and art materials, as well as for food). They consciously chose not to intensify their activities into full-blown agriculture.

Indeed, some communities, having tried out the agrarian method, then deliberately retreated from intensive farming—too much like hard work—returning to and revising their pastoral activities.

Hours and days were reclaimed from the agricultural model, which these communities then spent richly deliberating what to do next with themselves, using many different forms of assembly (well before ancient Greece, and often involving potlatch or carnival). This was often without a class of leaders, rulers or potentates to supervene the process."

(https://patkane.substack.com/p/the-dawn-of-everything-and-a-new)


'''2. Daniel Bitton:'''

"The three main issues that I have with Dawn of Everything, and the preview chapters that have been coming out since 2015 are:

* Graeber and Wengrow’s '''allergy to materialist explanations''' for human social structure – which is the fatal weakness of an otherwise wonderful book.

* Graeber and Wengrow’s '''maddening mis-representation of the literature on egalitarian hunter gatherer societies''' and the intentions of the people who write that literature.

* and #3. Graeber and Wengrow’s '''tirade against the concept of equality and egalitarianism''', which is a big problem in our political discourse in general."

(https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/2021/10/26/10-1xcript/)


'''3. Walter Scheidel's Diagnosis:'''

"The Dawn of Everything has formidable strengths. Its authors’ desire and ability to refresh,  augment  and  rebalance  conventional  narratives  by  rescuing  neglected millennia  and  muted  experiences  is  impressive  and  commendable. They  succeed in showing “what happens if we accord significance to the 5,000 years in which cereal  domestication  did not lead  to  the  emergence  of  pampered  aristocracies, standing armies or debt peonage, rather than just the 5,000 years in which it did” (523).  Graeber  and  Wengrow  are  right  to  remind  us  of  the  risk  that  in  more streamlined accounts, “huge swathes of the human past disappear from the purview  of  history,  or  remain  effectively  invisible  (except  to  a  tiny  number  of researchers)” who do not usually reach a wider audience (442). Their own project seeks to center rather than marginalize these experiences (524).14In that regard, their book renders us all a big service.

A  related  virtue lies  in their  critique  of classicisms  that  fetishize  state  power, stability  and  the  fine  arts  over  freedoms  and  experimentation,  a  theme  that—as they themselves suggest (382)—would have warranted further elaboration. Their resolutely  global  perspective—essential  for  the  task  they  set  themselves—is another strength, and especially their detailed engagement with North America. It is  true  that  sub-Saharan  Africa  comes  up  short,  even  as  sites  such  as  Jenne-jeno would  have  supported  their  argument,  but  the  book is  already  very  long  (and sequels might well have followed).Those qualities, in my view at least, are what makes this book worth reading. At the  same  time,  a  number  of  shortcomings  and  idiosyncrasies  undermine  their efforts. Graeber and Wengrow commit to an idealist approach with blinding ardor. In   their   view,   ideas,   reasoned   deliberation   and   free   choice   are   the  crucial determinants  of  historical  outcomes:  material  conditions  and  environmental  or technological incentives and constraints pale by comparison. Even as they invoke ecological factors if its suits them, the specter of “environmental determinists” is never  far  away  (204).  Yet “determinism” and  their  occasional  admission  that ecology   and   technology   made   certain   developments “possible” are   merely extremes that bound a wide spectrum of more balanced explanatory approaches. At the very least, any plausible account of our early history must give due weight to the influence of natural endowments and technological change. More often than not,  however,  Graeber  and  Wengrow  give  short  shrift  to  geography,  ecology, demography  and  technology,  and  generally  steer  clear  of  materialist  arguments and explanations: at best, these are brought up just for explicit rejection (e.g., 197).The  authors  explain  their  stance  with  commendable  candor.  Yes,  they  are aware  that  the  “intersection  of  environment  and  technology  does  make  a difference, often a huge difference” (205). And so, they concede, environmental and technological explanations  (or  cultural  ones,  for  that  matter)  are  not  necessarily bad.   Yet   they   consider   them   problematic   for   a   very   specific   reason—such explanations “presume that we are already, effectively, stuck. This is why we ourselves place so much emphasis on the notion of self-determination” (205).This may well be the single most important statement in the entire book. The implications  are  clear.  If  we  pay too  much attention to  such  factors,  we  might  be led  to  conclude  that  our  own  sociopolitical  arrangements are  too  hard to  change because  they  are  too heavily  constrained  by  current technology  and  culture. For Graeber and Wengrow, it does not seem to matter whether that is true or not: what counts the most is that it is ideologically unappealing. And they admit that it is for that reason that they sideline these factors—out of an ideological commitment to the feasibility of change through collective action today. Lest  anyone  think  that  such  firm  priors  might  corrupt  their  readings  of  our early history, they tell us not to worry — for “precisely where one wishes to set the dial between freedom and determinism is largely a matter of taste.” This premise allows them to “set the dial a bit further to the left than usual” (206; hence the title of my essay).But is it true that the balance of freedom and determinism in shaping the course of history is “largely a matter of taste”? One would think that it is something else entirely,  namely  one  of  the  greatest  intellectual  challenges  of  all:  to  find  ways  to gauge, as best we can, where that balance lies. That it might never be possible to accomplish this to everyone’s satisfaction is a far cry from giving up in advance and declaring it (“largely”) a matter of personal preference. 

Establishing  a  proper  balance  is  hard  work.  More  specifically,  it  requires precisely the kind of scholarship Graeber and Wengrow shy away from: large-scale mapping and data processing and coding in support of statistical investigation of correlations,  probabilities  and  significance  that  help  us  understand  the  strength and limitations of particular patterns and trends and to weigh the impact of specific factors  (e.g.,  Turchin  et  al.  2018;  Currie  et  al.  2020).  Without  such  inputs,  the exercise of setting the dial is indeed reduced to a mere matter of taste. But it doesn’t have to be, and—among inquisitive academics at least—it shouldn’t be.15Other   problems   of   substance   and   style   likewise   catch   the   eye.   In   their thoughtful  review,  Lindisfarne  and  Neale  2021  indict  Graeber  and  Wengrow  for their neglect of class and class conflict, which strikes me as a legitimate charge. The most   interesting   question   is   not   so   much   whether   there   was   a   king   or   a bureaucracy  or  how  powerful  they  were,  but  rather  in  which  ways  andto  what extent elite  groups  wielded  power  and  enjoyed  structural privilege.  After  all, tax and tribute rendered to rulers and rent collected by those in control of the means of  subsistence  were  merely  two  sides  of  the  same  coin,  reflecting  the  struggle among the few over the resources generated by the many. I have already alluded to the book’s relative neglect of warfare as a force in societal development. I have likewise referred to examples of Graeber and Wengrow’s readiness to devise all-or-nothing scenarios in which deviations from simplifying templates are taken  to  invalidate  the  templates  as  such.  Their  mode  of  engagement  with  their peers is also a cause for concern. Ars longa vita brevis— whoever paints on a canvas as  wide  as  theirs  must  needs  be  selective.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  popularizing account of the dawn of “everything” cannot adhere to the exacting standards of a dissertation literature review. Then again, Graeber and Wengrow erron the side of  parsimony,  disavowing  the  conventional  approach  of  setting  out  different interpretations  and  explaining  their  own  preference  for  a  particular  version  by noting that this would have overburdened the reader (514–55). Not quite: it could easily have overburdened the text. But that’s what endnotes are for.It  can  be  hard  to  decide  what  grates  the  most: the tacit  sidelining  of  scholars who already espoused ideas Graeber and Wengrow present as shiny and new; the tacit sidelining of literature that prioritizes the impact of factors such as geography, ecology,  technology,  or  warfare;  the  parading  of  choice  quotations  by  non-specialist  writers  who  espouse  outmoded  positions  as  though  they  represented common failings of contemporary scholarship; or the unreferenced indictment of imaginary positions. Instead of taking issue with fellow historians, archaeologists and  anthropologists  over  substantive  points,  they  prefer  to  lambast  eclecticists such  as  the  physiologist  Jared  Diamond,  the  psychologist  Steven  Pinker,  or  the primatologist Robin  Dunbar. Mercifully,  outright  insults  along  the  lines  of their dismissal of several fellow scholars with the words that “at some point, you have to take the toys back from the children” (529 n.12) remain rare."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jj9j6z7)


==THE RIGHT WING IMPLICATIONS OF GRAEBER & WENGROW’S ARGUMENTS==

Daniel Bitton:

"Something that’s worth noting about the idea that human social structure is mostly a matter of choice, is that if you take it to it’s logical conclusion it just ends up taking us to some very ugly places.  Like if the traditional Haida of the pacific north west coast have chiefs and nobility and commoners and used to have slaves, and the Nuer in Sudan have male dominance, but the Mbendjele are totally egalitarian and gender egalitarian, and if it’s all just a matter of conscious choice, then that must mean that the Haida and the Nuer people are just choosing to bad people and the Hadza are just good people.  

Or maybe Lese women are pathetic because they choose extreme subservience instead of “choosing” equality the way awesome Hadza women do.  It’s like in our society, when people say that if you’re working the cash at McDonalds it must be because you’re stupid and lazy and it’s your choice, but if you’re CEO of ratheon, it’s because chose to be some kind of brilliant hard working genius, and you chose parents who could afford MBA school.  

It’s ultimately right wing thinking – thinking that justifies hierarchy.  Obviously that’s the opposite of what Graeber and Wengrow are trying to do, but again, their whole project is an incoherent, ill conceived mess, and one of the reasons it upsets me so much is that on top of making us stupid, it’s inadvertently giving right wingers a bunch of rhetorical gifts, just like occupy not making any demands was giving all the banks and governments of the world a giant gift.  

In contrast, if you shift the focus onto the conditions that shape our social structures and our choices, this implies a “there but for the grace of God go I” type of philosophy.  Individuals are different, and we all have agency, but in similar conditions, given similar constraints, people will tend to make similar decisions on average, and in the long run which is the scale of social structure formation.   We spend less time judging people and more time trying to figure out how we can change the conditions which generate shitty people."

(https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/)


==A Habit of Making Bold Speculative Claims Based on Poor or No Evidence==

Walter Scheidel:

(reviews Graeber & Wengrow's claim one by one)

"They readily  concede  that  the  evidence  for  early  conditions  is  generally  poor—the lowest layers of sites that sprang up in floodplains and wetlands are particularly hard  to  investigate  (287–88)—but they  nevertheless  deem  it  good  enough  to “upend the conventional narrative” (283–84). What,   in   their   telling,   sustained   these   early   agglomerations   of   people?
 
Environmental  factors  make  sporadic  appearances:  the  authors  note  that  more stable flood regimes made river basins more useful for habitation after about 5000 BCE (286–87) and that black earth soil formation in Ukraine supported the rise of the “mega-sites” of  the  fourth  millennium  BCE  (290).  Even  so,  Graeber  and Wengrow  are  quick  to  put  ecology  and  technology  in  their  place  with  the unsupported assertion that “In point of fact, the largest early cities, those with the greatest  populations,  did  not  appear  in  Eurasia — with  its  many  technical  and  logistical  advantages—but  in  Mesoamerica,  which  had  no  wheeled  vehicles  or sailing ships, no animal-power traction or transport, and much less in the way of metallurgy or literate bureaucracy” (285). But this is impossible to reconcile with the historical record: in terms of absolute chronology, mega-cities such as Babylon predated Teotihuacan by a wide margin, as did large urban sites in South and East Asia. Moreover, in terms of actual urban population size, Teotihuacan appears to have been a solitary outlier in the Americas until Tenochtitlan rose in the fifteenth century. That matters because the ecological and technological preconditions for urbanism differed so much between the Old and the New Worlds. Compared to their discussion of the origins of farming,  much more strenuous mental  gymnastics  are  required  to fashion  early  urban  settlements  into  initially peaceful, cooperative enterprises. Poor evidence is never allowed to deter us from this conclusion: the poorer the evidence, the bolder the claims. Thus, the authors advance  the  “speculative”  claim  that  certain   structures   on   the   late   fourth-millennium  BCE  acropolis  of  Uruk  may  have  been  assembly  halls,  which  were subsequently razed and replaced with gated courts and ziggurats that appear more consistent  with  the  exercise  of  priestly  and  then  royal  power  (306).Yet  this explicitly “speculative” take swiftly morphs into fact, turning into “at least seven centuries of collective self-rule” at Uruk (380).

For the Indus civilization of the third millennium BCE, Graeber and Wengrow fill  the  absence  of  evidence  for  kings  or  warrior  elites  with  the  model  of  a  caste system  that  maintained  order—a  model  inferred  from  later  customs  and  the presence of a citadel with monumental purification facilities in the city of Mohenjo-daro (317–18). Piling conjecture upon conjecture, they maintain that although the system they envision implies “a clear hierarchy between groups,” “this doesn’t necessarily  mean  that  the  groups  themselves  were  hierarchical  in  their  internal organization,” or, for that matter, that the higher caste called the shots in “matters of  day-to-day governance” (319). While this last point is indeed impossible to disprove, “necessarily” does  a  lot  of  heavy lifting  here;  yet  readers  suspected  of harboring  doubts  are  promptly  chided  for  their  lack  of  imagination  (319).  True, there  are  no  iron  laws  of  history,  “no  necessary  correspondence  between overarching  concepts  of  social  hierarchy  and  the  practical  mechanics  of  local governance” (321), but there are affinities, patterns and trends.In a case that is even less well understood, that of oblong Trypillian “mega-sites” in  what  is  now  western  Ukraine,  Graeber  and  Wengrow haul  in  contemporary Basque rural communities because these “also imagine their communities in circular form ... as a way of emphasizing the ideal equality of households” (295). An    instant    hedge — “obviously,  the  social  arrangements  of  these  existing communities are unlikely to be quite the same as those of ancient Ukraine” (295) — jars with the “also” that confidently conjoins Basque and Trypillian mentalities. We are left to marvel at reasoning as perfectly circular as Basque communal ideals. But there is more. 

The authors fail to mention that the Basque settlements look nothing  like  those  ancient  mega-sites:  unlike  Talianki  or  Nebelivka,  they  are  not physically round, and not even coherent sites, merely social communities loosely spread out over miles of scenic countryside. The leap from (spatially) circular sites 6,000 years ago to the (mental) “circular template” (295) of Basque villages is breathtaking. Yet although “we must admit that much remains unknown” (297), the former nonetheless offer “proof that highly egalitarian organization has been possible on an urban scale” (297). “Proof”—their word, not mine. In the end, all we end up with is a single solid case of a large city without clear signs  of  highly  centralized  authority,  Teotihuacan  in  the  Valley  of Mexico.  A metropolis of around 100,000 residents in the first half of the first millennium CE, it has not left written records but lacks iconographic evidence of royalty, even as men  hailing  from  there  occupied  positions  of  power  in  Mayan  Tikal  (331–36). Conventional  beginnings—ritual  mass  killings,  ambitious  temple  projects  that must have required vast labor inputs—were derailed around 300 CE (or perhaps rather earlier). Pyramid construction ceased, the fanciest temple was desecrated, and high-quality stone-built multi-household apartment compounds were erected to house the urban masses, arranged around 20-odd local temple complexes that may   have   provided   local   coordination.   This   situation   prevailed   for   several centuries  before  things  started  falling  apart,  culminating  in  the  abandonment  of much of the site (341–45). Nobody  knows  who  ran  the  city  during  the  second  phase:  some  layer  of overarching control, for instance by religious authorities, is an option, as is more dispersed  authority  centered  on  the  local  temple  complexes.  The  relationship between  these   precinct   installations   and   the  general   population   is   likewise unknown. While the city’s grid design implies strong governance, this does not allow  us  to  infer  whether  it  was  centralized  or  collective  in nature:  both  options are  empirically  attested  elsewhere.  What is known  is  that  in  terms  of  its  design, Teotihuacan was unique in the sense that it was without precedent and successor among Mesoamerican cities (Smith 2017). 

Palaces in particular were common and readily  identifiable  in  other  Mesoamerican  cities  from  at  least  the  early  first millennium CE onward, whereas Teotihuacan may well have lacked them entirely, just as it lacked the otherwise ubiquitous ball courts. Conversely, other cities did not  feature  comparable  multi-household  compounds.  Something  unusual  was clearly going on, and a non-royal form of governance seems more likely than not. It is unclear how far beyond this we can push the data. Graeber and Wengrow infer from all that a “surprisingly common pattern” of scaling-up “with no resulting concentration of wealth or power in the hands of ruling elites” (322). Leaving aside the meaning of “common,” it  is  difficult  to reconcile  this  with  the  evidence  they  themselves  present.  By  their  own  account, Teotihuacan appears to have started out in more authoritarian ways and even later may  well  have been maintained by elite  groups,  and  Mohenjo-daro  is  thought  to have been controlled by a higher caste. Their speculative scenario of a “social revolution” in the previously stratified city of Taosi in Shanxi, China, around 2000 BCE   is   likewise   predicated   on   several   centuries   of   initial   urban   formation characterized by “rigid segregation between commoner and elite quarters” and the presence of a palace (324–26).Nobody  can  tell  if  there  were  religious  elites  in  Uruk  well  before  there  were kings,  and  even  less  is  known  about  the  Ukrainian  mega-sites.  Moreover  (and  as Graeber  and  Wengrow  themselves  note:  323),  other  than Uruk,  where  monarchs become  visible  by  the  early  third  millennium  BCE,  all  of  these  sites  failed spectacularly, not to be replaced by anything comparable. Taken together, all this hardly  amounts  to  a  formidable  challenge  to  the  standard  paradigm  that  links urbanization to hierarchy and centralized control, nor does it in any way “upend the conventional narrative” (284). We are left wondering — how much revision do prevailing interpretations of the emergence of urbanism actually require?"

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jj9j6z7)


==CRITIQUES OF GRAEBER AND WENGROW==

Chris Knight 2021 – Did Communism Make Us Human? The Anthropology of David Graeber [https://brooklynrail.org/2021/06/field-notes/Did-communism-make-us-human]

Christ Knight 2021 – The Anthropology of David Graeber (video) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhOLjy3sNQA]

Camilla Power 2018 – Gender egalitarianism made us human: A response to David Graeber & David Wengrow’s ‘How to change the course of human history’ [https://libcom.org/history/gender-egalitarianism-made-us-human-response-david-graeber-david-wengrows-how-change-cou]

=Discussion=

==Critique of Evolutionary Theory and Evolutionary Critique==

What do evolutionary theorists think of Graeber/Wengrow's put downs ?


'''1. Daniel Hoyer:'''

"It needs to be stressed, however, that when Graeber and Wengrow critique the “familiar narratives” of cultural evolutionists, it is clear that they are referring to the concept of ideal-typical “stages” of social development—hunter-gatherer band to  small  sedentary  village, then  on  to  chiefdoms, proto-states,  archaic  states, ancient empires, and so on. These are arguments found more often in the works of anthropologists  and archaeologists from  the  mid-twentieth century  like  Elman Service  and  Marshall Sahlins (Service  and  Sahlins  1960;  Service  1962)than contemporary cultural evolutionists such asRobert Boyd, Peter Richerson, Richard Blanton, Lane Fargher, Gary Feinman, Joyce Marcus, and many of the authors who written  for  this journal. To  this latter group,  sociocultural  evolution  is  neither linear  nor  singular  (nor  always “beneficial”),  but  displays  great  diversity  in trajectory and pressures leading to many different sorts of outcomes for different communities;  precisely  what DoE  chastises  the  field  for  failing  to recognize. Nevertheless, Graeber  and  Wengrow do  propose  to  offer  a  different  way  of understanding  long-term  cultural  and  sociopolitical  change which,  at  the  very least, deserves consideration and response."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/24f0h2t3)

Source: Hoyer,  Daniel. 2022. Introduction  to  Special  Issue:  Leading Scholars  of  the  Past Comment on Dawn of Everything. Cliodynamics SI: Leading Scholars of the Past Comment on Dawn of Everything.


'''2. Nancy Lindisfarne and Jonathan Neale:'''

"Anthropologists and archaeologists since have now constructed an entirely serviceable account of the origins of human inequality. Key figures here are Kent Flannery, Joyce Marcus and James C. Scott whose work we discuss below.

Unfortunately, Graeber and Wengrow fail to engage with the enormous body of new scholarship on human evolution. In ignoring these new studies, Graeber and Wengrow have set themselves against a careful, and now extremely well-documented, arguments about comparative primate evolution and the human adaptation. Their problem is that this material would upend their assertion that there was no ‘original’ human society, and make their arguments about choice seem rather silly.

Graeber and Wengrow do not deny that humans once lived by hunting and gathering. But they are deeply uninterested in the environment and the material bases of human existence. And they do deny that these societies were necessarily equal.

The first step in their argument is to say that human evolution is all in the past, and we cannot know what happened then. Everything is speculation. But this is simply not true.

Over the past forty years, the scientific revolution has been remarkable, and there has been an enormous flowering of research in the field of human evolution. There are now many amazing new studies of non-human primates and primate behavior, new archaeology of early humans and new ethnographies of near contemporary hunter-gatherers.

Thanks to chemical microanalyses, DNA sampling, radiocarbon dating and patient archaeology in humble homes, we have learned a great deal about the people who lived in pre-class and then early class societies. Among our heroes are the extensive publications of the readable Christopher Boehm, Frans de Waal, R. Brian Ferguson, Sarah Hrdy, Martin Jones and Laura Rival.

This work is transforming the study of human evolution and human history. And the starting point may come as a surprise. It now seems that we became human by becoming equal. This is a remarkable and precious insight. But it is an insight that strikes at the very foundation of Graeber and Wengrow’s account.

Dozens of long-term field research projects with different apes and monkeys now show, for each species, how a particular complex adaptation allows them to survive in a particular environment. That adaptation includes the details of how their staple diets, their alternative diets in bad times, their brains, hands, feet, stomachs, teeth, genitals, grunts, songs, dominance relationships, sharing relationships, child rearing, aggression, loving, grooming and group structure fit together.3 That is the baseline, and it is our method for understanding human evolution as well.

Over time, several parts of a new adaptation came together to produce modern humans. The short story is that early humans were puny primates. To survive, they had to learn to share meat and vegetables, to share childcare and to share sexual joy. To do this, they had to discipline would-be bullies and transcend the dominance hierarchies of their primate ancestors. And for at least 200,000 years, they lived in egalitarian societies where men and women were equal too.

...

In sum, the work of scholars in many fields makes it possible to put forward a coherent picture of a human adaption to a particular ecological niche evolved over two million years and led to the emergence of humans some 200,000 years ago. Yet apart from brief disagreements with Sarah Hrdy and Christopher Boehm, Graeber and Wengrow deal with this impressive range of new material by ignoring it.

Indeed, had they taken it on board, they would then they would then have to accept both the egalitarian character of this adaptation and the extent to which it is intimately tied to the material conditions of specific environments, and these would throw their arguments about humans choosing freedom out the window.

To hang on to their commitment to free choice, and keep their political project intact, their argument ducks and dives.

The writing is dense, yet full of flourish and apparent authority. The book roars on at a great pace. The apt illustration is wearying and it is hard to unpick the non-sequiturs and slights of mind. The reader should be warned that their use of evidence is often not reliable. It is also something of an ethnographic midden–so good luck to the uninitiated who have never met the Hadza, the Montagnais-Naskapi, the Shilluk or the Nuer for there is madness in the detail."

(https://mronline.org/2021/12/20/the-dawn-of-everything-gets-human-history-wrong/)

==Anthropological freedoms==

Pat Kane (citing the authors):

"The authors ask us to consider three basic “freedoms” in human history - the freedom to move, to disobey and to change our social arrangements. They put them in context here:

The freedom to abandon one’s community, knowing one will be welcomed in faraway lands; the freedom to shift back and forth between social structures, depending on the time of year; the freedom to disobey authorities without consequence – all appear to have been simply assumed among our distant ancestors, even if most people find them barely conceivable today.

Humans may not have begun their history in a state of primordial innocence, but they do appear to have begun it with a self-conscious aversion to being told what to do. (pp. 132-133).

If these freedoms are actually what Marx once called our “species-being”, then we may begin to conceive this “barely conceivable” politics."

(https://patkane.substack.com/p/the-dawn-of-everything-and-a-new)


==The Authors Systematically Ignore the Material Conditions that Influence Choice==

Daniel Bitton:

"Something that never seems to have entered the minds of the authors is that a hierarchical social structure is rarely some kind of democratic choice.  Rather, it’s a matter of relative bargaining power.  

People have conflicting interests and desires – but certain conditions give certain people advantages such that some people get more of what they want than others do.  If your livelihood depends on a specific territory – like it does for farmers or for fishing based hunter gatherers – then if you and your allies can control the productive territory, then you have power over those people who need the products of that territory to survive – boom hierarchy.  That’s how capitalism works.  Or how any hierarchical system works.  In other words, social structure is usually a reflection of the balance of powers in a given society.  

Sometimes, social structure can be more of a democratic choice involving trial and error.  But people don’t do those kinds of experiments for kicks or as an BDSM bondage kink game or because they have superhuman agency.  We do it to solve problems.  And people with similar problems in similar conditions end up coming on similar solutions over time – because reality!  

Like people who are stuck together on plots of land for extended periods of time will often choose some kind of person to endow with a little bit of authority so that they can arbitrate disputes, which are much more frequent and hard to resolve when you’re sedentary than if you can just go off to another band when you get annoyed or want a divorce like nomadic hunter gatherers do.  And theories around how we got stuck with more serious hierarchies over time all revolve around certain changes of conditions which gave people in those positions of weak authority, leverage to turn it into stronger authority.  Conditions!

Another example of people making conscious choices in reaction to conditions is when people come under frequent attack, they’ll usually organize themselves around closely related men who grow up together and stay together forming a tight team, while their sisters will marry outside the group, and unrelated women will marry in to the group from the outside.  

And this choice, called [[Patrilocal Residence]], which we see all the over world among people faced with frequent attacks – for example every single nomadic pastoralist society known to exist or to have ever existed organizes this way because it’s easy to steal animals from herds – when people organize this way for self defense, it means that all the women end up coming from separate families and are socially isolated from eachother while all the men are close allies and form a close coalition.  

And so, the unintended consequence of this is that it gives men political advantages that women don’t have, which leads to varying degrees of patriarchy.   And this is why every single nomadic pastoralist society ever known to exist from northern scandinavia to the deserts of arabia to the mongolian steppe, have all been male dominated.  

This is one of the best known and easiest to explain paths to male domination – but it’s totally absent from The Dawn of Everything, because they don’t want us to think about conditions, it’s all just freedom and choices!"

(https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/)


==[[Materialism and Agency Are Not Opposed To Each Other]]==

Daniel Bitton:

"if we want to answer Graeber and Wengrow’s question of how we got stuck in hierarchy – meaning if you want to understand where a particular dominance hierarchy comes from and how to get rid of it, or how to reduce it’s severity, then first you need to ask “what are the conditions that are giving some people the ability to impose their choices on other people”.  And then once you’ve identified those, the next thing you need to ask is “what can we do to change those conditions in a way that reduces or eliminates those advantages”.

Unfortunately, as Graeber and Wengrow will later tell us in Chapter 5, they explicitly don’t want to think about conditions or circumstances.  Instead, they want to focus on conscious choice and “freedom”.  And the reason for this, is because they mistakenly think that if conditions are what result in hierarchy or equality, then this means that we are truly stuck forever stuck in hierarchy today because of the conditions inherent to advanced industrial civilization.  And they quote Jared Diamond and others to that effect in chapter 1.  

But what the authors forget as they go down this dead-end path of seeing hierarchy as a random choice disconnected from conditions, is that one of the powers of human beings is that we have the power to choose to shape and change the conditions that we live in – at least sometimes – it all depends on the conditions!   

Unfortunately, as a result of trying to avoid materialist answers, and of trying to focus on discombobulated conscious choices outside the context of the conditions in which those choices are made, not only are the authors unable to answer their own questions, but they routinely bury or ignore all of the parts of the sources that they discuss which actually do answer those questions, which we saw last time and which we’ll see more of today. 

Materialism and agency are not opposed to each other – materialism is simply the context in which freedom and choice are exercised.  And without it we throw away our best tools for understanding why people make choices, or for predicting what choices they will make, which makes it impossible to design institutions and rules that will have the effect we want them to have."

(https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/2022/04/21/10-4xcript/)


==The potential origin of Graeber's rejection of original egalitarianism==

Chris Knight:

"Graeber’s mature outlook on politics and anthropology is such a seemingly paradoxical combination that it can seem difficult to understand where it all came from. The clue lies in the title of his major fieldwork publication, Lost People (2007).24 It was his experience in a rural community in central Madagascar that decisively cemented his perspectives on social inequality, history, religion, state coercion, the power of narrative, and, critically, grassroots opportunities for resistance.

In this rural community, people were identified as either Black, known as “Mainty,” or noble, known as “Andriana.” The Mainty were lost people in being descendants of African slaves, uprooted from their former homes, cut off from their families as they were dispersed and sold to new owners. The Andriana came originally from South Borneo. Attached tenaciously to their ancestor-worshipping traditions, they too were “lost,” but in a different sense. Reticent about their slave-holding past and still reluctant to perform physical work for cash, they became increasingly impoverished when descendants of their former slaves began to skilfully manage the rising economy of money-lending, cash transactions, and trade.

Graeber’s ethnography describes a world turning upside down as the descendants of slaves progressively employ, exploit, and partially expropriate their former masters, against the background of a colonial-era state apparatus now so moribund as to be virtually irrelevant. With insight and humour, Graeber describes a dilapidated state of post-colonial near-anarchy, giving each “lost person” freedom to construct their own narrative in their own chosen way, with effective story-telling the surest route to confidence-building, public support, and some chance of financial success. Among the more economically successful people might be an astrologer, for example, whose success would rest on a special talent for plausible fictions.

Graeber, then, found himself in a world where economic facts seemed to be determined by imaginative fictions. That was a far cry from Marx’s idea that myths and ideologies are constrained ultimately by economic processes. In Madagascar, the primacy of story-telling seemed to make a mockery of any idea of conducting rigorous science. Worse, any attempt to conduct science seemed an external imposition, reinforcing the form-filling addiction of the colonial administrator, interested only in regularities. To follow the scientific method, Graeber felt, is to close your mind to the surprises and exceptions which make up real life, subordinating people’s creative agency to alien priorities of your own. In sympathy with his eminent supervisor, the late Marshall Sahlins, Graeber resolved not to bend his own creative imagination to such deadening and artificial imperatives.

For Graeber, setting aside science was a matter of according respect and equality to the people he was living among. He saw no reason why the visiting anthropologist should set himself up as a mind operating on a higher level. So decisive was that fieldwork in shaping his world view that he went on to apply its lessons elsewhere. Human beings, he came to insist, are by their very nature free agents, not robots or slaves to scientific laws. His reluctance to seek out regularities or norms among the Malagasy became matched, in subsequent publications, by a reluctance to claim regularities in any field.

This stance led Graeber to dismiss historical materialism, in particular the idea of history as a sequence of stages. In his view, allegedly “simple” hunter-gatherers are no more likely to share their land or resources than so-called “complex” storage hunter-gatherers, farmers, or city-dwellers. For Graeber, extant hunter-gatherers are just people who happen to have been thrown together by fate, often marginalised in impoverished, hostile environments, living as best they can and inventing myths as required. We have absolutely no reason to assume that current customs of the Bushman people of the Kalahari, for example, are genuinely ancient or can teach us anything about our distant past. Graeber does not quite say that today’s hunter-gatherers are “lost people,” but the implication is there. When it comes to human origins, in his view, nothing is to be gained by focusing on hunter-gatherers. Graeber’s Madagascan experience taught him to dismiss any notion of cultural regularities or laws. Irrespective of the prevailing mode of subsistence, people will always be free to choose between alternative political forms.

Much of Graeber’s later work, co-authored with the archaeologist David Wengrow, was an approach to human origins and prehistory moulded by these views. In place of evolutionist assumptions about complexity emerging incrementally from simple beginnings, the authors argued that the very earliest fully cultural societies, such as those of Upper Palaeolithic Europe, were already highly complex. In a controversial article, the authors offered a triumphantly non-Darwinian, explicitly anti-evolutionist account of human origins."

(https://brooklynrail.org/2021/06/field-notes/Did-communism-make-us-human)


==On not understanding the [[Difference Between Democratic and Dominance Hierarchies]]==

Daniel Bitton:

"A conventional or democratic hierarchy is where a group of people voluntarily organize into a  hierarchy in order to achieve some goal.  And while, like in every decision-making hierarchy, the people on top of the hierarchy have more decision-making power, the people at the bottom are still the ultimate deciders, in that the leadership position exists only because it serves their interests – and they can remove the person filling that position it if they’re not happy with their leadership service, and even remove the position entirely if they want to.   And the terms of getting to be on top of a conventional hierarchy – like the degree of authority and responsibilities you might have,  and the rewards you get – if any – are all ultimately determined by the people on the bottom. 

A dominance hierarchy on the other hand, is something that people on the top impose on the people on the people below them because of differential bargaining power between the two sides.  And if the people on the bottom tolerate the power imbalance, it’s because they don’t have any better options – like how you go to your job that you hate and you obey your dingus boss, because not going to that job will be worse in various ways than going to it.  

For an example of a conventional hierarchy – even in the most hyper egalitarian hunter gatherer societies, who have no chiefs or authority figures – when there’s a hunting party, the hunters will often pick someone among them who has a lot of experience and good skills and instincts to be the party leader, and they’ll look to him for guidance and leadership on the hunt. 

Not only do these hunting leaders not have any official authority, but the second that people don’t like what he’s doing they’ll either stop listening, or else never appoint him again, depending on the circumstances.  

In that video I mentioned last time with the bro dude going hunting with the Hadza, the translators refer to one man called Sokolo as the “chief” but that’s a mis-translation from the translator who’s from a different more hierarchical ethnic group – Sokolo was just the hunting party leader – and any Hadza trying to pass himself off as a chief would get into enormous trouble with the rest of the community.  

Now sometimes the lines might get blurry between a conventional and dominance hierarchy, and there’s a bit of a spectrum, which we can talk about more another time – but a good analogy to know which kind of hierarchy you’re dealing with is like the difference between Sadomasochism and sexual assault.  On the surface they might look like the same thing – but the second someone says stop, and the other person doesn’t stop, then it becomes sexual assault.    

So, by definition, when the authors ask “how did we get stuck” in hierarchy – what they’re talking about is dominance hierarchy not a democratic hierarchy, because you’re not stuck in a democratic hierarchy, you have entered into it on an equal footing with all the other members of that hierarchy, and you have an equal say with everyone else on determining how it will be shaped, and who gets to be in what position, and whether or not the hierarchy continues to exist at all.

Now one thing to note about dominance hierarchy is that since by its very nature, no one chooses to have it imposed on them – dominance hierarchy can only exist if there are certain conditions or circumstances that give some people a set of advantages which allow them to impose their dominance onto other people.  

These sorts of conditions are things like – I have guns and you don’t, i’m an adult and you’re my child and you depend on me for food and shelter – or our economy depends on fishing, and my family got to this fishing spot first, and we’re numerous and strong enough to control it by force and you have no where else to get your fish, etc. 

And so, by not distinguishing between conventional vs dominance hierarchies, and by not understanding that dominance hierarchy can only exist because of conditions and circumstances – the Dawn of Everything creates a lot of confusion when it comes to understanding why we got stuck in hierarchy and how we can get unstuck."

(https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/2022/02/22/10-3xcript/)


==On not understanding the difference between Equality and Hierarchy==

Polly Wiessner:

"Graeber and Wengrow '''struggle with the concept of egalitarianism, which they see as “sameness” in some specific ways that are agreed upon to be important''' (p. 126).However, egalitarian   relations   are not  about   sameness in   small-scale societies,  but rather about  respect  and  appreciation  of  different  skills  offered  by group   members   to   build   complementarity   and   dependency. As   a   group   of Ju/’hoansi put it during a firelit conversation about what constitutes the core of their culture: “It is not the trance dance, hunting techniques, apparel or songs that are  the  essential  elements  of  our  culture  but  rather  relations  of  respect and appreciation  for  what  others  have to  offer.  We  walk/talk  softly,  unlike the  Bantu who  are  big penises” (an expression for relations of dominance). This fits with what  is  probably  the  best  anthropological  definition  of  egalitarian  societies,  that proposed by Fried (1967): '''in egalitarian societies there are as many positions as there are qualified individuals to fill them. The respect for the abilities of different individuals creates tolerance  for  the  variation  on  which  cultural  developments draw'''. It is this respect that lies at the heart of the testimony by the Huron-Wendat chief Kandiaronk about the dynamics of his own society, mentioned frequently by Graeber and Wengrow. Egalitarian  and  hierarchical  elements  co-exist  in  all  human  societies.  Though both  appear  to  have  roots  in  our  simian  heritage,  why  were  both  maintained through  social  selection  and  cultural  means?  Institutionalized  hierarchy  reduces internal competition and the often-destructive race to the top, allows for efficient organization   of   collective   action,   and coordinates responses   to   intergroup competition  which  benefit  many  group  members.  Egalitarian  institutions  reduce the transaction costs of social and economic exchange in a number of respects. As equals,  it  is  not  necessary  to  work  out relative  social  standing  with  every interaction. Women and men can help each other knowing that as equals they can give, ask, take and receive help when in need. With egalitarian institutions people do not fear that assistance given will be used to dominate, fostering the conditions and trust for delayed exchange. Finally, equality facilitates the mobility necessary for  intergroup  interaction, as  hierarchies  do  not  mesh  easily."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nn4h4m2)

=More information=

* [[Foragers vs Hunter-Gatherers]]

[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]