
Not sure who the author of this article is.

Posted at http://www.rekombinant.org



=Text: The Death of the Author 2.0=


The (second) removal of the author is merely a historical fact.

The figure of romantic genius was born in XVIII century, since this time,
many speculations have been doing around the myth of author and its aura.
Then it has been the culmination of capitalist ideology, which has attached
the greatest importance to the "person" of the author. The image of ideas
to be found in ordinary culture is tyrannically centered on the author, his
person, his life, his tastes, his passions.
In the first decade of XXI century, the myth of the author die.

The user-producer is a concept that speak to the digital experience and the
freedoms that this digital culture allow for ordinary people to become
artist and producer. This model fundamentally challenges the traditional
assumptions of author, it moves away from the idea of the romantic notion
of authorship, which saw authorship and cultural production as an isolated
activity of a genius sitting and creating something out of nothing.
In the act of copy, many usually in the digital world, as we lose the
concept of the original, we forget the author ever more. So the only
effective things that we remember and we feel, are narrative codes and
moral signs.

Some factors as the democratic diffusion of tools for create and for spread
content, the explosion of economy of imagination, the sharing of
intellectual products, the figure of prosumer and the social network of web
2.0, these have desacralized the figure of author, these have stripped its
aura, it has been plunged in the Pangea of Knowledge, which is the only one
creator of human culture, transversely in time and in place.

Authorship becomes indistinguishable from the multiplicity of authors, this
profusion transforms the culture and their creators in a unique body. It's
the collective intelligence, it's the return of the rules of oral and folk
culture. Collaborative creativity, influences, remix, sampling, reshaping
and mesh of diffuse publications of intellectual products, from ideas and
concepts, to arts and researches; these are the causes that have diminished
the character of originally, individually and autonomy composition.
Culture consists of multiple writing, indeed, everything is to be
distinguished. This multiplicity is collected, united and this place is not
the author, as we have hitherto said it was.

So the author back to its old work of compiler, and its name isn't
important anymore. It's the inevitable way: ever more become difficult to
be sure of attribution, so it might not refer to a real individual. Again
as in the past, anonymous narrative contributions are the roots of our
culture and our perception of reality. Contemporary examples of this social
spaces are YouTube, MySpace, Digg, Delicious and Blog Sphere in general. In
the end, the fifteen minutes of fame for each of us, go down to zero
seconds, but each little piece of art becomes infinitely more useful for
human being. It's the forest that take shape of tree, not vice versa.

The quote represents the culture itself as the principle of human becoming,
the improving of human thinking, from quoting to quoting, from the
evolution of ideas to others and their negation. The culture is a tissue of
citations, resulting from thousand sources of culture and signs. The
history of human thinking is a tissue of quotations drawn from the
innumerable centers of culture.


'''AS FOLK :: AS ORAL CULTURE :: AS networked culture.'''

Authorship, originality is of no or little relevance in virtually all
traditional forms of popular culture all over the world. Most folk songs
and folk tales, are collective anonymous creations in public domain.
Variation, modifications and translations are traditional encouraged as
part of their tradition. Much author founded much of its wealth on folk
tales, by taking them out of public domain and turning them into
proprietary and exploiting that.

The same is true for many works considered part of the high cultural canon,
crafted by unidentified, often collective authors: Homer's epics for
example, or the tales of 1001 nights, which were spread by storytellers and
of which no authoritative, 'original' written version ever existed. In the
middle age, and renaissance, original authorship was even rather more
disregarded than encouraged. Literally works typically render themselves
canonical by inventing new stories, but rewriting existing one, so many
adaptions of the same. Originality of the work to recognize the value that
various user contribute through their modifications and adaptions to an
existing work, thus placing higher premium on collaborative production than
on isolated production. In fact the history of cultural production has, to
a large extent been the history of collaborative production, and this is
true in all kinds of human achievements. Many work considered part of the
high-cultural canon, crafted by unidentified, often collective authors.
Shakespeare was brilliant play writing we should also remember the fact
that he drew rather liberally from various source, form history, mythology
and the work of his peers, as inspiration and as source of modify.

Language which speaks, not the author, linguistically, the author is never
anything more than the man who writes, just as is no more than the man who
says language knows a "subject", not a "person", end this subject, void
outside of the very utterance which defines it.

Work of art tries to set itself free from its artist, challenging
preconceived ideas or opinions, sometimes being able to exceed the
importance of its creator.


==SOME BIBLIOGRAPHY==

#Beam me up, Scotty, David McKie, The Guardian, 2005, at http://www.guardian.co.uk/comment/story/0,3604,1560194,00.html
#OS Tactics for Collective Art Practice, Saul Albert, 1999
#Death of the Author, Roland Barthes, 1967
#Plagiarism, Madrid, La Casa Encendida, ArteLecu, 2005
#Guide to open content licenses, Lawrence Liang, Piet Zwart Istitute, 2005
#Du bon usage de la piraterie, Florent Latrive, Exils, 2004
#TheWork of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, Walter Benjamin, 1935
#The Mag.net reader, M. Eraso, A. Ludovico, S. Krekovic, 2006
#Falso è Vero, Various, AAA, 1998
#International Artistic Without-Sign Movement, Manifesto, 2005

=Commentary by Michel Bauwens=

My own personal comment is that I do not believe that contemporary collective authorship diminishes the importance or identity of an individual author. Unlike pre-modern anonymity, the contemporary process transcends and includes both the individual and the collective, and I don't think there is much evidence that people produce anonymously, even in collective environments.

Because our identity is constructed through our collective engagements, and because these are multiple, we need portable reputations and identities that are dependent on our authorshop being acknowledged.




[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Culture]]