

=Description=

Mentioned by Kevin Carson:

'''Decentralized Economic and Social Organization (DESO).''' This is a project in development by
Reed Kinney. It's a continuation of the work of his late father, Mark Kinney, among other things a
writer on alternative currency systems and an associate of Thomas Greco. Kinney's book on DESO is
forthcoming. 

Here's his brief summary of the project, provided at my request:


'''Reed Kinney:'''

"This is a minuscule explanation of Decentralized Economic Social Organization, DESO.

The text has required five years to research and write. As of July 2009, I’m now editing it. The text
categorically unfolds every DESO structure, component, department, and its accompanying philosophies. It
is a substantial work and will require a conventional publisher by October 2009. As a favor to Kevin Carson,
I can offer this very brief overview.

The content of this text is an object of dialogue. The assertion made here is that the base of human
intercourse is structurally embedded. And that each type of socioeconomic structure generates a
corresponding form of social intercourse. The stated objective here is the development of the socioeconomic
pattern that best meets the real needs of its members and that generates the maximum and the fullest mental
health among them. This content is derived from many contributors, like Paulo Freire, whom each create
equally important components that are here molded into coherent functioning form. True dialogue is the soil,
water and sunlight needed to germinate DESO.

DESO is the creation of viable, independent communities within which the humanity of each person
is supported through humanistic education and participatory decision making processes. The autonomous
DESO economy is designed to both support and further cultivate those objectives.

DESO’s economic organization, its educational organization, and its civic organization are designed
to interpenetrate and to be interdependent. From their incipience each DESO community develops those
three fundamental DESO spheres concurrently. DESO culture is the consequence of inter-community
networks. However, it is structured to maintain and perpetuate decentralization.

DESO creates stable, regional economies that resemble the self-sustaining ecosystems of nature <ref>See [[Biomimicry]]</ref>.
DESO independence is proportional to its population. Structurally, DESO is designed to expand
exponentially through mass centrist society, MCS, which it depopulates with astonishing rapidity.
Ultimately, DESO curbs the destructive momentum of MCS."
(http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/11/C4SS-Resilient-Communities-and-Local-Economies.pdf)


==References==
<references/>

[[Category:Governance]]