
=Discussion=

Jeff Vail uses the hilltop towns of northern Italy as a model for the [[Resilient Communities]] that will emerge from the coming crisis.

From Jeff Vail, cited by Kevin Carson [http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/industrialpolicycarson0109.pdf].

"How is the Tuscan village decentralized? Production is localized. Admittedly, everything
isn’t local. Not by a long shot. But compared to American suburbia, a great percentage of
food and building materials are produced and consumed in a highly local network. A high
percentage of people garden and shop at local farmer’s markets.

How is the Tuscan village open source? Tuscan culture historically taps into a shared
community pool of technics in recognition that a sustainable society is a non-zero-sum game.
Most farming communities are this way—advice, knowledge, and innovation is shared, not
guarded. Beyond a certain threshold of size and centralization, the motivation to protect and
exploit intellectual property seems to take over (another argument for decentralization).
There is no reason why we cannot share innovation in technics globally, while acting locally
—in fact, the internet now truly makes this possible, leveraging our opportunity to use
technics to improve quality of life.

How is the Tuscan village vernacular? You don’t see many “Colonial-Style” houses in
Tuscany. Yet strangely, in Denver I’m surrounded by them. Why? They make no more sense
in Denver than in Tuscany. The difference is that the Tuscans recognize (mostly) that locally appropriate,
locally-sourced architecture improves quality of life. The architecture is suited to
their climate and culture, and the materials are available locally. Same thing with their food—
they celebrate what is available locally, and what is in season. Nearly every
Tuscan with the space has a vegetable garden. And finally (though the pressures of
globalization are challenging this), their culture is vernacular. They celebrate local festivals,
local harvests, and don’t rely on manufactured, mass-marketed, and global trends for their
culture nearly as much as disassociated suburbanites—their strong sense of community gives
prominence to whatever “their” celebration is over what the global economy tells them it
should be."
(http://www.jeffvail.net/2007/04/design-imperative.html)


[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Villages]]