
'''= "we are shaping a planetary network for peer-to-peer exchange integrated through the socio-ecological tech stack designed for cooperation and coordination".'''

=Discussion=

Franz Josef Allmayer:

"Each territory that we engage in gives rise to bioregional learning hubs that are cooperatively owned and where its corresponding treasury is managed by local communities. This begins with the development of land suitable for regeneration that can be employed as a training ground for regional economic development. Each local circle becomes the convener for mapping of its territory, coordination of development efforts, related research and educational activities.

'''Each DAB vehicle enables communities to weave together multi-stakeholder networks''', bringing together the key people involved in various aspects of land management and economic development in that region — including staff of national ministries, agribusinesses, smallholder farmers, regional investors, conservationists, and researchers. To achieve the desired future and a preferred direction for economic development that balances conservation, regeneration, economic and social goals, cooperative members of a DAB can create and energize roles, launch quests, and easily scale contribution frameworks that effectively align purpose with finance.

We have been approached by more than 50 bioregions on six continents since the launch of the SEEDS Global Passport. Our strategy is to weave together the plethora of initiatives, movements, new forms of enterprise, and lifestyle experiments encompassing all aspects of life which are invisibly connected in a shared attempt to bring about a more sustainable future. By joining existing permaculture camps, retreat centers, ecovillages, cities, nation states, universities, values-based banks and other for-purpose organizations, we shape an integrated impulse for genuine transformation, giving form to a planetary-scale network of regenerative hubs — all of which align around a shared vision for change.

Investment large and small can be brought into bioregions and distributed using decentralized governance to contribute towards regenerative transformation and subsidizing adoption."

(https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/seeding-decentralized-autonomous-bioregions-dabs-9f006fbf378e)


[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Bioregional]]