=Status=

ChatGPT'synthesis, based on the material available on our wiki in 2025 (but dated from a few years before):

Open accreditation and peer-based credentialing have emerged as innovative approaches to recognizing and validating learning and skills outside traditional educational institutions. These concepts leverage community validation, digital platforms, and decentralized systems to offer more flexible and inclusive forms of accreditation.​

[[Open Accreditation]] and [[Open Peer Accreditation]]: Traditional accreditation often relies on centralized authorities to validate educational achievements. In contrast, open accreditation emphasizes decentralized and transparent processes, allowing individuals and communities to recognize and endorse each other's skills and knowledge. This approach aligns with the principles of open education, promoting accessibility and collaboration.​

[[Peer-to-Peer Recognition of Learning]]: Peer-to-peer (P2P) recognition involves learners assessing and acknowledging each other's competencies. This method fosters a collaborative learning environment where validation comes from community members rather than formal institutions. It challenges traditional hierarchies in education by valuing the insights and judgments of peers.​

The [[Mozilla Open Badge Infrastructure]] (Mozilla Open Badges and Recognition Badges): Mozilla's Open Badge Infrastructure (OBI) represents a significant advancement in open accreditation. It provides a framework for issuing, managing, and displaying digital badges that signify various achievements and skills. These badges can be earned from multiple sources and aggregated in a "badge backpack," offering a comprehensive digital portfolio. Recognition badges serve as digital representations of accomplishments, enabling individuals to showcase their competencies across different platforms.

[[Crowdsourced Credentialling]]: Crowdsourced credentialing involves the collective endorsement of an individual's skills by a community. This model leverages the wisdom of the crowd to provide more nuanced and context-specific validations of abilities. It offers an alternative to traditional credentials by emphasizing real-world skills and peer acknowledgment.

[[Certificates of Completion]]: Many online learning platforms issue certificates of completion to signify that a learner has finished a course or program. While these certificates may not always carry the same weight as traditional degrees, they provide tangible evidence of learning and can be valuable in demonstrating commitment and acquired skills to potential employers.


===Educational Paradigms===

The evolution of education can be conceptualized into [[Three Generations of Education]]:

Education 1.0: A traditional, one-way dissemination of knowledge from teacher to student.​

Education 2.0: Incorporation of Web 2.0 technologies to enhance traditional education methods without fundamentally altering the teacher-student dynamic.​

Education 3.0: A transformative model where learners actively create and share knowledge artifacts, blurring the lines between teachers and students, and fostering cross-institutional and cross-cultural educational opportunities.

[[Anya Kamenetz on the DIY Future of Learning]]: Anya Kamenetz discusses the shift towards a more open and self-directed learning paradigm. She highlights how technology and openness are transforming content delivery, social learning, and accreditation, enabling learners to take control of their educational journeys.

Current Status of Open Accreditation Initiatives: Since the initial discussions and implementations of open accreditation concepts, there have been significant developments:​

Expansion of Digital Badges: The adoption of digital badges has grown, with various organizations and educational institutions issuing them to recognize a wide array of skills and achievements.​

Integration into Professional Platforms: Professional networking sites have incorporated features allowing users to display earned badges and certifications, bridging the gap between informal learning and formal employment opportunities.​

Standardization Efforts: There have been movements toward standardizing digital credentials to ensure their validity and recognition across different sectors and regions.​

Blockchain for Credentialing: Emerging technologies like blockchain are being explored to provide secure, verifiable, and tamper-proof digital credentials, enhancing trust in open accreditation systems.​

These advancements indicate a growing acceptance and integration of open accreditation methods in the broader educational and professional landscapes."


==Status 2025==

By ChatGPT, based on new sources:

"The movement toward open and peer accreditation has seen significant advancements in recent years, particularly with the evolution of digital credentialing systems like Open Badges. These developments have enhanced the security, portability, and recognition of skills and achievements across various platforms.​

#National Association of Peer Supporters
#We Are Open Co-op

===Open Badges 3.0 and Comprehensive Learner Records 2.0===

In May 2024, 1EdTech released Open Badges 3.0, marking a substantial leap in digital credentialing. This version introduces enhanced security features and improved interoperability, empowering learners, educators, and employers to recognize lifelong learning more effectively. The updated standard aligns with Comprehensive Learner Records (CLR) 2.0, facilitating a more detailed and verifiable representation of an individual's skills and accomplishments. ​

The Open Badges 3.0 Implementation Guide, published in December 2024, provides detailed instructions for product developers on integrating these standards. It emphasizes the importance of assertions—claims specific to one learner that detail achievements and include metadata about the achievement, issuer, and learner. ​

===Open Recognition and Decentralized Credentialing===

The concept of Open Recognition has gained traction, focusing on empowering individuals and communities to acknowledge and make visible their achievements and competencies. This approach extends beyond traditional institutional recognition, fostering a more inclusive and participatory acknowledgment of skills. ​

In January 2025, discussions around developing an Open Recognition Wallet emerged, aiming to provide individuals with a decentralized platform to store and manage their credentials securely. This initiative seeks to enhance user control and privacy in the digital credentialing space. ​

===Conferences and Collaborative Efforts===

The 22nd international ePIC conference, held in Paris from November 6 to 8, 2024, brought together global participants to discuss the future of digital badges and open recognition. The conference focused on strategies to scale and expand digital badge initiatives, reflecting the growing interest and investment in this field. ​

#[[Open Badge Factory]]

===Integration Challenges and Institutional Adoption===

Despite technological advancements, integrating open badges into existing educational frameworks presents challenges. Institutions are exploring ways to align digital badges with traditional qualifications and professional accreditation, ensuring that these credentials are valued and recognized in formal settings. ​

In summary, the open and peer accreditation movement is progressing through technological innovations, conceptual developments in open recognition, and collaborative efforts to standardize and implement digital credentials. These advancements aim to create a more inclusive, secure, and widely accepted system for recognizing and validating learning and achievements."


=Examples=

* * "[[Learner Credential Wallet]] is an open source mobile wallet developed by the Digital Credentials Consortium, a network of leading international universities designing an open infrastructure for academic credentials." [https://lcw.app/]

[[Category:Education]]