
(please note I am unsure about the source, it may have been from a third party source which referred to this one)

=Discussion=

==Decentralized Impact Organizations (“DIOs”) to Supercharge Social Policy Bonds==

Olli Tiainen:

"Crypto has transformed grassroots-level organizing. For the first time in history, it is possible to economically align networks of strangers into working together by using programmable incentives and providing them with tools to make decisions and govern shared resources in a decentralized manner. These new organisms are called by many “DAOs,” Decentralized Autonomous Organizations.

An SPB and its bondholders together form an entity very similar to a DAO: the bondholders form a grassroots organization and share an economic fate via the bonds they own. What is particular about this type of “DAOs” is that its token (the bond) derives its value from the quality of a public good. To distinguish it from generic DAOs, we’ll call them “DIOs,” Decentralized Impact Organizations.

The technology for creating crypto-native DIOs already exists. Six months ago, UMA Protocol launched a new crypto-derivatives product called “Key Performance Indicator Options.” KPI options were initially created so that crypto protocols could trustlessly guarantee that their community receives rewards for hitting milestones such as increasing Total Value Locked (TVL). However, their design allows them to be used for SPBs, too.

KPI options are synthetic (ERC-20) tokens that will pay out rewards if a KPI reaches predetermined targets before the given expiry date. Every KPI option holder has an incentive to improve that KPI because then their option will be worth more.”

(https://mirror.xyz/olli.eth/149Q5LjUJzioXp-mC-8gazh5gbfqF5gEP9RpXIh1Kzc)


=Example=

==Hypha==

Olli Tiainen:

“Hypha is the Decentralized Human Organization building your favorite Solarpunk Regens: SEEDS – Regenerative Renaissance. Topics dear to me (Local Food, Stable Money) feature prominently in SEEDS’ “Coordinating Regenerative Societies”, and you can tell the passion behind the project.

They’re gone through every level of society, from myopic-incentives to the monetary system, and systemically replaced short-term cancerous growth with regenerative ecosystems.
Joachim, leading strategy and design at Hypha, spoke of building multi-tenancy DHOs –– Decentralized Human Organization. These multiDHOs would be customizable to a specific goal, such as reducing food scarcity. Objectives would then be established, metrics are measured, and paid out in $SEED.

Hypha is building with a conscious, radical commitment to human flourishing. Their seeds-library features many examples. From teaching courses on regenerative agriculture to funding community building/improvement ambassadors, SEEDS is dedicated to regenerating the degrading systems around us. If you have a passion for environmental and sustainable design, from economics to urban development, this is your team.”

(https://mirror.xyz/olli.eth/149Q5LjUJzioXp-mC-8gazh5gbfqF5gEP9RpXIh1Kzc)

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]