'''= an aspect of contemporary global governance, a concept from Kanishka Jayasuriya'''


=Description=

Jeb Sprague:

"You have previously written about the emergence of a global
regulatory regime characterized by processes of “decentralized enforcement”, whereby
supranational institutions lay down standards for member states and monitor their
compliance rather than directly regulating their activities (Jayasuriya, 1999, p. 452). You
also suggest that different institutions within national states have become mechanisms for
internalized regulation and jumping-off points for transnational governance practices."


[[Kanishka Jayasuriya]] (KJ): 

"My work, particularly on the regulatory state, has
emphasized the transformation of the state via complex systems of multi-level regulation,
meta-governance, and systems of soft law, all of which enable the trans-nationalization of
the state apparatus (1999; 2001a; and 2001b). This approach has a lot in common with
the transnational state perspective (e.g. Robinson, 2001a; and 2004), although my
approach differs in that it places the emphasis on how, and through what mechanisms,
regulatory regimes become the centre of political conflict within the state. Equally, my
work has sought to emphasize the often fragmented and contradictory character of the
emerging regulatory and administrative rules and standards that shape transnational
regulation. It is the understanding of the nature and dynamics of these regulatory rules
that should be at the heart of the analysis of transnational governance.

...

I think this
regulatory shift, which, as I have argued, involves substantial multi-level governance
within the state, will not be easily reversed as a result of the crisis. Indeed, in my view there
is already an intensification of regulatory governance rather than any shift back towards a
more direct role for the state reminiscent of post-war Keynesianism. My short answer is
that changes are likely to occur within the regulatory state — in actors, instruments, and
agencies — but no fundamental shift is likely in the form or nature of regulatory
governance.

The reason for this is, as I have tried to indicate in my recent publications, that
the shift from what I have called ‘social constitutionalism’ to ‘economic
constitutionalism’ is driven by changes in ‘work’ and ‘war’. The twin transformation of the
social settlement within advanced industrial states and the end of the Cold War heralded
a change in the politics that was based on the constitutional and political recognition of
class politics. This social settlement had a global dimension because the Cold Car was
essentially a social and political conflict between competing economic and social systems.
In a similar way this conflict between the two major superpowers was also fundamental to
the way in which these social and political conflicts were played out in the Third World.
This point is of course central to the argument of Odd Arne Westad in his book The
Global Cold War (2007). The core of my argument is that changes in ‘work’ and ‘war’
have resulted in a shift towards a form of economic constitutionalism geared towards the
promotion and regulation of economic order. For this reason the deep-seated structural
transformation of the state over the last three decades means that we cannot simply go
back to the ‘social constitutional’ order of the post-Second World War period.
Nevertheless some important changes are now underway in the nature and form of
regulatory governance. 


Some of the significant changes are:

1. The emphasis on the concept and practice of the ‘systemic regulation of risk’ of
financial governance. This is potentially an important and intriguing development
in that it seeks to create new notions of ‘public responsibility’ within forms of market
governance. In this sense it represents an amplification of the idea of market
citizenship, which I have discussed in my book Statecraft, Welfare and the Politics of
Inclusion (2006), as well as in other work I have done on accountability
communities (2008b; 2008c; and 2010a). The significance of this notion of
‘systemic risk’ lies in the way it creates a public domain within market-based
regulatory governance operating across national boundaries. In other words, forms
of ‘publicness’ are created within market-centered forms of governance. This to me
is an intriguing development that signals an important move away from pre-crisis
forms of regulatory governance. Indeed one of the striking elements of the Obama
Presidency (as well as the social democratic government of Kevin Rudd or Gordon
Brown) is exactly this ‘third way’ approach to regulatory governance. It reflects one
strand of regulation that socializes neoliberalism in a way that opens up interesting
political possibilities.

2. The other crucial element of recent regulatory changes is the development of hybrid
public-private forms of governance such as that exemplified in the institutional
design of the Troubled Asset Relief Program in the US. What matters here is not
whether actors are public or private per se; it is that the relationship between these
actors within new institutional settings challenges the distinction between the
‘public’ and the ‘private’ and undermines the ‘national-global’ binary created by
Weberian and Westphalian notions of statehood. I suspect that these new
institutional ensembles of public and private will become increasingly important
within emerging forms of governance."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Accountability Communities]]


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Security]]