

=Description=

Alexander Lange:

"By using the term “decentralization” I refer to a process of redistributing functions, people, powers or things away from a central authority. The problem with centralized systems is that they lack transparency, allow for single points of failure, censorship, abuse of power and inefficiencies. The fundament of their existence often is missing trust within communities or networks, so they need a trust building intermediary to be organized. Paradigm shifts towards decentralized systems are enabled by new technological breakthroughs (i.e. blockchain, cryptography, consensus mechanisms), a rapidly growing developer community as well as new ways of raising capital."
(https://medium.com/birds-view/mapping-the-decentralized-world-of-tomorrow-5bf36b973203)

=Discussion=

==Technological Decentralization==

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"But what does “decentralization” mean? Echoing back to the rhetoric of the early
web, re-decentralization advocates tend to focus on structural interventions that might
realign power relationships between institutions (governments, corporations, etc.) and
end users. Advocates like Brewster Kahle have urged open web advocates to
investigate ways we might “lock open the web” with code, enabling more peer-to-peer
interactions in the place of mediated private platforms. The urge here is to return to the 5
good old days of unmediated publishing without the need for third-party intermediaries
who can exercise undue influence over our interactions online. In contrast to other
strategies that might focus on legal frameworks or market competition, the appeal of
structural interventions is that, in theory, they are less corruptible and more resistant to
corporate and political capture. Structurally decentralized systems strive to avoid any
chokepoints where a single actor can constrain use of the system, while hoping to
preserve the usability of centralized systems.

In some ways, this line of thinking is a reincarnation of the [[Cypherpunk]] worldview,
which first emerged in the 1970’s alongside significant developments in the study of
cryptography. Technological advances in encryption, such as the widely used RSA
encryption algorithm and the Diffie-Hellman key exchange, made it possible for an
individual with modest computing resources to enjoy strong privacy protections, even in
the face of governments and corporations with significantly greater resources. Many
celebrated these technological breakthroughs as a critical safeguard for user privacy in
an increasingly digital world. Still others–the cypherpunks–strove to harness
cryptographic innovations in order to drive much broader social and political changes.

The intellectual roots of the cypherpunk movement are grounded in the work of
people like David Chaum, who first proposed the use of cryptographic primitives to
create anonymous digital cash in the early 80’s. Cypherpunks took ideas like this and 6
extended them even further. For them, cryptography was a critical vehicle for individual
freedom, one that could significantly weaken the reach of governments and other
powerful institutions. The most extreme adherents to the cypherpunk worldview
embraced a philosophy sometimes referred to as crypto-anarchism, which envisioned a
world in which all laws and regulations were supplanted by mathematically verifiable
code. Important values and enforcement mechanisms could be encoded directly into
software that would carry out critical social processes through the secure exchange of
information.

Forty years later, the cypherpunk dream has not (yet) been realized. Security
scholar Arvind Narayanan argues there is simply not a high user demand for upsetting
fundamental power structures through crypto-enforced contracts, particularly in
democratic societies where governments are chosen by the people. Moreover, the
vision of code as a functional stand-alone governance institution breaks down amidst
the reality of unpredictable and imperfect humans, messy social systems, and buggy
code. In order for cryptographic systems to be practical, Narayanan argues, they need
to provide clear paths to recourse for users when things go wrong. To do this,
technological solutions must effectively interact with other modes of governance and
enforcement, such as existing legal systems.

In spite of these struggles, the cypherpunk movement has experienced a
renaissance in recent years thanks to the rise of projects like Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a
peer-to-peer cash system that enables the secure exchange of digital tokens without the
need for a trusted third party like a bank or credit card company. Bitcoin enthusiasts
frame the potential of this technology in terms of its “decentralizing” impact. Rather than
placing one’s trust in a closed network controlled by elite financial institutions, Bitcoin
offers users an open alternative by “decentralizing” critical processes of secure value
exchange, like transaction validation and currency issuance. The decentralized
architecture of Bitcoin provides guarantees for certain user protections, such as
resistance against censorship. Bitcoin achieves censorship-resistance through two
mechanisms: First, there is no consistent mapping of digital Bitcoin identity to real-world
identity -- anyone can join the system and create as many “accounts” as they wish.
However, these accounts are pseudonymous, not anonymous, and identities can be
uncovered by carefully examining the flow of transactions. Second, theoretically,
anyone has the ability to verify and update the Bitcoin ledger by entering into a process
known as “mining.” Mining is the process by which participants in the network process
and secure new transactions. Mining is not gated, but practically, it lies in the hands of
the few who are willing to make the financial investment in the necessary hardware.
On the one hand, Bitcoin faces many of the hallmark struggles of a cypherpunk
project -- it is cumbersome to use and demand for alternative financial services has not
been high enough to push Bitcoin into the mainstream. At the same time, Bitcoin has
captured public imagination and provided the conceptual framework for a new
generation of projects that strive to distribute critical processes and services that
currently fall under the purview of large, for-profit companies. Like the early
cypherpunks, many of these projects seek to “disrupt” this new class of power elites–the
digital platform owners–by developing peer to peer protocols for the exchange of
information, and supporting crowdsourced methods for curating content and managing
user reputation.

This school of thought has greatly influenced the thinking of open web advocates
who are concerned about the increased consolidation of the web around a few large
platforms. For advocates of an open web, the clearest path forward lies in a return to a
more distributed web architecture, one that hearkens back to the early days online. Yet
this framing of the issue fails to account for the fact that all of the centralized services
that have come to dominate the market today were built on top of the distributed
architecture of the original web.

Distributed, peer-to-peer protocols like HTTP and SMTP are still the functional
rails on top of which today’s web runs. However, practically speaking, the web is now
heavily consolidated around just a few service providers. This consolidation is most
clearly illustrated in the distribution of online advertising dollars, which roughly reflects
the distribution of viewership on the web. According to a 2016 report, 85 cents of every
new dollar spent on online advertising went to just two companies–Facebook and
Google. It appears that structurally decentralized architecture doesn’t inherently lead to 9
decentralized, competitive markets. This points to the need for developing a more
nuanced understanding of the role that structural/technical decentralization plays in
addressing the new class of risks to personal and political speech that we observe
online today.

A good first step would be to recognize that structural centralization in and of
itself may not be a negative development. Indeed, many positive benefits in terms of
usability, efficiency and performance can come from consolidating resources and
managing economies of scale. But these perks come with a cost. What we might gain in
terms of convenience and efficiency, we then lose in terms of control and freedom. In
developing a strategy to address contemporary challenges online, we must develop a
more fine-grained understanding of what we view as the threats that accompany
increased “centralization” of the web. Only then can we weigh the costs and benefits of
different interventions intended to re-decentralize the web.

Some of those interventions might come in the form of peer-to-peer alternatives
to corporate social media platforms. Others might be structural checks and balances
that help us safeguard against abuses of power by today’s online hegemons. Still others
might be hard coded structural limitations on power–ways to offload liability from large
players so that they cannot comply with external pressures to violate important user
rights, such as a user’s privacy or rights against self-incrimination. In order to
understand which strategies are best suited for which risks, we need to get a more
detailed understanding of the specific chokepoints we want to address."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

==References==

"Locking the Web Open: A Call for a Distributed Web | Brewster Kahle's ...." 11 Aug. 2015,
http://brewster.kahle.org/2015/08/11/locking-the-web-open-a-call-for-a-distributed-web-2/. Accessed 19
Feb. 2017.

Chaum, David. "Security without identification: Transaction systems to make big brother obsolete."
Communications of the ACM 28.10 (1985): 1030-1044. 

Narayanan, Arvind. "What happened to the crypto dream?, part 1." IEEE Security & Privacy 11.2 (2013):
75-76. 



=More information=

* The [[Centralized Web]]

[[Category:Network Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]