=Discussion=


JZ Garrod:

"While the prospect of a washing machine that can order its own detergent is intriguing, the
true draw of Ethereum is its potential to remake the social world. The central institution that
makes this possible is the decentralized autonomous organization, or DAO. As the name
suggests, DAOs are essentially digital organizations that manage themselves: “long-term
smart contracts that contain the assets and encode the bylaws of an entire organization”
(Buterin 2014, par. 2). Depending on how they are structured, certain members of the DAO
might be able to spend its funds, or modify its code.

Buterin (2013, par. 2) has described DAOs as an attempt to extend the logic of the industrial
revolution upwards. Where that revolution allowed us to “start replacing human labour
with machines,” it only automated the bottom half of the equation, “removing the need for
rank and file manual labourers.” DAOs are thus an attempt to see if it is possible to “remove
management from the equation, instead.” With such technology, it becomes possible for selfdriving
cars to autonomously make micro-payments to each other for the right-of-way, or to
share data plans via mesh networks, making much of the internet infrastructure unnecessary
(Pollen 2013).

For many true believers, however, smart contracts, blockchains, and the DAOs that might
stem from them, are the building blocks of something much bigger: the decentralized autonomous
society (DAS). While there are competing versions of this possible future, the predominant
theme is a society in which technological development has disrupted the centralized
and hierarchal forms of the nation-state system.8 In this society math, perfect information,
and market mechanisms are supposedly able to solve the problem of organizational
politics by removing humans from politics altogether.

Viewed as inherently corruptible creatures, the thinking goes that it is far more sensible “to
base a future economy on the mathematical laws of the universe, outside the grasp of human
error and manipulation” (Patron 2014, 102).9 Through DAOs, it is claimed, we might be
able to augment human autonomy by automating the governance of all organizations, since
DAOs can run “without any human involvement under the control of an incorruptible set of
business rules” (Larimer 2013, par. 2). And since the code simply runs itself, these DAOs
could run forever, making politics a simple problem of engineering.

Inherent in this view is the idea that political elites have too much power, and are a hamper
on freedom. Billionaire Peter Thiel, for instance, writes that he no longer believes “that
freedom and democracy are compatible” (as cited in Frank 2015, 27). Perhaps it could exist,
“he imagined, in cyberspace, in outerspace, or on high-seas homesteads, where individualists
could escape the 'terrible arc of the political.'” Similar remarks have been made by Roger
Ver, the prominent Bitcoin investor, who argues that such technologies “will prevent governments
from being able to just print money at will and then use that to buy tanks and guns and
bombs to murder people around the world” (as cited in Dodd 2015, par. 4). While not all cryptographers
share these views, Karlstrøm (2014, 29) notes that there has always been “a
strong current of libertarian sentiments in the discussions about cryptography.” Indeed, the
popular economist Paul Krugman (2014, par. 1) has confessed that his own uneasiness with
Bitcoin stems from the fact that it is “intimately tied up with libertarian anti-government fantasies.”

Many, however, claim that these anti-government fantasies are unrealistic. More likely,
claims Kosner (2014), is that DAOs intermingle with other, more traditional, centralized organizations,
with each focusing on what it scales best to (Kosner, 2014). This point is echoed
by De Filippi and Mauro (2014, par. 22) who suggest that it is more plausible to see a future
in which “decentralized organizations with distributed models of governance, independent
legal systems, or perhaps even autonomously governed communities . . . compete with both
governments and corporations.”
(http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/692)

=More information=

* see the video of the first pro-DAS meetup in Palo Alto at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iubsqehXUoY (January 2015 ?)

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]