'''* Book: Decentralised Futures. How digital technologies will change the shape of organisations to come. Edited by Jonathan Bone & Christopher Haley. NESTA, 2020'''

URL = https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/Decentralised_Futures_Essays_FA.pdf

=Description=

"Human civilisation is, in large part, a
story about human organisation. From
hunter-gatherer bands to nation states,
our societies have been fundamentally
shaped by the organisational forms we
have adopted; whether that be democratic
government or dictatorship, army battalion
or resistance movement, worker cooperative
or multinational corporation. Organisational
structures have typically developed as a
means of tackling specific problems, such
as speeding up decision-making or ensuring
resources are distributed fairly among group
members; however, it is clear that those we
have developed to date are inadequate
when managing common-pool resources
like our environment. Our future will thus
be determined, to a great extent, by how
effectively we can design organisational
forms which deal with the challenges ahead.

This collection of essays discusses new
organisational forms which are emerging,
enabled by digital technologies like
blockchain. These organisations are allowing
people to self-organise and collaborate
as part of decentralised networks. Such
decentralised networks have several novel
features, perhaps the most important of which
is that, unlike many organisations, they are
designed to function without the need to trust
other members of the group – that is, with
trust in people replaced by a different kind
of trust, in the technology itself. This has the
potential to change radically what people
think an organisation can be and what it
means to work for one."


=Contents=

==The Last, Best Hope for Open Data== 

– In our winning essay, Kevin Werbach argues that
big tech platforms like Facebook, Google and
Amazon will not be replaced by decentralised
alternatives, because few people will accept
significantly worse functionality or user
experience in return for better privacy.
Rather, he suggests, blockchain will see
mass adoption ‘behind the scenes’ in the
infrastructural foundations of digital identity
and hardware, and big tech will participate
in the new decentralised data economy
because it provides benefits for them as well.


==DAO: Mismatch of Technology and Objectives== 

– Our second prize winner, Grace
(Rebecca) Rachmany, presents a slightly
contrarian perspective, making the case
that decentralisation is not a better way to
run businesses and that many developers
have been blinded by a naïve technooptimism. Instead, she argues, the principles
of decentralisation should be applied to
areas such as climate change, preservation
of cultures and cross-border disputes where
centralised organisations are failing, where
collective intelligence is needed and where
everyone’s interest is at stake and therefore
everyone should have a say.


==How DAOs Can Revive Local Communities==

– In our third prize winning essay, Rhian Lewis
explores how decentralised technology can
not only help global tech organisations, but
also support the growth of local initiatives,
such as community-owned pubs, shops and
cafés. In this way, Lewis argues that decentralised digital organisations can craft a
future where individuals can decide the shape
of their own communities and build the lives
they want, centred around vibrant high streets
where everyone feels a sense of ownership
and pride.


==The Web of Commons: Rethinking the Status Quo from the Data Up== 

– In this essay,
Karissa McKelvey draws parallels between
the historical enclosures of common land
and the gatekeeping of current knowledge
commons, such as scientific papers. She then
draws on Elinor Ostrom’s seminal work to
describe a framework for what a fairer, more
secure and more private web might look like
and argues why blockchain is not the right
tool for this.


==Cooperation Across Difference== 

– Jack Henderson also explores the tragedy of
the commons. He argues that if we want
sustainably egalitarian decentralised
societies, then the rules and mechanisms
that govern them are as important as the
data structures that enable them. He then
highlights how some of the ideas put forward
by the RadicalxChange movement are being
applied in this space.


==How the Blockchain’s Internet of Transactions Can Ensure a New Contract with Nature== 

– Michel Bauwens takes a
centuries-long historical view of systems of
control and paradigm shifts in social models.
He makes the case that we are currently
undergoing another transitional phase of
human history, from one stable system to
another. He hypotheses about where we are
heading, what changes we will make to get
there and what technologies and tools we
might need to achieve such ends.


==The Illusion of Blockchain Democracy: One Coin Equals One Vote== 

– In this essay,
Dionysis Zindros argues why the consensus
mechanisms used by current blockchains
unavoidably favour the wealthy and are
thus not the answer to more democratic
corporations and governments.


==The Future Is a Safe And Dark Web: This is What It Will Look Like== 

– Joshua Tobkin asks
how we can reconcile privacy preservation
with the need to coordinate and exchange
value with others, concluding that ‘selfsovereign’ distributed identity is the only way
forward. He makes the case that over the
next decade, increasing internet surveillance
will drive us to encrypt everything and
communicate online on a purely need-to-know
basis. He discusses the role that blockchain
will play in allowing us to coordinate and
exchange value in such a world.


==Taking the Power Back== 

Ziri Rideaux and Brendan Miller offer a vision in which
decentralised autonomous organisations
(DAOs) replace both corporations and
governments as the preferred type of human
organisation. Like Bauwens, they see moderm
representative democracy and nation
states as being incapable of solving various
problems, which instead require global
collective action, and envisage what a global
direct democracy platform might look like.
[[Taking the Power Back]]


==Earth 2030==

Primavera De Filippi and Tony
Lai take a different tack, exploring a fictional
post-COVID future through the eyes of Leia,
whose community embraced decentralised
technology following the crisis, as she talks
to others from different communities which
followed different paths."

[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Technology]]