'''= Voluntary contributions conceived as a market for efforts''' (cfr. [[Effort Trading]])


See also [[Governance Rights Typology]]for a more extensive treatment of decision rights in open source projects  




=Typology=


<br><a name="0.1_table01"></a>
<div align="left">
<table width="0" border="2" cellspacing="0">
<tr valign="top"><td width="33%"> <br> <br><font size="3"
face="Calibri"> </font></td>

 <td width="33%"> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">DON'T
SELF-IDENTIFY</font></td>
 <td width="33%"> <br><font size="3"
face="Calibri">SELF-IDENTIFY</font></td></tr>
<tr valign="top"><td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">PRODUCTS</font>
 </td>
 <td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">Inside contracting /or</font>

 <p><font size="3" face="Calibri">Outsourcing</font></p>
 </td>
 <td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">Classic Market</font></td></tr>
<tr valign="top"><td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">EFFORTS</font>
 </td>
 <td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri">Classic Firm</font> <br>

 </td>
 <td> <br><font size="3" face="Calibri"><b>*Voluntary Production*</b></font>
 </td></tr>
</table>


</div>

Langlois and Garzarelli write:

“We can distinguish four possibilities:

Along one
dimension is the issue of design: is assignment to task (and maybe even the
division of labor itself) generated through the a centralized process or does it
arise from the self-identification of collaborators with tasks? Along the other
dimension is the problem of information and agency: are we talking about
products cleanly measured and priced or are we taking about exchanges of effort
that involve costs of measurement and agency?

In the upper left-hand box, the
division of labor is centrally designed, but the products of that labor are easily
measured and priced. This is the world of inside or outside contracting.

In the lower left-hand box, the
division of labor remains centrally designed, but the cost of measuring and
pricing transactions makes it cheaper to purchase the effort of collaborators
directly. This is the classic firm.

In the upper right-hand box, participants self-
select their contributions; but measurement and pricing costs are not prohibitive,
and those contributions take the form of products offered on spec. This is the
classic market. Finally, in the lower right-hand box, participants self-select their
contributions (also effectively “on spec”); but those contributions come directly
in the form of effort rather than of effort embodied in a product. This is the
model of voluntary or open-source production."
(http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf)

==Discussion of the Typology==


“This two-dimensional schema has advantages, we argue, over the tripartite distinction
Benkler (2002) offers among markets, hierarchies, and what he calls peer production. Benkler
argues that a perceptible trend toward the increased importance of human capital in
production is leading toward peer production and away from both markets and hierarchies.
It may well be that, with economic growth and an expanding extent of the market, there is a
general trend rightward in Figure 2, what Langlois (2003) calls the phenomenon of the
Vanishing Hand. But an increased importance of human capital and greater spontaneity of
production is consistent with markets as well as with decentralized collaboration through
direct effort. Even apart from the likes of books, musical scores, or screenplays, there are a
plethora of “consulting” services – from legal representation to brain surgery – that are
priced on markets. The interesting issue, in the language of Baldwin and Clark (2003), is:
when can cooperation be effectively measured and priced (and thus turned into
“transactions”) and when not?”


“The most extreme form of a voluntary arrangement would occur when the
self-selection of the collaborators itself actually creates the division of labor. This
is far from unimaginable: it is exactly what happens in “the market” in the
largest sense – including the market for software in the large. It also arguably
happens in the context of academic open science, where the pattern of
knowledge emerges from the self-selected research choices of the participants. If
we cast our gaze down to a less lofty level, however, there almost always seems
to be some pre-existing structure of possible tasks from which the participants
choose.

At the level of any particular
software project, the self-selection of workers to tasks takes place within the
context of an established architecture or (at the very least) an established
technological trajectory.”
(http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf)


=Source=


Article:  [[Of Hackers and Hairdressers]]: Modularity and the Organizational Economics
of Open-source Collaboration. By Richard N. Langlois (The University of Connecticut, Richard.Langlois@UConn.edu) and Giampaolo Garzarelli (Università degli Studi di Roma, ggarzarelli@tiscali.it). Journal Industry & Innovation, Volume 15 Issue 2 2008

URL = http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf (2005 draft version)

Quoted from the above 2005 draft.

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]