

=Discussion=

by Jehu Eaves, (in Gonzo Times):

"The argument Dunayevskaya is making here is simple:
Marx proposed that capitalism would be increasingly
hamstrung by a decline in the rate of profit. This decline
was not an accident or aberration, since it rested on a
fundamental feature of the economy: On the one hand,
the capitalist was always seeking to maximize his profits
by reducing labor costs. This drive leads businesses to
produce more output with fewer workers. On the other
hand, the source of profits were the unpaid labor time of
the employed workers. Thus, even as the capitalist tried
to maximize profit by reducing its work force, its success
at reducing its work force reduced the pool of unpaid
labor time that was the source of its profits.

So far, not much of interest, right? Just another cat fight
among the followers of Marx over interpretation of his
theory; and Marxists are, if anything, more prone to cat
fights than a bag of wet cats. But, then Raya does something
jarring: she throws in that sentence at the end and
changes the entire nature of the argument:
Since the realization of surplus value IS the decline in
the rate of profit, the poor capitalist MUST search for
profits.

Let me perform an intellectual shortcut here: Although
it may not be obvious what she has just done, Raya has
just stated that Marx is setting the reader up, not for
an explanation why prices of goods reflect the values of
those goods, but why they can never reflect the values of
those goods. On a micro-level, Marx is explaining why
that $600 iPad you got for Christmas probably cost no
more than $3 to manufacture in China.

To put this another way: Marx was describing why the
actual labor time expended in a capitalist economy must
always and increasingly be greater than what is socially
necessary. The tendency built into a capitalist economy
toward a secular decline in the rate of profit produces
its opposite: a mad scramble on the part of each capital,
and all of them together, to find every avenue to maintain
profitability in the face of this tendency; and this
tendency can only be countered by effort to extend the
social work day beyond what is actually required by society.

As we have argued elsewhere, if Marx is correct in his
analysis, there is a vast pool of superfluous labor within
existing society that can be abolished without touching
on the material living standard of society.

To put it bluntly, Marx’s law of the tendency toward a
fall in the rate of profit predicts that if total debt, total
consumption and total hours of labor don’t constantly
increase capitalism will collapse. The social relation is not
only incapable of achieving equilibrium, but it becomes
increasingly self-disequilibrating as the productivity of
labor increases. 


Assuming Raya was saying what I understand
her to be saying, I think this self-induced, self-reinforcing,
disequilibrium results in, at least, the following 5 symptoms:

1. The Market for output must constantly expand.

2. Total employment must always rise more quickly
than productive employment. And, total hours of labor
must always increase more quickly than productive
hours of labor.

3. Because of the above, total consumption must always
increase more rapidly than necessary consumption
(i.e., production). Which is to say, waste and unnecessary
consumption becomes a matter of life or death for
the economy.

4. Since waste becomes a permanent feature of the
economy and the rising cost of wasted effort must be
borne by society, total prices must always increase more
rapidly than total value.

5. Since, wasted effort itself produces no new value, exchange
itself is increasingly founded on debt; hence, the
financial sector must always increase more rapidly than
the industrial sector, and debt more rapidly than equity
— leverage, which is, at root, only the relation between
the sum total of social labor to the sum total of productively
employed labor, must always increase.

Assuming I am correct about Raya’s comments about
Marx’s third volume of Capital, and, that she is correct
in her reading of the volume — two very big ifs, I admit
— in his third volume of Capital, Marx is setting us up
to understand how the State becomes an absolutely critical
and absolutely necessary feature of capitalist society
— a matter of life and death for capital. Each of the five
symptoms of modern society I cited above are no more
than functions taken on by the State to manage capitalist society through its increasingly devastating cycles of
booms and busts.

Marx’s law of the tendency toward a decline in the rate
of profit is, in reality, a theory of the State. To extend
Raya’s statement: Marx’s theory of value is the foundation
for his theory of surplus value; his theory of surplus
value is the foundation for his theory of the decline in
the rate of profit; and, finally, his theory of a decline in
the rate of profit is the foundation for his theory of the
modern State."
(http://www.gonzotimes.com/print/Gonzo%20Times%20V1I1Web.pdf)


[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Economics]]