'''* Book: The Decline and Rise of Democracy: A Global History from Antiquity to Today. By David Stasavage. Princeton University Press,''' 

URL = https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691177465/the-decline-and-rise-of-democracy


=Description=

"Historical accounts of democracy’s rise tend to focus on ancient Greece and pre-Renaissance Europe. The Decline and Rise of Democracy draws from global evidence to show that the story is much richer—democratic practices were present in many places, at many other times, from the Americas before European conquest, to ancient Mesopotamia, to precolonial Africa. Delving into the prevalence of early democracy throughout the world, David Stasavage makes the case that understanding how and where these democracies flourished—and when and why they declined—can provide crucial information not just about the history of governance, but also about the ways modern democracies work and where they could manifest in the future.

Drawing from examples spanning several millennia, Stasavage first considers why states developed either democratic or autocratic styles of governance and argues that early democracy tended to develop in small places with a weak state and, counterintuitively, simple technologies. When central state institutions (such as a tax bureaucracy) were absent—as in medieval Europe—rulers needed consent from their populace to govern. When central institutions were strong—as in China or the Middle East—consent was less necessary and autocracy more likely. He then explores the transition from early to modern democracy, which first took shape in England and then the United States, illustrating that modern democracy arose as an effort to combine popular control with a strong state over a large territory. Democracy has been an experiment that has unfolded over time and across the world—and its transformation is ongoing.

Amidst rising democratic anxieties, The Decline and Rise of Democracy widens the historical lens on the growth of political institutions and offers surprising lessons for all who care about governance."


=Contents=

Jack Visnjic:

"The book consists of twelve chapters organized into three main sections. 

'''Chapters 1–4 seek to explain the origins of democracy''', to present evidence that it was widespread  in  premodern  times,  and  to  illustrate  ways  in  which  the  progress  of civilization  often  undermined  early  democracy.  

'''In  chapters  5–8,  Stasavage  attempts to explain the political divergence between modern Europe and the rest of the world'''. He does so by first ''tracing the emergence of representation (one of the defining features of modern democracy) in medieval Europe in chapter 5''. The next two chapters explore why large-scale democracies did not emerge in China and the early Islamic world, respectively. ''Chapter 8 works to debunk claims that economic history alone can explain the political divergence of modern Europe''.  

'''The  third  and  final  section  of  the  book  (chapters  9–12)  explores  the  rise  and spread  of  modern  democracy'''.  Chapters  9  and  10  illuminate  just  how  much  the character  of  modern  democracy  is  indebted  to  the  peculiarities  of English  and American history. Chapter 11 discusses the astonishing  spread  of modern  democracy over the past few centuries, including  recently to regions of the world that were  thought  to  be  too  poor  or  underdeveloped  to  sustain  democracy.  The  final chapter applies the lessons learned throughout the book to offer some thoughts on what the future may have in store for not just America, but also China. In the case of  America,  Stasavage  claims  that  the  long  history  of  democracy  should  make  us hopeful about its future, provided that we make continual efforts and investments to  address  two  challenges  in  particular:  growing  executive  power  and  citizen distrust in government."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6x84w6mm)

=Review=

Jack Visnjic:


"In an age of anxiety about the future of democracy, when new publications routine-ly come out bearing such titles as How Democracies Die and How Democracies End, David Stasavage’s new book offers a deeper probe into the past and a more hopeful message about the future. In contrast to the recent flurry of books and articles on the topic, which usually limit their focus to the past century or two, The Decline and Rise of Democracy claims to bring to light a global history of democracy spanning several millennia. In that respect, it continues the trend of “grand narrative” histories  popularized  by  such  writers  as  Jared  Diamond,  Ian  Morris,  and  Walter Scheidel. One of the book's objectives is to overturn the long-established narrative that democracy  was  invented  at  a  particular  time  and  place  (viz.  ancient  Greece)  and was later revived by modern Europeans. Stasavage argues that democracy, rather than being a hallmark of the West, was actually common across early societies all around the globe. However, as states became larger, democracy proved harder to scale than what he calls the “autocratic alternative.” Many early democracies thus came  to  be  overrun  by  larger-scale  autocracies.  Even  when  democratic  societies prevailed against larger kingdoms and conquered them, they often  became auto-cratic in the process because they inherited a centralized state with bureaucratic structures.  In  addition  to  the  problem  of  scale,  early  democracy  was  also  under-mined by new technologies that allowed rulers to monitor their subjects’ activities and production more closely. This is the initial “decline of democracy” referred to in the book’s title. The subsequent “rise of democracy” refers to the appearance of a new form of representative government in the 18th century, initially along the north Atlantic seaboard, from which it has now spread to much of the world. This new system, dubbed by Stasavage “modern democracy,” is characterized by broad suffrage and a legislature in which—this is key—representatives are not bound by mandates from their constituents.

...

To read the book is to be taken  on  a  roller-coaster  ride  across  four  millennia  of  history,  from  ancient Mesopotamia and India, to pre-colonial America and Africa, to medieval Arabia and Europe, and beyond. 

Ultimately, '''Stasavage isolates three factors as being key to the rise of early democracy'''. 


Democratic rule was most likely to arise in 

(1) small scale settings  where  

(2)  rulers  lacked  accurate  knowledge  about  what  their  subjects were producing. This information deficit gave rulers an incentive to share power in  order  to  optimize  their  taxation  system.  Furthermore,  democracy  was  more likely to arise when 

(3) rulers needed their subjects more than their subjects needed  them.  


'''This  last  factor  was  especially pertinent  in  cases  where  rulers  needed people to fight wars and where the people had exit options''' (they could pack up and move to a new territory). In such cases, rulers often made concessions to the ruled in exchange for their services and loyalty.

...


'''The book can also be contextualized within the longstanding  debate  about  whether  democracy  is  a  uniquely  Greco-Roman legacy  or  not.''' 

On the one hand, Stasavage’s deemphasizing of Athens’ role in the birth of democracy is in line with the recent work of classical scholars such as Robinson (1997) and  Ober  (2015), who have shown that Athens’ democratization was part of a larger trend happening across the ancient Mediterranean. Moreover, his exploration of “early democracy” in other societies around the world is both illuminating and constitutes the most comprehensive such survey to date.  On the other hand, his underlying claim that these early societies may legitimately be called “democracies” has  been  made  before, and  was controverted as  recently  as  2016  by  Paul Cartledge in his book Democracy: A Life. Given the similarity of Cartledge’s book to Stasavage’s in terms of its chronological breadth and overall purpose, it is somewhat striking that Stasavage nowhere responds to Cartledge’s argument. What Stasavage’s book makes indisputable is that non-autocratic regimes with cooperative  structures  have  existed  the  world  over  and  for  millennia.  Moreover, the  book  offers  perhaps  the  most  thorough  analysis  to  date  of  the  factors  that promoted and sustained non-autocratic governance in premodern times.

...

In conclusion, The Decline and Rise of Democracy is an important book for our age of political uncertainty.  In a world where there is no shortage of “democracy experts,” each offering ghastly predictions about the future, this book offers much-needed  historical  depth  and  nuanced  analysis.  The  discussions  of  democratic  regimes across history are complimented by parallel discussions of autocratic states which  helpfully  illustrate  the  factors,  choices,  and  sequences  of  events  that  led different states down the path of either democracy or autocracy. The scope of the book  is  so  broad  that  all  readers  (even  historians)  stand  to  learn  much  from  it. While  some  of  the  arguments  are likely to  prove  controversial,  the  evidence  for them is always transparently laid out in such a way that readers may use it to reach their own conclusions. Instead of ending with a vivid prediction, Stasavage prefers to conclude by offering historically based reasons for optimism, reasons for pessimism, and steps that we can take to help ensure the longevity of democracy."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6x84w6mm)

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P History]]