
'''* Article: The Decline of Wikipedia. By Tom Simonite. MIT Technology Review, October 22, 2013'''

URL = http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/520446/the-decline-of-wikipedia/


=Excerpt=

"Yet Wikipedia and its stated ambition to "compile the sum of all human
knowledge" are in trouble. The volunteer workforce that built the
project's flagship, the English-language Wikipedia-and must defend it
against vandalism, hoaxes, and manipulation-has shrunk by more than a
third since 2007 and is still shrinking. Those participants left seem
incapable of fixing the flaws that keep Wikipedia from becoming a
high-quality encyclopedia by any standard, including the project's
own. Among the significant problems that aren't getting resolved is
the site's skewed coverage: its entries on Pokemon and female porn
stars are comprehensive, but its pages on female novelists or places
in sub-Saharan Africa are sketchy. Authoritative entries remain
elusive. Of the 1,000 articles that the project's own volunteers have
tagged as forming the core of a good encyclopedia, most don't earn
even Wikipedia's own middle-ranking quality scores.  The main source
of those problems is not mysterious. The loose collective running the
site today, estimated to be 90 percent male, operates a crushing
bureaucracy with an often abrasive atmosphere that deters newcomers
who might increase participation in Wikipedia and broaden its
coverage."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]