'''* Article: A male perspective of psychology from the  Rainbow Nation. By Angelo Vincenzo De Boni. Psychreg Journal of Psychology, 2019.'''

URL = https://www.pjp.psychreg.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/de-boni-151-167.pdf


=Abstract=
 
"This perspective piece aims to provide a current snapshot of the psychology curriculum as experienced 
by a male middle adulthood student in South Africa. A short declaration of my lived experience is followed 
by a review of literature relevant to the topics of feminism, masculinities, individual identity, community 
development  and  gender  diversity.  I  discuss  the  questionable  ethics  of  adopting  various  ideas  coming 
from Western sociology and social justice activism, used to train Generation Z adolescents in counselling 
techniques. From my audience perspective, I reflect on the impact of including catastrophising theoretical 
material on young females, males, and people of colour who enter psychology with the best intentions; to 
learn how to help others. There is a bias in psychology today towards feminine traits which may ostracise 
the young male student at a time we when need more male counsellors. Concurrently, the inappropriate 
use  of  foreign  theories  may  be  driving  away  people  of  colour  who  are  seeking  emic  solutions  to  their 
environment. There is a danger that we are fuelling the radical ‘decolonise’ advocates, which will further 
devalue  psychology  in developing  communities.  I  advocate  for  material in  the  curriculum to  allow  for  a 
balance within male psychology, science-based theories, and humanist values rather than identity politics 
and victimology. This discussion happens in the context of lower resilience in  Generation Z, evidence of 
social  contagion  through  social  media,  evolving  masculinities,  identity  confusion,  rising  mental  health 
challenges, and calls for decolonisation of education."

(https://www.pjp.psychreg.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/de-boni-151-167.pdf)

[[Category:South Africa]]
[[Category:Gender]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]