'''= a condition for the  [[Modularity]] of [[Peer Production]]'''

=Description=

“Herbert Simon contrasted systems that are non-decomposable with
systems that are (or are nearly) decomposable. Brooks’s conception of the 360
operating system created a non-decomposable system: every part communicates
with virtually every other part.8 By contrast, a decomposable system is one in
which all (or most) communication takes place within the subsystems and little or
none among the subsystems. As Simon put it more recently, a decomposable
system “can be thought of as a boxes-within-boxes hierarchy with an arbitrary
number of levels. Its special characteristic is that equilibrating interactions
between boxes at any level take place
much more rapidly than the interactions
between boxes at that same level, and
similarly all the way to the top of the
hierarchy.” (Simon 2002, p. 589).
(http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf)

=More Information=

#[[Encapsulation]]
#[[Modularity]]


==Bibliography==

Simon, Herbert A. 1998. “The Architecture of Complexity: Hierarchic Systems,”
in Idem, The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd edition, second printing.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press: 183-216. Originally published in 1962,
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 106(6): 467-82 (December).

Simon, Herbet A. 2002. “Near Decomposability and the Speed of Evolution,”
Industrial and Corporate Change 11(3): 587-99 (June).



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]