You can find out more about the Definition of Free Cultural Works at http://mako.cc/writing/freedomdefined.org

=Description=

Benjamin Mako Hill [http://mako.cc/writing/free_culture-fsf_bulletin_200707.html]:

"it argues for essential freedoms to use, study, redistribute and change cultural works. However, it recognizes that there are important differences between different types of creative goods and it attempts to explore and speak to these differences. In particular, it discusses the role of attribution, the idea of ``source'' data for a work, the use of free data-formats, and technical restrictions such as Digital Restrictions Management (DRM). 

While the definition has reached a ``1.0'' stage and has been translated into more than a dozen languages, it continues to be a work in progress and a space for meaningful discussion about what ``freedom'' in the realm of cultural work should mean. In an important step forward this year, the board of directors of the Wikimedia Foundation, the nonprofit organization that oversees the Wikipedia project, endorsed the idea that content in Wikimedia wikis should be free except in several well-defined cases. They stated that the Definition of Free Culture Works would be their guide as to what was and was not free enough. Other projects are underway to provide buttons that users of qualifying CC licenses can use to explicitly reference their ethical motivations when they reference the license of their work--much like what the GNU GPL's preamble does for free software. 

This effort does not argue that culture should be free in certain ways because it is in the way that free software is defined. Instead, it takes tactical inspiration from free software for a definition of freedom, as well as for a strong example of an analogous social movement with a compelling message and compelling success. It provides a way that the free culture movement can use the licenses that groups like CC have already created in a way that attempts to replicate free software's tactics and success."
(http://mako.cc/writing/free_culture-fsf_bulletin_200707.html)


=More Information=

#[[Free Culture]]
#[[Free Software]]


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Culture]]