
'''* Article: Degrowth, postdevelopment, and transitions: a preliminary conversation. By Arturo Escobar. Sustain Sci (2015) 10:451–462'''

URL = http://www.degrowth.de/en/catalogue-entry/degrowth-postdevelopment-and-transitions-a-preliminary-conversation/

=Abstract=

"This paper seeks to initiate a conversation between
degrowth (DG) and postdevelopment (PD) frameworks
by placing them within the larger field of discourses
for ecological and civilizational transitions and by bridging
proposals emerging from the North with those from the
Global South. Not only can this dialogue, it is argued, be
mutually enriching for both movements but perhaps essential
for an effective politics of transformation. Part I of the paper
presents a brief panorama of transition discourses (TDs),
particularly in the North. Part II discusses succinctly the
main postdevelopment trends in Latin America, including
Buen Vivir (BV), the rights of Nature, civilizational crisis,
and the concept of ‘alternatives to development’. With these
elements in hand, Part III attempts a preliminary dialogue
between degrowth and postdevelopment, identifying points
of convergence and tension; whereas they originate in
somewhat different intellectual traditions and operate
through different epistemic and political practices, they
share closely connected imaginaries, goals, and predicaments,
chiefly, a radical questioning of the core assumption
of growth and economism, a vision of alternative worlds
based on ecological integrity and social justice, and the ever
present risk of cooptation. Important tensions remain, for
instance, around the critique of modernity and the scope for
dematerialization. This part ends by outlining areas of
research on PD that could be of particular interest to degrowth
scholars. The conclusion, finally, envisions the dissolution
of the very binary of ‘Global North’ and ‘Global
South’ by adopting a pluriversal perspective."


=Excerpt=

From the conclusion, Arturo Escobar:

"As one of the most lucid and persistent critics of development
put it in his most recent analysis of the concept,
despite failures, development continues to be ‘‘at the center
of a powerful but fragile semantic constellation’’. (Esteva
et al. 2013, p. 1). So with growth, progress, markets, and
the economy. If the consolidation of these constructs
involved a veritable civilizational development, their theoretical
and practical denaturalization similarly demands
important civilizational rearrangements. Transition discourses,
including degrowth and postdevelopment, intuit
compelling and viable paths in this direction. Thinking
from the perspective of the Earth as a whole, in the last
instance, suggests that divisions between ‘Global North’
and ‘Global South’ (another modern binary), and hence
between ‘degrowth’ and ‘postdevelopment,’ will tend to
dissolve as pluriversal perspectives asserts themselves.

There are additional connections between DG and PD;
for instance, arguments about the communal and the relational
should be useful to enrich debates in the degrowth
field concerning the extent to which the transition to a
degrowth society can be accomplished within, or through,
capitalism and liberalism. The current thrust in Latin
America is that while engaging by necessity with capitalism,
modernity, and the State, the struggles for transformation
have to be conducted on the basis of an entirely
different logic of socio-natural life, indexed provisionally
as non-liberal, non-capitalist, communal, and relational.
The emphasis on the re-invention of communities is a
powerful argument to deal with the amazingly pervasive
practices keeping ‘the individual’ (anchored in markets and
consumption) in place as the pillar of society and for
imaging alternative regimes of relational personhood, in
which personhood is also redefined within the tejido
(weave) of life always being created with non-humans.

Similarly, from the concept of the pluriverse one can raise
questions about the re-constitution of the plurality of
European worlds, away from the dominant version of Euromodernity,
and envision perhaps ‘‘degrowing into a pluriverse’’
as part of sustainable degrowth, beyond the OWW
structured by capitalism, liberalism, secularism, and the
State. The centrality of questions about autonomy in Latin
American debates could buttress DG arguments about the
importance of re-thinking democracy from this perspective (Asara et al. 2013).

World-wide, the economic globalized civilization has
taken on a tremendous force, seemingly relegating critical
debates over growth and ‘development’ to the back burner;
internationally, these debates are domesticated within the
discourses of the millennium development goals (MDGs)
and the post-2015 ‘sustainable development goals’. However,
global movements continue to keep radical conversations
alive, connecting development debates to questions
of epistemic decolonization, social and environmental
justice, the defense of cultural difference, and transition to
postcapitalist, postgrowth, and non-anthropocentric societies.
For most of these movements, it is clear that conventional
development, in any of its forms—including
‘sustainable’—is no longer an option. In this context, the
degrowth and PD/AD discussions are a beacon of hope. At
least for many social movements and for transition advocates,
whatever form ‘development’ or alternatives to development
take will have to involve more radical
questionings of growth, extractivism, and even modernity
than ever before."


[[Category:Degrowth]]

[[Category:P2P Transition]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]