=Definition=

THEO COX, RUFUS POLLOCK AND ANNA KATHARINA SCHAFFNER:

"we define  “deliberately developmental spaces” as:

Physically colocated groups together for a sustained period of time with a conscious engagement in multidimensional developmental praxis."

(https://www.whatisemerging.com/opinions/deliberately-developmental-spaces-a-key-to-addressing-the-metacrisis)


=Characteristics=

THEO COX, RUFUS POLLOCK AND ANNA KATHARINA SCHAFFNER:

"we can hypothesize three key characteristics for environments that would consciously support “development of being”:

1. Space. These environments are spaces in both a physical and temporal sense. They are a site for a group to live, work, practice and engage with one another with shared time that can be dedicated to these ends. 

2. Developmental. These environments are explicitly developmental spaces: their practices and activities revolve around fostering the growth of participants “ontologically”, both individually and collectively. As discussed above, ontological development is a shorthand for sustained development in the capacities which enable us to make sense of and engage with the world around us, particularly in how this relates to our own inner states. This can extend to more traditional education but also, and arguably more importantly, the domains often covered by spirituality and personal development such as emotional intelligence, self-knowledge and so on.

3. Deliberate. Development is intentional in that both the creators and participants are consciously orientated towards ontological development. This may not be the exclusive focus (as it is with. traditional monasticism, for example). However, it should be a clear, conscious and central component of their participation."

(https://www.whatisemerging.com/opinions/deliberately-developmental-spaces-a-key-to-addressing-the-metacrisis)

[[Category:Facilitation]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]