

=Discussion=

Kees van der Pijl:

"The Soviet experiments with digital planning, most of which remained confined to the
drawing board, are yet important to assess the possibilities of collectively operating
system of computerised direction of an economy at the service of society. One would
imagine that a number of directly involved mathematicians and computer engineers
are still around to enlighten the world about what was and can be achieved here.
There was also an important experiment with digital planning in Chile under Salvador
Allende’s Unidad Popular government in which the element of responsiveness to
popular concerns (and to disruptions) was explicitly accounted for, but it was cut short
by the Pinochet coup in 1973.

The question I address in the remaining part of this essay is how social control of
the economy, as part of a broader social self-determination guaranteeing maximum
individual autonomy, might be realised.

Unlike the Soviet digital planning experience, which transpired when the United
States was also in the early, experimental phase of the Information Revolution, this
time, the capitalist economy has pioneered key aspects of digitalisation, as noted with
repression and war preparation as key objectives. However, there is also a conscious
attempt to revitalise the system ideologically by attaching it to a new bourgeois,
entrepreneurial heroism. Presented first at the World Economic Forum’s annual
gathering at Davos in 2009, a ‘New Deal on Data’ was launched to turn those
providing their data into active property owners of what can be done with it. As 
Evgeny Morozov relates, the idea caught on and both the EU and the UN embraced
the notion of a new era of enterprising data owners, who would directly engage in
transactions with each other, essentially an ownership-based Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
system, with the allure of emancipation but firmly based on private property rights.17
However, the ambivalences of digitalisation in principle work to empower the
population at large too. The Open Source and Open Data spheres are effectively
operating as a democratic movement increasingly confronting the economically
powerful private sector, which owns the media, enjoys privileged state protection
nationally and internationally and yet is weaker, in terms of the larger transition
underway, than the open, public domains. The transition hinges on how states will
respond to pressures to ensure the security (job, food, energy security and the like) of
the population under conditions of extreme financial volatility. ‘Just as companies like
Google, Microsoft, Apple, and Amazon build regulatory mechanisms to manage their
platforms, government exists as a platform to ensure the success of our society, and
that platform needs to be well regulated’, writes O’Reilly.

The Open Data movement, in which Aaron Swartz was an iconic leading figure (he
took his own life when faced with a draconian sentence in the US for making
privately copyrighted academic materials publicly accessible), seeks to create a data
universe parallel to the Big Data available to the corporate sector, ‘civic data’. The
ubiquity of data itself already works to generate a culture that is moving away from
the bourgeois one of possessive individualism, or any other individualism that is
irresponsible relative to the large questions of human survival. The availability of
these data create expectations and habits that help build a civic culture which is
resistant to corporate control.

Hence it will be essential that movements making demands on capital and the state
(whether through trade union action or in movements such as the Yellow Vests in
France) also demand control facilities embedded in Open Data systems accessible to
all. These will then serve to complement the operation of representative organs, from
the United Nations and its functional and regional organisations down to national and
sub-national parliaments and councils. As more and more issues concerning the
organisation of the economy, the safeguarding of the biosphere including human
health, etc. will be reclaimed for democratic decision-making, these bodies will again
begin to attract quality memberships. After all, the decline of representative organs
has everything to do with the fact that in neoliberal capitalism the oligarchies behind
the major banks and corporations decide, and representative organs are merely there
to rubber-stamp their decisions. Through the IT infrastructure, old ideals such as the
right to recall of elected officials are becoming a reality because citizens will be
provided with real-time information on how representatives vote. In combination with
freely accessible tax data and data on secondary occupations of representatives, the
citizenry will be able to reclaim true sovereignty.

Clearly, the expropriation of large private concerns (in the case of public utilities
by not renewing the leases when they come up for renewal, as proposed by the Labour
Party in Britain) would have to be complemented by a movement to reclaim the media
from corporate control in order to make meaningful public discussion possible.
In this way the aforementioned structures of public representation, subject to digital
transparency, may be expected to begin to set targets beyond the day-to-day
management of current affairs.  

Within these broad parameters of a socialist reorientation of society as a whole,
specific digital regulation according to O’Reilly would require four steps: 

1) an understanding of the desired outcome; 

2) ‘real-time measurement whether that
outcome is being achieved’; 

3) algorithms (ordering rules meant to allow adjustment
on the basis of new data), and 

4) ‘Periodic, deeper analysis of whether the algorithms
themselves are correct and performing as expected’. "

(https://www.academia.edu/40678009/Democracy_ecology_and_Big_Data._Can_they_be_combined_into_a_21st-_century_socialism?)


=More information=

*  Katharina Loeber,. ‘Big Data, Algorithmic Regulation, and the History of the Cybersyn Project
in Chile, 1971–1973’. Social Sciences, 7 (65) 2018, doi:10.3390/socsci7040065, pp. 1-15.

*  Evgeny Morozov, ‘Digital Socialism? The Calculation Debate in the Age of Big Data’. New Left
Review, 2nd series (116-117), 2019, pp. 33-4.

*  W. Paul Cockshott, and Allin Cottrell, Towards a New Socialism. Nottingham: Spokesman
Books [pdf edition].1993, pp. 57-8.



 
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]