'''* Book: Democracy And Economic Planning. The Political Economy Of A Self-governing Society.By Pat Devine. Routledge, 1989.

URL = https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9780429033117/democracy-economic-planning-pat-devine


=Description=

"Devine begins with an analysis of the theory and practice of capitalist planning, central planning and 'market socialism'. He argues that, while market socialism is currently favoured by many economists who reject both capitalism and the command planning of the Soviet model, it cannot fulfil the promises held out for it."


=Contents=

* Chapter 1: Introduction

* Chapter 2 Capitalist Planning

* Chapter 3 Central Planning
 
* Chapter 4 Market Socialism

* Chapter 5 The Socialization of Production

* Chapter 6 Democracy

* Chapter 7 Abolition of the Social Division of Labour

* Chapter 8 National Priorities and Planning

* Chapter 9 Communities and Production Units

* Chapter 10 Negotiated Coordination


=Discussion=

by Gavin Mendel-Gleason [http://spiritofcontradiction.eu/rowan-duffy/2012/06/28/which-way-the-economic-revolution] :

"Devine’s negotiated coordination is an attempt to meet both consumer and producer demands through democratic stake-holding bodies which compromise between production and consumption targets to produce a plan. The book is useful as an introduction to British wartime planning and various theories about the nature of the USSR. The British wartime examples are both instructive and encouraging and make the first half of the book well worth the read.

On the other hand the actual details of how planning would be conducted are relatively sparse. The idea given really focuses much more on managing democracy and much less on managing efficient production. As such it seems like it would be a better adjunct to another theory of planning which could give insight into what a baseline plan aught to look like."
(http://spiritofcontradiction.eu/rowan-duffy/2012/06/28/which-way-the-economic-revolution)


=More information=

'''* [[Research Project on Democratic Economic Planning]]'''

URL = https://innovationsocialeusp.ca/en/crits/recherches/democratic-economic-planning?

"From the middle of the 20th century to the present, few economic models have been developed that are not based on market allocation or centralized planning. One can think of the content of socialism according to Cornelius Castoriadis, libertarian municipalism according to Murray Bookchin, coordinated negotiation by Pat Devine and Fikret Adaman and participatory economy according to Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel. Very different from each other, these models all have the advantage of being relatively detailed and written by authors with a certain proximity to the social movements of their time. However, while they have been discussed in some circles, they have rarely been debated and discussed in depth."

* [[Central Planning and Rivalry]]

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]
[[Category:Economics]]