=Introduction=

Alex Foti analyzes a great crisis of neoliberalism, which can lead to a 'European bifurcation', i.e. two possible outcomes, either demoliberal, or demoradical regulation.

For background, I strongly recommend you read Foti's analysis of the current world crisis and the remarkable graphic it contains, at http://www.leftcurve.org/LC31WebPages/Grid&ForkTable.pdf


=Description=

Alex Foti:

"Europe is today facing a fundamental bifurcation for the future of its
political economy. The crisis of the neoliberal agenda, unpopular in
Europe everywhere, is evident also to European elites. They have
responded by tracing what I call a DEMOLIBERAL regulation. Basically
it's neoliberalism lite: it is a bit less pro-American, because US-EU
interests are no longer coinciding in geoeconomic and geopolitical
terms (for instance, Europeans have only to lose from clashing
head-front with Islam) but retains a strong commitment to NATO; it
invests a little more in public infrastructure and possibly spends on
welfare to cushion workers from the vagaries of the labor market, but
only as long as people remain under the control of workfare provisions
aiming at increasing the productivity of so-called human capital and
guarantee social obedience among welfare recipients. This top-down
project, to which social movements and radical subjectivities must
respond with a grassroots mobilization to shape political Europe as
they see fit, has one only, but crucial, merit. It would constitute
antibushist counterbalancing for Europe, and would put Atlantic
relations on a more equal footing, should bushism be electorally
defeated. And muted European neoliberalism could be still preferable
to returning to the nation-state with its nationalist and militarist
pretensions. Demoliberal regulation not only seeks a new
business-friendly social consensus, it opposes the dangerous
xenophobic forces that have become a major factor in European
politics.



A political answer to European moderates which would take an
explicitly multiethnic, egalitarian and ecological road is what I call
DEMORADICAL regulation, i.e. a dramatic change in socioeconomic policy
thanks to a progressive social bargain imposed from the bottom up
(rather than top-down, as in demoliberal regulation) through labor
protest, social conflict, participatory democracy. A progressive front
that would link leftist/democratic organizations, unions, movements in
their common opposition to technocrats, corporations, financial
markets and the liberal regulation these would like to re-assert, in
order to protect the unequal economic status quo they have gained so
much from. But most of all, demoradicalism would be a clarion call to
all emancipatory forces in Europe to mobilize against populist
xenophobia, anti-immigration hysteria, clerical interference."
(http://info.interactivist.net/node/5252)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]