

=Discussion=

==The Greek Demos as principle and place of equality==

David de Ugarte:

'''Demos: the Equality Space'''

"Originally, a demos was something rather similar to a
parish in traditional territorial orderings, but with
Kleisthenes's democratic reform, the demos (δημος)
became the basic unit of social organisation, a micropolis
constituted by the real community surrounding each
person.

The demos gave those of its members who wanted
to be its representatives in the boulé – a sort of Senate
which had executive power – a pinakion, a piece of bronze
with his name and that of the demos. The pinakion was a
sign of belonging and guaranteed that its bearer would be
recognised as a citizen by the rest of the demos, that is,
by the polis as a whole.

One could not be elected without a pinakion. That's
why the demos, the institution which distributed them, is
used nowadays as a synonym for the group of people who
have full citizenship within a organisation. But what's
really interesting is how.

The demos was really something that went
much deeper than a list of candidates.

The Athenian democratic system was not
based on representation and voting, but on random
election: in order to represent his demos in the boulé, a
citizen had to drop his pinakion into a slot of his choice in
a matrix called kleroterion. The kleroterion would then
release either a white or a black ball according to the slot
chosen. If on entering the pinakion a black ball was
released, the citizen was entrusted with representing the
demos.

Belonging to a demos was thus synonymous with
attaining the rights – and duties – of full citizenship, but,
more importantly, in accepting someone into the
demos, what was accepted was that he could
become part of the executive power independently
of whether most of the community members would
prefer someone else.

That is, accepting the incorporation of a
citizen to the demos entailed accepting his
effective equality, as it amounted to a declaration that,
independently of his specific political views, it was a
matter of indifference to any citizen whether he
was part of the executive power.

The demos entails a high degree of identity
because it is really based on the indifference principle:
to consider myself part of a demos means that I don't
care which one of the other members carries out any
given representation or administration task on behalf the
community, even if it affects my safety or welfare. That's
why originally "democracy" meant a draw, not a vote."
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/phyles.pdf)


Source: the book, [[Phyles]]: [[Economic Democracy in the Network Century]]. by David de Ugarte 


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]