
draft page, for a initiative with Pat Conaty et al.

=Description=

Pat Conaty:

"The aim of the project is to create "socially useful money organisations" (SUMO) and to eventually co-build a digital platform. 

If you can imagine a Commons alternative to VISA you get the picture. Why should all credit be debt based? If large and small credit unions, CDFIs, co-operative banks came together and built common cause and unity, Financial Democracy could be made real and practical. But we need the Commons and democratically owned platforms."



=Recommended Reading=

==Key Documents==

* [[Democratic Money and Capital for the Commons]]. Report by Pat Conaty and David Bollier. Commons Strategies Group / Heinrich Boll Foundation, 2016.

URL = https://www.boell.de/en/2016/01/15/democratic-money-and-capital-commons [https://www.boell.de/sites/default/files/democratic_money_capital_for_the_commons_report_january2016.pdf pdf]

Report based on a intensive 'deep dive' conversation by experts from the funding world and actors in peer production, which examined funding possibilties for the commons and commons-based projects.


* Robin Murray's [[Reflections on Democratic Money and Capital for the Commons]]; commentary on the above report and event.

==Formal Contributions==

* [[Frances Hutchinson Comments on the 'Democratic Money and Capital for the Commons' Report]]

* [[Policy Proposals for Future Money by James Robertson]]

* [[Shann Turnbull on Establishing Sustainable Units of Value]]

* [[Mary Mellor on Public Money for Sustainability and Social Justice]]

* [[Adrian Costain on How To Find Democratic Money and Capital for SME's]]

* [[Joseph Huber on the Case for Sovereign Money]]

==Other Short Articles==

* [[Pat Conaty on Distributed Money Creation Without Central Banks]]

* Ellen Brown proposes a new Economic Bill of Rights, http://ellenbrown.com/time-for-an-economic-bill-of-rights/ 
** [[Ellen Brown on Public Banking]]
** [http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/brexit-and-the-derivatives-time-bomb_us_5777ff56e4b0746f5648184e Brexit and the Derivatives Time Bomb]

* [https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/geoffrey-ingham/whose-money-is-it Whose money is it?]. GEOFFREY INGHAM: excellent historical introduction

* [[Shann Turnbull on Establishing Sustainable Units of Value]]

==Additional Resources==

* Dieter Suhr, paper on Neutral Money Networks, http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~roehrigw/suhr/nngengl.html 

* '''Richard Douthwaite. Degrowth, Money and Energy, 2011''' [http://degrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/douthwaite_degrowth-money-and-energy.pdf]

Pat Conaty writes:

"What strikes me about this wonderful paper is how he creatively frames an outline of the new money commons architecture and he approaches this challenge in a multi-level way from global to national to regional. He links insightfully the fossil fuel crisis to the crash in 2008 and also highlights what the late  Margrit Kennedy drew attention to, the embedded interest costs in public services and other essential goods.  What is marvelous about this paper is the way he shows how the work to build resilience through co-operative innovation in community energy, food sovereignty, community land trusts (are implied) and regional currency can be brought together in a synergistic way. He argues for a provisioning system as Mary Mellor and Frances Hutchinson set out so well in Politics of Money book in 2002. But he also draws attention to the kilowatt hour forms of money and tethering ideas Shann Turnbull has been articulating."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]