
=Contextual Quote=

"the Denial to Domesticate (DtD)™ theory and is a unifying bridge between the two brilliant theories of Varki ([[Mind Over Reality Transition]] (MORT) theory) and Wrangham (“The [[Goodness Paradox]]”). DtD states that MORT enabled Self-Domestication."

- un-Denial [https://un-denial.com/2019/05/07/on-the-emergence-of-behaviorally-modern-humans-the-denial-to-domesticate-dtd-theory/]



=Description=

un-Denial:

"About 1 or 2 million years ago our primate ancestors mastered the use of fire to cook food. Cooking increased the energy available from food thus enabling the evolution of a larger brain. These primates used their more powerful brain to cooperate and create technologies like stone tools and weapons that enabled them to prosper and expand their range.

Several hundred thousand years ago the evolution of increased brain power and associated social cooperation bumped up against a barrier. This barrier resulted from a reduction in reproductive fitness when the brain became powerful enough to understand its own mortality. Several different hominid lines were blocked by this barrier. Then about one or two hundred thousand years ago, one small tribe in Africa evolved a mechanism to break through this barrier. The evolutionary trick was to simultaneously evolve an extended theory of mind with a behavior to deny unpleasant realities like mortality. The two otherwise maladaptive features when combined became a powerful adaptive advantage by enabling the evolution of a more powerful brain with an extended theory of mind.

Having broken through the mortality awareness barrier, the tribe became what we now call behaviorally modern humans, with religions rooted in life after death, and exploded out of Africa to populate the entire planet, initially displacing all other hominids, and today is well underway to displacing many other species, including perhaps itself.

The cognitive barrier, and the mechanism for breaking through it, is explained by '''Ajit Varki’s [[Mind Over Reality Transition]] (MORT) theory'''."

(https://un-denial.com/2019/05/07/on-the-emergence-of-behaviorally-modern-humans-the-denial-to-domesticate-dtd-theory/)


=More information=

* Ajit Varki’s [[Mind Over Reality Transition]] (MORT) theory

* a new book by Richard Wrangham titled “The [[Goodness Paradox]]”

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]