

Video documentary about ecological design for a sustainable future.

A selection of clips can be found here, with statements from 'design outlaws' such as Stewart Brand, John Todd, etc...

URL = http://www.designoutlaws.com/gallery.html?PHPSESSID=01936cabefec978d272cd6345f0dd127


=Review of full documentary=


"'''Solar Energy''':Design Outlaws explores the various aspects of the solar energy movement, with examples of solar architecture, breakthrough innovations in solar panels, solar roofs and other forms of solar design. Once viewed as a hobby for wealthy environmentalists, solar energy is now considered an economically viable alternative to "the Grid" and may in fact be the saving of energy-starved states such as California.


'''Renewable Systems''': A major focus of Design Outlaws is upon renewable or regenerative systems. These are items or processes that we use and depend on in our daily lives.Examples include waste-water treatment, sewage treatment, and transportation devices. Until relatively recently, most such systems used technologies that consumed fossil fuels or utilized chemicals to accomplish their tasks. Unfortunately, these processes have caused great damage to the environment either through the process of their extraction and creation, or through their consumption/ utilization. Alternatively, renewable systems (such as solar energy) do not consume fuels and leave toxic residues. Another example is wind-power, or windmills. Living machines are the answer to processing waste-water in an organic fashion, without harmful pathogens and chemicals.


'''Eco-Design''':A prevailing concept throughout the book, Design Outlaws and the documentary film, Ecological Design: Inventing the Future, is that we have the power to redesign and improve our environment in virtually every way. Concepts as diverse as green architecture, alternative power sources and the saving of rivers and wetlands are woven into an overriding philosophy that describes a new mandate for living in harmony, rather than in conflict with, our environment.


'''People''': The trailblazers who contributed to Design Outlaws reads like a who's who of ecological innovators and leaders. The list includes: Amory Lovins, Anthony Walmsley, Arthur Young, Brendan O' Reagan, Brian Danitz, Buckminster Fuller, Carol Franklin, Catherine Simon, Chris Zelov, Christopher Alexander, David Sellers, Douglas Adams, Duane Elgin, Edmund Bacon, Gail Vittori, James Wines, Jay Baldwin, Jean-Paul Polinere, John Allen, John Todd, Harold Cohen, Hazel Henderson, Hunter Lovins, Ian McHarg, Jaimie Lerner, Leslie Sauer, Mary Catherine Bateson, Mike Corbett, Paolo Soleri, Paul MacCready, Peter Calthorpe, Pliny Fisk, Steward Brand, Ted Nelson, Thomas Hughes, Tom Casey, Tony Gwilliam, William McDonough"


[[Category:Webcasts]]