

=Description=

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"[[Design Justice]], an emergent concept that is being developed in large
part through the efforts of folks connected to the Allied Media
Conference, is a normative and pragmatic proposal for a liberatory
approach to the design of digital technologies, products, services, and
systems. Design justice proponents might argue that we have an ethical
imperative to systematically advance democratic participation in all
stages of the digital technology design process, and especially to
center historically marginalized communities in this process, based on
principles of democratic inclusion and social justice. At the same time,
design that follows these principles can produce products and systems
that work better for all of us, in the long run. We need to ask a series
of questions about how the design of digital technologies currently
works, and about how we want it to work. We need to raise questions of
accountability (who gets to do design? how do we move towards community
control of design processes?), values (what values do we encode and
reproduce in the objects and systems that we design?), discourse (What
stories do we tell about how things are designed? How do we scope design
challenges, and frame design problems?), sites (Where do we do design?
How do we make design sites accessible to those who will be most
impacted by design processes? What design sites are privileged and what
sites are ignored or marginalized?), political economy (who profits
from, and what social relationships are reproduced by, design?), and
pedagogy (how do we teach and learn design justice skills and
practices?) At the same time, we have to document innovative
community-led digital design practices, each grounded in the specificity
of a particular social movement. There is a growing community of
designers, technologists, and engaged scholars who work hand in hand
with community based organizations, through iterative stages of project
ideation, design, testing, evaluation, launch, and stewardship; we
invite you, the reader, to participate in these communities. Let’s work
towards design justice in theory, practice, and pedagogy."
(http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup )

=Discussion=

==Design Justice: An Introduction and conclusions==

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"Design Justice might initially be seen as part of a long turn
towards the theory and practice of User Centered Design, as well as the
more recent advance of value driven design, both increasingly popular
within industry. These shifts are important and have had the practical
outcome of producing products that better respond to user needs, and
that are designed with affordances that fit the values of design teams.

However, they don’t satisfy the normative or ethical goals of aligning
design with larger struggles to overturn the intersectional matrix of
domination (along lines of race, class, gender identity and sexual
orientation, disability, immigration status, and more), in part because
these approaches are too easily appropriated as extractive mechanisms by
oppressive institutions and systems. Design justice goes further than
previous proposals since it not only argues for equity in employment in
the design professions and for the intentional inclusion of values in
decisions about the affordances of designed objects and systems, it also
insists on community participation, leadership, and accountability
throughout the design process, as well as community ownership of digital
technologies and of the narratives about them.


...


By default, digital technologies are designed in ways that reproduce
existing forms of structural inequality. Only through conscious and
coordinated intervention can we bend the arc of digital technology
development towards justice. There are many mechanisms at work in this
process: designers, intended benificiaries, scope, values, discourse,
sites, governance, and other aspects of the development, deployment, and
use of digital technology are all structured by race, class, gender
identity, sexual orientation, immigration status, disability, geography,
and other intersecting axes of inequality. Power reproduces itself
through the stories about technology design that we center (design
discourse); who we pay to design and develop digital technologies
(employment inequity); the imagined ‘end users’ for whom we design the
majority of digital technologies (design benificiaries); the
affordances, features, presets, intentional and unintentional biases
that we encode into digital technologies (encoded values); the inclusion
and exclusion of various kinds of people from the places and spaces
where we design digital technologies (design sites); the allocation of
decisionmaking power over the digital technologies in our lives
(governance), and more. There is also a growing community of design
justice practitioners: people, organizations, and networks that already
work on a daily basis to realize design justice principles in practice.
This zine includes the principles of design justice as developed through
the Design Justice Network Gathering at Allied Media Conference. Those
principles are a living document, and we hope to continue to develop
them together. We might also explore how to evaluate design according to
those principles, and we urge the reader to consider how these
principles might apply to their own work. Let’s build theory, practice,
and pedagogy of Design Justice together!"
(http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup )

=More information=

*  [[Notes on Design Justice and Digital Technologies]]. By Sasha Costanza-Chock. [http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup]: an introduction to: 
** [[Design Pedagogy]]‎
** [[Design Sites]]‎
** [[Design Discourse]]‎ 
** [[Design Values]]‎
** [[Design Accountability‎]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]