
'''= a production-chain project that covers everything from the furniture design to its production and distribution and creates a network of professionals and user involvement right from the product configuration stage. '''


URL = http://www.droog.com/projects/events/design-for-download/


=Citation=

"When Droog launches its Design for Download website in the coming months, it will have the opportunity to do for furniture what Apple did for music: turn a commodity business into a service business. It’ll be '''FaaS: Furniture as a service'''. Simulatenously, it will be one of the earliest commercial efforts at “[[Physibles]]”."
(http://p2pbydesign.com/post/26727776847/droog-downloadable-design-an-example-of-mass)


=Description=


'''1.'''

"allowS the production of storage furniture, wardrobes, tables and seating with variable configurations. Users can shape and personalise their own furnishings with intuitive 3D modelling parametric programs. The design file is then sent to a network of local manufacturers and suppliers, who produce the finished object using numerical control machinery. The process is made possible by simple system assembly and the choice of materials, mostly natural wood which can be chosen and sourced locally."
(http://www.domusweb.it/en/design/download-for-design/)




'''2. Massimo Menichinelli:'''


"We can certainly say that Open Design is now mainstream if the most famous conceptual design company starts a business around it. This is the case of Droog Design, that with Mediagilde started the Design for Download initiative (previously called downloadable-design).

This initiative will be presented during the Salone del Mobile in Milan in 2011, but the launch of the platform, featuring various brands and institutions alongside Droog, will occur later this year. The platform will not only include products, but also architecture, home accessories, fashion, food, wearables, and more.

For the moment Droog will present furniture and accessories designed for download by EventArchitectuur and Minale-Maeda, including CNC cut tables, cupboards, desks, side tables, shelves, couches and 3D printed electrical outlets, flowers and charms. Furthermore:

- Droog will also present digital design tools that allow ordinary computer users to easily make functional design decisions, automatically generating blueprints for local execution in various materials. The tools also enable communication between designer and customer, streamlining and lowering the cost of a custom design process. The presented products have been customized by Droog for its collection. 

According to an interview to Droog director Renny Ramakers, this is not the first time that Droog considers Open Design as an option. In 2004, Mario Minale designed Red blue Lego chair, a Lego version of the iconic Red blue chair by Gerrit Rietveld. Mario Minale, originally wanted people to make the Lego chair by themselves, releasing the project as open source. Droog wanted to make it accessible for everybody, but since it was not possible to mass produce it due to copyright reasons, they produced it in a copy of 5 and it became an art project.

Renny Ramakers explains then that with Open Design:

- With the opening up of the design industry to consumers now empowered with easy-to-access and low-cost design and production tools, the role of curation becomes ever more important.

For this project Droog Design have collaborated with consultants Cathal McKee (CMK1), Catherine Jasserand (Ivir), Hans Lensvelt, Institute of Relevant Studies, Joris Laarman and Michiel Frackers. The project has been initiated by Droog and was made possible by Agentschap NL.

Moreover, according to Waag Society, within their program called Open Design:

- The Open Design Lab aims to make design innovation an open, collective and shared effort, as in open-source, open content and ultimately open design.

they are collaborating with Droog Design for this project:

- The Open Design Lab also intends to build a database of open designs with Droog design under the title ‘downloadable design’.
(http://www.openp2pdesign.org/2011/open-design/open-design-is-going-mainstream-now-second-part/)



=More Information=

#[[Crowdsourced Design]] VS [[Open Design]]
#YouTube video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nuzcl_QdTOM&feature=player_embedded#!
#[[Agata Jaworska on the Design for Download Project]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]