
= '''Who participates in, owns, and governs digital technology development?'''

=Discussion=

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"The most valuable ‘ingredient’
in Design Justice is the full inclusion of people with direct lived
experience of the conditions the designers say they are trying to
change. We could summarize the recent state of knowledge on the raced,
classed, and gendered nature of employment in the technology sector, but
we also need to shift from an argument for equity (we need diverse
designers and software developers) to an argument for accountability
(those most affected by the outcomes should lead and own digital design
processes and products). The ‘participatory turn’ in technology design
includes intersecting histories of User-Led Innovation, Participatory
Design, and Feminist HCI (Von Hippel, 2005; Schuler and Namioka, 1993;
Bardzell, 2010). Case studies might include the disability justice
movement, whose activists popularized the phrase “Nothing About Us,
Without Us,” (Charlton, 1998) and ACT UP!, who transformed HIV treatment
through a potent mix of direct action, media savvy, and policy lobbying
(Shepard, 2002). The key lessons include: involving members of the
community that is most directly affected by the issue that you are
focusing on is crucial, both because it’s ethical, and also because the
tacit and experiential knowledge of community members is sure to produce
ideas, approaches and innovations that a non-member of the community
would be very unlikely to come up with. It’s possible to create formal
community accountability mechanisms in design processes. This is
especially urgent to do when working with historically marginalized
communities, but applies to any and all design processes. The vast
majority of community-based organizations don’t feel like they have the
resources, skills, or time to participate in technology design. This
doesn’t mean that they aren’t doing design, that they can’t do design,
or that it doesn’t make sense to try and include them in a design
process focused on an area that they work in; it means that a Design
Justice framework requires doing the work to gather resources that will
enable community participation and shared ownership."
(http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup)


=More information=

* [[Design Justice]]

*  [[Notes on Design Justice and Digital Technologies]]. By Sasha Costanza-Chock. [http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup]: an introduction to: 
** [[Design Pedagogy]]‎
** [[Design Sites]]‎
** [[Design Discourse]]‎ 
** [[Design Values]]‎


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]