
= '''What stories do we tell about the design of digital technologies?'''

=Discussion=

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"Stories have power. For example, contrast the ‘official’ Twitter
origin story (one of the founders had a brilliant blue-sky flash of
genius) with counternarratives from developers who were part of the
process (anarchist activists created the demo design for Twitter as a
tool to help affinity groups stay one step ahead of the cops in the NYC
Republican National Convention actions of 2004; see Siles, 2013). The
key point is that innovation in media technology, like all technological
innovation, is an interplay between users and tool developers, not a
top-down process. Social movements, in particular, have always been a
hotbed of innovation in media tools and practices, in part because of
the relationship between the media industries and social movement
(mis)representation. Social movements, especially when led by
marginalized communities, are systematically ignored and misrepresented
in the mass media, so movements often form strong community media
practices, create active counterpublics, and develop media innovations
out of necessity (Downing, 2000). Many social movement media innovations
are later adopted by the journalism profession and by the broader
cultural industries, although stripped of their original
counterhegemonic intent. Examples include Indymedia and CNN iReports,
TxtMob and Twitter, and DIY livestreams from DeepDish TV to Occupy
(GlobalRevolution, Timcast) to Periscope and FaceBook Live. We have to
tell these stories, so that our contributions to the history of
technology development aren’t erased."
(http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup)

=More information=

* [[Design Justice]]

*  [[Notes on Design Justice and Digital Technologies]]. By Sasha Costanza-Chock. [http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup]: an introduction to: 
** [[Design Pedagogy]]‎
** [[Design Sites]]‎‎ 
** [[Design Values]]‎
** [[Design Accountability‎]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]