
'''* Thesis: [[Participatory Aid Marketplace]]. Designing Online Channels for Digital Humanitarians. Matt Stempeck, 2013'''

URL = http://www.mattstempeck.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Matt-Stempeck-Participatory-Aid-Marketplace.pdf

Submitted to the Program in Media Arts and Sciences, School of Architecture and Planning,
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Media Arts and Sciences at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2013


=Abstract=

"Recent years have seen an increase in natural and man-made crises. Information and 
communication technologies are enabling citizens to contribute creative solutions and 
participate in crisis response in myriad new ways, but coordination of participatory aid 
projects remains an unsolved challenge. I present a wide-ranging case library of 
creative participatory aid responses and a framework to support investigation of this 
space. I then co-design a Marketplace platform with leading Volunteer & Technical 
Communities to aggregate participatory aid projects, connect skilled volunteers with 
relevant ways to help, and prevent fragmentation of efforts. The result is a prototype to 
support the growth of participatory aid, and a case library to improve understanding of 
the space. As the networked public takes a more active role in its recovery from crisis, 
this work will help guide the way forward with specific designs and general guidelines."

Thesis supervisor: Ethan Zuckerman


=Contents=

"This introduction will discuss my motivations and overview of my contributions. 

Chapter 2 explains the spectrum of ways we, as a society, respond to crises. It 
dissects formal and mutual aid and introduces a new phrase, participatory aid, to 
describe the dramatic democratization of crisis response. 

Chapter 3 offers a framework 
for understanding participatory aid projects and a deep case library of examples. 

In  Chapter 4, I review related work, introduce my technical intervention, the Participatory 
Aid Marketplace, and discuss how it seeks to support various actors in the 
participatory aid sector. 

Chapter 5 discusses next steps for the Marketplace and 
additional research questions to investigate in participatory aid. 

Finally, Chapter 6 
concludes the work and summarizes the key findings and limitations of this thesis."

=Excerpts=

From the introduction:

"This thesis examines the many ways the public can contribute to help others in 
times of crises, be they man-made or natural disasters. I introduce the growing trend of 
participatory aid: mutual, peer-to-peer aid assisted by information and communication 
technologies like the World Wide Web and the smartphone. My inspirations are the 
many creative ways people have used the internet and related technologies to aid 
others in need. Remote online volunteers have used the internet to develop 
crowdsourced maps for decisionmakers and translate victims’ requests for aid, to give 
two successful examples. 

The spectrum of what individuals and groups can achieve online is wider and 
richer than our conventional imagination allows. Technology's advance over time 
continues to expand the realm of the possible. Knowing -- and signaling -- what can be 
done, where to get involved, and, crucially, how such an effort maps to others’ needs 
are unsolved problems. A central clearinghouse of opportunities and active efforts 
could reduce barriers to communication and collaboration."
(http://www.mattstempeck.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Matt-Stempeck-Participatory-Aid-Marketplace.pdf)

==On [[Ad Hoc Mutual Aid]]==

Matt Stempeck:

"In recent decades, there has been significant sociological research into “helping
networks” to investigate the power of informal social networks in our lives. Donald 
Warren’s 1980 book, Helping Networks, studies how these informal aid systems sit in 
society: “They are not groups. They often do not know each other. They are the 
combinations of people we turn to.”

There is also a wide collection of literature studying “pro-social behavior”, and 
the forces that drive individual and collective altruism.18 René Bekkers and Pamala 
Weipking completed a thorough and useful literature review of empirical studies of 
philanthropy and identified eight mechanisms that drive charitable giving. One of the 
most referenced works discussing pro-social behavior in society is Dynes’ 1970 book, 
Organized Behavior in Disaster.

The literature on “helping networks” and studies of offline social networks have
analyzed how people solicit and receive aid from a wide range of others in their lives, in 
times of acute crisis as well as daily life. There are “[s]ystems of help, not simply those 
with which bureaucracy and professionalism are associated, but also a vast set of 
almost invisible threads of human contact used in times of crisis and need for everyday 
problems.”20 In the context of mental health, neighbors rely on one another naturally for 
social services and resources rather than seek professional intervention.21 Shirley 
Patterson’s exploration of “Natural Helping” found that social contacts provide mutual 
aid support to their neighbors out of altruism rather than expectations of future 
rewards.

Mutual aid is also a significant force in the context of acute crises. When there is 
a crisis, people want to help, and will often go to great lengths to provide meaningful 
aid themselves. Sarah Vieweg finds collective intelligence in the aftermath of the 
campus shooting at Virginia Tech in 2007.23 In Facing the Unexpected: Disaster 
Preparedness and Response in the United States, Tierney, et al., analyze 25 years’ 
worth of disaster data and strongly support the finding that “disasters engender pro-
social, altruistic, and adaptive responses rather than negative reactions like panic.”

Vieweg, et al. write, “Disaster situations, throughout history, have demonstrated that 
people rise to difficult challenges to help others, often through remarkable innovations 
and adaptations of their own abilities and resources to meet needs.”

Professional emergency response managers like Pascal Schuback understand 
that the affected population itself begins responding to a new disaster long before 
“first-responders” from formal aid groups can arrive.26 The informal aid offered by 
citizens in these first hours can be critical to saving lives. One exemplary recent 
example is the unplanned evacuation of lower Manhattan on September 11, 2001. 
Kendra, et al. document how ships of all kinds, from tugboats to ferries to private 
pleasure boats materialized at the site of the most devastating terrorist attack in US 
history to help evacuate between 300,000 and 500,000 civilians stranded at the 
southern tip of the island with little direction from the Coast Guard.27 Writing about this 
type of ad hoc mutual aid in emergencies, Stallings and Quarantelli argue that formal 
aid actors should facilitate these “emergent citizen groups”, not just in crises that 
trigger a clear survival consensus, but also in divisive crises like riots.28
Mutual aid may be a natural inclination, but it is also at least partially driven by 
the limits of formal aid actors:

“Self-help or mutual-aid groups have developed, in part, as a reaction to various limitations of 
professional organizations. Such limitations included an “unwillingness of professionals to deal 
with certain problems, a limited reach with regard to various populations, an overly intellectual 
orientation, and monopolistic credentialism.”

One directly relevant example of mutual aid rising to meet a population’s needs 
when the formal aid system fails is Gregory Asmolov’s work launching the Russian 
Fires Map30 (which has evolved to become Rynda.org). When wildfires consumed large 
areas of Russia in 2010, the ineptitude of the government response and paucity of 
state-influenced media coverage inspired citizen-driven aid efforts, coordinated 
through an Ushahidi map.

The mapping platform was repurposed to connect citizens 
in need and citizens seeking to help. Citizens used participatory media to hold the 
government accountable, but also to organize and collaborate on ways to respond to 
the fires to take the action that the formal state actors had failed to take. Asmolov has 
since launched Rynda.org, an 'atlas of help', to match peer donors and beneficiaries 
under the romantic symbol of the rynda, the bell Russian sailors would strike when they 
were in need of help. (For an extensive treatment of affected communities’ own abilities 
to respond to crisis, see Humanitarianism in the Network Age report by UNOCHA)."
(http://www.mattstempeck.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Matt-Stempeck-Participatory-Aid-Marketplace.pdf)


==On [[Civic Groups-Based Mutual Aid]]==

Matt Stempeck:

"In addition to the ad hoc aid found throughout human history, mutual aid 
includes semi-formal groups like religious congregations, citizen clubs, and other
community groups. These civic groups often serve critical organizing roles in alerting 
and structuring mutual aid within a community. 

Like many dichotomies, the distinction between formal and mutual aid has 
always been somewhat artificial. Formal and mutual aid are in no way mutually 
exclusive, except that we may sometimes focus on the former at the expense of 
developing the latter. Formal aid sector workers do the best they can to save as many 
lives as possible, but they do not pretend to have every answer, or the resources to 
sufficiently help every person in every crisis. Mutual aid is recognized within the formal 
aid space as a powerful force.

A community’s ability to manage crisis itself has been described as resilience.
The concept has been popularized in recent years to describe “the capacity of the 
affected community to self-organize, learn from and vigorously recover from adverse 
situations stronger than it was before.” In Building Resilience: Social Capital in Post-Disaster Recovery,
Daniel Aldrich argues that the strength of (traditional) social 
networks themselves can predict a community’s resilience and ability to recover in 
times of crisis. He pulls together data from four different large-scale natural disasters to 
prove that “social resources, at least as much as material ones, prove to be the 
foundation for resilience and recovery.”36 A community with a more densely connected 
social network and deeper social capital may prove more adept at providing mutual aid 
to one another, because it can more quickly share critical information, aid resources,
and better stem population losses due to migration away from the affected area. To 
illustrate his argument, Aldrich compares the stark difference in post-Katrina recovery 
between different neighborhoods in New Orleans. The Vietnamese community 
centered around the Mary Queen of Viet Nam Church is deeply interconnected and rich 
in social capital, and was able to recruit back 90% of homes and businesses within a 
year of the hurricane, in addition to establishing a charter school, urban farm, and 
medical clinics.37 The community was also able to organize itself to rally for official 
resources, like the restoration of electricity from the local utility. Other neighborhoods 
are still visibly suffering from the unemployment, poverty, and structural damages 
delivered by the storm years later. Aldrich argues that the great disparities in recovery 
between neighborhoods or cities are not the result of variation in official government 
recovery funding but rather the degree to which the responding community has 
information, collective action, and social connections."
(http://www.mattstempeck.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Matt-Stempeck-Participatory-Aid-Marketplace.pdf)


==On [[Peer to Peer Aid]]==

Matt Stempeck:

"In the crisis management world, Kropotkin’s term ‘mutual aid’ describes the acts 
of the affected populations in leading their own response and recovery. Participatory 
aid is the evolution of mutual aid, which can stand independently of formal aid 
systems, and which invites participation of people from all over the globe to have 
greater impact, thanks to ICT. We might even reimagine the role of the formal aid 
systems to support and inform participatory aid.

The mutual aid school of thought has gained new currency in recent years with 
the success of technology-mediated peer-production movements38 like open source 
software, Wikipedia, and other digital projects where non-market forces drive 
individuals’ contributions to the common good. Collaborative projects have exposed 
the productive roles peer reputation and cooperation can play in driving meaningful 
participation.

Proponents of the peer-production trend, such as Stephen Johnson, argue that 
the continued debate over the appropriate role for the market and the state in society 
must also now include the third pole of networks of individuals. Mutual aid has evolved 
and grown stronger alongside our advances in information and communication 
technology. Johnson’s book, Future Perfect, describes ‘peer progressives’ who 
organize in a decentralized manner and can actually surpass the efficacy of traditional 
hierarchical (and market-driven) approaches.39 The descriptor ‘peer’ works, Johnson 
argues, on the civic level (“a jury of our peers”) as well as the technical level (peer-to
peer networks).40 These broad shifts in the agency of networked individuals are 
changing the crisis response industry just as they have disrupted the music, travel, and 
countless other industries before it. 

Industry after industry has been disrupted by the rise of connective technical 
platforms like the internet, which has enabled end consumers (or citizens) to source 
their books, news, music, travel, and, increasingly, their response to crisis, directly. In 
the 20th century, record labels gained control of many of the stages involved in the 
production and distribution of music. Peer to peer filesharing dramatically disrupted the 
labels’ 20th century distribution model, but also other stages, such as artist discovery, 
promotion, production, and the revenue models behind each process. In the travel 
industry, the middlemen known as travel agents have been replaced by more efficient
web platforms that aggregate and filter numerous options for end consumers. Airbnb 
has further disrupted the travel industry by making private residences available to 
travelers, introducing serious competition to the hotel industry. 

In each case, technology has brought producers and consumers closer 
together, or in some cases, blurred the lines beyond recognition. This creates a 
diminished role for mediator middlemen like retail stores, distributors, travel agents, 
and large crisis response NGOs. Cultural and business factors play an important role in 
timing, but one of the key independent variables in ICT disruption of consumer-facing 
industries is the introduction of intermediary platforms that supplant the human- or 
bureaucracy-organized options presented to consumers. These platforms usually 
accomplish this feat by simultaneously expanding the range of available options and 
improving customized filtering of these options to prevent overload and reduce friction 
(such as time or cost required for the consumer to take action).

Information and Communication Technologies like the World Wide Web and 
smartphones have not only connected us, but also digitized many of our professions. 

Information workers, from lawyers to designers to cartographers, now use digital tools 
extensively in their labor. This development has opened up the opportunity to donate 
one’s time, and with it one’s professional skills and abilities, to assist in recovery 
efforts. Our networked, digitized workplace allows professionals to make significant 
pro bono contributions from anywhere in the world. Properly allocated, the time of an 
individual with valuable skills could quickly surpass the value of the small donation they 
may (or may not) represent as a traditional donor. The range of potential ways to help 
has also greatly expanded. Online, the simple act of bringing attention to a crisis has
emerged as an important, if lightweight, contribution. Well-structured crowdsourcing 
allows even unskilled volunteers to contribute en masse.

Thus far, the participatory aid movement is small relative to the percentage of 
citizens that might give a donation during a telethon. One reason this is the case is that 
awareness of available ways to help is low (identified by Bekkers and Wiepking as a 
key factor in successful philanthropy). Another barrier to public involvement in 
participatory aid is the lack of a popular, central, and trans-crisis intermediary platform 
to connect those who seek to help with projects and organizations that can channel 
this energy. 

We might expect fewer citizens to get involved in participatory aid projects 
relative to the number that take the simple act of making a donation. But we should 
also expect more people, in absolute terms, to contribute to participatory aid efforts, 
and in a wider range of ways than we’ve previously seen. This work seeks to 
encourage meaningful participation by producing a volunteer-friendly intermediary 
platform to increase awareness of channels accepting volunteer contributions and to 
reduce the friction of finding and joining such efforts. 

The Humanitarian Horizons report predicts “the emergence of a “new 
humanitarianism” that will be part of neither the humanitarian nor development 
systems.”

Just as participatory media opens the power of communication to the 
audience, participatory aid invites the involvement of the people formerly known as
beneficiaries, and their peers, to respond to and even drive recovery efforts 
themselves. 

Information technology has driven participatory models of interaction forward 
and disrupted the companies, institutions, and societal expectations built, over 
decades, around the broadcast model. Macro trends independent of any specific 
players in the aid industry have shifted the roles and relative abilities of donors, 
recipients, and mediating organizations in ways we do not yet fully understand. In 
many ways, this shift echoes similar technology-driven disruption in other fields. 
Participatory aid does not outright replace formal aid, but if supported, could greatly 
augment it. This connection between 
disparate sectors requires facilitation."
(http://www.mattstempeck.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Matt-Stempeck-Participatory-Aid-Marketplace.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Participatory Aid]]



[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Research]]