
= '''Where do we create new digital technologies?'''


=Discussion=

Sasha Costanza-Chock:

"Design takes place everywhere, but particular sites are valorized as
ideal-type locations for design practices. There is a growing literature
about, and increased discussion of, real world practices within
hackerspaces, hackathons, and design challenges. There has been a steady
shift away from hacklabs as explicitly politicized spaces at the
intersection of social movement networks and geek communities (Maxigas,
2012). Instead, startup culture and neoliberal discourses of individual
mastery and entrepreneurial citizenship have largely colonized
hackerspaces (Irani, 2015), even as city administrators have leveraged
technofetishism to create ‘innovation labs’ at the city level. At the
same time, there has been a more recent move towards intentional
diversification of hacker and makerspaces, specifically along lines of
gender, race, and sexual orientation. Examples include Liberating
Ourselves Locally, Double Union, and more. However, in addition to the
diversification of hacklab participants, design justice requires a
broader cultural shift, back towards intentional linkage of these spaces
and their practices to social movement networks. We must interrogate the
ideals, discourse, and practice of hackathons and design challenges:
what do people think or pretend hackathons do, and what really happens
at hackathons? How do we imagine them as more intentionally liberatory
and inclusive sites where design justice principles and  practices can
be implemented?  How do institutions frame ‘problems’ for designers to
‘solve’ in ways that systematically invisibilize structural inequality,
history, and community strategies of innovation, resilience, and
organized resistance? Examples might include Hurricane Hackers, Occupy
Data Hackathons, MigraHack, and TransHack, as well as the DiscoTech
model (pioneered by the Detroit Digital Justice Coalition) and the Make
the Breast Pump Not Suck hackathon. Ultimately, we also need a shift
from deficit to asset based approaches to design scoping, and for the
formal inclusion of community members in design processes during scoping
and ‘challenge’ definition phases of a design cycle, not only during the
‘gathering ideas’ or ‘testing our solutions’ phases."
((http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup)

=More information=

* [[Design Justice]]

*  [[Notes on Design Justice and Digital Technologies]]. By Sasha Costanza-Chock. [http://bit.ly/DJZine3Mockup]: an introduction to: 
** [[Design Pedagogy]]‎
** [[Design Discourse]]‎ 
** [[Design Values]]‎
** [[Design Accountability‎]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]