'''* Book: Design for Services. Anna Meroni. Gower,'''

URL = http://www.gowerpublishing.com/isbn/9780566089206


=Description=


1. From the publisher:

"In Design for Services, Anna Meroni and Daniela Sangiorgi articulate what Design is doing and can do for services, and how this connects to existing fields of knowledge and practice. Designers previously saw their task as the conceptualisation, development and production of tangible objects. In the twenty-first century, a designer rarely 'designs something' but rather 'designs for something': in the case of this publication, for change, better experiences and better services.

The authors reflect on this recent transformation in the practice, role and skills of designers, by organising their book into three main sections. The first section links Design for Services to existing models and studies on services and service innovation. Section two presents multiple service design projects to illustrate and clarify the issues, practices and theories that characterise the discipline today; using these case studies the authors propose a conceptual framework that maps and describes the role of designers in the service economy. The final section projects the discipline into the emerging paradigms of a new economy to initiate a reflection on its future development."
(http://www.gowerpublishing.com/isbn/9780566089206)


'''2. Daryl Taylor:'''

'Based on a "Service Design approach, interested in sustenance 
activities and with emphasis on relationality, attachment, conviviality and scale.

It's "about 'designing for something' rather than 'designing something' is worth checking out.
Her commitment is to designing people in, based on the 
social value created, rather than out, because of the economic cost of labour, is key.


I love the principles and guidelines deduced from their small scale slow experiments.

    * Increased service accessibility
    * Preserve relational qualities
    * Enhance local visibility
    * Fluidity management
    * Reduce cognitive cost
    * Offer different levels of involvement
    * Support collective use
    * Promote availability
    * Keep the relational scale
    * Enhance the semi-public scale
    * Provide support for participation
    * Build trust-based relationships'

(via email, February 2012)


=Contents=


#Preface, Rachel Cooper; 
#Introduction, Ezio Manzini; 
#Section 1 Introduction to Design for Services: A new discipline. 
#Section 2 Design for Services: from Theory to Practice and Vice Versa: 
##Designing interactions, relations and experiences: case studies 1-5; 
##Designing interactions to shape systems and organisations: case studies 6-9; 
##Exploring new collaborative service models: case studies 10-13; 
##Imagining future directions for service systems: case studies 14-17; 
##A map of design for services; 
##What is design for services?; 
##What job profiles for a service designer? 
#Section 3 Future Developments: An emerging economy; 
#Appendices; 
#Index.


=About the Author=

Dr Anna Meroni is assistant professor at the INDACO (Industrial Design, Arts, Communication and Fashion) Department of the Politecnico di Milano University, Italy, a Training and Research Centre in Design. She investigates service from the perspective of strategic social innovation, with a specific emphasis on community centred design. Her main research areas are food systems and innovative housing for sustainable lifestyles. Dr Meroni is co-director of the international Master in Strategic Design and a visiting professor and scholar in schools and universities around the world. She is active in the launch and promotion of the international network DESIS, Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability.

Dr Daniela Sangiorgi is a lecturer at ImaginationLancaster, the creative research laboratory at the Lancaster Institute for Contemporary Arts (Lancaster University, UK). As one of the early scholars looking into Service Design, she has gained international recognition. Her work has been mapping and supporting this emerging field of study and research since its outset. Her doctorate has investigated services as complex social systems, proposing holistic and participatory approaches to Service Design. Recent work has been exploring the role of Design and participation within public services reform, with a focus on commissioning for healthcare. She has been one of the founders of the Service Design Network and Service Design Research initiatives. 


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Books]]