

=Definition=

the formal definition of 3D printing, or “additive manufacturing” as defined by the 
ASTM International Committee F42 on Additive Manufacturing Technologies3 as, 

“process of joining materials to make objects
from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as opposed to subtractive manufacturing methodologies.”

Source: ASTM F2792-10 Standard Terminology for Additive Manufacturing Technologies


=Description=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"3D printers use as an additive
process, meaning they make objects by systematically depositing a chosen raw
material in layers. Somewhat similar in concept to that of an inkjet printer that
orchestrates different colored print cartridges to form an image onto paper, the most
common household 3D printing process involves a “print head” that works with any
material that can be extruded, or squirted through a nozzle. Another common type of
3D printer uses a laser beam or glue to selectively fuse powdered plastic, metal, or
ceramic raw material in layers.

...

Industrial size 3D printers cost up to half a million dollars, but low end personal-scale
3D printers cost less than $1000."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


==Materials==

"The most commonly used material in 3D print applications is plastic, but some
higher-end machines are able to work with metals and ceramics.

...

Today’s 3D printers are
already capable of combining and manufacturing previously incompatible materials, namely simple
electrical components and mechanical parts, called electro mechanical devices. (Your cell phone or laptop
(or Roomba) is made of electrical and mechanical parts that were manufactured on separate, specialized
machines and assembled afterwards by yet another machine, or human factory workers)."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


==How-To==

"The 3D printing process works as follows. Once
the user has selected an electronic design blueprint
and loaded up the raw materials into the 3D
printer, the machine begins its work. In a process
that can take several hours to days, the 3D print
head deposits layer upon layer of tiny droplets of
raw material to form the object. Depending on the
complexity of the design, the machine is able to
switch between different print heads to work with
multiple materials and form shapes with a number
of colors and diverse textures. Eventually, after
countless back-and-forth sweeps, a three-dimensional
object forms out of raw material."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



=Advantages and Disadvantages=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

'* 3D printers appeal to artists and designers since their unique layer-upon-layer
production process enables creative people to precisely fabricate imaginative and
unusual objects, according to exact blueprint specifications. 

* 3D printers are clean,
meaning since their manufacturing process does not involve cutting, scraping, or
burning a raw material, they produce very little manufacturing waste, or un-used byproduct.

Due to their precision and versatility, 3D
printers are already in use in industry for
industrial modeling, product or part visualization, and prototyping.

...


* Almost any physical object that can be sliced into thin,
horizontal cross-sections and represented in an electronic blueprint can be 3D
printed. 

* Another characteristic of 3D printers which makes them uniquely versatile is
their ability to simultaneously print, into a single object, previously incompatible
materials.

* When working with raw materials that are chemically incompatible, or that require
different manufacturing conditions, traditional manufacturing machines must work
on the incompatible materials in separate processes and then assemble them later.
Since 3D printers form objects layer by layer, they fuse together multiple materials
into a single object at the time or printing. As a result, in a single “print job,” a 3D
printer can combine materials that have different physical properties to produce, for
example, a plastic hair brush with soft-bristles set
into hard plastic. 

'''This “co-fabrication” process is not unlike biological growth, where hard and soft tissue is cofabricated and intertwined in living beings of infinite complexity."'''
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


==Disadvantages==

* "The main disadvantage of 3D printers is the slow
speed of their unique layer-upon-layer fabrication process. Even industrial-scale 3D
printers are too slow to quickly produce large volumes at the rate needed in mass
production environments. As a result, 3D printers remain impractical for the
production of anything other than small batches of a kind custom objects, complex
product prototypes or objects d’art."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



=Areas of Application=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

* "a popular application for 3D printers is that of
custom food and candy. Since it is meticulous and
can combine materials in new ways, a 3D printer
can create edible materials and custom confections

* As the price of 3D
printers shrinks, consumers are experimenting with the fabrication of novel
recreational consumer items such as jewelry and toys. 

* In industry, companies print
specialized technical parts for high end electronic and medical products that demand
custom precision, such as dental crowns and bridges. 

* A vibrant hobbyist 3D printing
community continues to attract a growing number of designers, businesses and
consumers.


'''In the future:'''

* future 3D printers are able to manufacture very sophisticated
devices that contain fully formed electronic circuitry, batteries, sensors inside some sort of mechanical
“body,” we will witness the production of fully formed robots that will not require further assembly.

...

a 3D printer that manufactures
a complete robot would qualify as “a robot printing robots.”
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]] ; [[Desktop Manufacturing]]
* [[3D Printing]]
* [[Desktop CNC Routing and Milling Machines]]



[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]