
'''* PhD Thesis: The development of a carrying capacity assessment model for the Australian socioenvironmental context (Research PhD). By Murray Lane. A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING OF QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, 2014'''

URL = https://eprints.qut.edu.au/67485/1/Murray_Lane_Thesis.pdf

=Description=

"There are clear signs that society is threatening the biophysical limits of our shared
environment and that the size, distribution and behaviour of the population is to
blame. The ongoing worsening of crises like water, food, soil and energy depletion,
climate change, biodiversity loss and environmental degradation serves to illustrate
that the current human situation is not sustainable. The seven billion-strong global
human throng is exerting such pressure on our existing societal and environmental
systems as to suggest a re-evaluation of existing approaches to the way in which land
and resources are managed and to the very structures that allow these problems to
escalate. A whole-of-system approach would see a realignment of priorities whereby
the economy is viewed as a subsystem of society and the environment provides the
backdrop to all societal systems. In order to achieve a sustainable socioenvironmental balance, society’s resources will increasingly need to be produced and accounted for, much closer to where they are to be used. New societal strategies need
to be developed in order to cope with the challenges ahead and a re-localised system
of resource usage is one potential systemic change that may facilitate more
sustainable future lifestyles. Carrying capacity assessment provides one important
tool for estimating the ability of landscapes to support the demands of local
populations. Carrying capacity assessment offers a way to assess our resource needs
and also determine how best to meet these needs in the future. This process
establishes direct causal relationships between a specific landscape, timeframe and
people, and inherently links these aspects to systems of land usage and social
function.

A key aim of this research is to highlight '''how society’s understanding of constraints to the productive capacity of its resource base is vital to its long-term survival. This was achieved through the development of an online model, the Carrying Capacity Dashboard, which links a population to the potential biophysical capacity of its environment.''' 

By accessing and reconfiguring existing data, this
research has developed a flexible, robust and easily-accessible carrying capacity
assessment tool. It offers user choices relating to climate, diet, land-use, agricultural 
techniques, energy consumption and nature conservation, and also provides dynamic
responses to online users. This educative feature is a valuable innovation to carrying
capacity modelling which can assist in future societal decision-making processes
relating to consumption patterns, land-use planning, population control and systems
design.

Analysis developed from the Dashboard tests the effects of various resource
consumption patterns on carrying capacity and highlights the degree to which various
regions are over or under capacity. Three scales of analysis were employed –
national, state and regional; and it was found that the most significant determinant of
carrying capacity is the proportion of cropping land within any one state or region.
Findings also reveal that Australia’s current short-term carrying capacity is estimated
to be over 40 million. However, if calculated on a regional basis, the nation’s
carrying capacity is reduced by almost half, suggesting that national resource
utilisation would currently be more efficient than at the regional scale, even though
future resource constraints may necessitate greater regional self-sufficiency. Longterm projections were also tested and carrying capacities both at a large and smallscale were found to be much smaller in a future fossil-fuel depleted context.
Ultimately, this research indicates that an entire systemic change is required to place
society back on the path towards sustainability. Such changes entail a future
decentralisation of the population, agricultural and recycling practices instituted at
local or regional scales and a rapid reduction in the reliance on non-renewable
resources."


=Excerpt=

== The [[Tokugawan Period in Japan]] as exemplifying ecological and population stability ==

Murray Lane:

"Japan’s Tokugawan period, between 1600 and 1868, was one of relative peace,
prosperity and strikingly unusual population stability. From a carrying capacity
perspective, this period highlights one potential ideal; reflecting a societal system
that was both resource self-sufficient and well aware of its population limits. In this
regard, Japan’s Tokugawan era provides a rare example of a population not only
stabilised within the carrying capacity of its landscape but also conscious of the
extent of these limits and dedicated to the difficult task of maintaining population
numbers within such constraints.

The Tokugawan or Edo era began when Tokugawa Ieyasu took control of Japan
in 1600 after a long period of internal conflict.213 While the first century of this era
featured a rise in the Japanese population from about 20 million to 30 million people,
the next 150 years is marked by very little change in population numbers214 until the
Meiji Restoration after 1868 ushered in an escalation in population which today
stands at over 120 million.

There is little doubt that the population stability evident during the Tokugawan era
did not occur by chance, nor did it occur through Malthusian checks. Indeed, this
period is noted for its prosperity rather than any deprivation. Rather, at a household
level, the Japanese population was acutely aware of the optimum size and
configuration of family makeup and took various steps to control it. Smith
proposes that population control occurred through a series of initiatives such as, “low
registered fertility and mortality, wide spacing of births, early stopping of childbearing
by married women, and small completed families.” Smith examined one particular
Japanese village in order to illustrate Tokugawan population dynamics and found that
while abortion and contraception may have occurred, the practice which most
significantly influenced family planning was infanticide. He argues that infanticide
was used to control the gender sequence, the spacing of births and the overall size of
families and that it was practiced by both large wealthy land-holders and poor tenant
farmers alike.220 Given the stability in population numbers during this period, it can be
assumed that families merely replicated existing numbers. According to Hanly and
Yamamura, “[p]arents sought to rear a family of about three to four children.” Exact
replication would suggest a family with only two children, but the additional one or
two children suggested here may be accounted for by either premature death or
childless adults. The optimum composition of Tokugawan families was also
consciously regulated and according to Smith, the over-riding motivation was socioculturally based. He states that all families wanted one or two male children to supply a male heir and also to provide farm labour. However, any more than one or two males
risked eventual competition over inheritance rights so female offspring were often
deemed more desirable once the males were born.

While providing a salient historical exemplar of population control and stasis, to be
relevant to the processes of carrying capacity assessment, the Tokugawan experience
need also to provide evidence of a societal awareness of the landscape’s bio-physical
limits and a commitment by the population to live within them. Evidence to support
this notion is clear, but circumstantial. While there are no apparent records of villages
or families stating that they restricted the population size to the biophysical limits,
there is ample evidence that villagers were well aware of such limits, suggesting, as
Macfarlane222 says, “an attempt to balance fertility and resources.” The way in which
widespread awareness of resource production can be ascertained is through
examination of the Tokugawan taxation system. At the beginning of this period, an
assessment, called the kokudaka, was made of the productive capability of every
Japanese village, with the resultant data being used to tax each village in the rice and
other grains that were produced. According to Smith,223 these land registers aimed to,
“register within a small and more or less carefully defined area - usually a village -
each taxable field; to record the name of its holder, its extent, the quality of its soil,
and its estimated yield… The kokudaka therefore was an estimate of normal yield with
adjustments for factors affecting taxable capacity.” These records were openly
assessable to all villagers, were updated throughout the Tokugawan period224 and
formed the basis of their communal civic contributions. While they were designed for
taxation rather than carrying capacity objectives, the result was the same – each
Japanese family was acutely aware of the productive capacity of their farm and
village, at a scale within which the vast majority of their resources were drawn. This
high degree of self-sufficiency makes an examination of Tokugawan Japan even more
relevant for carrying capacity-based exemplars. Not only was the nation as a whole
relatively cut off from the rest of the world, but as Smith225 notes, each village was
made up of mutually dependent families which, “attained a degree of self-sufficiency
that was impossible for any of its members alone - a self-sufficiency imposed by
physical isolation and the rudimentary state of the market.”

Another salient point in the exploration of the relevance of carrying capacity
issues to the Tokugawan exemplar is the fact that Japan was effectively at or just
below full population capacity by about 1700 when the population stabilised. As
highlighted by Macfarlane,226 “there was also no open frontier for the Japanese,” they
were forced into a choice between population stability or population overshoot, and
all evidence suggests that they chose the former. One example of resource constraints
limiting population size occurred in a village in Totomi Province where population
records show that there were two types of local families; the ones in place prior to
1741 and those arriving after this date. As Smith227 explains, “[t]his particular date is
significant since no new land was brought under cultivation after that. This year the
absolute limit on the expansion of arable was apparently reached. Families founded
afterwards, therefore, had access to land only as tenants, and they were probably
placed under political disabilities to discourage any further increase in their number.”
The example offered by Tokugawan Japan fulfils the criteria of a carrying
capacity-led population dynamic. At a village level, this society was relatively selfsufficient; it was well aware of the productive potential of its landscape and it went to great lengths to maintain a population size within these biophysical limits. Far
from being repressive, dreary or repugnant, this era is celebrated for its peacefulness
and prosperity. Despite a stable population, there were quite significant changes and
advancements in technologies and demography. As Smith228 explains, “the very
success of the Tokugawan system created conditions favourable to change; cities
grew, communications improved, productivity in agriculture increased, industry
spread from town to countryside.”
(https://eprints.qut.edu.au/67485/1/Murray_Lane_Thesis.pdf)



[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Articles]]