

'''Devolve''', http://www.devolve.org/

"Devolve! is a radical English devolution movement. We aim to encourage the peoples of England to achieve greater control over their own lives. We believe that there are four dimensions to this task: territorial, democratic, cultural and economic devolution (see below). A tolerant style is vital if large numbers of people are seeking to agree on what is to be done. Hence tolerance is central to our beliefs. Devolve! is non-party political.

OUR FOUR ROADS TO EMPOWERMENT: -

Our own regions* of England: bringing power closer to home through Territorial Devolution.

Ourselves as individuals and small bonded groups: through involved democracy (people making policy), starting locally and face to face: Democratic Devolution.

Ourselves as cultural groups (peoples): giving English culture, and the other cultures in England, full political representation: Cultural Devolution.

Ourselves as producers and consumers: creating together a co-operative economy under responsible human control: Economic Devolution."
(http://www.devolve.org/)

"The Vision: A new approach to democracy that recognises - for the first time - that people respond differently to issues of power and responsibility; that understands how human types play complementary roles in the small human group; that recognises the (face to face) group as the bedrock of democracy while while affirming that all individuals have a part to play in their various groups, including the ultimate sanction of withdrawal. [ORGANIC DEMOCRACY not ELECTED OLIGARHY]

A pluralist ideal or goal in which civil society, not the state, is at the heart of politics; in which power and responsibility are always built from below by the sideways co-operation of local° and particular°° bodies into wider forums capable of addressing social issues relevant to their member groups. [SYNARCHY not HIERARCHY"


THE EIGHT STRATEGIES

1. Recognising and supporting the aspirations and visions of existing movements for full territorial devolution (based on history, distinctive culture and identity) as cultural or 'Homeland' projects aimed at winning hearts and minds but not yet as practical politics: until the democratisation of society outlined below is substantially advanced.
2. Opposing any additional tiers of bureaucratic government decreed or dispensed from above. Also opposing directly elected 'regional' assemblies as undermining both empowered local governance and the pluralist principle that power and responsibility should always be built from below.
3. Making re-invented local government the starting point of future devolution. See below.
4. Local government re-connected to the people. How? Through our own micro organisations (residents, traders, faith groups etc) confederating into structures of Very Local Democracy [VLD] capable of holding elected councillors continuously to account, and of making responsible partnership with them for very local and local governance.
5. Supporting moves to make the most senior officers in local authorities both accountable to elected members (no more delegated powers) and removable by democratic decision ... while recognising the dedicated contribution of most officers and employees to implementing the policies of their councils.
6. Further developing the new economic tools now becoming available to empower local communities and partnerships and also to overcome the catch 22 of local authority economics.
7. Supporting all efforts and campaigns to draw down specific powers from Westminster to local level. This process is essential to reverse 150 years of centralisation that has stripped the cities, towns and districts of England of the means to solve their problems.
8. Encouraging and supporting confederations of local authorities as they evolve into Functional Sub Regions (whether focused on counties or conurbations) capable of effective administration within their areas and also of mobilising support against central dictates where appropriate - for example, airports we can learn to live without and green belt/flood plain housing developments."
(http://www.devolve.org/)

[[Category:Movements]]