

=Context=

Christina Priavolou and Vasilis Niaros:

"Considering the low productivity rates and unsustainable practices unveiled through the bursting of the housing bubble [11], the potential to produce more convivial houses through community-driven processes was explored.

By applying DGML principles in the construction sector, we refer to open construction systems as a potentially sustainable approach in housing provision. Through community-driven practices, pressing issues related to the lack of transparent and sustainable processes could be addressed [12]. The embedded modularity of such systems, together with their momentum to provide affordable housing in a collaborative and convivial way, is gradually increasing their social impact, affecting large parts of the Western and non-Western world.

In line with the DGML model, open construction systems attempt to provide affordable housing in a creative and convivial way. However, safety issues related to the construction of a DGML house have been identified. Overcoming such issues will potentially inaugurate a new paradigm in building houses where the users feel in control of constructing and maintaining their houses."


=Example=

==[[WikiHouse]]==

"An instrumental case study was thoroughly examined to assess certain features of an open construction system, that of a WikiHouse. These features are associated with advantages that refer to the conviviality as well as the drawbacks that pertain to the openness degree of the WikiHouse technology. The latter has been claimed to inaugurate a model of open-source practice towards the democratization of the construction process.

In this article, the comprehensiveness of the published data and the relevant practices will be discussed for a specific WikiHouse technology. Through evidence-based analysis of the relevant dynamics, we will shed light on the conviviality and the openness potential of a WikiHouse. The aim is to critically assess the conviviality potential of a DGML artefact and examine the role of openness in enhancing DGML features. An in-depth understanding of the relationship between openness and conviviality as well as their interrelation with the DGML approach for producing technological solutions will be explored."

For the full case study, see: [[Openness and Conviviality in the WikiHouse Project]]


=Source=

* '''Article: Assessing the Openness and Conviviality of Open Source Technology: The Case of the WikiHouse. by Christina Priavolou and Vasilis Niaros. Sustainability 2019, 11(17), 4746'''; https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174746

URL = https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/17/4746/htm


=More information=

* Priavolou, C. The emergence of open construction systems: A sustainable paradigm in the construction sector? J. Futures Stud. 2018, 23, 67–84. [Google Scholar]



=Source=

* Article: Assessing the Openness and Conviviality of Open Source Technology: The Case of the WikiHouse. by Christina Priavolou and Vasilis Niaros. Sustainability 2019, 11(17), 4746; https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174746

URL = https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/17/4746/htm

[[Category:Housing]]
[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]