
'''* Book: Dialectics of Myth. Aleksei Fedorovich Losev. Routledge. (2004)'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/The-Dialectics-of-Myth/Losev/p/book/9780415753852


=Description=

"Aleksei Fedorovich Losev (1893-1988) was among the greatest Russian philosophers, thinkers, and classicists of the twentieth century. A contemporary of Mikhail Bakhtin, and a scholar of astonishing erudition, his work remained almost unknown to the public until the fall of communism in 1990. The Dialectics of Myth, published here for the first time in English, remains his foremost achievement. Setting out a provocative and spiritually informed account of the way that myth informs secular and religious ideologies, it challenges limited interpretations of myths as mere poetic allegories, primitive scientific constructs, or channels for religious dogma and political fabrication. Insisting upon the miraculous elements of myth, the book creates a powerful and readable defence for mythic experience as a genuine part of consciousness, reality, and being."


=Contents=

Chapter I Myth is neither invention nor fiction nor fantastic fabrication. 

Chapter II Myth is not ideal being. 

Chapter III Myth is not a scientific nor, more specifically, a primitive scientific construct 

Chapter IV Myth is not a metaphysical construction 

Chapter V Myth is neither schema nor allegory 

Chapter VI Myth is not a poetic work 

Chapter VII Myth is a personalistic form 

Chapter VIII Myth is not an especially religious construction 

Chapter IX Myth is not religious dogma 

Chapter X Myth is not an historical event as such 

Chapter XI Myth is miraculous 

Chapter XII A review of all dialectical elements of myth from the standpoint of the concept of miracle 

Chapter XIII The final dialectical formula. 

Chapter XIV The transition to actual mythology and the idea of absolute mythology


[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Cosmobiological]]