
'''* Book: Crossing the Divide: Dialogue among Civilizations.  School of Diplomacy and International Relations at Seton Hall University, 2001'''

URL = http://academic.shu.edu/diplomacy/dialogue/news/crossing.html


=Description=

“The result of an international endeavor whose seeds were planted in 1998 by President Mohammad Khatami of the Islamic Republic of Iran during an address to the United Nations General Assembly. The time had come to bring the world together in a discourse aimed at replacing hostility and confrontation with mutual acceptance and understanding. Looking back, it is fateful that the UN proclaimed 2001 as the Year of Dialogue among Civilizations. Now, more than ever, a meaningful dialogue is necessary to address our political, religious, ethnic and cultural differences and even more so, to realize our similarities and embrace our diversity. In addition to addressing these issues, Crossing the Divide illuminates the pathway for a new paradigm of global relations for present and future generations.
To examine the different and shared values in today's cultures, and better understand how increased globalization will affect and alter relations among nations and peoples, UN Secretary-General Annan appointed an international group of eminent persons to lead the Dialogue among Civilizations. The eminent persons include former heads of state and government, Nobel laureates and renowned scholars. They were led by former UN Under-Secretary Giandomenico Picco, best known for his role as chief hostage negotiator and for gaining the freedom of the hostages in Beirut, Lebanon.”

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Books]]