
'''Diamond Touch = horizontal collectively changeable computer screen table for cooperation in physical groups.'''

URL = http://www.merl.com/projects/DiamondTouch/


Video at http://www.merl.com/projects/DiamondTouch/DiamondTouch.mov

Another one, a Google Earth application of the system, at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J5ra4CxNb80


=Description=

"The MERL DiamondTouch table is a multi-user, debris-tolerant, touch-and-gesture-activated screen for supporting small group collaboration. The DiamondTouch table is available commercially as a developer's kit and includes: a selection of demonstration applications; a mouse emulator with onscreen keyboard to support common Windows applications; and a Software Developer's Kit allowing the development of new software applications that support gesture inputs and multiple simultaneous users.

Background & Objective:  Computers are good at facilitating collaboration between people in remote locations. However, when people are in the same place at the same time, computers tend to get in the way. DiamondTouch supports small group collaboration by providing a display interface that allows users to maintain eye contact while interacting with the display simultaneously (i.e., without having to take turns). DiamondTouch was first created in 2001 as an experimental multi-user interface device. Over the past few years, MERL has manufactured about 100 DiamondTouch tables, lending them to universities and research organizations around the world."


==In French==

"Le laboratoire de recherche de Mitsubishi Electric (la filiale américaine du groupe asiatique) a mis au point Diamond Touch  (vidéo .mov), une table de travail interactive pour améliorer la collaboration en petits comités. Le système fonctionne par rétro-projection et peut reconnaître plusieurs utilisateurs d'une manière tout à fait fluide. La table est disponible commercialement sous forme d'un kit pour développeur… Appliquée au jeu vidéo, comme le montre cette autre vidéo, ou à l'information géographique, comme le montre celle-ci, l'intuitivité de l'interaction produit de! s effets assez remarquables."

Lien permanent et réaction en ligne : http://www.internetactu.net/?p=6422 


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Gaming]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]