

=Discussion=

Paul Fernhout:

" there are two reasons why open manufacturing is different than open
agriculture.

One difference is that open agriculture requires significant amounts of
sunny land (with water and good soil). The history of the world in recent
centuries includes all sorts of episodes of forcing individuals out of
ancestral lands and either into cities or onto more marginal lands (and
justifying it also by propaganda). Open manufacturing requires very little
space so it can be done even in cities, and while it does require power, raw
materials can often come from scrap.

Another difference is that agriculture takes some skill appropriate for the
particular microclimate and soil etc. Much of that has been lost, and also
the seeds that grow well in an area may be harder to get. A big part of open
manufacturing is in a sense "deskilling" what now requires a lot of manual
dexterity and wide-ranging knowledge, as well as providing computer-assisted
training for what remains (web pages, wikis, community forums, meetups). And
again, some of the manufacturing knowledge may be more generally applicable
and easily discussed globally than local agricultural knowledge to some
degree. We found that when we did our garden simulator -- my wife looked
through dozens of gardening advice books and found many of them disagreed
about many things -- some of it was no doubt superstition, but other things
had to do with assumptions about climate and soils and local pests."
(Open Manufacturing list, June 2009)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]