

=Description=

Mark Stahlman:

"EXO believes the Digital paradigm is more accurately characterized as a “Sphere,” a civilizational subconscious mindset ordered around the focal points of language and definitions of what it means to be human. The Digital Sphere competes against two other Spheres, centered respectively around Western and Eastern civilizations. Collectively, the Three Spheres represent a classic 3-body problem that is forcing the disintegration of the old Television “world-order” and a reconfiguration of their respective original “ground.” In other words, the tug of war between the Three Spheres has awakened global humanity from its modern trance to an awareness of human spirituality in its various original cultural forms.

How and why is the Digital Sphere having what would seem to be an anachronistic effect on the “modern world”? EXO’s answer resides in the Digital Sphere’s grammar. This includes the basic architecture of the hard- and software of digital technology. Its hardware consists of circuits, made of composites of conductive and resistant materials that route electrical charges in elaborate configurations of flow (conductive) and stop (resistance). Essentially on-off switches. The software corresponds to this flow-stop/on-off circuit structure through a 0-1 binary code. The code “names” particular circuit patterns that are stored in the hardware as “memory.” Those code names can be used to retrieve that “memory.”

(https://exogenous.substack.com/p/the-reunion-of-body-and-the-old-soul-a14)


[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]