* Thesis: Ciudad Digital y Economía del Nuevo Paradigma. By  Felipe Velasquez Palacio. Lapapaya.org.

URL = http://www.bubok.es/libros/205909/Ciudad-Digital-y-Economia-del-Nuevo-Paradigma-Lapapayaorg

=Abstract=

"The last twenty years of history have created such significant changes to society that could practically define history for the next 500 years . These changes originated in the transformation of the governance model of society and change in patterns of production , coupled with scientific advances, the evolution of consciousness and the creation of digital economy model , be able to modify the way we live human beings in the territory. The earth. 

From this perspective, this book exposes the twenty fundamental principles that could build a new internet governance , destroy traditional coins and make way for a model adaptive to the dreams and needs of those cities . Lapapaya.org is the virtual model of the theory that is expressed in this book and to demonstrate the thesis of cities created for and from the knowledge, where people we are paid by the contributions we make each in our own community."

=Contents=

==Part 1. Theoretical foundations==

* 1.1 . The Integral philosophy.
* 1.2 . Western thought - Eastern .
* 1.3 . Holarchical Theory of Ken Wilber .
* 1.4 . Holons.
* 1.5. The four quadrants.
 1.5. Early twenties .
 1.5.1 . The twenty principles applied to the history and current social theory.


==Part Two. Crisis nature of the problem==

* 2.1. The origin of the problem.
 2.1.1 . On a personal level .
 2.1.2 . A social and cultural level.
 2.1.3 . At economic level .
 2.1.4 . At the environmental level.
* 2.2 . Where is it located?
* 2.3 . What format is displayed ?
* 2.4 . How is this reflected in the economy ? 
* 2.5. Natural self-regulation mechanisms . 
* 2.6 . Subprime - viral Capitalism .
* 2.7 . Consequences .
 2.7.1. revolutions
 2.7.2 . Social movements, the fallacy between pre and post capitalism.
 2.7.3 . The observed society, the world truman . 1
 2.7.4 . The energetic matter .
 2.7.5 . Industrial decline - Digital Personal Growth . 2.7.6 . Change in the curvature of global growth.
 2.7.7 . Workplace empowerment as an energy source .


==Part Three . The new Paradigm==

* 3.1 . The world as perceptions.
* 3.2 . Cognitive stages.
* 3.3 . The more evolved visions leap . 3.4. The big three.
 3.1 . In person:
 3.1.1 . From massification to personalizing , P2P networks and custom world.
￼ 3.1.2 . The core values ​​that are currently in crisis.
￼ 3.1.3 . Internet printing and reproducibility of information versus navigate.
￼ 3.1.4 . Linearity - Relativism of vision .
￼ 3.1.5 . Europe and the United States one step higher in the pyramid of needs.
￼ 3.1.6 . Searching toward the intangible.
￼ 3.1.7 . The rescue of human depth.
￼ 3.1.8 . Of reason and logic to empirical knowledge.
￼ 3.1.9 . The digital logic builds a new ethics.
￼ 3.1.10 . A new approximation to the ME.
* 3.2 . In culture:
 3.2.1 . Internet and culture.
 1 The Truman Show, known as The Truman Show ( live life ) in Spain and the story of a life in Spanish America , American film directed by Peter Weir and starring Jim Carrey and Ed Harris. Released in 1998.
￼ ￼3.2.2 . New Technologies , society and heritage.
 3.2.3 . Heritage.
 3.2.4 . New category of equity valuation . Heritage and identity.
 3.2.7 . The Historica re interpretation, in the creation of new identities .
 3.2.8 . Heritage and creation of digital content.
 3.2.9 . Nonlinearity in the perception of heritage.
 3.2.10 . Why re- interpret the heritage ?
* 3.3 . In Social .
 3.3.1 . The industrial age and the internet . 
 3.3.2 . Programming languages ​​and appearance. 
 3.3.7 . Work in involutional era.
 3.3.9 . The digital workflow replaces industrial . 
 3.3.10 . The redefinition of work.
* 3.4. As economic .
 3.4.1. New technologies, new economic model , new philosophical conception .
 3.4.2 . Move the economic model of the real to the virtual. Schemes of value in the new paradigm. 
 3.4.4 . Wikis and regulation systems in real time.
￼ 3.2.5 . The material heritage.
￼ 3.2.6 . individuals . The wave of change - Differentiation and Integration new .
￼ 3.3.3 . The relativism of socially vision .
￼ 3.3.4 . 70s - 2010 differentiation , binding of 2010 onwards
￼ ￼3.3.5 . The information society ( noosphere ) versus labor society ( Biosphere ) .
￼ 3.3.6 . New paradigms of communication - Leaders social .
￼ 3.3.8 .
￼ ￼3.4.3 . reaction. Interest rates , brokers and the economy
￼ ￼3.4.5 . The digital money.
￼ 3.4.6. The currency systems and regulation of society.
￼ 3.4.7 .
 3.4.8 . The actual money is data that behave differently than airplane .
 3.4.9 . New economic indicators . April . Lapapaya.org Internet and social network.
* 4.1 .Personal Development . 
* 4.4 .
￼* 4.3. Overcrowded society people . Internet 1.0 .
￼* 4.2. People . ￼ From individuals to the technological networks. Internet 2.0
￼ Collective .
￼* 4.5. Digital communities people . Internet 3.0

=More Information=

* If you want to experience this model , do not forget to sign up http://lapapaya.org .

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]