
Digital Literacies for Learning. Martin, A. and Madigan, D.,. Facet Publishing, 2006. ISBN: 978-1-85604-563-6


=Summary=

Edited by Allan Martin and Dan Madigan, this book addresses the wide
range of skills and competencies required of learners in the digital age.
Written by and aimed at information professionals, researchers and
educators it expands on the 2003 text "Information and IT Literacy" -
co-edited by Martin. This new text takes on the broader concept of
digital literacy and what it means for learners, educators supporting
professionals.

With input from 25 contributors spanning nine countries (UK, Sweden,
France, USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Mexico),
the text discusses the multi-faceted nature of digital literacy. Included
in this concept are a number of overlapping literacies relevant in the
digital age, e.g. ICT, technology, information, media and visual
perception.

The book is divided into two main parts over 21 chapters. Part 1
entitled "Literacies for the Digital Age" (chpts 1-11) introduces the
idea of the importance of digital literacies to the learning process and
to social survival. Also covered in this section are the development of
the digital literacy concept and the evolution of virtual learning
environments with some useful discussion on e-pedagogy.

Part 2 entitled "Enabling and Supporting Digital Literacies" (chpts
12-21) discusses equipping learners with competencies relevant to
digital literacy. Different approaches to, and problems with, this process
are given as examples. A variety of scenarios and settings are
described, from application of government policy to digital literacy skills
training courses. Some of the problems associated with e-learning from both
student and teacher perspectives are addressed and the impact of
digital literacy on graduate employment is also discussed.

The development of e-learning is covered and the current emphasis on
learner participation, identity and relationships in e-learning is placed
within its wider setting – both historical and social. The value
placed on these social competencies in e-learning is heartening to read
about given the tendency of e-learning to isolate the learner from certain
other social learning opportunities, e.g. face to face tuition,
classroom and lecture hall situations.

Focused on the higher education sector, this book should appeal to
those involved in learning at both a strategic and practical level. For
librarians, Chapters 4 and 16, covering publishing in the digital age and
the information commons, will be of particular interest.

The editors suggest that "digital literacy is about mastering ideas,
not keystrokes" (p XXVII). While working examples are given, the book
also deals in great part with ideas and concepts (particularly in Part
1) and the language used is often correspondingly conceptual. However,
there is a wide variety of writing styles across the 235 pages adding
texture to the book.

As the preface suggests this books is "one bite at the apple of
making the digital amenable to understanding . . ." (p XXVII). In bringing
together contributions from a wide range of professionals from
different countries and settings, it offers an important text for anyone
wishing to help learners learn successfully in the digital age.


=Editor bio's=

Allan Martin (ed) is Director of the IT Education Unit at the
University of Glasgow. Dan Madigan (ed) is Interim Director of Scholarship of
Engagement at Bowling Green State University, Ohio.


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Education]]