
'''= "to combine our resources to research, design, develop and certify digital products and services to protect privacy, foster trust, and work towards a sustainable and equitable world".''' [http://www.philipsheldrake.com/2017/01/digital-life-collective/]

URL = https://diglife.com/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Digital technologies are undermining our privacy, permitting mass state surveillance, enabling censorship, undermining journalism, and spreading fake news. It feels forbidding, uncertain, unsafe – more problem than solution, and far from the original vision for the Internet and Web.

And yet we’re optimistic that we can join together to fix it. The problem isn’t really the technologies we have to work with of course, but rather the way they’re crafted and who gets to do the crafting.

We’re forming the Digital Life Collective to combine our resources to research, design, develop and certify digital products and services to protect privacy, foster trust, and work towards a sustainable and equitable world. We aim to pool $20m p.a. to make this happen."
(http://www.philipsheldrake.com/2017/01/digital-life-collective/)


'''2.'''

"We believe our tech should serve without tracking us, protect without limiting us, and empower without betraying us. And such tech should be accessible to everyone without exception.

We use digital technologies to improve our lives — for convenience, connection, information and entertainment. However, these same technologies track our every movement, our every action, our every interaction. They allow others to build and use and sell digital copies of us, corroding our privacy and influencing our lives in unknowable ways.

The Digital Life Collective develops, funds and supports technologies created with only the individual's needs in mind.

We're member funded, member owned, and member operated, for everyone's benefit …digital technologies of, by, and for the people.
We simply can't do this unless we do this together. Your experience, participation and enthusiasm as a co-founder helps others, and helps all those others help you and yours."
(https://diglife.com/)


=More Information=

* see also, the [[Hi Project]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]