
'''= "DCPC) conducts scientific research to increase recognition for the digital commons and the voluntary work that creates these common goods".''' [https://dcpc.info/lab24/]

URL = https://dcpc.info/


=Description=

" The DCPC aims to increase the recognition of the benefits of digital commons such as free and open source software and Wikipedia, and of the volunteer labour which produces these common goods. It does so by producing evidence-based public reports and other resources."

(https://dcpc.info/about/)


=Status=

"In 2022 the Société des Communs held two Policy Labs bringing together digital commons project representatives and members of government entities. Building on this work, the DCPC-CIS 2024 Policy Lab was held in Paris on May 30 and 31, in partnership with the Centre Internet et Société (CIS) of the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). The Policy Lab was organised by Mathieu O’Neil, University of Canberra, with support from the Digital Infrastructure Insight Fund’s Katharina Meyer and from CIS Director Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay. The event was facilitated by O’Neil, and held thanks to the financial support of the Ford Foundation’s Technology and Society program and the Digital Infrastructure Insights Fund.

The event brought together thirty digital commons experts from Australia, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK. They included representatives from digital commons communities, e.g., Civic Data Coop Liverpool, Framasoft, La Coop des Communs, Open Food Facts, Wikimedia France; from public organisations, e.g., Agence Nationale de la Cohésion des Territoires (ANCT), Direction Interministérielle du Numérique (DINUM), Sovereign Tech Fund; from civil society organisations, e.g., Collectif pour une Société des Communs, Inno3, Open Forum Europe, Open Future, Open Knowledge Foundation; and from academia, e.g., Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Fondazione Bruno Kessler – Digital Commons Lab, University of Dundee, Université Paris 8, Université de Technologie de Compiègne. It was a chance for participants to share experiences, present their work, and discuss long-term challenges and opportunities. New connections were made, and new plans were hatched.

The main purpose of the DCPC-CIS 2024 Policy Lab was to identify best practices and opportunities in the public institutions-digital commons communities space, and to develop tools for increasing their cooperation. Participants identified problems and solutions on Day 1, and sorted themselves into groups on Day 2 to collaboratively develop three resources. Working versions of these resources will be made available to Policy Lab participants for review and comment by end June."

(https://dcpc.info/lab24/)

[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]