
'''* CFP: ICTs, digital media and social movements: beyond the state of the art. Special issue editors Cristina Flesher Fominaya and Kevin Gillan. Social Movement Studies, 15(4), August 2016.'''

=Summary=

Continual innovation in technologically mediated communications has excited social movement
scholars, particularly over the past two decades. As a result there is now a great deal of empirical
research detailing the uses of a variety of technologies by activists in a wide range of movements.
However, the developing literature displays a number of conceptual problems and empirical gaps
and we believe that addressing them could significantly advance our understanding of the
interaction of movements with information and communication technologies (ICTs). We are calling
for papers that address problems or gaps in the state of the art in scholarship on ICTs, digital media
and social movements.


Contributions may address some of the following issues, which we see as some of the most pressing
in the current state of the art.


· For each new technological development – now social media, in the past, the Web or email
or television – there has been a tendency to cycle through a particular kind of debate:
optimists see democratizing potential, pessimists see the reconfiguration of traditional
power structures in a new arena, while others seek a middle ground. 


That debate is often
unproductive and is indicative of three related conceptual problems:

o First, the novelty of particular technologies appears to create amnesia about past
innovations. To keep up with the stunning rate of innovation in this field while also
transferring learning from one phase to the next we need to be able to relate the
particularities of new tools for communication to the general features of
technologically mediated communications. Theoretical advances in relation to the
latter should help us understand the former.

o Second, optimistic, pessimistic and ‘middle ground’ positions on new technologies
are frequently built on overly simplistic conceptualizations of technologies as
determinants of social change. This removes agency from social movement groups,
their opponents and other actors in contentious political fields. Finding a better
balance between technological ‘structures’ and movement ‘agents’ – however
theorized – will likely also help us recognize the significance of the interaction of
online and offline practices. We can no longer see these as separate spaces that
impact each other, but must understand the ways in which they are mutually
constitutive. Careful attention to the cultural aspects of ICT use offers one important
corrective to tendencies towards technological determinism.

o Third, there is a recurrent problem of overemphasizing social media (especially
Twitter) and a lack of attention to the impact and interaction effects of other forms
of media, such as television and newspapers. This is compounded by a tendency to
select “successful” cases where high rates of digital or social media use is concurrent
with high levels of offline mobilization, leading to causal narratives that downplay or
ignore other factors or field effects.


· When the agency of movement actors is recognized it is typically in studies of online
communication as a mobilization strategy. So far, however, such studies have tended to
treat recipients of movements’ public communications as little more than a passive audience,
when for mobilization to occur there must be active processes of interpretation that leads to
participation. Empirical studies of such processes will need to find new ways of
systematically interrogating the relationship of protest participants to ICTs.


· The increasing focus on public communications has also led to neglect of the internal
communications by which those involved in movements organize and strategize, debate
political issues and develop collective identities. If understanding the interaction of online
and offline practices is an important theoretical challenge in and of itself, then relating that
to empirical studies of well-known movement processes is likely to be fruitful. Moreover,
the mutually constitutive nature of online and offline life may be having an impact in
breaking down boundaries between ‘internal’ and ‘external’ movement work in a milieu in
which the individual’s relationship to movements cannot be simplified to roles such as
‘member’, ‘organizer’ or ‘bystander’.


· Finally, the current trend in empirical studies that focus on the users of particular
communication platforms tends to present a picture of surprisingly homogenous groups
communicating about a relatively restricted range of political issues. This neglects the
various ways in which both movements and ICT use in general are cut across by cultural
differences and digital divides. Hard divisions such as those around degrees of censorship or
access to the Internet are plainly important in examining transnational movements in
particular, but so too are softer divisions such as the degree to which there is affinity or
conflict between increasingly important technological cultures (hacker or geek culture for
instance) and the various political cultures that are embedded in social movements.
Comparative work in particular would help illuminate the range and heterogeneity of digital
repertoires across movement networks.

We are by no means alone in reflecting critically on the understanding of ICTs and social movements
available in the developing literature. We welcome submissions that either address the issues noted
above or identify new ones in full, original research articles (max 9,000 words).

Interested scholars should submit proposals of up to 300 words to the Editors at
politics.socialmovement@keele.ac.uk by 27th February 2015. By 16th March 2015 a preliminary
selection of authors will be invited to submit full articles by 30th July 2015 (max 9000 words, inc. all
endnotes and bibliography). Please bear both the word length and the deadlines in mind when
considering whether you would like to be part of the collection. Final publication decisions will be
dependent on normal peer review procedures and the decisions of the Editors. We aim to publish
this special issue in August 2016 as Social Movement Studies 15(4). Advanced online publication will
be available for papers that are completed earlier. Once published in hardcopy the online papers will
be available on an open access basis for a limited promotional period.


=More Information=

Abstracts due 27th February 2015

Submissions due 30th July 2015

Contact: politics.socialmovement@keele.ac.uk


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]