
'''* Article: Digital Neofeudalism. Crisis of Network Politics and the New Topology of Rent. By Matteo Pasquinelli. Paper for the Liquid Democracies conference at Transmediale festival, February 2010'''

URL = http://matteopasquinelli.com/docs/Pasquinelli_Digital_neofeudalism.pdf

=Excerpt=

"Digital neofeudalism: The internet is a liquid pyramid. Indeed digital networks are liquid, flexible 
and stretchable. But they have these properties in any direction and for any actor. The digital matrix 
made cooperation easier but also made competition easier. In particular the digital made global 
monopolies easier and faster to establish. 

Each new digital platform has become hegemonic in a short time. Take Myspace, Facebook, 
Youtube, Twitter. The internet is becoming faster and faster a stratification of one-dimensional protocols. 
It’s a very Darwinist scenario: the creative class is just the opium for the masses: here very few players 
win. Not to mention the layer of proprietary hardware, smartphones and the lineage of iPhone, iPod, 
iPad. Here we are talking of huge techno-conglomerates.

This liquid matrix of the digital should be drawn along these 3 tensions: user cooperation, labour 
competition, corporate monopolies. Which is the strongest vector? Are we sure that digital cooperation is 
stronger than digital monopolies?

Network society is not horizontal but polarised. An example. The digital 
changed the world of music in quite a neofeudal way. Peer-to-peer networks affected both the big names 
of music industry and the glorious underground, both. The digital made the music scene more 
competitive and polarised, only few names can survive a market with no more sales of records. The 
outcome scenario is an opposition between the few stars selected by media corporations and a multitude 
of musicians forced to a local economy of concerts, to a performance-based economy. This pyramid is 
quite polarised, clearly more squeezed in the middle than a decade ago. 

Or, the crisis of the cognitive middle-class. We talk often of the crisis of the 
industrial working class as a political identity. But what is in front of our eyes today is specifically the crisis 
of the cognitive middle class. 
There is an interesting world in the French critical theory discussing cognitive capitalism: 
déclassement, that means ‘declassing’, scaling down, when a social class moves to a lower position, losing 
social and economic prestige. In the internet decade we experienced the massive déclassement of the 
cognitive workers to precarious workers. Neofeudalism is also this disempowerment of the middle players. 
9. Digital neofeudalism: Or, the new spaces of rent. This crisis of the social subject of the cognitive 
middle class actually happened along a transformation of the economic structure — that is of the regime 
of value production. The dominant business model of cognitive capitalism and also of the internet has 
shift from profit to rent. What does it mean this? 

To be schematic we can say that profit is the income made selling commodities, rent is the income 
made by a monopolistic exploitation of spaces. In feudal times, it was the exploitation of land cultivated 
by farmers, in the internet age it’s the exploitation of the immaterial spaces cultivated by cultural 
producers, prosumers and the notorious Free Culture. 

‘Rent is the new profit’ state some political philosophers and economists like Carlo Vercellone, 
Christian Marazzi and Toni Negri. Rent is also the typical economic model of the so called FIRE 
economy: from Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate. It’s typical of cities like New York and its results are 
in front of our eyes as the recent financial crisis. Rent is also typical of the new Russian and Arab 
oligarchies of oil: exploitation on vast lands rich of natural resources. 

The internet, similarly to the geopolitical scenario, is becoming the matrix of a new feudal system. 
Few barons, multitudes of freelancers. So maybe, instead of liquid democracy, we should talk of liquid 
neofeudalism." 


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]