
'''* CFP: The digital economy and its implications for labour. Edited by Maria Jepsen & Jan Drahokoupil. Special issue of Transfer: European Review of
Labour and Research,'''

URL = http://trs.sagepub.com/site/includefiles/Transfer_CfP_digital_economy.pdf

=Description=

Call for contributions:

"The themed issue addresses the implications of the digital economy on jobs,
distribution of productivity gains, the dynamics of job destruction and job creation,
and in particular the possible recast of the labour market in the light of the ‘gig’ or
‘sharing’ economy. The research on labour aspects of digitalization is growing rapidly
but its findings are by no means unequivocal. Many are predicting a transformative
change in the global distribution of jobs and wealth as well as with regard to what
jobs will exist. However, the research looking at the place and role of trade unions is
embryonic at best. This special issue aims at clarifying what a future labour market
might look like and what policy choices are crucial in shaping the outcomes.
We thus encourage submission of proposals for contributions that address a wide
range of issues related to labour implications of digitalization. 


At the same time, we are actively seeking papers that address the following questions and themes:

 Is this time different? Assessment of the specificity of the fourth industrial
revolution in comparison with the previous ones

 Who is going to end up unemployed? The evolution of demand for skills and
tasks on European labour markets

 What are the lessons from the new economy champions? Case studies of
multinational companies such as Amazon that ride the digitalization wave while
exploiting the diversity in labour markets and industrial relations in Europe

 How to make the welfare states and labour-market regulation fit for
purpose? The future of insurance systems in the era of gig employment, the role
of basic income schemes and other policy responses

 Are we all going to end up self-employed? The extent to which the
platforms are transforming labour markets and their potential to undermine
employment relations

 Can technology give trade unions a new life line? Existing strategies of
trade unions in using the new technology, possibilities that the technology offers
to trade unions, the digital era as an opportunity for trade unions to forge a new
role in societies, organizing self-employed workers

 Is this the end of manufacturing and global supply chains? Shift from
manufacturing and supplier relations to services and 3D printing, shift from trade
in goods to trade in information, trends in re-shoring, production relocation."

=More Information=

Contact: Editor of Transfer Maria Jepsen (mjepsen@etui.org) 

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Research]]