

=Directory=

Compiled by Patrick Meier:

See http://irevolution.wordpress.com/2009/06/15/digital-security/ for the links:

When combine with the tactics described above, the following technologies can help you stay safe and keep your data relatively more secure.

==Mobile phones==

#Use CryptoSMS, SMS 007 or Kryptext to text securely (this requires java-based phones). 
#Use Android Guardian as soon as it becomes available. 
#Access mobile versions of websites as they are usually not blocked. In addition, connecting to mobile websites provides for faster connections. 

==Digital cameras==
 
#Use scrubbing software such as: JPEG stripper to remove the metadata (Exif data) from your pictures before you upload/email. 
#Have a safe Secure Digital Card (SD) that you can swap in. Preferably, use a mini SD card with a mini SD-SD converter. Then place the mini SD into a compatible phone for safekeeping. 


==Computers/Laptops==

#Use an effective anti-virus program and ensure it updates itself online at least once a day: TMIS, McAfee, Symantec/Norton, AVG, Avira, NOD32, Kaspersky. 
#Do not use illegal, cracked, hacked, pwned, warez software. 
#Keep your software programs (operating systems, productivity suites, browsers) up-to-date with the latest software updates. 
#Use software to encrypt your hard drive: Bitlocker, TrueCrypt, PGP Whole Disk Encryption, Check Point, Dekart Private Disk. 
#Use a different file type to hide your sensitive files. For example, the .mov file extension will make a large file look like a movie. 
#Mac users can use Little Snitch to track all the data that goes into and out of your computer. 

From a technical perspective, there’s no such thing as the delete function. Your deleted data is eventually written over with new data. There are two common ways to wipe sensitive data from your hard drive or storage device. You can wipe a single file or you can wipe all of the ‘unallocated’ space on the drive. Eraser is a free and open-source secure deletion tool that is extremely easy to use. 


==Flash disks==

#StealthySurfer USB Flash Drive 
#The secure browsing Tor software can be installed on flash disk. 
#Using a USB watch calls less attention as do the USB ear rings and this credit card USB flash disk. 


==Email communication== 

#Use https when using Gmail. 
#Use encrypted email platforms such as Hushmail and RiseUp. 


==Browsers and websites==

#Use Firefox and get certain plugins to follow website tracking such as ghostery and adblock, adart to remove ads/trackers. 
#User Tor software or Psiphon to browse privately and securely. 

I shan’t list access points for secure browsers, Proxy servers and VPNs here. Please email me for a list. 

Always use https in “Settings/General/Browser Connection.” 


==VoIP==

#Use Skype but not TOM Skype (Chinese version). Note that Skype is not necessarily 100% secure since no one has access to the source code to verify. 
#Off The Record (OTR) is a good encryption plugin. For example, use Pidgin with OTR (you need to add the plug-in yourself). 
#Gizmo offer encryption for voice conversations, and then only if you are calling another VoIP user, as opposed to a mobile or landline telephone. However, because neither application is open-source, independent experts have been unable to test them fully and ensure that they are secure. 
#Adium is a free IM application for Macs with built-in OTR encryption that integrates most other IM applications. 


==Blogs and social networking platforms==

There are no safe social networks.  The best way to be safe on a social network is fake account and a proxy server. 

The anonymous blogging platform Invisiblog no longer exists, so the best bet now is WordPress + Proxy (preferably Tor) + anonymity of content. 

Log out of facebook.com when not using the site. 


==File sharing==
 
#Use Drop.io to create a private, secure media sharing site. 
#Use BasecampHQ with secure/SSL option to create more specific usernames and passwords for each user or remote site. 


==Internet Cafe==

#Tor can be installed on flash disk and used at Internet cafe and also used from LiveCDs if flash drives are not allowed. 


==Other potential tech==

#LiveScribe 
#FreedomFone 

Source: http://irevolution.wordpress.com/2009/06/15/digital-security/


=More Information=

#[http://security.ngoinabox.org/ Security in a Box]: Tactical Tech
#[http://mobileactive.org/wiki/Mobile_Security MobileActive's Mobile Security guide]


[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Technology]]