
'''* Book: Fuchs, Christian. 2022. Digital Humanism. A Philosophy for 21st Century Digital Society. Society Now Series. Bingley: Emerald.'''

URL = https://fuchsc.uti.at/books/digital-humanism/


=Description=

"Our contemporary global digital society is not always a good place to
live. Authoritarianism, hatred, false news, post-truth culture, the
COVID-19 anti-vaccination movement, COVID-19 conspiracy theories, and
political polarisation are organised via the Internet. The public sphere
is highly polarised. Today, many humans tend to think of other humans
mainly in terms of friends and enemies. Robots and Artificial
Intelligence-based automation have created new challenges for the world
of work. Decades of neoliberalism have increased inequalities. The
COVID-19 pandemic has shown the vulnerability of humanity to viruses and
health crises.


Humanity and society are in a major crisis and digitalisation mediates
this crisis. /Digital Humanism/ explores how Humanism can help us to
critically understand how digital technologies shape society and
humanity, providing an introduction to Humanism in the digital age.
Fuchs introduces the approach of Digital Humanism and outlines
foundations of a Radical Digital Humanism, analysing what decolonisation
of academia and the study of the digital, media and communication means;
what the roles are of robots, automation, and Artificial Intelligence in
digital capitalism, and how the communication of death and dying has
been mediated by digital technologies, capitalist necropower, and
digital capitalism. In order to save humanity and society, we need
Radical Digital Humanism now."

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]