
=Description=

Saule T. Omarova:

"China is the undeniable leader in the CBDC
race, the only major economy with a “live”
CBDC in the public testing phase. The
People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has been
actively working on CBDC since 2014 and
launched its first multi-province “digital
yuan” '''(e-CNY) pilot''' in early 2020.10 The
Chinese government has partnered with
private Chinese banks and technology
companies to offer mobile apps, ATMs,
and other supporting services for e-CNY.

It also offered direct money incentives for
retail users, to encourage e-CNY adoption
on a scale sufficient to get the system ready
for use at the at the 2022 Beijing Winter
Olympics.11 By the end of August of 2022,
transactions using e-CNY surpassed $13.9
billion (or 100 billion yuan). The spending
involved 360 million transactions in pilot
areas in 15 provinces and municipalities,
with more than 5.6 million merchants
accepting digital yuan payments. In
2022 alone, participating regions have
reportedly offered 30 rounds of e-CNY
subsidies – including the $4.5 million in
free e-CNY drop in Shanghai – designed
to stimulate consumption and serve other
macroeconomic purposes. During the
Lunar New Year period, the government
distributed nearly $30 million dollars’
worth of e-CNY to boost its use for holiday
spending and gifting As reported in
early 2023, China is planning to expand its
digital yuan pilot to most of its 1.4 billion
population.

From the start, the Chinese government
has approached the e-CNY issuance as
a long-term strategic project serving
multiple political goals. As designed,
the e-CNY system gives the PBOC sole
direct access to users’ financial and
transactional data and ability to monitor
individual payments in real time. This new
form of mass surveillance qualitatively
expands the familiar toolkit of digital
authoritarianism and amplifies its capacity
to collect information far beyond its own
borders. For example, at the Beijing Winter
Olympics, the e-CNY was reportedly used
to make more than $315,000 of payments
a day, which raised concerns about the
possibility of enabling Chinese government
to monitor foreign citizens’ financial
transactions. Centralized state control of
money and payments can also be used as an
instrument of coercion, as the government
can punish political dissenters by freezing
or expropriating their funds and effectively 
cutting them off from the financial system.
It can also manipulate people’s opinions
and behavior by “rewarding” political
loyalty via direct credit of their e-CNY
wallets or by subsidizing intentionally
designed “activities.” The malleability and
programmability of digital money makes it a
particularly effective instrument of power.

The e-CNY is also closely tied to China’s
geopolitical ambitions. Despite China’s
leading role in international trade, its
currency currently constitutes a tiny share
of international payments settled primarily
in USD. Issuing its own digital currency
will enable the Chinese government to
create an alternative global payments
system it can effectively control. Coupled
with the Chinese government’s longstanding strategy of investing in the
infrastructure and acquiring real assets
in foreign countries, the globalization
of the digital yuan will solidify China’s
economic dominance and expand its
geographic sphere of influence. It will
also insulate China and its geopolitical
allies from economic sanctions and
other means of political pressure exerted
by the international community.18 This
technologically-enabled concentration
of financial, infrastructural, and political
power in China’s hands will fracture the
global system and potentially subject
many sovereign countries’ populations to
mass surveillance and oppressive tactics
deployed by the Chinese government
against its own citizens.

At this relatively early stage, it is difficult
to identify the full range of dangerous
implications of using CBDC as a tool
of digital authoritarianism, In part, the
picture may be hazy because the Chinese
government has been working on the
e-CNY rollout in partnerships, both globally
with other governments and domestically
with private companies. In 2022, the PBOC
partnered with central banks of Thailand,
Hong Kong, and United Arab Emirates to
test a multi-CBDC cross-border payments
platform, m-Bridge, where the e-CNY
was the most actively used settlement
currency.19 Domestically, PBOC issues
and distributes its e-CNY not directly but
through several state-approved banks. The
digital yuan is accepted for payments on
China’s major social media and e-commerce
platforms, including WeChat and Alibaba
that offer their own competing payment
apps.20 Private companies’ participation
may help to obscure the nature and extent
of the government’s control over the
emerging ecosystem, thus legitimizing the
entire project as an innovative economic
experiment. It is critical to remember,
however, that the public-private dynamics
in digital finance are bound to reflect the
underlying balance of public and private
powers in the relevant political system."

(https://cdn.sanity.io/files/9xbysn2u/production/4d7f42a888168a1d66292f26cdc50b5e3ff8d698.pdf)


Source: Article/Chapter: Digital Finance and the Specter of Digital Authoritarianism. Saule T. Omarova. In: Decoding Digital Authoritarianism. Global Affairs Canada, 2023.



=Discussion=

Yanis Varoufakis (interviewed by Evgeny Morozov):

What do you make of China’s recent efforts to rein in both its FinTech market and the crypto industry, as well as to accelerate the development of the e-yuan? Are they an example for Europe and the US to emulate? And if so, what are the elements worth borrowing?
I am immensely impressed by these moves, especially when looked at as a package. 

The Chinese authorities are, at once: 

(1) deflating the real estate bubble (by taking down Evergrande, blow-by-blow); 

(2) aiming to reduce aggregate investment from 50% to 30% of GDP as a precondition for boosting the wage share of GDP; 

(3) ending the oppressive tutoring system for pupils that crushes young souls without helping nurture creative thinking; 

(4) sponsoring sci-fi writing and game design; 

(5) restricting the power of Big Tech; and, last but certainly not least, 

(6) bringing the digital yuan online.


That last move, the digital yuan, constitutes a revolution: when fully-fledged, it will equip every resident in China, but also anyone from around the world who wants to trade with China, with a digital wallet – a basic digital bank account. In one move, therefore, the commercial banks will have been ‘dis-intermediated’; or, in plain English, they will have lost their monopoly over the payments system. This is genuinely a radical break from finance as we have known it. And, yes, it is one that we should emulate in Europe and in the United States – which is, of course, why Wall Street and the rest of the West’s financiers will do their best to stop it, preferring to blow up the world rather than allow themselves to be… dis-intermediated.”

(https://metacpc.org/en/crypto-blockchain/ )


[[Category:China]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]