=Contextual Quote=

""We defend the following thesis: the forms of digital commons have always been conceptualized by actors based on their critique of a particular figure of the State during debates aimed at regulating digital infrastructure while envisioning other desired State figures. We rely on secondary sources, a collection of grey literature, and ten interviews with historical actors of the digital commons movement to identify three moments when actors critique three State figures, conceptualize three forms of digital commons—digital common goods, digital commons, and making common through digital means—and prefigure three alternative State figures. This categorization fills a blind spot in the literature by explicating the different ramifications of the digital commons movement and their relationship with the State."

- Sébastien Shulz [https://journals.openedition.org/terminal/7684]


=Discussion=

==Michel Bauwens on the Partner State==

Sebastien Shulz:

"The Prefiguration of a Partner State by Commoning Actors


What is the relationship with the State? This conceptualization of commoning stems from a critique of the neoliberal State. These authors maintain a distrust of the “market-State alliance.” However, the State is not absent from their political narrative. The prefiguration of the State they propose, this “reconceptualized State,” takes the form of a “partner State.” According to M. Bauwens, the State should be a “partner State that creates optimal conditions for the constitution and promotion of the commons, stimulates self-production, regulates the market, ensures public safety, and upholds the general interest.” (Bauwens and Lievens, 2015, p. 149). As D. Bollier explains, “the State’s role must be clearly defined from the outset: it should act as a fiduciary curator on behalf of commoners. It should conscientiously maintain shared goods and protect them from enclosures. It should ensure that these goods are accessible to all under fair, non-discriminatory conditions, and that commoners have the authority and space to engage in genuine ‘commoning’.” (Bollier, 2014, p. 146-151).

This prefiguration of the State is more transformative than the previous two. Like the others, the State should adapt laws to protect and guarantee the forms of Digital Commons (CN). But it should also support sharing and commoning practices, particularly through what they call “public-commons partnerships,” where the State delegates some of its prerogatives to self-organized citizens while providing them with necessary resources (legislation, funding, technical assistance, etc.) so they can contribute to the establishment of open infrastructures and decentralized public services (Bollier and Helfrich, 2019). This prefiguration of the State envisions a bottom-up democratization of the State.

Bauwens and D. Bollier disseminate their conceptualization through numerous public interventions and publications, notably within their association, The Commons Strategies Group. They also form alliances with institutional actors. M. Bauwens collaborates within the framework of the P2P Foundation with the Ecuadorian government (2015) and the city of Ghent (2017) to produce “transition plans towards a commons society” (Bauwens and Onzia, 2017; P2P Foundation, 2015). While the first branch primarily engages in the legal domain (trials, licenses, etc.) and the second in the academic world (establishment of principles, etc.), this latter branch operates in the activist and political world."

(https://journals.openedition.org/terminal/7684)


=More information=

'''* Article: Histoire sociologique d’un mouvement ambigu. Ce que la critique de l’État nous apprend des formes de communs numériques. Sébastien Shulz. Terminal, #130, 2021 [https://doi.org/10.4000/terminal.7684 doi]'''

URL = https://journals.openedition.org/terminal/7684

"Les acteurs qui conceptualisent et défendent des formes de communs numériques entretiennent une relation ambiguë avec l’État considéré tantôt comme un ennemi objectif, un horizon à dépasser ou un allié potentiel (Broca, 2016). Par rapport à la littérature qui passe cette ambiguïté sous silence ou qui la considère comme problématique, je me propose de déplacer la focale pour l’interroger et voir ce qu’elle peut nous apprendre de ces formes de communs numériques. Dans le cadre d’une sociologie des épreuves d’État (Linhardt, 2012, 2018) et à travers une histoire sociologique des concepts (Gaboriaux et Skornicki, 2018), une sociologie des mouvements sociaux (Neveu, 2019) et une histoire pragmatique de la critique (Boltanski, 2009), nous défendons la thèse suivante : les formes de communs numériques ont toujours été conceptualisées par des acteurs à partir de leur critique d’une figure de l’État à l’occasion de débats visant à réguler l’infrastructure numérique tout en dessinant d’autres figures d’État souhaitées. Nous nous appuyons sur des sources secondaires, un ensemble de littérature grise et dix entretiens avec des acteurs historiques du mouvement des communs numériques pour dégager trois moments lors desquels des acteurs critiquent trois figures d’État, conceptualisent trois formes de communs numériques –biens communs numériques, communs numériques et faire en commun par le numérique–, et préfigurent trois figures d'État alternatives. Cette catégorisation permet de combler un point aveugle de la littérature en explicitant les différentes ramifications du mouvement des communs numériques et leur rapport à l’État."


==Bibliography==

From the article's bibliography:

Bauwens M., 2003, « Peer to Peer: From Technology to Politics to a New Civilisation? », Prajñā Vihāra, 4, 2.
DOI : 10.1002/9781405165518.wbeos0975

Bauwens M., 2005, « P2P and Human Evolution: Peer to peer as the premise of a new mode of civilization », Intergral Visionning.

Bauwens M., 2007, « The next Buddha will be a collective: spiritual expression in the peer-to-peer era », ReVision, 29, 4, p. 3446.
DOI : 10.3200/REVN.29.4.34-46

Bauwens M., 2008, « The Political Implications of the Peer to Peer Revolution », Knowledge politics quarterly, 1, 2.

Bauwens M., Lievens J., 2015, Sauver le monde : vers une économie post-capitaliste avec le peer-to-peer, Paris, Les Liens Qui Libèrent.

Bauwens M., Onzia Y., 2017, « Commons Transition Plan for the City of Ghent », Ghent, P2P Foundation.

Bauwens M., Sussan R., 2005, « Le peer to peer  : nouvelle formation sociale, nouveau modèle civilisationnel », Revue du MAUSS, no 26, 2, p. 193210.
DOI : 10.3917/rdm.026.0193


[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]

[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]