
'''* Report / Discussion Paper: The Case for a Digital Ecosystem for the Environment: Bringing together data, algorithms and insights for sustainable development. United Nations Assembly for the Environment, et al., 2018'''

URL = https://un-spbf.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Digital-Ecosystem-final.pdf

''To build awareness of the state of our planet "making data and information more accessible including through the Environment Situation Room and the MapX spatial data platform of UN Environment".''

=Abstract=

"The planet is not currently on a sustainable path. In order to change
the current trajectory requires transparency, inclusion and
accountability. A shift in the global political economy of environmental
data is needed to harness the efforts of public and private sectors to
jointly generate high quality data and insights as a global public good
while avoiding technology and data monopolies. The global economy is
changing and we will not be able to achieve the environmental SDGs
or environmental sustainability without utilizing frontier technologies
and integrated data. Social media networks are shaping consumer
preferences and political outcomes across the globe. There is still an
opportunity to change the current trajectory if we use data and
information: to build awareness of the state of our planet, to influence
consumer behaviour, to inform markets and to reform governance
systems.

A global digital ecosystem for the environment has the potential to put
us on a path toward a sustainable future. This will require action from
citizens, governments, the private sector and intergovernmental
organisations to collect and share data, process data and create
analytical insights and information. Citizens must be engaged in using
and collecting data. Countries must create a culture of data use,
innovation and data governance for national data ecosystems. A
private sector contribution related the sharing of data, algorithms and
expertise is key. The UN can play a role to incubate and develop a
global digital ecosystem which is built upon innovative partnerships
across stakeholders. As the global entity responsible for the
environment, UN Environment is responsible for leadership in
developing an approach to govern the digital ecosystem for the
environment as part of a broader sustainable development ecosystem
and to bring existing environment related data into focus for policy
making. This will be done through envisioning the role of different
stakeholders in a digital ecosystem and through ''making data and
information more accessible including through the Environment
Situation Room and the MapX spatial data platform of UN
Environment''.


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Maps]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]