
'''= distributed, de-territorialised socialisation'''


=Definition=

David de Ugarte:

"At this point, some of them start to live for theirselves: the objective of the community becomes the community itself, not the original cause that made them to meet. They dream the possibility of a completely virtual life with their real community. Sometimes it takes the form of virtual countries, other times of exclusive social networks or even different kinds of transnational activism. That is what we call “Digital Zionism“, a kind of digital segregationism. But Digital Zionism is an unstable terrain: economy matters and in the long run no coversational community can afford a complete identity, alternative no national identities if it cannot explain the very basis of the personal subsistence of its members."
(http://elarte.coop/neovenetianism-in-a-nutshell-from-networks-to-phyles/)




=Description=

David de Ugarte et al.:

“Real communities of people who share and
debate are flourishing, and distributed, de-territorialised socialisation is becoming
an accepted cultural fact. Citizenship is being joined, if not displaced, by what
Marcelo Estraviz had called linkship back in 2001:

-	That's what linkship is. It's citizenship without cities. It's deterritorialised.
Actions are local, but connections are global.[ http://tzatziki.wordpress.com/linkania]


We explore our linkships, our belonging to socialisation spheres where abundance
prevails, where there is no need to vote on anything, where [[Pluriarchy]] is the"natural" regulating system. That's what's addictive about digital life. Inevitable, the will arises to move the highest possible number of socialisation spheres to that pluriarchic, diverse, free world. That is what we call "digital Zionism".”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/Nations.pdf)

=Discussion=

David de Ugarte et al.:


“The name itself comes from a post by Pere Quintana in a 2006 forum in
which he celebrated the result of the collective experience: a life that is
autonomous from the public agenda set by the media, an environment of trust and
conversation constituted both by visitors and by peers who have been in the
network for years:

-	For some time now we haven't been Spanish or European or anything
else. For some time now we have been digital Zionists. What brings us
together is certain common values, not the fact of having been born
here or there. In fact, we don't even see each other's faces – our
identity lies in our online texts. We don't belong to the newspaper
world. We are free!

The forum in which this was published – possibly not by chance – was "Ciberpunko
Internacia", a short-lived mix of two traditions, the pluriarchy of Spanish cyberpunk
in the nineties and noughties, and old Zamenhof's dream of a trans-national space.
But digital Zionism is something more than a mass social trend in
cyberspace. It is the matrix from which a highly interesting reflection sprang to
which this book owes a debt.

To being with, digital Zionism must understand and re-appropriate internet
comprehension. The apex of the Web 2.0 discourse had been accompanied by the
ranking boom. The blogosphere was depicted as a single space, relatively
homogeneous and hierarchised (in terms of "influence"), in which small
communities constituted a tiny, irrelevant "long queue". It was a bad place to
understand and place oneself.


Digital Zionism is actually a pluriarchic, free-aggregation communitarianism,
not a marginality discourse. It remaps the blogosphere and produces a topology
that radically refutes the media message. There is certainly a huge web in the
blogosphere, but there are also thousands of small independent networks, hardly
connected to each other, autistic in the face of the striking and media-advertised
circus of the gurus' blogosphere. This is the sea of flowers. Ongoing experiments
and measurements have ratified the fact that the sea of flowers is many times
larger than the great central artichoke.

The internet is a space of irreducible diversity, of different and more or less
overlapping identities between which one can continually skip. A huge chessboard
through which to move and in which to socialise, not a cheap digital version of the
20th-century de-centralised media universe.


But when the freedom of pluriarchy is recognised, when our main social
community is really articulated in virtual conversations, and these, within the
universe of the Western Latin languages, quickly transcend state borders, a new
and inevitable question arises. Can't I also take my economic life to such a world?
Can't I work within an online network, make my way of making a living independent
from erratic economies and national crises in the same way as my conversation has
gradually become mongrelised, open, and independent from the media agenda?
There are small and medium businesses that work within online networks.
Having a virtual co-worker, keeping one's IM window permanently open, starts to be
common. This kind of change starts to be of interest to entrepreneurs who have
very small companies.


The time has come to look at large companies, the trans-nationals which
some multinationals are gradually becoming. The time has come to experiment with
hard core of every social articulation: the economic-territorial structure.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/Nations.pdf)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]