
'''* Book: Sabine Pfeiffer. Digital Capitalism and Distributive Forces. Transcript, 2022'''

URL = https://www.transcript-publishing.com/978-3-8376-5893-4/digital-capitalism-and-distributive-forces/


=Description=

"Are robots taking away our jobs? Those who ask this question have misunderstood digitalisation – it is not an industrial revolution by other means. Sabine Pfeiffer searches for the actual novelties brought about by digitalisation and digital capitalism. In her analysis, she juxtaposes Marx's concept of productive force with the idea of distributive force. From the platform economy to artificial intelligence, Pfeiffer shows that digital capitalism is less about the efficient production of value, but rather about its fast, risk-free, and permanently secured realisation on the markets. The examination of this dynamic and its consequences also leads to the question of how destructive the distributive forces of digital capitalism might be."


=Contents=


3. The First Blind Spot: Value in Digital Capitalism
Seiten 61 - 82

4. Transformation and the Productive Forces
Seiten 83 - 112

5. The Second Blind Spot: The Realisation of Value in (Digital) Capitalism
Seiten 113 - 138

6. The Distributive Forces and (Digital) Capitalism: What is New?
Seiten 139 - 172

7. The Distributive Forces and (Digital) Capitalism: Some Clarifications
Seiten 173 - 198

8. The Distributive Forces in Digital Capitalism: Some Empirical Illustrations
Seiten 199 - 230

9. Digitalisation: Distributive Force or Destructive Force?
Seiten 231 - 252




[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Books]]