=Description=

Mishra, V., Bell, J. et al. :

"Digital infrastructure encompasses not only physical elements like
broadband networks, data centers, and cloud services but also the laws,
standards, and protocols that govern transparency, access and control of
data. By developing comprehensive, long-term strategies for the design,
scope and governance of digital infrastructure, governments can influence
the social, economic and civic impact of new technologies, as they emerge
rather than after the fact."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/Project_Liberty_Institute_Digital_Infrastructure_Solutions_Policymakers_Toolkit.pdf)


=Examples=

'''1. From open to closed, a spectrum:'''

* Government-Led Systems => Cuba’s state-owned telecom, ETECSA.

Fully controlled and
operated by the state, with
centralized decision-making
and oversight.


* Closed-Access Systems => Starlink: vertically integrated, no external access or servicelayer integration.

Infrastructure is controlled
by a single entity with no
third-party participation.
Typically streamlined but
not open to external input.


* Private Consortium-Led Systems => mVodafone & Orange’s Open RAN project in Europe.

Managed by a few
private actors who share
infrastructure governance.
Participation is limited to
members of the consortium.


* Permissioned Networks => Some government cloud systems or health data exchanges.

Access is limited to
approved actors.


* Open Standards- Based Infrastructure => Estonia’s X-Road.

Built on transparent, publicly
available standards enabling
interoperability and modular
development.


* Multistakeholder Systems => Brazil’s Internet Steering Committee (CGI.br).

Shared governance among
the government, the private
sector, and civil society with
shared responsibilities in
design and oversight.


* Permissionless Open Networks => Guifi.net in Spain.

Participation and
contribution are open to any
actor with varying degrees of
prior approval.


* Decentralized Autonomous Networks => Emerging Web3 and blockchain-based infrastructures. 

No central authority;
governance and operation
are distributed.


'''2. Spectrum of standardization'''

* Local Standards => Early Aadhaar, national health records

Local standards are developed
and implemented independently
to reflect a country’s specific
needs, legal frameworks,
technical capacity, and cultural
values.


* Layered Standardization => ISO standards adapted regionally

This model uses international
standards as a base but allows
for tailored national or sector specific adaptations.


* Hybrid Standardization => OpenCRVS, national ID systems based on MOSIP

Hybrid approaches give
equal emphasis to global and
local priorities. Standards
are co-designed, often
through inclusive, multi-actor
engagements, to maximize both
interoperability and contextual
relevance.


* Global Standards => SWIFT, TCP/IP, W3C
standards

Complete adherence to
international frameworks,
ensuring interoperability and
consistency but limiting local
customization."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/Project_Liberty_Institute_Digital_Infrastructure_Solutions_Policymakers_Toolkit.pdf)

=Discussion=

Bell J. at al. :

"The most promising systems combine open standards, modular design,
and multistakeholder governance without defaulting to either fully open or
fully closed extremes.

The India Stack is a case in point: while the first wave of digital
infrastructure solutions heavily relies on government-mandated identity
and payments infrastructure, it has inspired a second generation of more
open and distributed services with open API and open protocols like
Beckn. Today, this hybrid model has enabled 8.6 billion mobile payments
per month for 1.2 billion people – at minimal cost and maximum scale.
However, the model is not without risks. The concentration of sensitive
personal data within core systems means that breaches, when they occur,
can have outsized consequences. Building openness must go hand in
hand with strong data protection, redress mechanisms, and continuous
security reinforcement.

Importantly, openness does not mean insecurity. Having multiple actors
participating in a system actually enhances resilience and reduces the
risks associated with centralized blind spots or single points of failure.
Additionally, with the right protocols, transparency can enhance trust
and resilience. Properly implemented, open standards and protocols can
strengthen system resilience and public trust. Estonia’s X-Road shows
how open-by-design systems can scale securely. As digital infrastructure
becomes the backbone of economies and, designing for openness, where
appropriate, is not just a technical choice, but a state imperative.
Finally, policymakers do not need to choose between strictly open or
closed infrastructure – these are false binaries. Instead, they must ask:
Where do we need control, and where can openness enhance legitimacy,
innovation, or trust? A modular, hybrid design, rooted in open standards
and strong governance, offers the best of both worlds.


...


Each spectrum of standardization choices offers distinct strengths and
trade-offs. Local standards offer strong alignment with national priorities
and control over data governance, making them ideal for sensitive
sectors like health and identity—but they risk fragmentation and limited
global interoperability. Layered standardization builds on international
norms with tailored national adaptations, striking a balance between
global compatibility and local relevance, especially useful in finance or
trade. Hybrid models co-design standards through inclusive processes,
maximizing interoperability and trust across borders, but often require
complex governance and slower consensus. Global standards ensure
seamless integration and operational consistency across borders—
essential in areas like internet protocols or cloud services—yet can
overlook local needs and disproportionately reflect the priorities of
global actors. Smart policy design must weigh sovereignty, speed, and
scalability to match sectoral demands.

There is strong sovereignty in chosen collaboration. Being globally
interoperable doesn't mean being globally dependent. For instance,
the India Stack illustrates how a national digital infrastructure can be
rooted in local legal and social needs, use open protocols to ensure
interoperability, and support ecosystem-wide innovation (public and
private actors). Its architecture, even though retrofitted since it wasn’t
designed to be globally interoperable in the first place, proves that
strategic openness enables both sovereignty and scale.

The tradeoff between local and global standards is crucial in shaping
effective digital infrastructure. While local standards offer tailored
solutions with high relevance and control, they can hinder broader
interoperability. Layered and hybrid standardization models provide
flexible frameworks that balance global consistency with local needs,
fostering collaboration without compromising region-specific solutions.
Global standards, though ideal for cross-border operations, may not
always address unique local contexts.

Ultimately, the goal is to strike the right balance between local
sovereignty and global interoperability, ensuring that digital systems
are both adaptable and resilient in a rapidly evolving, interconnected
world. Interoperability does not have to mean uniformity and identical
systems. Similarly, data localization does not mean data sovereignty. True
sovereignty depends on how infrastructure is governed, by whom, and
under what rules, not just where the servers sit. In this sense, this is less of
a trade-off and more of a design challenge. Therefore, dependence on a
few players for cloud infrastructure, or overcorrection by overreliance on
private actors in Eurostack proposals must be considered carefully."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/Project_Liberty_Institute_Digital_Infrastructure_Solutions_Policymakers_Toolkit.pdf)

=More information=

* Report: Nicole, S., Mishra, V., Bell, J., Kastrop, C., Rodriguez, M. (2025, May). '''Digital Infrastructure Solutions to Empower Citizens: A Toolkit for Policymakers'''. Project Liberty Institute & Global Solutions Initiative.

URL = https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/Project_Liberty_Institute_Digital_Infrastructure_Solutions_Policymakers_Toolkit.pdf

[[Category:Public_Services]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]