
'''Book: Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics is Revolutionizing Science, Medicine, and Business. Glyn Moody. John Wiley, 2004'''


=Summary of Content=

"In his new
book of nearly 400 pages, Glyn Moody,
also the author of Rebel Code that
described the open-source movement and
the Linux revolution, offers a similar
journalistic chronicle of bioinformatics in
the past two decades.

This book consists of 14 chapters.
Narrating as a third person, the author
unfolds episodic stories behind key past
bioinformatics moments in each chapter.

Chapter 1 reviews the significance of
Watson and Crick’s discovery of the
DNA double helix structure. 

Chapters 2–4 recount the creations of GenBank,
NCBI, the BLAST software, major
genome sequencing centres, and the
genomics company giant Celera. 

Chapters 5 and 6 examine the divided views
between the public Human Genome
Project (HGP) and Celera over wholegenome
shotgun sequencing, genome
data access, scientific publication and
patent right issues in their ‘tied’ rivalry to
completely sequence the human genome.

Chapter 7 describes the ongoing genome
sequencing efforts of other organisms.

Chapter 8 describes the investigation of
human genome variations by the public
SNP Consortium and by a successful
Icelandic company – deCODE. 

Chapter 9 examines scientific opportunities and
bioethical dilemmas in genetic testing.


Chapters 10–12 each explores a postgenome
large-scale biology topic:
transcriptomics, structural genomics and
proteomics. 

Chapter 13 raises the
scientific hopes of using systems biology
to integrate data from all sources and
study the effects of perturbations to the
whole cellular machinery. 

Chapter 14 concludes the book by summarising
promising genomics technologies for
treating human infectious diseases and cancers."
(http://bib.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/5/3/305.pdf)


=Review=

Jake Chen:

"The book presents readers with a
comprehensive and coherent picture of
the still ongoing bioinformatics
revolution. Its writing materials come
mostly from recent papers and editorials
published in Science and Nature magazines.
Remaining as much of an objective
observer as he did while writing Rebel
Code, the author does not attempt to
exude first-person opinions upon readers.
Instead, he carefully chooses speech
excerpts, quotes and synopses of research
articles to guide readers’ minds, in which
the writings of scientific fervours, business
misjudgments and witty criticisms often
interweave into vivid scenes of the
historical moments."
(http://bib.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/5/3/305.pdf)

Source: BRIEFINGS IN BIOINFORMATICS. VOL 5. NO 3. 305–307. SEPTEMBER 2004




[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Science]]