
'''Report: RAPPORT AU GOUVERNEMENT. La nouvelle grammaire du succès. La transformation numérique 
de l'économie française. Philippe Lemoine'''

URL = http://static.pcinpact.com/medias/rapportlemoine.pdf

“Rapport Lemoine” [http://www.usine-digitale.fr/editorial/rapport-lemoine-ce-que-la-france-peut-faire-pour-devenir-un-champion-numerique.N295830]

=Policy Measures Proposed=

 
Policy Measures Proposed via Lionel Maurel:


Several measures go in the direction of support for approaches of Libre
(Free) and Open, and there is also a call to rely on the Peer Production
License and the Reciprocity License. This is a premiere for France.

Amongst 9 emblematic projects, the report highlights the building of a car
model manufactured in a Fablab, inspired by the Wikispeed approach.

 
The retained proposals:

Measure N° 9: Support foundations of the Wikipedia-, Mozilla-,
OpenStreetMap-type to create links between public services and common
goods.

Measure N° 13: Create the "1% Open" to encourage companies to devote
themselves to Open projects.

Measure N° 14: Create a ranking of companies valorizing their involvement
in Open initiatives: concept of Digital responsibility of Companies (RNE).

Recommendation N° 98: Develop the concept of the common good of
technological innovations based on new license, type Peer Production
License & License Reciprocity (free and non-commercial use).

Recommendation N° 101: Create the IRC (Individual Right to Contribute) to
allow employees to spend time on Open projects, for example by
transforming the Individual Right to Training (IRT) in IRC.

Recommendation N° 111: Initiate an economic research program to
demonstrate the return on investment and the positive externalities of
Open approaches

Recommendation N° 112: abound systematically, by ‘1 to 1’ public funds,
any crowdfunding campaign respecting predefined Open criteria.

Recommendation No. 113: Linking all or a part of public subsidies of
public institutions and operators under guardianship to the amount of Open
Source and Open Access

One of the nine emblematic projects highlighted in the report, inspired by
the collaborative project known as Wikispeed, is also part the opening
approach promoted by Without Model

Emblematic project N° 2 - Industry Sector: Automotive for the connected
generation, multiple designed and prototyped in Fablab.



==In French==

via Lionel Maurel:

Ci-dessous, les propositions retenues :

*  plusieurs mesures vont dans le sens du soutien aux approches du Libre et de l'Open et il y a également un appel à s'appuyer sur la Peer Production Licence et la Reciprocity Licence. C'est une première en France. 

* le rapport met en avant parmi 9 projets emblématiques la construction d'un modèle de voiture connectée en Fablab, en s'inspirant de la démarche Wikispeed. 


Les propositions retenues :

* Mesure n°9 : Soutenir les fondations de type Wikipédia, Mozilla OpenStreetMap pour créer des liens entre services publics et biens communs

* Mesure n°13 : Créer le “1% Open” pour inciter les entreprises à se consacrer à des projets Open

* Mesure n°14 : Créer un classement des entreprises valorisant leur implication dans des démarches Open : notion de Responsablité Numérique des Entreprises (RNE)

* Recommandation n°98 : développer la notion de bien commun des innovations technologiques en s’appuyant sur de nouvelles licences de type Peer Production Licence & Reciprocity Licence (usage libre et non commercial)

* Recommandation n°101 : Créer le DIC (Droit Individuel à la Contribution), pour permettre aux salariés de consacrer du temps à des projets Open, par exemple en transformant du du Droit Individuel à la Formation (DIF) en DIC

* Recommandation n°111 : Lancer un programme de recherche économique visant à démontrer le retour sur investissement et les externalités positives des démarches Open

* Recommandation n°112 : Abonder systématiquement, par des fonds publics à 1 pour 1, toute campagne de crowdfunding respectant des critères Open préalablement définis

* Recommandation n°113 : Lier tout ou partie des subventions publiques des établissements et opérateurs publics sous tutelles à la quantité d’Open Source et d’Open Access


Un des 9 projets emblématiques mis en avant dans le rapport, inspiré su projet collaboratif Wikispeed, s’inscrit également dans la démarche d’ouverture promue par Without Model

Projet emblématique n°2 - Secteur Industrie : Automobile pour la génération connectée, conçue à plusieurs et prototypée en Fablab.

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]