
'''Quote on digitalization as 'total automation', by Jan Soderbergh'''

"'''The state of total automation hinted at by Ernest Mandel would be reached when fixed capital, without any injection of living labour, spit out an infinite volume of goods at instant speed.''' It is hard to imagine a machine with such dimensions, less than visualising futurist gadgets or (just slightly more down-to-earth) nanotechnology fancies. And yet, '''it is reality in most forms of cultural and immaterial production'''. That is what is meant by saying, that information can be copied infinitely without injecting additional living labour. '''Digitalisation of immaterial labour has leapfrogged capitalism to the endpoint of total automation'''. There is hardly any value-adding labour taking place in this form of production. One click is all labour it takes to duplicate immaterial goods. The main input of living labour is instead at the start-up of the production process. In other words, in the innovation of it. This is where we find immaterial labour. All forms of labour that can be objectified in digits are subject to infinite reproducibility. It is the Pyrrhic victory of capital. The end destination of capital's long quest to disband living labour by perfecting the techniques of separating and storing human creativity in systematised, codified knowledge. However, like Phoenix, living labour returns with a vengeance."
(http://info.interactivist.net/article.pl?sid=04/09/29/1411223)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]