
'''= Digital Tech/Labor Resources & Reading List'''

=Source=

This list, entitled "Digital Tech/Labor Resources & Reading List for Journalists (and Everyone!)", was created by Karen Gregory. [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZbVXp-ADMdedmzvMI5U7bXX_P1D9Zdr7ZYX009OXIx8/edit#]


=Resource List=

 
==Online Resources:==
 
(Start here!) Digital Labor Conference Speakers’ Videos: https://vimeo.com/mobilityshifts/videos
 
Triple C: Theorising Digital Labour and Virtual Work - Definitions, Dimensions and Forms
http://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/631
 
CUNY Digital Labor Working Group Blog:
https://digitallabor.commons.gc.cuny.edu/blog/
 
Trebor Scholz & Frank Pasquale in Conversation on Digital Labor http://vimeo.com/13139041
 
Digital Labor: Ephemera: Workers, Authors, Citizens
http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/10-3ephemeranov10.pdf
 
Belabored at Dissent Magazine with Sarah Jaffe: https://www.dissentmagazine.org/tag/belabored
 
Miriam Posner (UCLA)’s Digital Labor, Materiality, and Urban Space, Winter 2014
http://digitalmateriallabor.org/
 
Nakamura, Fernandez, and Balsamo, “Feminism, Technology, and Race”:
https://vimeo.com/73647791
 
FemTechNet
http://femtechnet.org/
 
Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology
http://adanewmedia.org/

Governing Algorithms Reading List: 
http://governingalgorithms.org/resources/reading-list/

Antonio A. Casilli and Yann Moulier-Boutang in conversation on Radio France Culture 
“Digital labor : portrait de l'internaute en travailleur exploité” (Dec 12, 2012) 
http://www.franceculture.fr/emission-place-de-la-toile-digital-labor-portrait-de-l-internaute-en-travailleur-exploite-2012-12-08 

Sarah Roberts speaks with NPR about the labor of Commercial Content Moderation:
http://illusionofvolition.com/2013/11/17/nprs-all-things-considered-commercial-content-moderation-ccm-and-the-internet-shadows/

Data and Society
http://www.datasociety.net/

PS Mag: “The future of work and workers” series
http://www.psmag.com/series/the-future-of-work-and-workers


 
==READINGS==
 
Abreu, Amelia. 2014. “Quantify Everything: A Dream of a Feminist Data Future.” 
https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/quantify-everything-a-dream-of-a-feminist-data-future

Adkins, Lisa. 1995. Gendered Work: Sexuality, Family, and the Labour Market. Buckingham: Open University Press.

Aneesh, Aneesh. 2006. Virtual Migration: The Programming of Globalization. Durham: Duke University Press.

Arvidsson, Adam. 2011. “General Sentiment: How Value and Affect Converge in the Information Economy.” Sociological Review 59:39–59.

Baym, Nancy. 2010.  Personal connections in the digital age. Malden, MA: Polity Press.

Beller, Jonathan. 2006. The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy and the Society of the Spectacle. New Hampshire: University Press of New England
 
Berardi, Franco “Bifo,” Francesca Cadel, Giuseppina Mecchia, et al. 2009. The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy. Los Angeles: Semiotexte.

Berry, David. 2014. Critical Theory and the Digital. New York: Bloomsbury.

Bernstein, Michael. 2015. “The future of work: Working for the machine” http://www.psmag.com/business-economics/the-future-of-work-working-for-the-machine
 
Blas, Zach. 2012. “Imperceptibly Dirty.” No More Potlucks. Issue 23: Dirt, ed. Heather Davis
http://nomorepotlucks.org/site/imperceptibly-dirty-zach-blas/
 
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. 2007. The New Spirit of Capitalism. (G. Elliott, Trans.). Verso.

Boydston, Jeanne. 1994. Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of Labor in the Early Republic. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Braverman, H. 1998. Labor and monopoly capital: the degradation of work in the twentieth century. New York: Monthly Review Press.
 
Brecher, Jeremy. 2014. Strike! Oakland, Calif.: PM Press.
 
Browne, Simone. 2015. Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Duke University Press.
 
Caffentzis, C. G. 2013. In letters of blood and fire: work, machines, and the crisis of capitalism. Oakland, Calif.: PM Press.
 
Cagle, Susie. 2014. “The Case Against Sharing.” 
https://thenib.com/the-case-against-sharing-9ea5ba3d216d

Cardon, D. and Casilli A. A. 2015, Qu’est-ce que le digital labor?, Paris, INA Editions. 

Casilli A. A. 2015, “Le digital labor est conçu pour ne pas avoir l’apparence d’un travail”, Jef Klak, Jan. 4, http://jefklak.org/?p=1467 

Casilli, A. A. 2015, “Digital Labor :  travail, technologies et conflictualités”. In: Id. & D. Cardon,  Qu'est-ce que le digital labor ?, Paris, INA Editions, pp.10-42, https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01145718/document 

Champaign, Patrick. The View From the Media.
 
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. 2006. Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
 
Clough, P. and Hailey, J. (eds) 2007. The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Duke University Press.
 
Crawford, K. and Gray, M.L. (eds) 2014. “Big Data, Big Questions”, special section in the International Journal of Communication, Vol. 8.
http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/issue/view/10. 
 
Crawford, K. 2013. “The Hidden Biases of Big Data”, Harvard Business Review, April 1. http://blogs.hbr.org/cs/2013/04/the_hidden_biases_in_big_data.html

Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. 1985. More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technologies from the Open Hearth to the Microwave. New York: Basic Books. 
 
Cowie, Jefferson. 2010. Staying Alive: The 1970s and the Last Days of the Working Class. New York: The New Press.
 
Culter, Jonathan. 2004. Labor’s Time: Shorter Hours, the UAW, and the Struggle for American Unionism. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Daniels, Jessie. 2009. Cyber Racism: White Supremacy Online and the New Attack on Civil Rights. Lanham, Maryland: Rowan and Littlefield. 

Dunbar-Hester, Christina. Low Power to the People: Pirates, Protest, and Politics in FM Radio Activism. Cambridge: MIT PRess. 
 
Davies, William. 2014. The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty, and the Logic of Competition. London: Sage Publications.
 
Dyer-Witherford, Nick. 1999. Cyber-Marx: Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in High Technology Capitalism. Champaign: University of Illinois Press.

Deleuze, Giles. 1992. “Postscript on the Societies of Control” _OCTOBER_ 59, Winter MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 3-7.
 
Deuze, Mark. 2007. Media Work. First ed. Cambridge: Polity.

Federici, Sylvia. 2012. Revolution at point zero: housework, reproduction, and feminist struggle. Oakland, CA; Brooklyn, NY; London: PM Press ; Common Notions : Autonomedia ; Turnaround. 
 
Federici, Sylvia. 1969. “Wages Against Housework”. 
http://caringlabor.wordpress.com/2010/09/15/silvia-federici-wages-against-housework/
 
Federici, Silvia. 2008. “Precarious Labor: A Feminist Viewpoint.” In the Middle of a Whirlwind. http://inthemiddleofthewhirlwind.wordpress.com/precarious-labor-a-feminist-viewpoint/.

Friedman, B. and H. Nissenbaum. 1996. ‘Bias in computer systems’, ACM Transactions on Information Systems 14: 330-347.

Fuchs, Christian. 2010. “Labor in Informational Capitalism and on the Internet.” Information Society 26(3):179–96.

Gabry, Jennifer. 2011. Digital Rubbish: A Natural History of Electronics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Gajjala, Radhika. 2012. Cyberculture and the Subaltern: Weavings of the Virtual and Real. Lexington Press

Golumbia, David. 2009. The Cultural Logic of Computation. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Greene, D. and Joseph, D. “The Digital Spatial Fix”. http://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/659 

Gregory, Karen. 2015. “Weird Solidarities”.  DIS Magazine. http://dismagazine.com/discussion/72958/karen-gregory-weird-solidarities/

Gregory, Karen. 2015. “Good Wives: Algorithmic Architectures as Metabolization.” Boundary 2 http://boundary2.org/2015/07/08/good-wives-algorithmic-architectures-as-metabolization/
 
Gregg, Melissa. 2013. Work’s Intimacy. New York: Wiley.

Gregg, Melissa. 2008. “The Normalisation of Flexible Female Labour in the Information Economy.” Feminist Media Studies 8(3):285–99

Guillaud, Hubert 2014. “Digital Labor : comment répondre à l’exploitation croissante du moindre de nos comportements ?”, Le Monde, InternetActu, Dec 20, http://internetactu.blog.lemonde.fr/2014/12/20/digital-labor-comment-repondre-a-lexploitation-croissante-du-moindre-de-nos-comportements/ 

Hardt, M. 1999. “Affective Labor.” boundary 2 26(2):89–100.

Harvey, David. 1991. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry Into the Origins of Cultural Change. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Harvey, David. 2001. “The Geopolitics of Capitalism.” In Spaces of Capital: Towards a Critical Geography, 312–344. New York: Routledge.
 
Hochschild, A. 2013. The Outsourced Self: What Happens When We Pay Others to Live Our Lives for Us. New York: Picador Press.
 
Howard, Dorothy. 2015. “Feed My Feed”. Rhizome.
http://rhizome.org/editorial/2015/jul/22/feed-my-feed/
 
Hunnicutt, Benjamin. 1990. Work Without End: Abandoning Shorter Hours for the Right to Work. Philadelphia: Temple Press.
 
Huws, Ursula. 2003. Cybertariat: Virtual Work in a Real World. New York: Monthly Review Foundation.

Huws, Ursula. 2013. Labor in the Digital Economy: The Cybertariat Comes of Age. New York: Monthly Review Foundation.
 
Irani, Lilly. 2013. The Cultural Work of Microwork. New Media and Society, 17(5), 720-739.
 
Irani, Lilly. 2015. Justice for “Data Janitors.” Public Books. Jan 15.

Jeong, Sarah. 2013. Unions and Racism. 
http://sarahjeong.net/2013/12/21/unions-and-racism/
 
Jones, AC. 2010. “Rank and File Opposition in the Late 1970s.” in Rebel Rank and File. London: Verso Books.
 
Katznelson, Ira. 2014. Fear Itself: The New Deal and the Origins of Our Time. New York: Liveright Publishing.

Kittur, Aniket, Nickerson, Jeffrey, Bernstein, Michael, Gerber, Elizabeth, Shaw, Aaron, Zimmerman, John, Lease Matthew, and Horton John. “The Future of Crowd Work”
http://hci.stanford.edu/publications/2013/CrowdWork/futureofcrowdwork-cscw2013.pdf

Kosner, Anthony Wing. 2015. “Google Cabs and Uber Bots Will Challenge Jobs ‘Below The API’.” Forbes
http://www.forbes.com/sites/anthonykosner/2015/02/04/google-cabs-and-uber-bots-will-challenge-jobs-below-the-api/

Levy, Karen. 2015. “The Future of Work: What Isn’t Counted Counts.” 
http://www.psmag.com/business-economics/the-future-of-work-what-isnt-counted-counts
 
Losh, Liz. “Beyond Biometrics: Feminist Media Theory Looks at Selfiecity”
http://d25rsf93iwlmgu.cloudfront.net/downloads/Liz_Losh_BeyondBiometrics.pdf
 
Losse, Kate. 2012. The Boy Kings: A Journey into the Heart of the Social Network. Free Press.
 
Lovink, Geert. 2012. Networks Without a Cause: A Critique of Social Media (1st ed.). Polity.
 
Lury, Celia. 2004. Brands: The Logos of the Global Economy. New York: Routledge.

Marwick, Alice. 2015. Status Update. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Martin, Randy. 2002. Financialization of Daily Life. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Marx, Karl. The Fragment on Machines. In The Grundrisse (pp. 690–712).

McMillan Cottom, Tressie. 2015. “Who Do you Think You Are? When Marginality Meets Academic Microcelebrity.”  Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology, Issue #7.
http://adanewmedia.org/2015/04/issue7-mcmillancottom/
 
Mitropoulos, Angela. 2005. Precari-us?
http://eipcp.net/transversal/0704/mitropoulos/en
 
Nakamura, L. and Chow-White, P and Nelson, A. (eds) 2011. Race After the Internet. New York: Routledge.

Noble, David. 1979. America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Noble, David. 1984. Forces of Production; A Social History of Industrial Automation. New York: Knopf.

Noble, David. 1995. Progress Without People: New Technology, Unemployment, and the Message of Resistance. New York: Between the Lines.
 
Noble, Safiya. 2013. “Google Search: Hyper-visibility as a Means of Rendering Black Women and Girls Invisible”. InVisible Culture: Issue 19.
 
Neff, Gina. 2012. Venture labor: work and the burden of risk in innovative industries. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
 
Neilson, Brett, and Ned Rossiter. 2008. “Precarity as a Political Concept; or, Fordism as Exception.” Theory, Culture & Society 25(7/8):51–72.


O’Donovan, Caroline. 2015. “What a New Class of Worker Could Mean for the Future of Labor.” http://www.buzzfeed.com/carolineodonovan/meet-the-new-worker-same-as-the-old-worker#.ifOR3grYJ

O’Donovan, Caroline. 2015. “American Labor Unions are Falling Down on Digital Workers.” 
http://www.buzzfeed.com/carolineodonovan/american-labor-unions-are-falling-down-on-digital-workers#.etm9eG7KQ

Pasquale, Frank. 2015. Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control Money and Information. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 
Papacharissi, Zizi. 2010. A Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites. New York: Routledge.

Pierre J. and Alloing, C. 2015. “Questionner le digital labor par le prisme  des émotions : le capitalisme affectif comme métadispositif?”, communication at the conference La communication numérique au cœur des sociétés : dispositifs, logiques de développement et pratiques, Grenoble, May 4-5, https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01171594/document 

Porterwood-Stacer, Laura. 2013. “Media refusal and conspicuous non-consumption: The performative and political dimensions of Facebook abstention.” New Media and Society. November 15:1041-1057

Resnikoff, Ned. 2015. “Unions Make Strides Among Silicon Valley Workforce.” http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/5/12/unions-make-strides-among-silicon-valley-workforce.html
 
Ross, Andrew. 2009. Nice Work If You Can Get It: Life and Labor in Precarious Times. NYU Press.

Ross, Andrew. 2003. No Collar: The Humane Workplace and its Hidden Costs. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
 
Sadowski, Jathan. 2013. “Civics for a Digital Age.” The Atlantic.
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/09/civics-for-a-digital-age/279829/

Sadowski, Jathan. 2014. “From mega machines to mega algorithms.” The New Inquiry http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/from-mega-machines-to-mega-algorithms/

 Scannell, Joshua. 2015. What can an algorithm do? DIS Magazine
http://dismagazine.com/discussion/72975/josh-scannell-what-can-an-algorithm-do/
 
Scholz, Trebor (ed). 2013. Digital Labor: The Internet as Playground and Factory. New York: Routledge.

Schüll, N. D. 2012. Addiction by design: Machine gambling in Las Vegas. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Seaver, Nick. 2013. Knowing Algorithms. 
http://nickseaver.net/papers/seaverMiT8.pdf
 
Shaviro, Steven. 2003. Connected, or, What it means to live in the network society. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 
Shaviro, Steven. 2010. Post-Cinematic Affect. Winchester: Zero.

Smythe, D.W. 1981. "Communications: Blindspot of Economics". In Melody, W.H., Salter, L., and Heyer, P. (Eds.). Culture, Communication and Dependency: The Tradition of H.A. Innis. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
 
 
 
Taylor, Astra. 2014. The People’s Platform: Taking Back Power and Culture in the Digital Age. New York: Metropolitan Books.

Taylor, FW. 1911. “The Principles of Scientific Management.”
http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/HIST363-7.1.3-Frederick-W-Taylor.pdf
 
Terranova, Tiziana. 2000. “Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy”. Social Text, 18(2_63), 33.
 
Terranova, Tiziana. 2014. “Red stack attack! Algorithms, capital and the automation of the common.” EuroNomade. from http://www.euronomade.info/?p=1708

Thebault-Spieker, J., Terveen, L. G., & Hecht, B. (2015). Avoiding the South Side and the Suburbs: The Geography of Mobile Crowdsourcing Markets. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 265–275). ACM Press. http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675278

Thompson, E.P. 1966. The Making of the English Working Class. New York: Vintage Books.
 
Turner, Fred. 2006. From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, The Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago: Chicago University Press .
 
Turfecki, Zeynep. 2014. “What Happens To #Ferguson Happens to Ferguson”
https://medium.com/message/ferguson-is-also-a-net-neutrality-issue-6d2f3db51eb0
 
Uchitelle, Louis. 2007. The Disposable American: Layoffs and Their Consequences. New York: Vintage

Vaidhyanathan, Siva. 2011. The Googlization of Everything: And Why We Should Worry. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 
Wacjman, Judy. 2015. Pressed for Time: The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capitalism. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Watters, Audrey. 2014. “Digital Labor and Geographies of Crisis.” 
http://hackeducation.com/2014/11/15/digital-labor-geographies-of-crisis/
 
Wark, McKenzie. 2012. Telesthesia: Communication, Culture and Class. Cambridge: Polity.

Weeks, Kathi. 2011. The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries T. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

Weizenbaum, Joseph. 1976. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation. New York: W.H. Freeman & Co.

Wen, Shawn. 2014. “The Ladies Vanish.” The New Inquiry.
http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/the-ladies-vanish/

Winner, Langdon. 1989. The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wong, Julia Carrie. 2015. “Silicon Valley’s Low Wage Mess: How Apple Was Forced to Revamp its Subcontracting Scheme.” http://juliacarriewong.com/2015/03/17/silicon-valleys-low-wage-mess-how-apple-was-forced-to-revamp-its-subcontracting-scheme/

Zuboff, Shoshana. 2015. “Disruption’s Tragic Flaw“ http://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/debatten/the-digital-debate/shoshana-zuboff-on-the-sharing-economy-13500770.html
***
Lawsuits

Otey v Crowdflower
http://wtf.tw/ref/otey.pdf
http://www.staffingindustry.com/eng/Research-Publications/Publications/CWS-3.0/July-8-2015/Crowdsourcing-supplier-settles-class-action-lawsuit

McPherson v Google
https://blog.workmarket.com/workforce-managers/google-hot-water-due-odesk-connection-worker-classification-dispute.html

O’Connor v Uber
http://uberlawsuit.com/OrderDenying.pdf


=Contributors=

This list was created by Karen Gregory. Please contact karen.gregory@gmail.com if you would like to add a reference or cannot access something on the list and would like a copy. 

Contributors to this list include: 

Antonio Casilli 		@AntonioCasilli 

J. Thebault-Spieker 	@jts__

Zachary Loeb		@libshipwreck 

Monica Mercado	@monicalmercado 

Naomi Rendina	@NaomiRendina

Dan Greene		@Greene_DM

Rochelle LaPlante	@Rochelle

Paul-Olivier Dehaye   @podehaye

=More Information=

===Additional suggestions===

Additional suggestions to be added into the list: 
https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/05/the-rise-of-the-voluntariat/

http://www.cbc.ca/radio/spark/273-school-bus-wi-fi-cuba-s-alternative-internet-capitalism-2-0-an
d-more-1.2928720/the-hidden-social-reality-behind-digital-labour-1.2928772 [audio]

http://wtf.tw/nonfic/Bederson%20and%20Quinn%202011%20-%20Web%20workers%20unite.pdf

http://www.researchgate.net/publication/52003766_Honesty_in_an_Online_Labor_Market


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Research]]