
'''* Report: Digital Commons as Providers of Public Digital Infrastructures. In depth literature review and five case studies. By Jan Kremer and Zuzanna Warso. Open Future Europe, November 13, 2024'''

URL = https://openfuture.eu/publication/digital-commons-as-providers-of-public-digital-infrastructures/

''with: Nil Homedes Busquets ([[Decidim]]), Nicholas Gates ([[Open Forum Europe]]), Lea Gimpel ([[Digital Public Goods Alliance]] (DPGA)), Cailean Osborne (Linux Foundation Europe), Roksana Wilk ([[European Open Science Cloud]])''


=Description=

"The concept of the Digital Commons describes a wide array of digital systems and solutions that are owned, developed, and maintained by groups rather than by single individuals or entities. Unlike businesses or state institutions, these groups coordinate not through pricing or subordination but through peer collaboration. While many Digital Commons projects began as small community efforts, numerous initiatives have since scaled to become essential societal infrastructures, attracting vast contributor bases and supporting global applications. Early 21st-century examples include Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia, and Apache, open-source software that supports over 20% of the busiest websites worldwide. Some authors have even described the current Internet Stack as an “accidental megastructure” of Digital Commons.

At the same time, strengthening Europe’s digital infrastructure and sovereignty has gained importance in discussions about Europe’s future and competitiveness. This topic is highlighted, for instance, in the European Commission’s White Paper on Europe’s digital infrastructure needs and in Mario Draghi’s report on the Future of European Competitiveness.

In this context, the paper presents a comprehensive review of foundational literature on infrastructure and current global debates and typologies of public digital infrastructures. Although free-market policies of the 1990s led to a private and platform-driven digital landscape, there is a growing interest worldwide in developing public infrastructures within this field. New policy debates for instance position the state as an “entrepreneurial state,” promoting openness and “generative interoperability.” Foundations for digital services and transactions, critical internet stack components, public spaces, and shared production platforms are increasingly seen as essential to economic and social well-being.

Policymakers are proposing various forms of public ownership to maintain the public character and societal benefits of these infrastructures, often incorporating Digital Commons. Through five case studies, this paper examines strategies to address infrastructure gaps and explores how Digital Commons can sustain and enhance these new forms of public digital infrastructure while ensuring that they are inclusive, open, and interoperable.

Both the ZenDiS and scikit-learn cases illustrate ecosystem strategies aimed at strengthening open source software connecting information systems and devices.
Decidim, created by the city of Barcelona, showcases partnerships providing alternative spaces for online public speech and debate.
DHIS2, used by many governments for health information management, exemplifies collectively managed and produced digital infrastructures, facilitating resource and capacity mutualization.

Finally, the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) is a unique example of a pan-European attempt to build a shared infrastructure with a community of researchers, not only redefining the tools and processes used by researchers, but also developing an infrastructure embedded in the values and principles of Open Science.

These case studies provide insights into the conditions necessary for Digital Commons to provide infrastructure, particularly regarding long-term funding, which communities struggle to secure. They also highlight the diverse relationships between public institutions and Digital Commons, impacting Digital Commons’ governance."


[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Articles]]