


=Context=

Marco Berlinguer distinguishes 3 hybrid forms of commons-market cooperation and co-existence:

# the [[Semi-Commons]]
# [[Commons as Shared Infrastructures for Businesses]]
# Digital Commons as Core Ecosystem Strategy


=Discussion=

Marco Berlinguer:

"The third way to frame the hybridism between FOSS and
capitalism describes '''the strategic use of FOSS to build an ecosystem'''. In these cases, it is usually a company that introduces a specific FOSS product, often maintaining control over its development. The strategy typically aims to
attract users, developers, and business ecosystems around
a new standard or platform, and is designed to exploit the
growth or creation of complementary markets that are adjacent and correlated to the FOSS commons. Informational
or “surveillance capitalism” (Zuboff 2015)—based on the
hoarding and exploitation of user data—has been a fertile
ground for these strategies. Google’s Android represents
the most successful and spectacular example. The recent
condemnation of Google by the European Commission for
abusing its dominant position proves how such cross-subsidizing can be used as a kind of innovative dumping strategy to wipe out competitors, unleash various network
effects and prepare the terrain for new forms of monopolization. But these modalities of competition are increasingly expanding, within but also beyond software. Facebook’s
Open Compute Project, aimed at sharing knowledge and
designs of hardware products for data centers, is an example. Another successful innovative entrepreneur who used
this strategy is Elon Musk. He did so with Tesla in the automotive industry, aiming to break its resistance to electric
cars and to mobilize the global investments necessary for
a hugely costly transition, while leveraging Tesla’s leading
position, especially in battery technology. He is also trying
to use this same approach with his OpenAI initiative, which
aims to catch up with the leading companies and emerging monopolies on data and artificial intelligence."

((Berlinguer, M. (2020). [[Commons, Markets and Public Policy]], Transform! ePaper, January 2020.)

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]