

=[[Directory of K-12 Personal Fabrication Education]]=

Source: [[Factory@Home]], http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf

==The University of Virginia and Cornell's [[Fab@School]]== 

and Cornell: In conjunction with Cornell, the Curry
School of Education at the University of Virginia was awarded a grant from the
MacArthur Digital Media and Learning Competition to develop a STEM curriculum
based on Fab@home’s 3D printing technologies. Glen Bull, a professor of
instructional technology founded the Fab@School initiative. Bull’s goal was to teach
future STEM educators to integrate 3D printers into their instructional materials to
help them explain mathematical and scientific principles used in engineering.

Curriculum development will take place under the umbrella of a lab called “The
Children’s Engineering Institute” managed by Bull. University of Virginia education
students will develop the Fab@school STEM
teaching curriculum for a pilot group of
elementary classrooms. At the National
Technology Summit in DC, Karen Cator, Director
of the U.S. Office for Educational Technology
described the Fab@School initiative as “fantastic.”



==Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)==

DARPA launched a
Manufacturing Experimentation and Outreach
(MENTOR) initiative to deploy digital
manufacturing equipment, including 3D printers, in public high schools throughout
the country. STEM high school students will compete as teams to design and build
cyber-electro-mechanical systems using personal manufacturing tools. These
students will learn the introductory concepts they will need to someday build
sophisticated robots and small unmanned aircraft. The program is intended to
encourage students to study STEM subjects in college. DARPA will expand the
program to over 1000 high schools over the next three years."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* extensive treatment in [[Factory@Home]], pp. 63+
* [[Personal Manufacturing]]



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]