
Source: [[Factory@Home]], http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf

"In the U.S., pioneering STEM educators in high
schools, technical colleges and universities
have integrated personal fabrication
technologies into their science and engineering curriculums."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf) 


Leading examples include:

==Stanford University==

professor Paulo Blikstein teaches a hands-on course to prepare
education students to integrate personal
fabrication technologies into their future classrooms. Students use prototyping
machines (such as laser cutters and 3D printers) to design and create toys, games and
other learning tools (“artifacts”) for children. Stanford students graduate from
Blikstein’s class knowing how to use computers and personal fabrication technologies
to design and create classroom learning kits and educational tools.


==MIT's How to make (almost) anything== 

Students in a course called “How to make (almost) anything” apply personal
fabrication technologies to solve real world problems. Taught by a leader in the field
of personal fabrication, Neal Gershenfeld, students in the class range from engineers
to artists to art historians. Over the course of a semester, students learn to use CAD
software, work with a circuit board, and use a number of personal fabrication
machines. The final semester project is each students’ designed and fabricated
solution to a real world problem.


==Cornell University==

At Cornell, the Fab@Home project is both the name of a 3D
printer model, as well as an ongoing initiative aimed at STEM educators. Developed
by Professor Hod Lipson and postdoctoral student Evan Malone, the Fab@home 3D
printer offers open-sourced design blueprints for the printer, so anybody who is
interested can download the design files, make their own Fab@Home, or improve
upon its existing design. Fab@home works with a number of kid-friendly materials,
including Play-Doh, cookie dough, and chocolate, as well as polymers and metals.

Technical development and support for Fab@home is provided by students and open
source volunteers. A second major STEM initiative under the Fab@home umbrella is
3dprintables.org, a web site exchange of no-cost 3D electronic blueprints for
educational tools and classroom models intended for use in K-12 STEM education. K-
12 students upload electronic blueprints onto the site for objects such as printable
models of the molecular structure of a particular element, or the physical
manifestation of a mathematical equation. Other students browse and download the
collection of designs and print their selected object on their local Fab@home 3D
printer. A growing collection of online electronic blueprints for a wide range of 3D
printable items are available at 3Dprintables.org.


==Lorain County Community College (LCCC)==

LCCC is a leading personal manufacturing
educator. Their Fab Lab is open to students and
the general public. Students can take a one-credit
course on Introduction to Personal Fabrication or
can enroll in a non-credit workshop. The Fab Lab
has personal-scale vinyl cutter, table-top milling
machine and a laser cutter that can engrave text,
graphics, and photographs onto a wide variety of
materials (wood, acrylic, marble, mat board,
leather, glass, and more)."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


==University of Washington==

The University of Washington’s Open3DP ([[Open 3D Printing]]) project is a website hosted by the Solheim Rapid Prototyping Laboratory in
the Mechanical Engineering Department. Its purpose is to disseminate information
and foster a community of people interested in an open sharing of 3D printing
information. The Solheim Lab is directed by Mark Ganter and Duane Storti.


=More Information=

* extensive treatment in [[Factory@Home]], pp. 63+
* [[Personal Manufacturing]]



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]