'''Direct Territories: concept and report by Xavier Comtesse'''

URL = http://www.thinkstudio.com/


=Summary=

Summarized by Marc Dangeard:

"Territories as defined by government have become disconnected from the
ecosystems in which people and business live and work. New ways of
communicating have created an additional layer on top of these
territories and ecosystems, ultimately defining new territories in
which we have to coexist.

These new ways of communicating have also created a culture of
participation.

As a result, governments need to reconsider their processes, they need
to foster participation and learn to manage collaboration between
multiple stakeholders from both the public and private sector. Rather
than deregulation, this calls for a redefinition of the role of
government, and of the culture we share."


=Findings=

Material - our physical world has evolved:

- For the longest time, territories were an administrative mapping of
geographical regions.

- More recently, business ecosystems have appeared in metropolitan
areas, and they typically overlap several administrative areas,
creating a layer on top of the original mapping, and adding a level of
complexity in the management of geographical communities.

- As a result, the administration of the physical space, and the power
over what can be done where, is a conversation between multiple
stakeholder that are a mix of private and public organizations.

- In addition people and companies are more mobile now than they used
to be. This means that there is competition between various regions of
the world through the ability of those involved to choose where they
go. The conversation cannot be a one way conversation, it requires a
participative process.

Immaterial - our life also happens online:

- The latest progress in telecommunication, with ubiquitous access to
information enabling telecommuting, is redefining the concept of
"community center". People can work from home, they can work while
they are on the move (airports, hotels, cafes, etc...), the center is
now a virtual place that does not necessarily map to a physical place.

Yet another layer has been built on top of physical territories.

- the emergence of online communities, and of online tools to manage
the collaboration between users, have created a culture of
participation.

New territories - material

Where the material meets the immaterial at the most basic level is in
the house, where it is now possible to navigate between the physical
and the virtual space, to be in many locations at once. And therefore
this is where we should look to define new territories we live in,
looking at the use of the space in the house and how it creates new
infrastructure requirements to better serve individuals and the
community around them.

New territories - immaterial:

To foster the participation that people have come to expect, we need
to implement the following:

- direct economy: involving the consumer in the value chain
- direct knowledge: involving the student in the learning process
- direct content: involving the user in the production of content
- e-government: online access to public document and online
transactions
- ubiquitous connectivity: wifi or wimax everywhere
- geotags: virtual tags for physical places
- digital spaces: internet cafes, creative corners
- techno-squares: technology in public spaces
- new services: for example digital books allowing shared comments and
notes
- Thinktanks open to citizens
- Digital governance: joint efforts involving multiple stakeholders
from the public and private sector, managed in total transparency

Meeting these new requirements create challenges on the government
side:

- grassroot power vs hierarchy
- bridging the digital gap
- government as a process rather than a solution
- from enforcement to engagement
- re-defining the role of politicians
- measuring intangibles
- re-emphasizing culture

More specifically government must foster participation through the
following:

- manage change
- map the various existing layers on top of the new territories
- establish common values
- push for results
- get stakeholders buy-in
- establish a core group before allowing others interested players
into the conversation
- favor a pragmatic approach rather than a decision process based on
ideology
- share best practices across the various new territories
- measure progress and results

To conclude, the emergence of new territories creates the need for an
evolution from democracy as we know it to participative democracy,
with an unavoidable overlap between the 2 systems while they coexist,
which will create tensions. But rather than deregulation, it calls for
a redefinition of the role of government and of the culture we share.
A lot of work still remains to be done and we should be ready for
exciting times to come..."


[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Villages]]