
=Source=

= copied from a list maintained by the Democracy Foundation, which has direct access to the links

URL = https://democracy.foundation/similar-projects/



=Directory=

Parties/Movements:

==Australia:==

Flux – An Australian political movement which aims to replace the world’s elected legislatures with a new system known as issue-based direct democracy.
MiVote – An information platform that presents you with a variety of perspectives on all major issues up for debate in the Australian Parliament and many others that affect our lives, via the MiVote App.
Online Direct Democracy Party – An Australian online direct democracy political party.
Canada:

None of the Above Party – This Canadian party campaigns for the 3Rs of direct democracy – Referendum, Recall and Real electoral and legislative Reforms that give voters control of politicians and parties.


==France:==

À Nous La Démocratie! – a French citizen movement and new political party whose aim is to promote direct and participative democracy through institutional reforms (non-accumulation of terms, popular initiative referendum, sortition, responsibility of the government before the people…) and encouragement of the citizens’ participation.


==Greece:==

Greek Direct Democracy Movement – A Greek movement advocating for direct democracy, sortition, and popular initiatives.


==Ireland:==

Direct Democracy Ireland – An Irish direct democracy political party.


==Romania:==

Direct Democracy Romania – An official, legally established party, and is registered in the list of parties in Romania.


==Sweden:==

Aktiv Demokrati – A non-political party for realizing direct democracy in the Swedish parliament, using a mix of delegation and direct voting through the internet.
United Kingdom:

People’s Administration – A mainstream UK party for reform to direct democracy.


==International:==

Pirate Party – a label adopted by political parties in different countries. Pirate parties support civil rights, direct democracy and participation in government, reform of copyright and patent law, free sharing of knowledge (open content), information privacy, transparency, freedom of information, free speech, anti-corruption and Internet neutrality.

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Movements]]