=Definition=

"A Discovery Network (DN) is an open and decentralized ''value network'', a collaborative organization that can include commercial, academic, governmental and independent entities, all collaborating together and coordinating their efforts to enrich society with new material goods and services, and extracting some value from doing so. The DN is mainly a knowledge and a logistical organization. It processes information and knowledge, plans and coordinates, in order to innovate, produce, and distribute new products, on the world market."

It was proposed by [[Tiberius Brastaviceanu]], through [http://multitudeproject.blogspot.ca/ Multitude Project] in summer 2008. See more on [https://sites.google.com/site/multitudeinnovation/home/discovery-network Multitude Innovation]


The [https://sites.google.com/site/matchmakingdevice The Matchmaking Device System] was an attempt to implement the Discovery Network model in the summer of 2010. The [[Value Network]] model, instantiated by [[Sensorica]], evolved from the Discovery Network after the collapse of the Matchmaking Device System project.


'''Some fundational documents of the Discovery Network'''
* [https://sites.google.com/site/multitudeinnovation/home/discovery-network/implement-a-discovery-network Guide to implement a discovery Network]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ux3LG6g9zObMYKJO_A_c1NL7pNLP6exEOF1na5Atc88/edit?hl=en# Value Exchange Mechanism]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/17S7zFZTVxz2kjatlNZm07YytXNHR56a8g_ss3XDLKlI/edit?hl=en# Back Office Catalog]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ukADSYqMntWLAi4Q1tmrccNtFQcP8DT8xL0aoum4Oc0/edit?hl=en# Decision Making]

=Examples=


'''SENSORICA'''

It was launched in January 2011 by [[Tiberius Brastaviceanu]], Ivan Pavlov and Francois Bergeron around the Mosquito, an optical fiber-based sensor designed for biomedical applications. The Discovery Network concept was used in the beginning as a template for [[Sensorica]]. As the network grew, the concept was expanded. The (experimental) infrastructure of [[Sensorica]] was built mostly on Google's platform.

'''Greener Acres'''

It is a value network focusing on local food systems. It was also built in parallel with [[Sensorica]], using a parallel infrastructure.


[[Sensorica]] and Greener Acres are two strongly interacting value networks. This value exchange between these two networks lead to the idea of a super-value network, a network of networks, a fractal structure. The infrastructure of such network in under construction.

PieTrust is collaborating with [[Sensorica]] and Greener Acres at the infrastructure level.

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Research]]