

=Bibliography=

Provided by Hugo Guyader, PhD student at Linköping University


Cui, Li, and Zhang (2017) “Discrimination with Incomplete Information in the Sharing Economy: Field Evidence from Airbnb”  (9 Jan. 2017)
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2882982

Ge et al. (2016). “Race and Gender Discrimination in TNCs” / MIT working paper (27 October 2016) http://faculty.washington.edu/dwhm/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/TNC_Main_NBER.pdf

“Airbnb’s Work to Fight Discrimination and Build Inclusion: A Report Submitted to Airbnb.” 8 Sept. 2016
By Laura W. Murphy (http://blog.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/REPORT_Airbnbs-Work-to-Fight-Discrimination-and-Build-Inclusion.pdf)

Financial Times. “Sharing Economy & Prejudice of Strangers”. 3 July 2016
https://www.ft.com/content/934612b6-3fa4-11e6-8716-a4a71e8140b0

Rohan Gilkes: “I’m a black man. Here’s what happened when I booked an Airbnb.” 25 May 2016 
https://medium.com/stay-woke/i-read-about-this-phenomenon-of-black-people-being-rejected-on-airbnb-f36dd3ab0375#.pw8v8qgk0

— and then he launched Innclusive.com (formerly noirebnb.com)

The Economist. “More Airbnb customers are complaining about racism”. 27 June 2016
- http://www.economist.com/blogs/gulliver/2016/06/unwelcome-homes

The New York Times. “As Airbnb Grows, So Do Claims of Discrimination”. 26 June 2016
- http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/travel/airbnb-discrimination-lawsuit.html 

Forbes.com. “After #AirbnbWhileBlack, Two Startups With Similar Names Look To Capitalize”. 10 June 2016
- http://www.forbes.com/sites/jordanlebeau/2016/06/10/after-airbnbwhileblack-two-startups-with-the-same-name-look-to-capitalize

USAtoday.com. “Noirbnb, Noirebnb to take on #AirbnbWhileBlack”. 7 June 2016
- http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2016/06/06/noirbnb-noirebnb-compete-airbnb-african-americans/85531202/
 
Schor (2016) "Does the Sharing Economy Increase Inequality Within the Eighty Percent?: Findings from a Qualitative Study of Platform Providers "
http://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/schools/cas_sites/sociology/pdf/SharingEconomyInequality.pdf

Cansoy, M & Schor, JB (2016). “Who Gets to Share in the “Sharing Economy”: Understanding the Patterns of Participation and Exchange in Airbnb” 
http://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/schools/cas_sites/sociology/pdf/SharingEconomy.pdf

The Independent (2016-04-25) Rising rent due to Airbnb-caused gentrification of 30 "black neighborhoods"
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/airbnb-ravaging-black-communities-new-york-city-a7000761.html 

Ert et al. (2016) “Trust and reputation in the sharing economy: The role of personal photos in Airbnb.” Tourism Management.

Edelman, Luca & Svinky (HBR 2016) "Racial Discrimination in the Sharing Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment” 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2701902
forthcoming: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (Sept. 2016)

Edelman & Geradin (Stanford Technology Law Review 2015): "Efficiencies and Regulatory Shortcuts: How Should We Regulate Companies like Airbnb and Uber?"
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2658603

Edelman & Luca (HBR 2014): "Digital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com"
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2377353

Articles from Havard Business School: http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/digital-discrimination-the-case-of-airbnb-com (28 jan 2014) ; http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/uncovering-racial-discrimination-in-the-sharing-economy (24 feb 2014)

Time (dec. 2015). “This One Stat Reveals the Sharing Economy’s Racism Problem” http://time.com/4147597/airbnb-sharing-economy-racism/

Chicago Policy Review (mar. 2016). “Renting while black: revealed preferences in the sharing economy” http://chicagopolicyreview.org/2016/03/01/renting-while-black-revealed-preferences-in-the-sharing-economy/

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]