

=Description=

Marc Saxer:

" A discourse community is a group of people
who share a set of discourses, understood
as basic values and assumptions, and ways
of communicating about those goals. These
shared discourses can be broken down
into four layers. On the surface is the policy
discourse, which explains what needs to be
done to solve a clearly defined problem (e.g.
repealing Obamacare). The paradigm discourse
defines the underlying policy making manual. It
identifies the problems, and suggests standard
solutions (e.g. discipline the weak). The
narrative discourse explains why the Doable
is the morally Right Thing to Do. It translates
facts into emotionally accessible frames (e.g.
the role of the father is to make his children
fit for the world). On the deepest level is the
metaphysical discourse, which echoes our view
of the world and human nature (e.g. the world
is a dangerous place)."


=Discussion=

==How does discourse alliance building work?==

Marc Saxer:

"In the absence of a common platform based on
interest, the best way to build a transformative
alliance is to start with a discourse alliance.
Discourse alliance building means introducing
a new narrative which resonates with several
discourse communities. It goes without saying
that the quality of the change narrative is front
and centre. This is why TCM makes extensive
use of the knowledge produced by cognitive
linguistics, e.g. the techniques of political
framing. Accordingly, all three foundations
of TCM have a discursive dimension: the
alternative vision of the future, a change
narrative which explains how to get there,
and the success stories which provide tangible
proof that change is possible."
(http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf)



[[Category:Relational]]