'''= Disintermedia, like CitizenWeb, is a one geek project consisting mainly of a blog and a bit of documentation.''' 

URLs:
* archived at https://web.archive.org/web/https://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/project-home
* copy here at [[Disintermedia Home Page]]

Resource base maintained by [[Danyl Strype]], aka 'Strypey', from  '''Aotearoa''' ('''New Zealand''').

==Description==

"Disintermedia is an Aotearoa-based project that advocates for a society of free people, living in self-governing communities, united in voluntary networks of economic co-operation across nations, continents, and the world. Disintermedia starts with a simple algorithm; free knowledge, free culture, free people. Unless otherwise labeled, all media on this site are licensed under a CreativeCommons-Attribution-Share-Alike license."
(https://web.archive.org/web/https://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/project-home)

==Discussion==

[[Danyl Strype]] [https://web.archive.org/web/http://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/danyl-strype]:

"What made we decide to join this list is the fact that Autonomo.us is a group of people, some of whom are doing amazing work at the coalface. It strikes me that If I want to help progress towards federated *social* networking, being a one-man-band isn't going to cut it ;)

It's seemed to me for some time that cracking the federated social networking problem will take more than just good software. I think [[Federated Social Networking]] will only succeed when the underlying technology become as automatic, reliable, and invisible to users as the machinations of the internet protocols are to users of the web. The current giants (Twitter, Farcebook etc) have succeeded where plenty of other proprietary walled gardens have failed, or just hobbled along with a loyal base of users (eg Ning). This article in PCMag makes some interesting comments on why that might be:
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2384588,00.asp

Two other pop psychology insights which I think are relevant here. One is that things which explicitly invite people to participate tend to get more participants. I felt welcome to join this list because of Mike's invitation to do so in the '2013 reboot' blog post. The other is that people tend to follow 'behavioural traces', to quote environmental psychologist Niki Harre. Harre cites research that people in a place covered in litter are much more likely to litter themselves than if you put them in a place with no litter. These two things mean that interfaces are really important to whether a free social service succeeds or fails. Interfaces which actively invite people to join, helps them connect with other users they already have some relationship with (even if they are on other services), and shows off what other people are using the service for, are much more likely to attract and retain users."

==More Information==

Some material from the Disintermedia wiki and subsidiary projects are copied/ported in the P2P Foundation wiki:

* [[Authoring Platforms‎‎]]
* [[Distributed Search Engines]]
* [[Free Code Chat Software]]
* [[Free Code Game Engines]]
* [[Free Code Graphics Toolkits and Libraries‎]]
* [[Free code mailing list software]]
* [[Free Code Self-Hosting Packages]]
* [[Free Culture Timeline]]
* [[Gaming Literacy‎]]
* [[Online Decision Platforms]]
* [[Open Source Game Operating Systems]]
* [[Open Source Virtual Worlds]]
* [[Open Game Business Models‎]]
* [[Open Source Games‎]]
* [[Slack Alternatives]]
* [[Women Active in Libre Commons]]

More recently, some pages have been created here instead of there:

* [[CC Music from Aotearoa/ NZ]]
* [[Free Code Chat Apps]]
* [[Open Source Electric Vehicle]]
* [[Open Source CRM]]
* [[Containers on GNU+Linux Servers]]
* [[Web-Based Tasks Lists]]

For all other Disintermedia links, please see our copy of the [[Disintermedia Home Page]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Media]]
[[Category:Standards]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:New Zealand]]