'''* Paper: How Open are Societies in the Virtual? Towards an Assessment of the Distribution of Power Between Users and Operators. By Holger M. Kienle, Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic et al.'''

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Kienle-etal-Paper.pdf


=Abstract=

"Virtual environments such as massive multi-player online games and virtual worlds are
expected to have an increasing impact on peoples' lives. These virtual environments are
not mere play, but are hosting virtual societies and communities. From this perspective, it
seems pertinent to ask, what is the degree of freedom that users are experiencing in these
virtual environments? In this paper, we try to analyze this question with the help of four
lenses|social, ethical, technical, and legal|that expose different viewpoints from which
this matter can be looked at. We focus our discussion on two stakeholders|the operators
of virtual environments and its users|and look at the distribution of power between them.
While our analysis is only a frst step towards understanding this question, we believe that
our lenses are a useful approach to structure the discussion."



From the introduction:

"In this paper, we explore freedom for virtual societies
and communities, which we believe has been a neglected field of study. Our guiding question
is: What factors are infuencing the degree of freedom that users of virtual environments are
experiencing? We explore this question with the help of different lenses (or viewpoints) that
guide the identification of factors. The lenses that we use are the following: social, ethical,
technical, and legal.

Freedom in virtual environments has different stakeholders. In this paper we focus on
the users of the virtual environment and the operators that run it. Other stakeholders are
lawmakers and regulators.


Our interest in studying freedom for virtual societies is grounded in the believe that society
is increasingly shaped in the virtual rather than the physical realm. Also, there are increasing
interactions between the virtual and physical, exemplified by location-aware mobile services,
augmented reality, and ambient intelligence. Generally, one can expect that virtual environments
will enable increasingly rich social interactions, enticing users to increasingly define their
lives in the virtual.

When we speak of the "virtual" we have a broad notion in mind. A virtual space can be
as rudimentary as an electronic mailing list (e.g., LISTSERV) or a bulletin board [43], and
as complex as a 3D virtual world (e.g., Second Life) with social networking sites in between
(e.g., LinkedIn). It is often overlooked that massive multi-player online games (MMOGs) spawn
vibrant societies [39]. All of these spaces seem to have in common that they enable users to
represent themselves with an avatar6 and provide mechanisms for communication among users.
Communication among users (through their avatars) entails that multiple users have access to
the virtual space and that they can perceive representations of each other. In the following,
when we do not want to single out a particular kind of virtuality, we use the term virtual
environment."


[[Category:Gaming]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]