

=Description=

F. Gregory Lastowka and Dan Hunter:

"Today distributed selection is an emerging reality. In various ways, distributed selec-
tion is replacing the past functions of the
entertainment industries by sifting through
and prioritizing large numbers of works.

Increasingly, “social software” allows for the
profiling of personal preferences, cross-indexing of those preferences among individuals, and thereby predicting with relative reli-
ability the preferences of consumers.

Perhaps the best known social software–reliant tool is Google, which ranks the relevance
of any given website by determining the number of other sites that are linked to it. As computer scientist Edward Felten has explained,
“Google is not a mysterious Oracle of Truth but
a numerical scheme for aggregating the preferences expressed by web authors.”34 Google fil-
ters out the vast panoply of irrelevant material
by collecting relevance assessments made by
other users.

Capturing individual preferences and writ-
ing preference algorithms that rank information’s relevance are generally known as collab-
orative filtering. Analog collaborative filtering
has existed for a long time. For instance, the
notion of good “word of mouth” to drive up
sales of movie tickets, Billboard’s listing of top
singles and albums, or the New York Times’s
listings of “bestsellers” are processes by which,
to some extent, the public casts votes that
buoy the sales of information products. But
well-written collaborative filtering software
can offer much more personalized and
nuanced varieties of recommendation.

...

Distributed selection is increasingly a more
reliable predictor of preferences than are the
traditional industry selection agents—commissioning editors, movie executives, and so
on. Distributed selection is real-time, individ-
ually tailored, and resistant to the personal
generalities, inconsistencies, and information
deficits that plague traditional industry
agents. The average selection agent makes a
gut reaction decision about the interest level
in a particular market or submarket. The algorithmic distributed selection agent makes
individualized predictions based on the end
user’s interests.

...

Central selection
agents will lose their relative power in much
the same way that the proliferation of cable
television channels has led to the decline in
prominence of the three major American
broadcast networks. In situations in which we
can actually compare centralized ex ante and
decentralized ex post selection directly — for
example, the ex post distributed Google search
engine as contrasted with the ex ante centralized, human-selected Yahoo! directory — the
distributed agent has garnered greater market
share because it apparently works better. And
for scope of material covered, the work of the
volunteer, amateur, and socially distributed
Open Directory Project is more comprehensive than the Internet directory produced by
Yahoo!

Distributed networks are transforming
the selection function. The conclusion is simple: Traditional centralized ex ante selection is
costly and decreases total available content.
Now that distributed selection is possible, ex
post selection among works by decentralized
agents seems to be a better alternative."
(http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa567.pdf)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]