
=Open Design Project Management=


* [http://openpario.net/ Open Pario]


=Design Depositories=

* [http://www.thingiverse.com/ Thingiverse]: This is a place to share digital designs that can be made into real, physical objects. 


=Directories=

==100K Garages==

URL = http://www.100kgarages.com/

"there are several thousand shops all over the world with tools for digital fabrication (sometimes called CNC tools) that can make exactly what you want   (how can replicating parts be that easy?). There's probably even one near you. Some are regular businesses, some are part-timers, and some are small shops that have some spare production time: each has the capability to help you make all kinds of things. You know what a 'Copy Center' is for getting printed pages and projects made, 100kGarages is like a virtual 3D copy center for getting real parts and projects made.

100Kgarages is your access to the network of these 'garages' that can make stuff for you (well we're just getting this thing started ... but you can read more here on the big idea). Your digital fabrication work will be done by a community of local workshops with digital tools for precisely cutting, machining, drilling, or sculpting the components of your project."


=Other Projects=

As far as I understand the following are projects only:

#[[OSCOMAK]]: '''The OSCOMAK project''' will foster a community in which many interested individuals will contribute to the creation of a distributed global repository of manufacturing knowledge about past, present and future processes, materials, and products. OSCOMAK stands for "OSCOMAK Semantic Community On Manufactured Artifacts and Know-how". 

#The '''Societal Engineering Knowledge Database''' ([[SKDB]]) is a group of programs designed to aggregate, store, present, and process clusters of engineering knowledge, described as 'packages' in analogy to linux software management tools like APT, yum, CPAN, rpm, etc.. These project packages might include simulation and visualization tools for tweaking, development tools to rewrite data about the package, explicit well-documented links to other projects, etc. The success of APT and friends comes not from any magical software intelligence, but rather in the wide-spread social diffusion and easy accessibility: the ability to easily get new components, and just as easily throw them away; users can play with them, see how the work, and implement changes on the spot.




[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]