

=Typology=

==Different types of [[Distributed Consciousness]] supported by the web==

By Shima Beigi and Francis Heylighen:

"We are now in a position to distinguish different types of distributed
consciousness supported by the web. First, we will envisage the
different agents (human as well as technological) communicating
via the web as the equivalent of neuronal circuits in the brain, and
their communications as equivalent to the “action potentials” or
“spikes” transmitted from neuron to neuron. The network structure
of the web then becomes equivalent to the associative network
in which information is stored for use by cognitive processes of
retrieval and inference. That means that it functions as a collective
memory: shared knowledge available in websites, databases and
computer programs that can be consulted and used when needed,
but is otherwise passive.

Information propagates immediately and automatically via the
existing links, for example when we download a book, watch the
video produced by a remote camera, or order a pizza. This information is retrieved, used, and occasionally updated, but without
active reflection or discussion. For example, we can find any info
we need about tuberculosis, including ways to deal with it, but are
at the moment not further interrogating that knowledge. Similarly,
when we send an email, that message is transmitted automatically
to the right address, without anyone wondering what path it took
to get there. This is undoubtedly a form of distributed cognition,
extending the information processing inside our individual minds
across the globe. However, from the present perspective this type
of process is not conscious, since it is not being examined, pondered or circulated. Therefore, the information that is standardly
available on the web can be viewed as the noospheric equivalent of
the subconscious.

Noospheric consciousness would then refer to those ideas that are
actively circulating, being propagated from person to person or
from webpage to webpage, while being scrutinized and discussed.
That means that these ideas are likely to be questioned, rejected or
elaborated before they become accepted as common knowledge or
as agreed-upon strategy. For example, global society is presently
discussing the different factors that promote the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the strategies to most efficiently combat it. Thus, we can say that at the moment, the global brain is consciously
attending to COVID-19. On the other hand, it is not consciously
attending to tuberculosis or to billions of other pieces of knowledge
and processes that are available for retrieval or use, but that remain
in the background.

The noosphere then is the equivalent of a global workspace for
the global brain. The web, and in particular social media, provides
the shared forum where inputs from many different, more specialized sources come together, complementing, contradicting or
confirming each other, while circulating between individuals and
systems. Ideas that are passed on, discussed and elaborated sufficiently frequently may start to “resonate” or “reverberate”, thus
being amplified until they reach “ignition”, i.e. widespread, global
circulation that maintains the overall pattern for a while in global
“working memory”."

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]