

=Discussion=

Roberto Verzola:

'''1.'''

"Please look more closely at net metering and the energy exchanges that
happen under it. It seems to be similar to the kind of mechanism you are
looking for, as follows: It measures the individual contribution of a
solar owner's surplus (the reversal in the electric meter) to the grid
supply, and which entitles the solar owner to credit equivalent to his
contribution. You can look at this contribution as a contribution to
the common supply of electricity, although it just so happens that this
contribution is privately appropriated by the utility at this time. But
one can imagine the surplus contributions of many solar owners as
something similar to code, information, etc. contributed to a common
pool. From this perspective, the grid is a network that is now
poised to turn into a commons where the accounting mechanism (my term,
equivalent to your 'economic calculation', I believe) has already been
found--net metering. I'm not sure yet that this is so, but it think it
deserves a second look."
(email, January 2016)


'''2.'''

"Thus one can think of this phenomenon now as
follows: those who have surplus are contributing to the common pool,
using wires which are also held in common; the those who are short of
electricity draw from this common pool but maybe in the future they
will have some surplus to give to the common pool too. And all these
exchanges are accurately accounted for by the meters that turn forward
or backward depending on the direction of flow of power through the
meter. Isn't this the kind of peer-to-peer mechanism you were looking
for. Of course, this is a special case, because the meters are already
there. How can this be extended to other situations and cases? Do we
always need to have metering equipment? Can computers perform a similar
recording function for other peer-to-peer activities/exchanges?"

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]