'''* Article: Distributed authorship and creative communities. By Professor Simon Biggs and Dr. Penny Travlou, Edinburgh College of Art'''

URL = http://www.littlepig.org.uk/texts/authorship_community.pdf


=Abstract:=


"In its requirement for both an author and reader art can be considered a participatory activity.

Expanded concepts of agency, such as in actor-network-theory (Latour 2005), question what
or who can be an active participant, allowing us to revisit the debate on authorship from a
new perspective. We can ask whether creativity might be regarded as a form of social
interaction rather than an outcome. How might we understand creativity as interaction
between people and things, as sets of discursive relations rather than outcomes?

Whilst creativity is often perceived as the product of the individual artist, or creative ensemble,
it can also be considered an emergent phenomenon of communities, driving change and
facilitating individual or ensemble creativity. Creativity can be a performative activity released
when engaged through and by a community and understood as a process of interaction.

In this context the model of the solitary artist who produces artefacts which embody creativity
is questioned as an ideal for achieving creative outcomes. Instead, creativity is proposed as
an activity of exchange that enables (creates) people and communities. In Creative Land
(Leach 2003) anthropologist James Leach describes cultural practices where the creation of
new things, and the ritualised forms of exchange enacted around them, function to "create"
individuals and bind them in social groups, "creating" the community they inhabit. Leach's
argument is an interesting take on the concept of the gift-economy and suggests it is possible
to conceive of creativity as emergent from and innate to the interactions of people. Such an
understanding might then function to combat an instrumentalist view of creativity that
demands of artists that their creations have social (e.g.: "economic") value. In the argument
proposed here, creativity is not valued as arising from a perceived need, a particular solution
or product, nor from a supply-side "blue skies" ideal, but as an emergent property of
communities.

This paper seeks to articulate these issues, identifying a set of core questions and describing
the context within which they will be addressed, indicating how these questions will be at the
centre of the pan-European ELMCIP collaborative research project. The paper examines a
specific example of a creative community and outlines the research methods we intend to
employ during our proposed field work. The paper concludes with an outline of our expected
outcomes."
(http://www.littlepig.org.uk/texts/authorship_community.pdf)


[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Articles]]