
'''* Working Paper: Peer-To-Peer Law: Distribution as a Design Principle for Law. . Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay. MEDIA@LSE Working Paper Series No. 31'''

URL = http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/research/mediaWorkingPapers/pdf/WP31-FINAL.pdf


=Abstract=

"Instead of applying law to peer-to-peer in order to control networks, I propose to apply
peer-to-peer to the law to transform it. The western liberal conception of law is based on the
legal category of the individual. This legal theoretical conception does not adequately take
into account the concept of communities of peers, defined as non-stabilised, evolving, or
non formalized groups sharing a common interest or an ad hoc production purpose, from
local communities (e.g. those using a commons-based governed fishery) to online
communities (e.g. the users of a platform) which do not have a legal statute as an
individually identifiable entity.

Legal thinking can be influenced by architecture design principles based on
decentralisation. Peer-to-peer architectures, for example distributed storage and wireless
mesh network, disrupt the application of positive law and question central legal notions of
liability, control, ownership and responsibility. I call for a transformation of legal thinking
and logic and a theoretical break from envisioning the individual person as unique point of
reference of the regulatory system composed by positive law and policies targeting
individuals. Network theorists have already been conceptualising the agency of collectives,
and commoners have been developing legal hacks to organise collective property. Beyond an
individualised law trying to control distributed Information and Communication
Technologies, peer-to-peer ways to think and design the law require to design collective
rights and legal persons. Challenging liberal legalism design grounded in individualism
requires to integrate peer-to-peer as a design principle for the law, towards the recognition
of collectives as subjects of rights and duties, and the distribution of the law itself."


=Excerpt=

==FOR A TRANSFORMATION OF LEGAL THINKING==

Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay:

"Lobbying to prohibit peer-to-peer file sharing or peer-to-peer based technologies of
anonymity, storage, browsing or access follows a traditional model of legal regulation, which
aims to control technology and safeguard the supremacy of legal rules which were developed
before the emergence of the new technical environment. However, this position, instead of
transposing legal values and general principles to the digital age, leads to constraining it
beyond the initial regulatory objective of preventing infringement, by controlling also
legitimate activities which were previously unregulated. Legal doctrine showed the
extension of the scope of copyright and the chilling effect on users’ rights and socio-cultural
practices of creation. The law has not been updated yet to scale to the technology. There has
not been any change of legal paradigm to integrate transformations caused by digital
technologies and especially peer production with unidentifiable networks of peers instead of
legally identifiable persons. Law can also interact with technology in a different way by
trying to integrate some of its features in order to maybe regulate it better.

One way to think about the relationship between law and peer-to-peer technology is to
wonder if the law needs to be expanded to face a new regulatory challenge. People choose to
use and to contribute to services based on distributed architectures for many reasons
including to preserve their privacy and escape censorship, but also legal control. The
uniqueness of the distributed environment may fade away if the legislator catches up and
blocks the ports needed to deploy peer-to-peer architectures. The same attack of 'law of the
horse' (Easterbrook, 1996 and the answer by Lessig, 2001) which has been made to cyberlaw
could be made to a law of distributed architecture, questioning its singularity and its raison
d'être. Or, if distributed architectures are unique, we are facing the emergence of new legal
categories which will produce new norms. But beyond the fact that these technologies may
be used for both legitimate and illegal purposes and that the fragmentation of the services
makes it difficult to assign liability, it should be noted that these peer-to-peer services are
also part of the social movement of the commons. They foreground peer-production as an
alternative to the market-based centralised services exercising control over their users and
their data. Even if technical efforts required to set them up as opposed to the ease of
installation of their commercial counterpart may prevent their take-off, they participate in
emancipation and autonomy through technology, and constitute a valid alternative to the
commodification of free labour and the lack of security and privacy of the commercial
services.

From a legal perspective, the main difference I want to observe between commercial and
peer-to-peer services is that the former services rely on a contractual relation between two
individual entities (the corporation and the user), allowing the allocation of responsibility in
case of infringement, while the latter services are not provided by an individual person.
They are offered by a mesh of nodes which ensure collectively that the service is possible,
each ensuring a fragment of it, which is difficult or impossible to monitor technically and
control legally. Distributed architectures are fragmenting data and actions, thus exploding
the localised rights model where each object or right can be assigned to one actor. The
problem comes from the fact that peer-to-peer architectures aggregate and distribute
technically insignificant fragments, while the law allocates rights to individual persons in a
bijective relation.

Individual legal entities are the basis of legal reasoning and the subjects of rights. Western
legal systems tend to mainly recognise the rights of individuals, to protect private property
rights, commercial interests in individuals and personal freedoms. Law assigns rights to
individuals (which can be states, corporations or non-profit) benefitting from autonomy and
agency. While law is arranging responsibilities, rights, duties, obligations and conditions
between moral or physical persons in localised determined jurisdictions, distributed
architectures operate with fragmented data and share the process between actors which are
neither localised nor stabilised, as they are not necessarily the same peers present all along a
given process of data communication.

I claim therefore that the distribution of the actors and the actions requires the rethinking of
legal categories, since the notions of author of an action, action and content or object are
not tangible units any longer, but aggregated, open-ended and evolving fragments. Legal
reasoning will question whether distributed services are really of a different nature; whether
localisation really matters; whether the association of encryption and fragmentation ensures
anonymity or untraceability; how to distinguish the request of an action from the
implementation or performance of the action? Regarding the last question, my
understanding is that fragmentation of actions between an unfixed network of peers at least
blurs responsibilities and at most makes them irrelevant.

Which method of research of the responsible person can be applied if there is no identifiable
owner or service provider? Joint liability of all identifiable nodes for the other members of
the group who would have performed an offence has not been applied, but the absence of
case law does not mean this could not happen. It might be the case that if no entity is found
liable, any identifiable entity related to the case would be sentenced. The reconfiguration
through cooperation of the notion of individuals forming a collective triggers a
deconstruction of legal categories in several domains: copyright, liability, cybercriminality,
processing of personal data, but also data security. In case of service failures and data loss, it
is not certain that a warranties disclaimer would be valid when faced with consumer
protection legislation. No contractual relationship can be deduced: since users are unknown
and unstable, the performance of the service depends on who is connected at what time, but
none of the nodes are individually essential. In the absence of a contract and of user
identification, it is difficult to assign responsibility in the traditional way. A complex
network of users and contractual relationships could be inferred from who is online when,
but if peers do not know what package is circulating, and if the package may take a different
road when they are not online, all peers could just be irresponsible nodes among others,
unaware of the content of the traffic they are collectively facilitating, but neither individually
allowing or blocking. The presence or the absence of one peer in the network is irrelevant to
the performance of the service, diminishing claims for collective responsibility."


[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Articles]]