

* MSc Thesis: Distributed Networked Biobased Economies. By Fabio Barone.

URL = http://fbarone.net/sites/default/files/Distributed-Networked-Biobased-Economies.pdf [http://fbarone.net/?q=node/3]


=Abstract=

"Distribution is a strategy used in information systems architecture to increase fault-tolerance
and overall resilience. Decentralising or distribution of energy generation improves the resilience of electricity supply compared to centralised big power stations with losses due to
transmission lines. Distributed production can further increase the resilience of societal systems, while allowing cultural diversity and certain degree of self-determination. It could mitigate destructive patterns of large scale economies through concentrating on small to mid scale
applications. Community ownership as well as local control and management of resources and
natural assets establishes stronger communities, streamlines supply allocation along local needs
and priorities while amplifying self-reliance and decreasing dependence on global markets and
big business. Such structures could organically conﬁgure themselves based on bioregions. Electronic communication embracing open source principles through the Internet constitutes the
base for equitable access to information and education worldwide, fosters collaborative, cooperative modes of working, interacting and sharing, and can be beneﬁcial for any kind of project
through the participative integration of potential contributors all over the planet. Costs of new
developments can be driven down through sharing of information and experiences. Facing peak
oil also means ﬁnding alternatives to oil products. Many such artefacts can be produced from
biomass. Bioreﬁneries are installations which convert biomass into usable products, like fuels,
bioplastics, solvents or chemicals. The correspondent technologies are still in infancy; their
development requires massive investments. Some are already available and suitable for small
scale distributed economies, others might become over time. A distributed scenario encompassing technological advance requires appropriate materials; bioreﬁneries could be instrumental in
providing them through the conversion of biomass. The biggest challenge to this vision is the
allotment of available biomass resources to different streams: food, clothing, energy, materials,
arts and construction. Prioritisation along local conditions would generate regional differences
and adaptations. Algae biomass holds amazing prospects. However, its implementation is all
too uncertain today."
(http://fbarone.net/?q=node/3)


=More Information=

* http://fbarone.net/?q=node/3


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Science]]