
'''* Article: Participatory Public Policy Microcosms: Diversity and Empathy as Generators of Creative Wholeness. by Rosa Zubizarreta. Spanda Journal, 2015, VI:2'''

URL = https://dk-media.s3.amazonaws.com/AA/AL/diapraxis/downloads/308857/Participatory_Public_Policy_Microcosms.pdf

pre-publication version of article published in Spanda Journal, 2015, VI:2 ; full issue available through spanda.org



=Abstract=

"One limitation of the "majority wins" approach to democracy is its "argument-as-battle"
mode of discourse, based on the underlying epistemological assumption that finding truth
is best served by playing "king-of-the-hill". This dominator mode of discourse is
embedded in our larger culture, yet alternatives are beginning to emerge. Within the
realm of politics, the evolutionary impulse to work creatively with differences is
currently manifesting significant democratic experiments whose underlying dynamics
could be described metaphorically with the following equations: (microcosm of larger
society) • (supportive facilitation) = holotropic outcome; (holotropic outcome) •
(widespread storysharing) = societal learning. Two instances are explored briefly,
MacLean's "Canadian experiment" and South Africa's Mont Fleur scenarios. A third is
explored more fully: Vorarlberg, an Austrian state, has hosted more than 35 ad-hoc Civic
Councils for generating high-quality participatory public policy inputs. These randomlyselected
microcosms have repeatedly evoked collective wisdom, systemic insights, and
powerful convergences. This work is coordinated by Vorarlberg's State Office for FutureRelated
Issues using Dynamic Facilitation, a non-linear, empathy-based methodology for
the Civic Councils, and World Café for the subsequent public Civic Cafés. Given the role
of local municipalities and regions in sponsoring these Councils, institutional good faith /
responsiveness has been found as key for positive outcomes, modifying slightly the
above equations. The wide-spread societal learning from these various collective
experiments can be understood as generating shifts in our shared appreciative systems, as
delineated by Vickers; also as steps toward high-leverage shifts in our shared paradigms,
as described by Meadows."

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]