
'''* Article: DUNBAR-HESTER, C. (2016). “Freedom from Jobs” or learning to love to labor? Diversity advocacy and working
imaginaries in Open Technology Projects, Revista Teknokultura Vol. 13(2), 541-566.'''

URL = http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52869/50003

=Abstract=

"This paper examines imaginaries of work and labor in “open technology” projects
(especially open source software and hackerspaces), based on ethnographic research in
North America. It zeroes in on “diversity initiatives” within open technology projects.

These initiatives are important because they expose many of the assumptions and tensions
that surround participatory cultures. On the one hand, these projects and spaces are
organized around voluntarism; in theory, everyone who wishes to participate is welcome to
do so. On the other hand, diversity initiatives form in order to address the “problem” of
imbalance in the ranks of participants. Technology is a unique domain for the discharge of
political energies. In collective imagination, it has been vested with the power to initiate
change (even as this belief obscures the role of social and economic relations). Multiple
ideas circulate about the relationships between diversity in open technology projects and
paid labor. This paper argues that in part due to the legacy of technical hobbies as training
grounds for technical employment for much of the twentieth century, as documented by
historians of radio (Douglas, 1987; Haring, 2006), voluntaristic technology projects are
vexed sites for imagining political emancipation. To a large degree, diversity initiatives in
open technology projects are consistent with corporate values of diversity as a marketplace
value. At the same time, collectivity formations around technology that incorporate
feminist, antiracist, or social justice framings may begin to generate connections between
diversity advocacy in tech fields and social justice movements or policy changes in order to
effect deep social change."


[[Category:Gender]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]