URL = http://divvydao.org/

=Description=

"Divvy is a growing organic Distributed Autonomous Organization (DAO) of collaborating communities for mutual security, strong anonymous identity, decision support and organizational support, within our community and in the interaction among each other’s communities.  We support each other in using the centralized internet 2 organizational support tools available today and evolving toward trustworthy Internet 3 decentralized disintermediated interaction tools of the future. Divvy is a user-driven platform development cooperative, selecting and developing tools by consent all the participating communities can use internally and interoperably.  

The object of Decentralized Autonomous Organization is to “divvy” up the control, costs and benefits of cooperation equitably, cooperating to maximize the autonomy of the individual and freedom of the organization to act without central or external control.    Divvy is a DAO of DAOs and other organizational structures – a platform which would enable a web of collaboration among DAO communities and cooperations among participants or users of an activity or organization of diverse functions and structure. This autonomous network of communities will cooperatively adopt and develop organizational support service alternatives. It will enable organizational support services and trustworthy interoperable services for individuals and communities in a trustless environment. Participants under consideration include The DAO user community, Synereonet (community), Synereo LTD, FreeTrust, OWASP, Proven Secure Solutions Inc. and other user communities

We aim to develop autonomous governance tools that are decentralized and scalable. This is an invitation to combine the efforts of the many innovators within this space. It will support the initial application of these facilities by the member communities. 

WHY? Internet applications are becoming decentralized.  This will change everything we do.  Either we manage the change or risk obsolescence. Divvy aims to support member communities and their collaboration on disintermediated organizational support infrastructure.  Our identities, tokens and contracts will need to interoperate. We can collaborate on standards, tools and gateways for interoperation.  Where we have consensus we can divvy costs and share benefits, acting collectively."
(http://divvydao.org/)


=History=

"DivvyDAO came about in a coalescing affect as the Ethereum Cooperative came in contact with DivvyDAO,founded by Jim Whitescarver – a well organized and determined guru on collaborative learning models and hellbent on protecting identity, reputation, privacy and personal security in the cryptoeconomy and the world going forward.
Public discourse is arrived from we the individual. We start as the individual and coalesce and have the ability to use the technology for what it is there for, not to spy on us, or render working people jobless, but to put the social aspect in the mix, with built in value that involves systems of governance that will offer a proper medium and this will involve public discourse, equal opportunity, uncensored, decentralized, and DivvyDAO dollars.
With spontaneous combustion comes a blog, a forum for voting opinions, and already we are building a system for public debate with moderation built in and real debates that are timed, and get this – with Consider.it on the side in live time that people can vote on in a live debate or group discussion. This will not only benefit decisions for this token and projects associated with it, but also the rest of general society as the ramifications are perfect, alternatively speaking. People can debate with the same questions, unlike the theater seen on Fox News or CNN. But we will offer this forum for public debate on the DivvyDAO going forward in a collaborative fashion. And yet the same functions can be allowed for any debate, and they can be as crazy as you can imagine. We are looking at incorporating a voting system for the content of the debate and blogs, etc complete with DivvyDAO tokens, and hope to involve inclusion of many and arrive at the best and reward the best and advance the ideas in the pipeline. And over the top, Virtual Reality is being thrown out there for a medium be it a board room setting or any setting. The world is truly ours to build and we can do it via the blockchain. DivvyDAO is the project that will combust soon."
(http://divvydao.org/index.php/2016/07/08/divvydao-collaborative-dao-project-building-the-stepping-stones-to-social-adaption-in-the-cryptoeconomy/)


=More Information=

* video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-6_EV3_EBO8

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Open_Company_Formats]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:P2P_Solidarity]]
[[Category:Post-Corporate]]