

=Examples=

Compiled from [http://www.bestcollegesonline.com/blog/2009/07/12/100-places-to-sell-and-share-your-knowledge-on-the-side/] :

* DIY Network: If you’re an expert in home renovation, share your skills on this home improvement focused site.

* Instructables: No matter what kind of knowledge you have to share you can create videos to share with and instruct others on this site.

* Graspr: Answer questions and make instructional videos that can help viewers learn just about 

* Make Magazine: If you love being creative with tech stuff and items around the house, this site could be ideal for you to share your ideas and most successful projects.

* DIY Chatroom: Talk with others who want to learn how to take charge of their own projects on this site and share what you know or have learned.

* WikiHow: Contribute your knowledge to this user-created site that focuses on how-to themed articles.

* eHow: From the practical to the outrageous, this site lets you ask and answer questions on just about everything.

* VideoJug: Here you can post videos on everything from being a great parent to solving your own plumbing problems.

* SuTree: This site helps you to share your knowledge about doing a wide variety of things with a great online community.

* LovetoKnow: Designed for women, this site offers the chance to ask and answer questions on everything from getting tattoos to home improvement.
(http://www.bestcollegesonline.com/blog/2009/07/12/100-places-to-sell-and-share-your-knowledge-on-the-side/)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Resources]]