
'''* Book: The DNA of Collaboration Unlocking Insight and Intention in the 21st Century. By Christopher D. Jones.'''


=Summary=

The structure of the book:


"'''CONCEPTS: Establishing a Foundation (Part 1)'''

— Sharing and developing new ideas can be highly contagious, and I contend collaboration unlocks excitement and energy when we dare to think deeply in team settings. We need to raise the bar on our skillsets to make this happen. To get started, we’ll talk about some practical scenarios, and explore the fundamentals of how we conceptualize our ideas in simple, useful frameworks.


'''MESSAGING: Unpacking the Communication Process (Part 2)'''

— The basic exchange of information between two individuals is often a struggle. When collaborating on a team, that shortfall is compounded. We forget that others may have a fundamentally different perspective on the topic at hand. Our ability to exchange insights in a group setting is fundamental to the collaborative process, yet we scarcely give it a second thought. Messages fly all around, but we’re prone to lose both context and relevance. Words are being spoken, but communication isn’t happening. How can address this?


'''RELATIONSHIPS: Exploring the Dynamics of Deep Engagement (Part 3)'''

— There is a strong relational element in the collaborative equation. Not everyone brings the same interpersonal skills to the table, but the connections among the team will prove vital. Group settings challenge us on many levels, so we’ll delve into the many interpersonal dynamics at work, including our ability to listen, the impact of culture, and a more flexible model for oversight.


'''FLOW: Fostering an Organic Collaborative Process (Part 4)'''

— Moving from a structured approach to one that’s more organic is a significant change of thinking. We’ll need a productive and flexible work spaces for collaboration, as we sort out new possibilities. We’ll also need a simple, adaptable process to help us establish common ground, and new tools to make the exchange simple, intuitive, and ubiquitous.


'''POSSIBILITIES: Imagining the Future of Learning (Part 5)'''

— As we begin to master meaningful collaboration, new possibilities emerge before us: the evolution of Knowledge Management for sharing insights across increasingly connected organizations, mastering the many demands of critical thinking, and touching on the fascinating social implications from the study of complexity.

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category: Books]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]