
'''* Article / Book chapter: Laurent Dupont, Fedoua Kasmi, Joshua M. M Pearce, Roland Ortt. ”Do-It-Together”: Towards the Factories of the Future. José Ramos; Sharon Ede; Michel Bauwens; James Gien Wong. [[Cosmo-Local Reader]], Futures Lab, pp.52-59, 2021,'''

URL = https://hal.univ-lorraine.fr/hal-03506100 [https://www.dropbox.com/s/64q6fn18wz4ewtt/CL_Reader.pdf?dl=0 pdf]


=Summary=

"The emergence and multiplication of spaces and networks of makers, hackerspaces, micro-factories, fab labs or other spaces equipped with digital manufacturing tools and technologies (3D printers, sensors...) has favoured the development of a more agile, democratized and distributed production. 7Such environments are conducive to distributed collective creativity, which plays an important role in the emergence of new forms of innovation and entrepreneurial activities. 8Based on the customization, integration and involvement of users in the production processes and local production in small series. ... Nevertheless, supporting this hybrid production approach and disseminating the DIY principles among local producers requires the development of new production modes and strategies in a context where processes: "are less open, less distributed and less minimal than the new Do-It-Yourself processes."   As a result, many actors, especially small producers, miss the opportunities of development and innovation offered by the DIY.  The new "Do-It-Together" (DIT) approach attempts to address these limitations. It is a participatory design and collaborative production strategy that allows "global design and local manufacturing" involving "prosumers" (consumers/producers) in the manufacturing process."

[[Category:P2P Foundation]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]
[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]