'''= concept and book'''


=Concept=

From the Wikipedia:

"Do it yourself (or DIY) is a term used to describe building, modifying, or repairing of something without the aid of experts or professionals. The phrase "do it yourself" came into common usage in the 1950s in reference to home improvement challenges that people might choose to complete independently.

In recent years, the term DIY has taken on a broader meaning that covers a wide range of skill sets. DIY is associated with the international alternative rock, punk rock, and indie rock music scenes, indymedia networks, pirate radio stations, and the zine community. In this context, DIY is related to the Arts and Crafts movement in that it offers an alternative to modern consumer culture's emphasis on relying on others to solve needs."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Do_it_yourself)


=Book=


'''Book: Do It Yourself - A Handbook For Changing Our World. EYFA, 2007.'''

URL = http://www.handbookforchange.org/

From the publisher:

"It's not a book about what's wrong with the world, but a collection of dynamic ideas which explore how we can build radical and meaningful social change, ourselves, here and now. Covering nine themes, the book weaves together analysis, stories and experiences. It combines in-depth analytical chapters followed by easy to follow "How to Guides" with practical ideas for organising collectively for change. 

Do It Yourself is part of a growing response from the global social justice movement. Written and edited by activists and grassroots campaigners from across the world, the book reflects on their experiments in taking back control of their lives from governments and corporations.
The Handbook for Changing Our World is the first book to be published by Pluto Press under the ground breaking Creative Commons license allowing greater rights for non commercial uses." 
(http://eyfa.org/network_news/do_it_yourself_a_handbook_for_changing_our_world)

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Movements]]