'''Doc Searls''', editor in chief of Linux Journal and A-list blogger, on '''the attention vs the [[Intention Economy]]'''.


=Webcast=

Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nVP3qF_HVkA&feature=youtu.be

"Among the goals of the VRM — Vendor Relationship Management — movement are preserving Internet freedom and opportunity, changing the economic power structure, and turning the tables on privacy-violating business models and practices. But there are several challenges to achieving this vision for the future of business and the internet.

Doc Searls' — co-author of the Cluetrain Manifesto, and founder of ProjectVRM — discusses some of the challenges he lays out in his new book "The Intention Economy: When Customers Take Charge."

=Podcast 1=

URL = http://techconf.thepodcastnetwork.com/2006/03/19/the-tech-conference-show-doc-searls/

"Doc Searls is not only co-author of the Cluetrain manifesto, he also has a big interest in technology and a background in advertising. Listen to his reflections at the end of Etech about Attention economy versus Intention economy, how much vendors where going for Web 1.0 kind of advertising, why Google needs to rethink their business model and what Barcamp has to do with Renaissance."


=Podcast 2=

URL = http://i.i.com.com/cnwk.1d/i/z/e/200606/ITMatters20060621_DocSearls.mp3


=Podcast 3: the Giant Zero=

URL = http://www.outklass.com/?p=70


"If you are a fan of the Cluetrain Manifesto, The Free Software Movement, or technologists’ ramblings, this luncheon talk from Audio Berkman will be of interest. The audio quality is a bit rough on the ears at times, but I found the content well worth it. Here is an excerpt from Doc Searl’s blog:

''The title is The Giant Zero. The metaphor is a play on the meaning of both World of Ends (which I co-wrote with fellow Berkman fellow David Weinberger) and The Stupid Network, by Berkman alumnus David Isenberg. (David is also my given name, by the way. Coincidence?) The origin of the metaphor, however, is Craig Burton, who was the first to observe that an end-to-end architecture in which every point is essentially zero distance from every other point (and as stupid as possible in the middle as well), would geometrically resemble a 3-D zero''.


=Podcast 4: Self-Forming Markets=

See our entry on [[Doc Searls on Self-Forming Markets]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Business]]