

=Podcast 1=

Collective discussion, with Doc Searls et al., on [[Vendor Relationships Management]]

URL = http://www.itconversations.com/shows/detail1676.html

"One of the major issues in technology is how to make services available to the less knowledgeable, making them so-called "grandparent compliant". In addition, consumers continue to look for ways to get what they need from businesses, rather than accepting a model based on a broken customer management system. Britt Blaser of Open Resource Group and Doc Searls, senior editor for Linux Journal, join Phil, Matt, and Scott in a discussion of the new paths of technology and how they relate to the average consumer.

ORG is developing a "community management system", a way for groups to join together and exist without the technological complexities of the current social networking sites. Britt gives a detailed overview of the current state of things and details some of the principles guiding the work.

One of the offshoots of this work was the desire to create a "Vendor Management System", a way for consumers to get businesses to respond to their needs, rather than having to be put into marketing controls. Doc discusses the concept and gives a number of real-world examples showing how the customer would be able to take control of their own needs.

The group also discusses Bruce Sterling's book, Shaping Things, a look at design and how it relates to information technology and the future. They also review current situations that point towards a vendor management future."
(http://www.itconversations.com/shows/detail1676.html)


=Podcast 2=

Interview by Radio Berkman via http://wilkins.law.harvard.edu/podcasts/mediaberkman/radioberkman/2009-03-31_searls.mp3






[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]