
'''= the first fully interactive collaborative documentary site that is totally geared to enable groups of users to collaborate together on one communal documentary'''

URL = http://www.docummunity.com/pages/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Docummunity is the first fully interactive collaborative documentary site that is totally geared to enable groups of users to collaborate together on one communal documentary. Make an edit and see what your friends think. This collaborative project allows filmmakers to - Share the workload. Share the responsibility. Share the rewards."


'''2.'''

"Docummunity is the first interactive collaborative documentary site that not only provides the technical architecture to collaboratively make videos is also has social networking infrastructure that enables community building.

This is truly Filmmaking 2.0.

Docummunity is a manifestation of the Collaborative Film Studio, a PhD research project supervised by Swinburne University of Technology and supported by the Federally funded Smart Services CRC and private investors. The aim of the project is to test under what conditions a documentary film could be collaboratively created by users with access to raw footage, basic editing functionality and some social networking capabilities.

The hope is to create the first fully interactive collaborative documentary site that not only allows users to upload, annotate, and publish their own version of a documentary but also to actively participate in the editing. Docummunity enables groups of users to collaborate on a mutually agreed, communal version of a documentary film."
(http://www.docummunity.com/pages/about)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]