

=Discussion=


Charles Eisenstein:

"Why don't we need each other? It is beôÙcause all the gift reôÙlaôÙtionôÙships upon which we once deôÙpended are now paid serôÙvices. They have been conôÙverted into serôÙvice work which the marôÙket conôÙverts into cash. What is there left to conôÙvert? Whether fosôÙsil fuels, topôÙsoil, aquifers, the atôÙmosôÙphere's caôÙpacôÙity to abôÙsorb waste; whether it is food, clothôÙing, shelôÙter, medôÙiôÙcine, music, or our colôÙlecôÙtive culôÙtural beôÙquest of stoôÙries and ideas, nearly all have beôÙcome comôÙmodiôÙties. UnôÙless we can find yet new realms of naôÙture to conôÙvert into good, unôÙless we can find even more funcôÙtions of human life to comôÙmodiôÙtize, our days of ecoôÙnomic growth are numôÙbered. What room for growth reôÙmainsã€”for exôÙamôÙple in today's aneôÙmic ecoôÙnomic reôÙcovôÙeryã€” comes only at an inôÙcreasôÙing cost to naôÙture and soôÙciôÙety.

From this perôÙspecôÙtive, a third conôÙseôÙquence of the gift cirôÙcle and other forms of gift econôÙomy beôÙcomes apôÙparôÙent. Not only does gift-based cirôÙcuôÙlaôÙtion subôÙtract from GDP, it also hasôÙtens the demise of the preôÙsent ecoôÙnomic sysôÙtem. Any bit of naôÙture or human reôÙlaôÙtionôÙship that we preôÙserve or reôÙclaim from the comôÙmodôÙity world is one bit less that is availôÙable to sell, or to use as the basis for new inôÙterôÙest-bearôÙing loans. WithôÙout conôÙstant creôÙation of new debt, exôÙistôÙing debt canôÙnot be reôÙpaid. LendôÙing opôÙporôÙtuôÙniôÙties only occur in a conôÙtext of ecoôÙnomic growth, in which the marôÙginal reôÙturn on capôÙiôÙtal inôÙvestôÙment exôÙceeds the inôÙterôÙest rate. To simôÙplify: no growth, less lendôÙing; less lendôÙing, more transôÙfer of asôÙsets to credôÙiôÙtors; more transôÙfer of asôÙsets, more conôÙcenôÙtraôÙtion of wealth; more conôÙcenôÙtraôÙtion of wealth, less conôÙsumer spendôÙing; less conôÙsumer spendôÙing, less growth. This is the viôÙcious cirôÙcle deôÙscribed by econôÙoôÙmists going back to Karl Marx. It has been deôÙferred for two cenôÙturies by the ceaseôÙless openôÙing up, through techôÙnolôÙogy and colôÙoôÙnizaôÙtion, of new realms of naôÙture and reôÙlaôÙtionôÙship to the marôÙket. Today, not only are these realms nearly exôÙhausted, but a shift of conôÙsciousôÙness moôÙtiôÙvates growôÙing efôÙforts to reôÙclaim them for the comôÙmons and for the gift. Today, we diôÙrect huge efôÙforts toôÙward proôÙtectôÙing the forests, whereas the most brilôÙliant minds of two genôÙerôÙaôÙtions ago deôÙvoted themôÙselves to their more efôÙfiôÙcient clearcutôÙting. SimôÙiôÙlarly, so many of us today seek to limit polôÙluôÙtion not exôÙpand proôÙducôÙtion, to proôÙtect the waôÙters not inôÙcrease the fish catch, to preôÙserve the wetôÙlandsã€”not build larger housôÙing deôÙvelôÙopôÙments. These efôÙforts, while not alôÙways sucôÙcessôÙful, put a brake on ecoôÙnomic growth beôÙyond the natôÙural limit the enôÙviôÙronôÙment poses. From the gift perôÙspecôÙtive, what is hapôÙpenôÙing is that we no longer seek merely to take from the planet, but to give back as well. This corôÙreôÙsponds to the comôÙing of age of huôÙmanôÙity, tranôÙsiôÙtionôÙing from a mother-child reôÙlaôÙtionôÙship to earth, to a co-creôÙative partôÙnerôÙship in which givôÙing and reôÙceivôÙing find balôÙance.

The same tranôÙsiôÙtion to the gift is unôÙderôÙway in the soôÙcial realm. Many of us no longer asôÙpire to fiôÙnanôÙcial inôÙdeôÙpenôÙdence, the state in which we have so much money we needn't deôÙpend on anyôÙone for anyôÙthing. Today, inôÙcreasôÙingly, we yearn inôÙstead for comôÙmuôÙnity. We don't want to live in a comôÙmodôÙity world, where everyôÙthing we have exôÙists for the priôÙmary goal of profit. We want things creôÙated for love and beauty, things that conôÙnect us more deeply to the peoôÙple around us. We deôÙsire to be inôÙterôÙdeôÙpenôÙdent, not inôÙdeôÙpenôÙdent. The gift cirôÙcle, and the many new forms of gift econôÙomy that are emergôÙing on the InôÙterôÙnet, are ways of reôÙclaimôÙing human reôÙlaôÙtionôÙships from the marôÙket.

Whether natôÙural or soôÙcial, the reclaôÙmaôÙtion of the gift-based comôÙmonôÙwealth not only hasôÙtens the colôÙlapse of a growth-deôÙpenôÙdent money sysôÙtem, it also mitôÙiôÙgates its severôÙity. At the preôÙsent moôÙment, the marôÙket faces a criôÙsis, merely one of a mulôÙtiôÙplicôÙity of crises (ecoôÙlogôÙiôÙcal, soôÙcial) that are conôÙvergôÙing upon us. Through the turôÙbuôÙlent time that is upon us, the surôÙvival of huôÙmanôÙity, and our caôÙpacôÙity to build a new kind of civôÙiôÙlizaôÙtion emôÙbodyôÙing a new reôÙlaôÙtionôÙship to earth and a new, more conôÙnected, human idenôÙtity, deôÙpends on these scraps of the comôÙmonôÙwealth that we are able to preôÙserve or reôÙclaim. AlôÙthough we have done grievôÙous damôÙage to earth, vast wealth still reôÙmains. There is still richôÙness in the soil, water, culôÙtures and bioôÙmes of this planet. The longer we perôÙsist under the staôÙtus quo, the less of that richôÙness will reôÙmain and the more calamiôÙtous the tranôÙsiôÙtion will be.

On a less tanôÙgiôÙble level, any gifts we give conôÙtribute to anôÙother kind of comôÙmon wealth ã€“ a reserôÙvoir of gratôÙiôÙtude that will see us through times of turôÙmoil, when the conôÙvenôÙtions and stoôÙries that hold civic soôÙciôÙety toôÙgether fall apart. Gifts inôÙspire gratôÙiôÙtude, and genôÙerosôÙity is inôÙfecôÙtious. InôÙcreasôÙingly, I read and hear stoôÙries of genôÙerosôÙity, selfôÙlessôÙness, even magôÙnaôÙnimôÙity that take my breath away. When I witôÙness genôÙerosôÙity, I want to be genôÙerôÙous too. In the comôÙing times, we will need the genôÙerosôÙity, the selfôÙlessôÙness, and the magôÙnaôÙnimôÙity of many peoôÙple. If everyôÙone seeks merely their own surôÙvival, then there is no hope for a new kind of civôÙiôÙlizaôÙtion. We need each othôÙers' gifts as we need each othôÙers' genôÙerosôÙity to inôÙvite us into the realm of the gift ourôÙselves. In conôÙtrast to the age of money where we can pay for anyôÙthing and need no gifts, soon it will be abunôÙdantly clear: we need each other."
(http://www.nationofchange.org/build-community-economy-gifts-1325082127)


[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]