'''* Article: Does Culture Evolve? Joseph Fracchia and Richard C. Lewontin'''

URL = http://joelvelasco.net/teaching/167win10/fracchia%20and%20lewontin%20-%20does%20culture%20evolve.pdf

Source: History and Theory, 1999, 8: 52–78. Blackwell Publishing.


=Introduction=

"The drive to describe cultural history as an evolutionary process has two sources. One from
within social theory is part of the impetus to convert social studies into ‘‘social sciences’’ providing them with the status accorded to the natural sciences. The other comes from within
biology and biological anthropology in the belief that the theory of evolution must be universal
in its application to all functions of all living organisms. The social-scientiﬁc theory of cultural
evolution is pre-Darwinian, employing a developmental model of unfolding characterized by intrinsic directionality, by deﬁnable stages that succeed each other, and by some criterion of progress. It is arbitrary in its deﬁnitions of progress, and has had the political problem that a
diachronic claim of cultural progress implies a synchronic differential valuation of present-day
cultures. The biological scheme creates an isomorphism between the Darwinian mechanism of
evolution and cultural history, postulating rules of cultural ‘‘mutation,’’ cultural inheritance and
some mechanism of natural selection among cultural alternatives. It uses simplistic ad hoc
notions of individual acculturation and of the differential survival and reproduction of cultural
elements. It is unclear what useful work is done by substituting the metaphor of evolution for
history."
(http://joelvelasco.net/teaching/167win10/fracchia%20and%20lewontin%20-%20does%20culture%20evolve.pdf)

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Evolution]]