==Podcast 1==

'''What is [[Wikinomics]] ?'''

URL = http://hbsp2.libsyn.com/index.php?post_id=184945

"What Is Wikinomics? This week, IdeaCast producer Steve Singer talks with Don Tapscott, co-author, with Anthony D. Williams, of Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything. In its latest incarnation, Tapscott says, the World Wide Web has become a communal experience--collaborators from anywhere and any walk of life now have the ability to solve problems and produce results through the use of collective wisdom. Although some business leaders may find the prospect of this kind of openness rather frightening, Tapscott believes that leveraging the new wave of community is the way of the future."

==Podcast 2==

"Don Tapscott and Chester Bateman discuss Wikinomics and emerging models for collaboration, business, and learning."

URL = http://oregonstate.edu/education/podcasts/podcastees/tapscott/

==Webcast==

Long webcast that can be watched by subject modules of a few minutes each.

From a conference presentation for the eLearning Institute.

URL = http://elearningforum.vportal.net/ ; http://elearningforum.vportal.net/main.cfm?m=browse.au&auid=218

'''Table of Contents:'''

00:20 Agenda

00:40 Don Tapscott

06:58 The Discussion Continues - April 20th

09:27 Wikinomics

10:07 Time's Person of the Year

11:34 Wikinomics Book

12:13 Web 2.0

12:22 Web 2.0 - The Thing

12:55 The 'Beyond MIcrowave'

14:10 Web 2.0 - Broadband Mobility

14:13 Mobility: 'Naked Wireless'

14:43 Mobility: Toronto Hydro Wi Fi

14:52 Mobility: San Francisco Wi-Fi

15:08 Web 2.0 - Geo-Spatiality

15:22 Web 2.0 - Geo-Spatiality

15:48 Geo-Spatiality: Plazes, Finding Your World

16:05 Geo-Spatiality: Tag Your World On The Go

16:43 Geo-Spatiality: Live Traffic At Your Fingertips With IntelliOne

17:32 Web 2.0 - Geo-Spatiality

18:04 Web 2.0 - True Multimedia

18:11 Web 2.0 - True Multimedia

18:33 True Multimedia: Tape it off the Internet (TIOTI)

18:51 Web 2.0 - True Multimedia

19:24 Web 2.0 - Web Services

19:31 Web 2.0 - Web Services 1.0 vs 2.0

20:28 Web 2.0 - Web Services - Flickr

21:24 Web Services: Microsoft - Start.com "Webtop"

21:43 Yahoo Pipes

21:57 Web 2.0 - Integration

22:03 Web 2.0 - Integration

22:19 Web 2.0: Ajax Behind The Firewall?

22:26 Web 2.0 - Integration

23:12 Web 2.0

23:19 The Net Generation

23:46 The Demographic Revolution

24:14 The Birth Rate: Boom, Bust and Echo

24:38 School Enrollment

25:14 The Louder Echo

25:49 Digital Immigrants - The Net Generation

27:19 Global Growth of the Web

27:48 The Generation Lap

28:43 The Net Generation

32:03 The Net Generation Norms

35:51 The Social Revolution

35:58 Flickr.com beats WebShots.com

36:24 Digg.com beats Slashdot.org

36:31 Craigslist.org Beat Monster.com, Match.com

36:35 Myspace.com beat MTV.com

36:44 Wikipedia.org beats Britannica.com

36:55 Blogger.com beat CNN.com

36:59 Epinions.com vs ConsumerReports.org

37:29 Alex Tapscott's Wikinomicists Community

38:46 The Economic Revolution

39:10 Mass Collaboration - 1. Peering

43:32 Mass Collaboration - 2. Being Open

44:49 Mass Collaboration - 3. Sharing

46:56 Mass Collaboration - 4. Acting Global

49:11 The Enterprise 2.0 and the Rise of Mass Collaboration

50:49 Digital Conglomerates

52:05 Four Drivers for Change

52:08 The Perfect Storm

52:25 Harnessing Mass Collaboration - Goldcorp

54:59 Harnessing Mass Collaboration

55:141. Peer Pioneers - Wikipedia

56:18 Wikipedia's Current Wikinomics Entry

57:361. Peer Pioneers - Linus Torvalds

58:441. Peer Pioneers - Spike Source

1:01:591. Peer Pioneers - TopCoder

1:02:111. Peer Pioneers - Zopa.com

1:02:301. Peer Pioneers - Marketocracy.com

1:02:412. Ideagoras

1:03:582. Ideagoras - Idea Connection

1:04:082. Ideagoras - Cambrian House

1:04:403. Prosumers - Second Life

1:06:083. Prosumers undefined Case: 'Music IndustryundefinedThe Remix'

1:06:523. Prosumers undefined Help Us Write the Final Chapter!

1:07:45 Doritos - Crash the Super Bowl Contest

1:08:543. Prosumers undefined Physical Goods

1:08:584. The New Alexandrians: The Sharing of Science

1:09:294. The New Alexandrians: Music

1:09:334. The New Alexandrians: Natureundefineds Google Earth Avian Flu Mashup

1:09:414. The New Alexandrians: Natureundefineds Google Earth Avian Flu Mashup

1:09:585. Open Platforms undefined All the world is a stage and you get to participate

1:10:235. Open Platforms undefined Amazon API

1:11:185. Open Platforms undefined Pikspot

1:12:026. The Global Plant Floor

1:13:136. The Global Plant Floor undefined Chinese Motorcycle Industry

1:13:547. The Wiki Workplace

1:15:27 Harnessing Mass Collaboration Summary

==More Information==
* [[Don Tapscott]]



[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Economics]]