
'''"What an amazing time in human history. Among other things, there is a revolution in revolutions. Up until three weeks ago [during the events in Tunisia], all revolutions throughout history had leaders..."''' [http://videos.liftconference.com/video/1168233]

==Webcast 1==

"Don Tapscott talks about the new age of networked economy, and how collaborative innovation is deeply transforming our society as well as our institutions. Why not open source government, education, science, energy production or even health care as new models of collaboration?"

Video via http://videos.liftconference.com/video/1168233 dated 2011-02-02

==Podcast 1==

"Don Tapscott joined Nora again in the Spark studio to talk about his follow-up book, MacroWikinomics. In it, Don describes how mass collaboration can “reboot” finance, climate change, education, the media, and government."
(http://www.cbc.ca/spark/2010/09/full-interview-don-tapscott-on-macrowikinomics/)

Podcast gone away from http://podcast.cbc.ca/spark/plus-spark_20100916_tapscott.mp3

==Podcast 2==

"On the podcast, he discusses an Iraq veteran whose start-up car company is “staffed” by over 45,000 competing designers and supplied by microfactories around the country. He also talks about how companies are using competitions for R&D, and how mass collaboration can improve government regulation and universities."
(http://surprisinglyfree.com/2010/10/12/don-tapscott/)

Podcast gone away from http://surprisinglyfree.com/podpress_trac/web/2675/0/SFC-039-101008.mp3

==Animated video (RSA-style)==
Titled: "From Crowdsourcing to Kony 2012: Macrowikinomics: New Solutions for a Connected Planet"

"In this new age of networked intelligence, collaborative communities are enhancing and even bypassing crumbling institutions. We are innovating the way our financial institutions and governments operate; how we educate our children; how the healthcare, newspaper, and energy industries serve their customers; how we care for our neighbourhoods: and even how we solve global problems.

From their latest book, Macrowikinomics: New Solutions for a Connected Planet, co-authors Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams present groundbreaking innovations from every corner of the globe: how businesses, organizations, and individuals alike are using mass collaboration to revolutionize not only the way we work, but how we live, learn, create, and care for each other."

Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rK4If-FFjW8&feature=youtu.be

==More Information==
* [[Don Tapscott]]
* Book: [[Macrowikinomics]]: New Solutions for a Connected Planet. Via http://macrowikinomics.com

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]