'''= A free decentralized open DNS system'''

URL = http://dot-p2p.org/index.php?title=Main_Page





=Description=

'''1.'''

The project aims to create a new top-level domain, .p2p, and name-resolution software that will hook into the normal client DNS resolver. (However, the new software will not interfere with name resolution for traditional TLDs like .com and .net.) Dot-p2p developers expect the .p2p service infrastructure to be mobile and hence flexible under attack; by contrast, administration is currently expected to be centralized. However, the developers would like to see a design for decentralized administration as well."
(https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2010/12/constructive-direct-action-against-censorship)


'''2.'''

"To limit the power governments have over domain names, a group of enthusiasts has started working on a revolutionary system that can not be influenced by a government institution, or taken down by pulling the plug on a central server. Instead, it is distributed by the people, with help from a BitTorrent-based application that people install on their computer.

According to the project’s website, the goal is to “create an application that runs as a service and hooks into the hosts DNS system to catch all requests to the .p2p TLD while passing all other request cleanly through. Requests for the .p2p TLD will be redirected to a locally hosted DNS database.”

“By creating a .p2p TLD that is totally decentralized and that does not rely on ICANN or any ISP’s DNS service, and by having this application mimic force-encrypted BitTorrent traffic, there will be a way to start combating DNS level based censoring like the new US proposals as well as those systems in use in countries around the world including China and Iran amongst others.”

The Dot-P2P project was literally started a few days ago, but already the developers are making great progress. It is expected that a beta version of the client can be released relatively shortly, a team member assured TorrentFreak.

The project has been embraced by many familiar names in the P2P-community. Former Pirate Bay spokesman Peter Sunde is among them, and the people from EZTV have been promoting it as well.

“For me it’s mostly to scare back. To show that if they try anything, we have weapons of making it harder for them to abuse it. If they then back down, we win,” Peter Sunde told TorrentFreak in a comment.

Although the initiators of the project are still debating on various technical issues on how the system should function, it seems that the administrative part has been thought out. The .p2p domain registration will be handled by OpenNIC, an alternative community based DNS network. OpenNIC also maintains the .geek, .free, .null and several other top level domains."
(http://torrentfreak.com/bittorrent-based-dns-to-counter-us-domain-seizures-101130/)


=More Information=

* http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20101129/01445312034/with-domain-name-seizures-increasing-its-time-decentralized-dns-system.shtml

* See also [[dotP2PTLD]] [http://wiki.opennicproject.org/dotP2PTLD] : .p2p is chartered for use with our peer to peer based DNS concept. ( http://dot-p2p.org/ ) The primary service will allow people to use a decentralized open DNS system. The purpose of this TLD is to allow people using traditional methods of DNS to gather information about this new concept and to also control domain registrations through the use of http://nic.p2p

* [[Open Nic]]: OpenNIC is a user controlled Network Information Center offering a democratic, non-national, alternative to the traditional Top-Level Domain registries. In case you were looking for them, traditonal TLDs are currently served by Network Solutions with policies set by ICANN.


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]