
'''=  a not-for-profit, community membership-based organization with a core mandate to promote Internet development and adoption in Asia'''

URL = http://www.dot.asia/


=Description=

"DotAsia Organisation is a not-for-profit, community membership-based organization incorporated as a “limited by guarantee and not having a share capital” corporation (in Hong Kong). As a not-for-profit organization, DotAsia has a core mandate to promote Internet development and adoption in Asia. Since the launch of the “.Asia” TLD through 2007 and 2008, DotAsia has contributed funds and support to many different Community Projects around Asia.

“From.Asia/For.Asia” is our philosophy. DotAsia was created based on a collaboration among the Internet community From Asia, and our works contribute to community development For Asia. We also believe that the “.Asia” domain is a valuable asset equally for those coming From Asia as well as those looking For Asia.

Asia has developed into a global force in the international commercial, political and cultural network. DotAsia Organisation is dedicated to the needs of the community with a vision of leveraging the successful, collaborative atmosphere and network among the Asia Internet community to create a globally visible Internet domain as a cyberspace that belongs to Asia, and a platform that would contribute in accelerating the overall growth of the region.

Besides the charitable and public interest initiatives that support DotAsia’s vision of regional collaboration, the “.Asia” domain aspires to embrace this dynamism in the Asia Century to become a nucleus, intersection and breeding ground for Internet activity and development in the region.

DotAsia is the Sponsoring Organization and Registry Operator for the .Asia Sponsored Generic Top Level Domain (TLD). DotAsia oversees the policies and governance of the “.Asia” TLD Registry. DotAsia is committed to building a strong foundation of active usage and traffic to “.Asia” domain names. Every “.Asia” domain name helps support Internet development in Asia, and the adoption of “.Asia” domain names is at the heart of our mission."
(http://www.dot.asia/dotasia-organisation/about-dotasia/)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Asia]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]