==Introduction to the Drupal Cooperatives Sphere==
[[Drupal]] is the world class content management system that is the pride and joy of the tens of thousands of developers who work with it every day.  Recently discussions have led individuals to look into how Drupal practitioners could work together.  There seem to be a lot of good reasons to do this.

==http://groups.drupal.org/drupal-worker-cooperative==
On Groups.Drupal.org you can find a group that is discussing how a Drupal Workers Cooperative might function.  Who knows how many different tech cooperatives might get started form this conversation.  Take a look at http://groups.drupal.org/drupal-worker-cooperative and find out more.

==Drupal Cooperatives and the P2P Cooperative Consultancy==
The [[http://groups.drupal.org/drupal-worker-cooperative Drupal Worker Cooperative Group]] on groups.drupal.org was started by [[Alex Rollin begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting]], a member-worker-owner of the [[P2P Consultancy Cooperative]].  The idea in his words:  ''Whether people find benefit with working in a team or would simply like to get a better price on services for the Drupal consulting business, it just makes sense to take a look at the Cooperative business model.  If folks are interested they can take a look at what we've done with [[P2PCC]] and take what they like from that.  If others are interested in developing Free and Open Source software under the same license as Drupal, [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html GNU General Public License], maybe they'll want to look at joining up with us.  Either way, it makes sense to take a look.''




[[Category:Cooperatives]]