
'''= platform for activist collaboration and self-organization using integrated free software tools'''

URL = https://dunia.cc/en/tools-and-services/

=Description=

"Email, mailing lists, collaborative editing and cloud, websites, monitoring and management of online communities, e-learning, teleconferences, secure and anonymous browsing, search engine, wikis and publications, shared infrastructure, collective intelligence method and valuation of networks, etc. These everyday communication components of a network or organization have many partners in the world of open standards and open source software.

Dunia promotes, shares and hosts a variety of tools for those who actively experience IT diversity and online exchange, while participating in the non-monopolistic, non-exclusive and open use of electronic networks. This diversity is both an asset and a complexity that has to be understood. Therefore, it is necessary to facilitate its mediation towards networks and users.

Dunia is a signatory of the World Charter of Free Media. Managing an online communication platform implies ethics in interdependency and responsibility: joining with similar initiatives and seeking synergies with other social campaigns, including that of free software; developing partnerships that can accompany the appropriation of tools, generating experiments and skills that can be shared more widely; being transparent about functioning, source code and electronic resources used; guaranteeing the integrity and protection of users’ data; respecting international legal frameworks, especially the recent GDPR in Europe (and also the IT and Freedoms Law and the Law for Trust in the Digital Economy in French territory where the servers are hosted.)"

 
=Characteristics=
 
(i.e Technologies)
 

"Technically, the Dunia platform is based on:

* A physical infrastructure, specifically three dedicated servers (two production servers and one storage server), located in France and leased from the company OVH (the annual hosting cost is approximately €6500); the company Gandi is the registrar of some of the domain names used and Open Computación hosts a virtual server within another infrastructure.
* Virtual servers (around thirty) based on ProxMox, OpenVZ, KVM and LXC technologies, deployed in the three physical servers.
* A set of open source software programmes (see below), developed by the communities of technicians and offered under free license (GNU, GPL, AGPL, etc.)

These services are offered free of charge or to benefit actors who pursue common goals and with whom we have agreements and associations. In the current stage of the platform, some services are not open to the general public."

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Free Software]]