
'''* Report: The cooperative approach under the new Dutch agri-environment climate scheme. Background, procedures and legal and institutional implications. Paul Terwan et al. Ministry of Economic Affairs, NL, 2016.''' 

URL = https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/enrd/files/w12_collective-approach_nl.pdf

=Description=

"A key role for agri-environment cooperatives in the Netherlands
Anticipating the new scheme, Dutch farmers established 40 new agri-environment
cooperatives, covering the entire countryside (see the map). 

This is – for now
– the final outcome of a long tradition of cooperative approaches to farmland
biodiversity conservation. This tradition starts in the early 1990s, when
– inspired by German and Danish examples – the first environmental
cooperatives were founded. Up to 2015, some 160 regional cooperatives
were established, many of them developing a broad range of rural
development activities. All of these were legal entities, but they varied
substantially in size (from several thousand hectares to over
100,000 hectares), in membership (many being open to citizens, some
to farmers only), and in terms of professionalism. The prospect of
a scheme based on the large-scale participation of cooperatives as
applicants and final beneficiaries led to the awareness that a
major reorganisation and professionalisation was needed.

From 2011 to 2014, the new approach was successfully
tested in four pilot regions. The actual reorganisation
took place in 2014 and 2015, resulting in 40 new
cooperatives, in many cases established on top of the
existing ones. The new organisational structure was a
result of intensive consultation, both among
cooperatives and with the national and provincial
governments. In 2015, all the new cooperatives were
established as legal entities and certified as conservation organisations. Although many of
the original cooperatives are still active, their number is slowly decreasing due to a gradual
transfer of activities to the new organisations."

=Discussion=

"After the 2014 EU Rural Development Regulation introduced the
option of group applications for agri-environment-climate
measures (Regulation (EU) No 1305/2013, Article 28), the Dutch
government decided to implement the measure for joint
applications only. As of 2016, a new scheme was introduced in
which individual applications are no longer possible. This approach
fits within a long Dutch tradition of environmental cooperatives.
Elsewhere in Europe, and even around the world, territorial
cooperation and community-based approaches are also becoming
increasingly common. A 2013 OECD report on collective delivery of
environmental services offers many interesting examples.

This growing popularity does not mean that a cooperative approach
to agri-environment is easily realised. Over the last years, the Dutch
government has been in close contact with the European
Commission to establish workable rules and regulations. In this
paper we explain the “Dutch model” in further detail, we discuss
the themes that needed special attention in terms of their
implementation and compliance with EU regulations, and we
describe the model’s relevance to other Member States.


'''Why did the Netherlands opt for a cooperative approach?'''

There are four main reasons why the Dutch government decided to
introduce the option for group applications, and even to deal
exclusively with cooperative applications.

First, in the course of the ongoing debate on the effectiveness of
agri-environment schemes, it gradually became clear that the
decline in farmland biodiversity can only be reversed through
a cross-farm approach. This applies especially to farmland birds and
ecological corridors, which are important conservation targets in
the Netherlands. For this reason, the government opted for strong
regional coordination and ecological guidance, creating a situation
in which individual applications can even be detrimental to regional
goals. The government expects that a cooperative approach will
deliver better value for money, while farmers wish to ensure
continued access to agri-environment budgets that would – in case
of poor cost-effectiveness – be an easy target for budget cuts.

Second, there is an increasing need for greater flexibility in terms of
the content of conservation activities, their exact location and their
financial compensation. Because of the dynamics of farmland
biodiversity (in relation to weather conditions, for example),
a static scheme design without room for yearly or seasonal 
deviations would not be effective. Making cooperatives the final
beneficiaries of agri-environment support allows for a simpler
scheme design with room for local fine-tuning of activities and
payments. Instead of extending the national list of approved
conservation activities, an emphasis on conservation targets in
combination with local fine-tuning by the cooperative and
real-time notification of the actual conservation operations is
expected to enhance entrepreneurship and ecological innovation.
As the number of applications and beneficiaries is drastically
reduced, this approach also enables the government to
substantially reduce implementation costs.

Third, the previous individual scheme had a relatively high error
rate. Working with cooperatives makes it possible to both simplify
the administrative processes and to improve scheme compliance.

And last but not least: the Netherlands has a long tradition of
agri-environment cooperatives, their number having grown to 160
over the last 20 years. They function as producer cooperatives for
public goods and have become a trusted partner for farmers as well
as governments. This means that the social structure for the new
scheme design was already present; it only had to be
professionalised and extended to the entire countryside."
(https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/sites/enrd/files/w12_collective-approach_nl.pdf)

[[Category:Netherlands]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]