

'''= Decision-making process that might be used for small or large groups. It might be used online and offline'''

URL = http://www.lifeblooddesign.com/content/dynamic-alignment-collaborative-decision-making-tool

=Principles=

Fernanda Ibarra:

“Agreement versus alignment: Alignment refers to pointing towards the 'same direction'. No need to agree on every form to move forward.

Positionality: not about positions but about movement. No person is allowed to say “no” or stop forward movement without saying what is needed for them to say “yes.”
(http://socialcompare.com/en/comparison/decision-making-tools)


=Evaluation=

Fernanda Ibarra:

“This tool is best used for groups that need to reach agreement about something that can be captured in a document and have some useful starting place. For example, I don’t recommend it for trying to brainstorm something from scratch, but if a group is trying to agree on a plan or strategy, ratify bylaws, or refine a policy, then this is could be the right kind of tool for you.

…

Alignment is similar to consent as it is ok to say 'no' within certain parameters.

Dynamic alignment is not a governance structure with 'how tos for work, procedures, organizational structure etc' it is a process for complex decision-making.”
(http://socialcompare.com/en/comparison/decision-making-tools)


=Details=

The rules and process, by Fernada Ibarra:

“1. Start by outlining the framework of the decision (each major point should be separated so that it can be considered and responded to directly).
2. Clarification round: Before having people “vote” or voice objections, it is desirable to have people be sure they’re clear about what their reacting to. In a group, you could post the outline on the wall, or read it aloud. Online, you can have people read the document and post clarifying questions to a discussion forum.

3. Voicing reactions and objections: Safe space to share your reactions without argument. Acknowledge volatile reactions. Let people know they have been heard.

4. The Decision-making process: This involves each person saying they’re aligned with moving forward. If someone says they’re not aligned, then they need so say what they need to be able to be aligned. There are three possible unaligned states for a participant:

- I need item X to be removed (alteration).
- I need item X to be modified to say Y (deletion).
- I need item Z to be included (addition).

5. Alignment threshold: Even though its best to operate with 100% alignment there are cases where groups need to fragment or some particular decisions don´t need 100% in order to proceed. You can set the alignment threshold at whatever level is appropriate. When you have that percentage of people aligned, then the decision has been reached.”
(http://socialcompare.com/en/comparison/decision-making-tools)



=More Information=

•	http://socialcompare.com/en/comparison/decision-making-tools

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]