: << [[E2C/|E2C overview page]] ([[E2C/Nota_breve_para_explicar_E2C |Spanish version of this page]])

'''Towards a ‘School of the Commons’'''

videos: 
* The commons http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L7jaSjkd0jM (by: onthecommons.org) 
* What are commons? http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0ZWFPVBTws (by: Fundación Boell)

The 'Escuela de los Commons'/'School of the Commons' is a horizontal platform for the production, exchange and dissemination of knowledge resulting from communal management of tangible resources (woods, earth, squares, gardens) and intangible ones (software, knowledge, information).

The Commons - those processes and resources that don't operate under the logic of mercantile/private property nor under state hierarchy - are nowadays an object of study and experimentation by many organisations, social collectives and local communities. Today it is a priority to share and optimise those expressions of knowledge produced and managed by the social body. We think that the commons contain many of the keys to move towards a social model that is sustainable and based in the principles of social justice.

The 'Escuela de los commons' has as its principal objective to practice hybrid models of learning. It aims to be a social school where P2P - peer production - methodologies are melted with more traditional formats of learning. The different actions that can be developed from the 'escuela de los commons', like formal and informal education, academic and non-academic research, reciprocal consulting services, a project incubator or dissemination space and transfer of existing experiences, etc, can help to think the school itself as a commons. Like a communal resource that can be economically sustainable, that can satisfy the demand of its community and those of akin communities that join the experience. 
 
Several similar initiatives in different geographies and with different local communities are set up with similar objectives. It should be observed that the 'Escuela de los Commons' seeks to establish close contact with likeminded initiatives and has done so from the start. In this respect, the aim is to jointly develop a common model for schools of the commons, with reference implementations and replications globally.