In this page we aim to keep an overview of the various aspects for the design of a curriculum on the Commons and possible study programmes. As this is a joint effort that benefits most from global collaboration, we first try to collect ideas in English and later, during its implementation localise into other languages (Spanish/Catalan in the case of the E2C).

=Existing courses=
Over the last years the first courses focused on the Commons have emerged. We can learn much from the proposed study programmes in these courses.

==David Bollier==

==School of Commoning==
Designed by George Por and Leo Burke at the [http://www.schoolofcommoning.com/ School of Commoning]
Study programme of [http://www.schoolofcommoning.com/content/common-course-introduction-global-commons The Common Course: An Introduction to the Global Commons].


==P2PCourse.cc==
This course is currently [http://p2pcourse.cc/index.php/Table_of_contents_of_the_course/Full_view being designed] by Michel Bauwens and others (P2P-F and FKI) and is focused at ''"Peer Production and Theories of the Commons"''.

=Methodologies=
We seek commons-based pedagogies, peer learning and activity-based programmes. Complementing online work from a distance with face-to-face encounters. Peer support and peer assessment can be a strong part, while depending on the sustainability model, there could be a commitment from experienced mentors to accompany participants (apprentices) on their learning path and provide feedback to assignments. 

Activities can include:
* introductory workshop (what workshop methodology is most adequate?)
* on- and offline debates
* (guest) lectures
* essays (that can be posted in wikis or blogs)
* contributions to specific commons

To form a true educational commons and allow the user and reuse by others under equal conditions, all content shall be under [http://freedomdefined.org/ free licenses]. In this sense activities can be designed that help construct the commons-based educational programme, where every participant contributes her/his little grain to the larger education commons.

=Modules=


=Target Groups=


=Resources=
Here are a few repositories with instructive materials on the commons:
* SoC: [http://www.schoolofcommoning.com/content/multimedia-commons Multimedia Gallery on the Commons]

Individual resources:
*