

=Description=

"The annual conference of the European Artistic Research Network (EARN) will be hosted in
2018 by the Graduate School of Creative Arts and Media (GradCAM) and Dublin School of
Creative Arts & Media (DSCA) at the Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT).

This two-day conference seeks to address the impact of contributory economies on traditional
understandings of the nation and state. Since the 2008 financial crisis, alternative
economies have been increasingly explored through digitally networked communities,
artistic practice and activist strategies that endeavour to transgress traditional links
between nation and economy. Developed at a crucial time on the island of Ireland when
Brexit is set to redefine centre/margin relations the conference seeks to engage with a
number of themes within this context: nation and inter-nation; the nation and aesthetics;
art and economy; P2P networks; digital economies; modes of exchange and modes of
production; alternative economies; network aesthetics; populism and counter populism;
aesthetics and the imagination; activist practices; geo-politics; island, archipelago
and continent; centre and margin.

The guiding concept of the conference ‘Inter-Nation’ comes from the work of anthropologist
Marcel Mauss, who in ‘A Different Approach to Nationhood’ (1920) proposed an
original understanding of both concepts that opposes traditional definitions of state
and nationalism. More recently, Bernard Stiegler has revisited Mauss’s definition of Inter-Nation
as a broader concept in support of contributory economies emerging in digital
culture. Contributory economies are those exchange networks and peer-to-peer communities
that seek to challenge the dominant value system inherent to the nation-state. Such digital
networks have the potential to challenge traditional concepts of sovereignty and
geo-politics through complex technological platforms. Central to these platforms are a
broad understanding of technology beyond technical devices to include praxis-oriented
processes and applied knowledges inherent to artistic forms of research. Similarly, due
to the aesthetic function of the nation, artistic researchers are critically placed to
engage with the multiple registers at play within this conference, and to address these
issues through multiple forms as they play out live on this island."


=Speakers=

Key-note speakers include:

* Michel Bauwens (P2P Foundation); 
* Conflict Kitchen - Dawn Weleski & Jon Rublin (artists);
* Bernard Stiegler (philosopher)

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]