
'''= "a non-profit charitable organization under Dutch law, created to help channel support from a variety of sources to the earth system governance research community".'''

URL = http://www.earthsystemgovernance.org/earth-system-governance-foundation/

=Description=

"The Earth System Governance Foundation was created in 2014 to support the implementation of the research programme and diverse activities of the Earth System Governance Project and the Global Alliance of Earth System Governance Research Centres.

The Earth System Governance Foundation is a non-profit charitable organization under Dutch law, created to help channel support from a variety of sources to the earth system governance research community. In particular, the Foundation shall promote academic and policy-oriented research and education in the field of global, national, and local environmental governance and policy within the larger context of earth system transformation and global sustainable development.

The Earth System Governance Foundation aims to assist public and private agencies at all levels to effectively and efficiently link up with the many world-class scientists who are affiliated with the Earth System Governance research alliance, including its more than 200 Lead Faculty and Research Fellows. To this end, the Earth System Governance Foundation seeks to work with public and private agencies to develop research projects, including consultancy projects, that advance the implementation of the earth system governance research agenda.

In addition, the Foundation supports projects that further the dissemination of research findings and policy proposals, including through teaching programmes, online education and training modules, and capacity building programmes. In executing its mission, the Foundation is developing cooperative links with government agencies, national funding bodies, UN agencies, environmental NGOs, private sector organizations, faith-based organizations, cities and local communities, among others.

The Earth System Governance Foundation also serves as legal representative of the Earth System Governance research community. The Foundation will apply for observer status as a nongovernmental organization with relevant United Nations agencies, thus helping researchers from the community to gain access to international conferences and meetings."
(http://www.earthsystemgovernance.org/earth-system-governance-foundation/)

=More information=

* For more information on the Earth System Governance Foundation, and for proposals for joint projects and mutual cooperation, please contact Ruben Zondervan, director, Earth System Governance Foundation, at director@earthsystemgovernance.org.



[[Category:Global Governance]]