'''= "Our mission is to advance Earth-centered laws, movements, and education. Our field of expertise is Earth law. Earth law is regenerative law for the planet".'''  [https://www.earthlawcenter.org/what-is-earth-law]

URL = https://www.earthlawcenter.org/


=Description=

ELC:

"Earth law is often called “ecocentric” law. It is an emerging body of law for protecting, restoring, and stabilizing the functional interdependency of Earth's life and life-support systems. In other words, Earth law lets Nature operate naturally. It may be expressed in constitutional, statutory, common law, and customary law, as well as in treaties and other agreements both public and private. Earth law is both a departure from environmental law and a new context for its extension. It is considered ecocentric law, as opposed to and compared to anthropocentric law. Earth law is regenerative law for the planet.

Within the framework of Earth law is the idea that ecosystems have the right to exist, thrive, and evolve—and that Nature should be able to defend its rights in court, just like people can. Some of the other specific movements falling under the banner of Earth law are nonhuman rights for animals, defining ecocide as a crime, and Indigenous rights."

(https://www.earthlawcenter.org/what-is-earth-law)


=More information=

* [[Earth Law]]


==Video==

'''* Why Adopt Earth Based Laws?''' 

URL = https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lubNvaTigAU

"When humans and corporations have rights, but nature does not, nature inevitably suffers. Adopting Earth based laws changes the status of nature from a resource and property to a rights-bearing entity, with those rights enforceable by people, governments and communities."

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Law]]
[[Category:Ecology]]