
= "Earth Trusteeship: “'''All global citizens are equal trustees of the Earth – for the wellbeing of future generations and the community of life'''.” [https://earthcharter.org/earth-charter-and-the-earth-trusteeship-forum/]


=Contextual Quote=

" Earth Trusteeship as intrinsic in global citizenship would provide a foundation for a new economic paradigm. The recognition of “global citizens as equal Earth Trustees” addresses inequality at a fundamental ownership level, and enables integrated governance – transcending present single-minded protection of national sovereignty – towards the realization of genuine sustainability."

- Alide Roerink [https://earthcharter.org/earth-charter-and-the-earth-trusteeship-forum/]

=Description=

Earth Trusteeship (.world):

"Earth trusteeship Trusteeship is a form of governance that requires a person or entity to act (as ‘trustee’) on behalf and for the benefit of another person or entity (‘beneficiary’). Arguably, the very institutions that act on behalf of and for citizens, i.e. states and governments, have trusteeship responsibilities. Humanity’s common destiny depends on the validity and effectiveness of human rights and Earth Trusteeship. To be effective, citizens and their institutions will have to act as trustees of Human Rights and Earth. That is trusteeship of what generically can be referred to as the ‘common good’."

(https://www.earthtrusteeship.world/)


=Discussion=

Klaus Bosselmann:

" There is in fact no legally-relevant duty of states to care for Earth. As bizarre as it may sound, States have no enforecable obligation under international law to protect the natural environment, either domestically or globally. They may choose to do so, but they are not legally required.

States are legal entities, therefore ‘persons’ with rights and responsibilities. The concept of state sovereignty gives the State exclusive rights, both internally and externally.

States have, for example, the right to control their own territories, and to exploit the natural resources within their boundaries, as they see fit. And the right to prevent other States from interfering with their ‘domestic affairs’.
States have also responsibilities, for example, to not intentionally harm the territory of other states. And the responsibility to protect citizens from harm.

Fortunately, international law holds human rights in high esteem, so much so that States must respect and protect human rights and not just within their own territory.

One of the most important recent developments in international law has been the emergence of the [[Responsibility to Protect]] (R2P) principle. This requires States to uphold and protect human rights against States not willing or able to do so. As Ramesh Thakur shows in his blog (29 Nov 2019), R2P walks a fine line between state sovereignty and human rights and is often ignored, but it is unlikely to be discarded anytime soon.

Parallel to R2P and even more promising is the doctrine of sovereign States as trustees of humanity. Universal human rights are constitutional to international law, and a constraint upon state sovereignty. States must therefore act as trustees of human rights across national boundaries (Eyal Benvenisti). Anything less would, in fact, threaten the very promise of human rights.

'''The [[Trusteeship Sovereignty]] concept''' has great potential for meeting the two biggest threats of the 21st century: threats to human rights, and threats to the Earth system – our home.

Earth trusteeship is the legal response to the PM’s call for environmental responsibility. The ethics of guardianship are deeply embedded in Maori and other indigenous cultures, but they are also rooted in religious traditions and often referred to in contemporary socio-ecological texts. From a legal perspective, we can think of Earth trusteeship as an obligation of the State to protect the integrity of Earth’s ecological systems – including the atmosphere and oceans (climate system!). More than 25 international environmental agreements refer to the duty of States to cooperate in order to protect and restore the integrity of Earth’s ecological systems. What is missing is the willingness of States to take this duty of care seriously, and accept it as a legal obligation."

(https://nzcgs.org.nz/board/earth-trusteeship/)


==The Rationale for Earth Trusteeship==

Klaus Bosselmann:

"The ethics of Earth stewardship are an integral part of the world’s religions and indeed humanity’s cultural heritage,but these ethics have never been more topical than today. We should be ready, therefore, for taking the step towards Earth trusteeship."

Excerpted from longer lecture at : http://files.harmonywithnatureun.org/uploads/upload96.pdf

Source: Seventh Interactive Dialogue of the United Nations General Assembly on Harmony with Nature, UN Headquarters NewYork, 21 April 2017: Klaus Bosselmann

=Examples=

Klaus Bossellmann:

Elements of Earth trusteeship already exist in many countries. Examples include constitutional obligations of the State to protect the environment, environmental rights or progressive environmental laws.

* A good example is '''New Zealand’s Resource Management Act''' if (!) implemented and interpreted correctly, namely to respect non-negotiable environmental bottom lines (2014 King Salmon decision of the NZ Supreme Court).

* Notably, '''the 2014 Te Urewera Act, the 2017 Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui River Settlement) Act and the 2017 Te Anga Putakerongo/Record of Understanding for Mount Taranaki''' recognize certain ecosystems – a national park, a river and a mountain – as legal persons. They have to be represented by guardians who speak and act on their behalf."

(https://nzcgs.org.nz/board/earth-trusteeship/)


=More information=

* [[Hague Principles]]

* [[Kaitiakitanga]], Maori concept for 'guardianship of the land'

* '''The Earth Trusteeship Initiative.'''

See the article: Chapter 19: Promoting global ethics: the Earth Trusteeship Initiative. By Klaus Bosselmann and Prue Taylor
[https://doi.org/10.4337/9781786430878.00027 doi]

URL = https://www.elgaronline.com/display/edcoll/9781786430861/9781786430861.00027.xml

(part of the '''book''': ''The Crisis in Global Ethics and the Future of Global Governance''. Edited by Peter Burdon, Klaus Bosselmann, and Kirsten Engel, Elgar, 2019)

"This chapter introduces the Earth Trusteeship Initiative as a vehicle for realizing the ethical demands made in this book. The covenantal approach to overcoming our predicament is indispensable. Covenantal ethics must be the guide for global governance. What exactly this entails will manifest itself in many forms and shapes. The book’s chapters are proof of the fact that ethically informed decision making is needed everywhere and at all levels of governance: at community level, at national level and at the global level. Rooted democratic ecological citizenship is a wellspring for an emergent global polis that demands and supports this transformation."


==Related Organizations==

(potentially supportive)

IUCN World Commission on Environmental Law; Ethics Specialist Group  https://www.iucn.org/commissions/world-commissionenvironmental-law/our-work/specialist-groups/ethics 

Earth Charter Initiative  http://earthcharter.org 

Global Ecological Integrity Group (GEIG)  http://www.globalecointegrity.net/ 

Common Home of Humanity (CHH) http://www.commonhomeofhumanity.org/ 

Planetary Integrity Project(PIP)  http://planetaryboundariesinitiative.org/ 

Ecological Law and Governance Association (ELGA)  https://www.elga.world/


==Legal Theory of Earth Trusteeship==

* Conference Paper: The [[Role of Trusteeship in Earth Governance]]. By Klaus Bosselmann.  Ecological Integrity in Science and Law.

URL = https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-46259-8_20

"Recent legal analysis on the concept of Earth trusteeship include

* K. Bosselmann, Earth Governance: Trusteeship of the Global Commons, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham,2015;

* P. Burdon, Earth Jurisprudence: Private Property and the Environment, Routledge, Abingdon & NewYork,2015;

* P. Higgins, Eradicating Ecocide: Laws and Governance to Prevent the Destruction of our Earth, Shepheard-Walwyn, London 2nd ed.2015;

* B. Weston and D. Bollier, Green Governance: Ecological Survival, Human Rights and the Law of the Commons, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014;

* M. C. Wood, Nature’s Trust: Environmental Law for a New Ecological Age, Carolina University Press, Durham,2013. 

* R. Kim, R. and K. Bosselmann, “Operationalizing Sustainable Development: Ecological Integrity as a Grundnorm in International Law”, Review of European, Comparative and International Environmental Law, 24:2, 2015, 194-208. 

* for human rights dimensions of state trusteeship see E. Benvenisti, “Sovereigns as trustees of humanity”,American Journal of International Law 107/2 (2013), 295-333.

Compiled by Klauss Bosselmann at http://files.harmonywithnatureun.org/uploads/upload96.pdf

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Ecology]]