
=Description=

As proposed by WM Eichbaum:

"In summary, ESM takes as a given that the human enterprise now operates at a scale
which inevitably alters vital earth process so that they no longer operate singly or
collectively to create a global environment healthy for life as we know it, and especially
for humans. The new and dangerous functionalities of these altered processes are
critical consequences. If the earth is to remain habitable, humans must act to manage
these processes to avoid or mitigate these critical consequences. In the field of climate
change practices that have been advanced include: releasing aerosols in the high
atmosphere to increase its ability to reflect the sun’s energy, fertilizing the ocean to
increase its ability to absorb carbon from the atmosphere, and artificially whitening the
Arctic to replace lost ice and thus enhance its ability to reflect solar energy All of these
are designed to enhance the earth’s ability to manage the increases in atmospheric
carbon due to our carbon economy. Additionally, massive engineered systems can be
imagined which would directly remove carbon from the atmosphere. Any or some
combination of these “fixes” would involve enormous costs, resolution of complex
scientific and policy questions and decision-making about risk and benefits on a global
scale. The task becomes even more challenging when it is understood that the critical
consequences are associated with a number of processes in addition to those of the
carbon cycle.

The balance of this paper is predicated on the idea that humanity must embrace ESM
as the defining quality of the human enterprise in the Anthropocene and that that can
only happen if new ethical values are adopted by humanity which result in a radical
transformation of how we govern ourselves and how we allocate our rich financial and
technical resources. One could also argue that, if such an ethical evolution were to
come about, that would be a driver sufficient to, in the near term, change the actual
nature of the human enterprise so that its consequences would no longer result in
irreversibly negative changes in vital earth processes, i. e., we would choose to live
within the earth’s given boundaries. In other words, humanity would exercise the
humility to retreat from the Anthropocene age. Thus, humanity finds itself on the cusp
of two great choices----embrace the Anthropocene and recognize the parallel
responsibility for ESM or retreat from the Anthropocene thereby assuring that the
human enterprise does not violate planetary boundaries and thus avoids critical
consequences. Failure to choose one or the other path bodes ill for the future of
humankind. Either choice will need to be built on the elements discussed below but as
the arc of human history suggests that retreat is rare and moving forward into uncharted
waters is the norm, the discussion has a focus on achieving effective ESM. "
(http://etransition.org/Entri%20Web%20Site/images/2016.Eichbaum.New%20Ethics%20for%20the%20Anthropocene.pdf)

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Governance]]