=Source=

Source: '''Whitepaper: Open Climate. Leveraging blockchain for a global, transparent and integrated climate accounting system'''. By Martin E. Wainstein.

([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])



=Description=

Obtaining Consensus on the physical state of the planet via the prototype proposed by

Martin Wainstein:

"The main insight of this pillar has already been laid out above
in section 1.1. There needs to be a clear distinction between
the physical planet and the political world. The need for
consensus of the Earth’s ecosystem state and key ‘vital signs’
are three-fold. First, a robust and scientific consensus needs to
dispel any post-truth or climate skepticism from the general
public, it needs to clearly record ‘the facts.’ Second, this data
sets the baseline for all science-based climate targets from
state and non-state actors. It also facilitates the evaluation of
the aggregate effect of climate actor’s collective efforts. Finally,
an established immutable value on a distributed ledger can be
used for smart contracts to automate certain processes that
need to be based on physical metrics. For example, a smart
contract can deterministically tie carbon pricing to the
remaining planetary carbon budget relative to a 1.5oC target
using on-chain records.

This pillar is translated in the concept of an Earth ledger.
Section [3.1] describes the architecture and process flow to
operate a decentralized carbon budget accounting
mechanism, involving global CO2 internet-connected sensors,
multi-source oracles, integrated assessment models, and
Earth system governance to manage uncertainty ranges. While
we focus here on the carbon modules of the Earth ledger, this
is but one of many modules to consider. A natural extension of
it could include the tracking of all planetary boundaries
(Rockstrom et al., 2009)."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

[[Category:Crypto_Ecology]]

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]