'''* Article: Lindholm, M. (2022). The Earth has Become the Garden of Mankind. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 18(1), 83–102.''' 

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1004


=Abstract=

"The environmental crisis challenges our faith in humanity. Building on deep ecology and recent insights in evolutionary psychology, this article elaborates evolutionary peculiarities of our species, in order to develop foothold for new perspectives on the relation between man and earth. Premodern cultures managed to interact with their environments by establishing bio-cultural interfaces, thereby maintaining sustainable resource use. Homo sapiens has not generally been 'a plague of the earth', but rather a species that enhanced local biodiversity. In addition to genetical information, humans share a reservoir of cultural meaning. This reservoir has been coined 'the noosphere' and probably make up the last stage in a series of major evolutionary transitions since the Precambrian. Through the noosphere, the earth has become the garden of mankind. Such perspectives may open for re-establishing faith in man and in his ability to develop flowering relations to his environment."


=Contextual Quote=

==The [[Biophilic Nature of Humanity]]==

"David Attenborough ("Humans are a plague of  the earth") or Umberto Echo, ... claim that  “the  rest  is  just  sex,  copulation,  the  perpetuation  of   the  vile  species”.      “Humans  are  the  cancer  of   the  Earth”  t-shirts  can  even  be  purchased  on  the  web.  Based  on  deep  ecology  and  recent  insights  in  evolutionary  biology,  this  study  questions  the  legitimacy of such a pessimistic conception of the man-earth relation. The article departures   from   the   paradoxical   fact   that   humans   not   only   destroy   the   environment.  They  are  biophilious,  as  well.  Use  of  flowers  for  ornaments,  or  animals as pets, are known from cultures across the world. People make nesting boxes  for  birds,  plant  trees,  and  dig  flowerbeds,  too.  Biophilic  behavior  is  universally  human,  known  from  Babylonia  and  ancient  China  to  today’s  suburban  balconies.  These  two  opposite  faces  of  Homo  sapiens  call  for  a  deeper  exploration  of  human  peculiarities,  in  order  to establish  a  better  evolutionary  concept of man and environment, which even may renew hope and belief in the value of environmental education."

- Marcus Lindholm [https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1004/1657]


=Excerpts=

See also:

* [[Noosphere as a Transition Threshold‎]]
* [[Breakdown of the Bio-Cultural Interfaces in the European Renaissance]]


==The [[Tragedies of the Commons Are Exceptions Rather Than the Rule]]==

Marcus Lindholm:

"Self-regulation   has   historically   characterized   common  resource  use  (Jackson  et  al.,  2000;  Shiraev  &  Levy,  2017).  Jared  Diamond's  book  Collapse  (2005)  evoked  much  attention,  with  its  reports  on  community  collapse  due  to  overexploitation  of  resources.  But  the  number  of  unambiguous  cases  of  such  collapse  are  in  fact  few  (the  Viking  colony  on  Greenland, the Easter Island, Minoan Crete), and have been factually disputed, as well (McAnany & Yoffee, 2010; Bregman, 2020). Most premodern communities managed to establish sustainable solutions to local resource use (Ostrom 1990). The Sami of the Arctic share limited grazing areas for reindeers, with agreements encompassing benefits and responsibilities in order to maintain common pastures (Barlindhaug,  2013;  Marin  &  Bjørklund,  2015).  Shared  use  of  summer  pasture,  arable  and  meadows,  has  a  long  history  across  Eurasia,  where  resources  have  been  regulated  by  common  rules  defining  numbers  of  grazers,  duration  and  associated duties, as well. The system of transhumance and setring of Northern Europe and the Swiss Alps partly roots back in the Iron age (Moe et al., 1988). Common laws included duties associated with maintenance and care of outfields, such as bush and rock removal, hunting of predators, and sowing of new grass following landslides. In Sahel, pastoralists have maintained the common use of meadows  for  cattle,  which  also  included  rules  for  shared  use  of  the  scattered  acacia trees, and their protein-rich fruits (Stave et al., 2007). Through such agreements, sustainable use of common resources have been successfully maintained over centuries, without resource deterioration. A 'tragedy of the commons' is an exception rather than the rule (Ostrom, 1990; Araral, 2014)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1004/1657)

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]