
=Discussion=


==On the Distinction Between ERA and UBiC Frameworks==

Reflections on conceptual distance and possible dialogue between the Earth Reserve
Assurance (ERA) framework and the Common Good Unit (UBiC) hypothesis.


Michel Foata:


'''1. Shared Intention'''

"Both ERA and UBiC arise from the same foundational intuition: the monetary
architecture of our economies no longer communicates the real state of the living world.
Each framework seeks, in its own way, to reconnect value creation with the regenerative
conditions of life and the commons.

ERA grounds monetary worth in biophysical reality. It aims to make money truthful by
tying it to verifiable relative changes in the productive capacity of ecosystems. UBiC,
meanwhile, explores how money might become reflexive: a medium through which the
care of the commons is recognised and rewarded within every act of exchange itself.
Although these approaches share the same ethical horizon, they seem to operate within
distinct paradigms of what constitutes legitimate knowledge and agents in a monetary
system.


'''2. The Logic of ERA'''

If I understand your framework correctly, ERA establishes a Money-of-Account grounded
in change to the Earth’s productive capacity, expressed through the indices ERiE and
ERiC. It thereby restoresestablishes a form of macro-ecological truth: when the
ecosystems within a currency zone degrade, the purchasing power of the anchored
currency declines, but the floating currency’s worth declines collectively becomes more
expensive, cause reduces international demand for goods and services prices in the
floating variant..

This design elegantly transforms environmental degradation into a monetary signal
rather than a moral one. It offers a non-coercive way to make ecological reality
economically visible. It is then a valuable contribution to the conversation on “sound
money.”

At the same time, I sometimes wonder about the degree to which such a signal, being
aggregate, can shape micro-level behaviour. BecauseBy design ERA’s feedback
operates collectively, it does not appear to differentiate between regenerative and
extractive actors, because extaction can be ecologically sound. It does distinguish
between circular use of exhaustible resources, and their permanent degradation. In that
sense, it may ensure truth, yet perhaps not coordination : the ecological condition of
value is made explicit, but the grammar of exchange, still symmetric and privately
optimising, remains unchanged.


'''3. The Logic of UBiC'''

UBiC begins from a similar diagnosis but moves in another direction. Rather than
recalibrating a global reference of value, it seeks to transform the act of valuation itself.
Each transaction can create or destroy units according to a Common Good Care Score,
derived from legitimate citizen deliberation across local, regional and planetary scales.
The aim is to produce a direct feedback loop between economic activity and the quality
of our collective care.

the two approaches are neither equivalent nor compatible. Where ERA attempts to
mirror an ecological general truth, UBiC attempts to embody a fine collective legitimacy.
It assumes that fine, local and factual measurement through civic evaluation must be
intertwined if money is to become a genuine medium of regeneration. The data
architecture of ERA could, in this sense, provide some empirical data for the state and
planetary layer of UBiC’s deliberative scoring, but not translate in a monetary
mechanism on its own.


'''4. Structural limits of the ERA mechanism from my point of view'''

From my current understanding, several systemic questions arise:

- Indiscriminate impact. When an ecosystem degrades, all currency holders lose value
equally, regardless of their responsibility or contribution. This seems to transmit
ecological truth but not necessarily incentive alignment.
- Persistence of transactional symmetry. As transactions remain zero-sum, the
market may still optimise for private gain, even with an ecologically indexed unit of
account. The feedback of care does not yet occur where economic behaviour is
generated.
- Cross-currency ecological arbitrage risk. In global trade, depreciation of a currency
due to ecosystem degradation could make exports cheaper, enabling “clean” economies
to outsource environmental harm. Without cross-boundary responsibility mechanisms,
such effects could unintentionally reinforce global inequality.


These limits may not diminish the coherence of ERA’s architecture, but they highlight
where its stabilising logic might differ from a fine regenerative one.


'''5. The cybernetic architecture of UBiC'''

UBiC aims to address precisely these systemic dynamics. It defines money not as a
mirror of global ecological condition but as a cybernetic medium of cooperation, a
language of value capable of integrating private and collective interests on
environmental and social criteria in real time. Its reference frame is multi-scalar and
participatory, aligning the legitimacy of evaluation with ecological reality itself.
From this perspective, the ER framework could serve as a valuable data and calibration
layer within a broader deliberative system, but its monetary logic may not by itself
achieve the feedback effects that UBiC seeks to activate. The two approaches thus
appear not so much complementary neither equivalent. ERA clarifies what is true
verifiable about the statedynamic changes of ecosystems and translate it through a
descendant monetary system ; UBiC explores how local truth can be translated into just,
regenerative and ascendant economic economical incentives and behaviours.


'''6. Closing Reflection'''

Your ERA framework offers one of the most rigorous and thoughtful attempts to ground
monetary worth in the biophysical integrity of the Earth. It raises questions that, in my
view, are essential for the next generation of monetary research. If I have underlined
some limitations here, it is not to diminish its value, but to open a dialogue on how
verifiable ecological truthdata might eventually be coupled with participatory legitimacy.
I am of course equally open to a critical reading of my own work on UBiC. Scientific
dispute, when conducted in good faith, is both a pleasure and the surest way to advance
shared understanding—even, and perhaps especially, when our frameworks do not
coincide. I would be very happy to continue this discussion with you, in whatever form
you might find fruitful."


[[Category:Money]]