'''* Book: John M. Hobson The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization,  N.Y., Cambridge University Press, 2004'''

URL = http://www.bandung2.co.uk/books/Files/Education/The%20Eastern%20Origins%20of%20Western%20Civilization.pdf

=Publisher's Summary=

"John Hobson challenges the ethnocentric bias of mainstream
accounts of the rise of the West. It is often assumed that since
Ancient Greek times Europeans have pioneered their own
development, and that the East has been a passive bystander in the
story of progressive world history. Hobson argues that there were
two processes that enabled the rise of the ‘oriental West’. First, each
major developmental turning point in Europe was informed in large
part by the assimilation of Eastern inventions (e.g. ideas,
technologies and institutions) which through oriental globalisation
diffused from the more advanced East across the Eastern-led global
economy between 500 and 1800. Second, the construction of
European identity after 1453 led to imperialism, through which
Europeans appropriated many Eastern resources (land, labour and
markets). Hobson’s book thus propels the hitherto marginalised
Eastern peoples to the forefront of the story of progress in world history."

=Review=

Reviewed by Reg Little.

 
"Are we about to return to a global order similar to that which existed for 
most of the past two millennia, when Chinese civilization led the world -
administratively, economically, technologically and medically? Is it 
possible that Confucian-Daoist, rather than Judeo-Christian, cultural 
norms will prove best suited to overseeing a global knowledge economy?

In other words, will the period of Western leadership - or, more 
accurately of Anglo-American empire - prove to be but a brief 200 year 
historical interlude before China returns to a more traditional role? Is
China likely to be again at the centre of the global trading system? 
Will China again produce an array of high quality products that Europe 
and America struggle to pay for through the value of their own 
production"? Will the West's universal values - democracy, rule of law 
and free trade - come to be seen as little more than the opportunistic, 
and rather hypocritical, inventions of a past imperial order?

John M. Hobson's The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization offers many 
reasons, which are only marginally related to the contemporary rise of 
China and East Asia, to ask these questions. Simply put, history as it 
has been understood in the West has largely been a political invention.

Andre Gunder Frank's 1998 publication, ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian 
Age, which preceded Hobson's work by six years, sums up a variety of 
evidence, including the path-breaking work of a Japanese researcher, in 
the following terms:

Thus, we can and should make an even stronger case than Hama$hita does: 
the entire world economic order was - literally - Sinocentric. Christopher Colombus and after him many 
Europeans up until Adam Smith knew that. It was only the 
nineteenth-century Europeans who literally rewrote this history from 
their new Eurocentric perspective. As Braudel observed, Europe invented 
historians and then put them to good use in their own interests and not 
those of historical accuracy or objectivity.

The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization complements and builds on the insights of Frank,
Braudel and others to illustrate in great detail both how substantial 
China's historical achievement has been and how much the West has 
distorted history to serve the purpose of its imperial civilizing 
mission:

.....the Enlightenment was 'schizophrenic'. For its 
greatest paradox was that while it borrowed and assimilated Eastern 
(mainly Chinese) ideas these were then crafted into a body of knowledge 
that imagined the East as uncivilized and, in turn, led on to the 
imperial civilizing mission and the repression of the East.....

The discourse created (largely unwittingly) a kind of intellectual 
apartheid regime in which the West was fundamentally segregated from the
East by an imaginary borderline that stretched back in time to Ancient 
Greece.

John Hobson's work is important because the West's 
deliberately distorted understanding of history and civilization may now
play a role in its own marginalisation. How well placed are Western 
nations to adjust to a genuine cultural renaissance in the 
Confucian-Daoist world of East Asia?

...

The Eastern Origins of 
Western Civilization suggests both the brilliance and limits of the 
achievement of the Enlightenment. This work, which could almost be 
described as a chronicle of the persuasiveness and perfidy of European, 
or more accurately of Anglo-American, historians, clearly identifies 
19th Century Britain as a 'newly industrializing country' or a 'late 
developer'. A chapter titled: 'The Chinese origins of British 
industrialization: Britain as a derivative late developer, 1700-1846' 
concludes with the words:

In short, my 
global-historical-cumulative perspective of industrialization suggests 
that the conventional emphasis on the British industrial revolution as 
the place where, to quote Rostow, 'it all began', can now be seen as the
product of a parochial Eurocentric mindset. We could, therefore, do 
little better than close with the words of Eric Jones:

Once upon a
time it seemed we had a definite event to learn about. Growth began 
with an industrial revolution in late eighteenth century Britain. Now we
know quite surely that the event was really a process, smaller, far 
less British (and far more Eastern), infinitely less abrupt, part of a 
(world-historical) continuum, taking much more time to run.

The above passages from Hobson's work more or less sum up his conclusions 
and sketch out some of their implications. Hobson has, however, explored
in considerable detail the past fifteen hundred years. He shows the 
East as the early developer in a comparatively benign oriental 
globalization from 500 to 1800, the invention of Christendom as a 
medieval, reactive European response, and the mythology of the Europe's 
civilizing, universal values as little more than a necessary invention 
to market the West's determined imperial strategies.

Hobson does  not deny the remarkable character of this achievement but no more does 
he pull his punches in describing a British imperial project built on 
national protectionism, regressive taxation, interventionism, despotism 
and militarism. This leads up to a passage headed 'Racism, 
Industrialization and the moral contradiction of the British Imperial 
civilizing mission', which is followed by other headings such as 'The 
contradictions of imperial free trade: containment verses cultural 
conversion' and 'Racism and the commodification of the East: the 
Afro-Asian origins of British industrialization'. The latter explains 
the critical role of the slave trade and the empire's slave labour 
plantations in generating further wealth and capital resources that led 
on to advances in Asia.

Of course, it would be naïve to indulge 
for a moment the thought that a grand empire could be built through the 
enlightenment of other people with democracy, the rule of law and free 
trade. Hobson does not make the case that the British empire was 
bloodier or more brutal than other empires. He does remind us, however, 
that it is the victors who get to write history and that that history is
valid only so long as they remain victors.

With this in mind the
timing the work of Hobson, and before him Frank, takes on its true 
importance."
(http://www.asiafinest.com/forum/lofiversion/index.php/t243048.html)

Source: Little, Reg (2005) "Review of John M. Hobson The Eastern origins of Western civilization," Culture Mandala: The Bulletin of the Centre for East-West Cultural and Economic Studies: Vol. 7: Iss. 1, Article 6. Available at: [http://epublications.bond.edu.au/cm/vol7/iss1/6]


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]