


'''= aims at allowing software to be discovered and used from any device around you'''

URL = http://www.ebrain.in


=Description=

Erle Pereira:
 
"eBrainPool aims at allowing software to be
discovered and used from any device around you. It enables any user
running ebrainpool to discover and run software from someone else in
the shared community resource pool and use it on their own netbook,
phone or any other device. This means that she doesn't need the
software installed on her device to use it - simply seek others with
the software and use it on your device while it runs directly on their
computer. While the architecture has been designed keeping in mind
our long term goal of platform independence, it currently runs on
Linux.
 
The broad goals are to provide software, computing and operating
environments as a shared resource.
 
We've shared crayons in kindergarten and our toys growing up, we've
shared our tools and we've benefited from sharing knowledge and our
lives. Communities are brought closer by sharing, working and playing
together. The long term vision of eBrainPool is to allow software with
anyone in the community to be usable throughout the community, across
boundaries of operating system and hardware capabilities and to not
just bring us closer but to bind us stronger.
 
A short note on the technologies involved:

The original architecture used P2P to build the network, the current
implementation has used Meshed Networking (OLSR -- www.olsr.org) to
achieve a direct connection between the various devices involved. At
the current time, Xorg (X Windows), SSH and Fuse are the other
essential elements. Security and data abstraction are essential in the
architectural design, a combination of ssh (libssh) and Fuse are being
used to achieve this currently."


=Status=

May 2011:
 
"Truthfully, a lot of work remains. Our code is still in development
alpha stage. Although rough what we would love is for this to be
tested in a real life large mesh environment so we can study usability
in a real world scenario. This is one area we need the most help with
and we would appreciate it profusely if someone here would be willing
to put a bunch of linux systems together in an ad-hoc mesh and test
this out. We are currently working hard to clean up our code further
to reduce the entry barrier for people trying this out and giving us
valuable usability data."
(NextNet, May 2011)



[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]