Back to [[ECC2013|Economics and the Commons Conference 2013]].

The list which is meant to be comprehensive and will be continuously updated is located here, at http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:ECC2013_Participants

Below is a draft version based on an earlier list produced for the printed brochure. This list is not complete nor updated.

=Directory=

Originally listed by participants themselves at http://titanpad.com/DXApAyVm72 and or  http://openetherpad.org/BioForECC-ProgramPrintedVersion


Aguilar Nils (Germany). Franco-German sociologist and filmmaker. His first feature "Voices of Transition" is an awarded documentary aiming to serve socio-ecological movements and to facilitate the launch of new transition town initiatives. 

Dr. Ao Yumin (China/USA). Adjunct professor in Chinese language and literature at George Mason University. Research interests include classical Chinese Literature, Traditional Chinese Drama and Theatre, Comparative Literature, Chinese Aesthetics and Arts History, Chinese Characters and the history of Chinese writing, and Cross-cultural Studies.

Ball Sophie (UK). Recent Phd student at Middlesex University, London, UK. Phd thesis title: Reclaiming the Commons: a discourse for new politics - How grassroots activists are shaping the future.
http://p2pfoundation.net/How_Commons_Grassroots_Activists_Are_Shaping_the_Future   Also work at Middlesex University as Student Exchanges and European Projects Manager . s.ball@mdx.ac.uk

Beckedahl Markus (Germany). Blogger and operator of netzpolitik.org (emphasises politics in digital society), co-founder of newthinking communications GmBH (agency for open source strategies), member of the German parliamentary committee of enquiry of ‘internet and digital society’, public relations and community building manager of the German Creative Commons, assistant lecturer at Mannheim University and the film academy in Ludwigsburg, co-organiser of the re:publica conference.

Betz Anna (UK). 30 years of experience working in the public and private sector in health and social care, workshop leader of Living Medicine. Co-founder of the School of Commoning, particular interest in protecting healthcare from enclosure and in supporting the right of everyone to optimal health.Started Health Commons group. Developing a Roadmap. See http://bit.ly/YvQBNB

Bianchi Bruna (Italy). Associate Professor ( History of Political Thought and Women's History) at the University Ca’Foscari of Venice and editor of the telematic Jornal "DEP Deportate, esuli, profughe" ( http://www.unive.it/dep), a venue for analysis and reflection on the topic of displacement from women's point of view. Commons-related publications: Ecofeminism: the Ideas, the Debates, the Prospects, in DEP, 20, 2012; Lev N. Tolstoy: A Radical Critic of Industrialisation, forthcoming.

Bodó Balász (Hungary/Netherlands). Economist, assistant professor, researcher at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics and the Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam, Fulbright Fellow at Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University, Hungarian Project Lead for Creative Commons, member of the National Copyright Expert Group. 

Bradley Alexa (US). Program Director at On The Commons http://onthecommons.org/ focused on the Great Lakes Commons Initiative http://www.greatlakescommons.org/  to catalyze a cross border citizen movement putting shared responsibility, equitable benefit, ecological sustainability and democratized decision making at the center of the Great Lakes governance).  She has worked as an organizer, facilitator, trainer and popular educator for over 25 years, with a particular focus on linking community organizing to broader social movement strategies.

Prof. Dr. Brie Michael (Germany). Philosopher, director of the Institute for social analysis at the Rosa Luxemburg Foundation, his key interest being theory and history of democratic socialism, member of the scientific advisory board of ATTAC Germany and of the board of trustees of the Institute Modern Solidarity.

Brown Héléne (Canada). Social entrepreneur and communications professional. Current project manager and web-community builder at Procédurable, Espaces temps Montréal, Communautique and Fab Labs Québec. Interested in social common initiatives, social web and new technologies serving communities. Twitter: @brownhelene

Brown Marvin (US). Consultant and writer in oganizational and economic ethics, lecturer in business ethics at the University of San Francisco, author of ‘Civilising the economy’in which he proposes a new framework for the global economy that reframes its purpose as the making of provisions and sees the civic as the platform for designing an inclusive economy.

Bullard Nicola (Australia/ France/ Thailand). Focus on the Global South.

Burke Leo (US). Professor and Director of the Global Commons Initiative (offers courses on the emerging paradigm of the global commons) in the Mendoza College of Business at the University of Notre Dame, Indiana.  Current teaching interests include the global commons, radically new models of leadership development, and collaborative value creation.

Chaturverdi Rahul (India). Senior Programme Offices at the Foundation for Ecological Security (FES).
Dr. Chemnitz Christine (Germany). Head of Department International Agricultural Trade at the Heinrich Böll Foundation. 

Cook Chris (UK). Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Security and Resilience Studies at University College London. His work foscuses on a new generation of networked markets and officer at Nordic Enterprise Trust, Scotland,  where he develops new partnership-based enterprise models and related financial products and services. He is a former market regulator at the Association of Futures Brokers & Dealers and a former Director of the International Petroleum Exchange.

Coulombe Guillaume (Canda) Entrepreneur, Founder of Procédurable and a cofounder of Fab Labs Québec. Committed to generating social profitability by organizing the performance in infrastructures management, involved in the operationnal readiness of University of Montréal Hospital Center, capitalizes various infrastructures operations manual’s semantic models into common good.

Dr. Cvijanović Vladimir (Croatia). Lecturer in the Faculty of Economics and Business at the University of Zagreb, Member of Group 22 (think tank), author of ‘Financing Innovations of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in a Systemic Perspective’ and ‘Cognitive Capitalism and its Reflections in South-Eastern Europe’.

Dahm Daniel (Germany). Geographer, ecologist, activist, consultant and entrepreneur. He works in the fields of sustainability and development research, ecological economics and ecological creation of values, future of work, plurality and diversity of life. Author of ‘Towards the governance of local and global commons’, co-author of ‘Global Justice, Equality and World Domestic Policy, The Potsdam manifesto’.
Degens Philipp (Germany). Phd student and research fellow in the Department for Cooperative Studies at the University of Cologne. He is an economist and a historian by training. His main research interests are microfinance and microinsurance, complementary currencies, and the co-operative movement. 

Dietrich Daniel (Germany). Open Data evangelist at Open Knowledge Foundation, Chairman of the German Chapter of the Open Knowledge Foundation, Project Coordinator for the Open Definition, Coordinator of the Open Government Data Working Group. Former editor of the ePSIplatform.eu and Research Associate in the Department of Internet and Society at the Technical University in Berlin. Author of several studies and papers on the topics of Open Government, Open Data, Transparency and Participation. More information at http://ddie.me/ and on Twitter: https://twitter.com/ddie

Dulong de Rosnay Melanie (France).
Permanent researcher at CNRS (National Center for Scientific Research) Institute for Communication Sciences
Associated Researcher and Creative Commons France legal lead at CERSA (Center of Study and Research on Administrative Science) CNRS University Paris 2
Co-founder of Communia international association on the digital public domain.
Co-editor of ‘The Digital Public Domain: Foundations for an Open Culture’ and ‘International Commons at the Digital Age’. Publications http://www.iscc.cnrs.fr/spip.php?article1558 Twitter @melanieddr

Ehlers Kai (Germany). Self-employed author, journalist, researcher who focuses on political, economic and cultural developments in the post-soviet area.

Engelmann Jan (Germany). Head of Department Politics and Society at Wikimedia.

Finidori Helene (France/Spain). Blogger, consultant, member of the p2Pp coop, founding member of the Commons Abundance Network and member of the Commons Action at the UN group. Her current work concentrates on bringing advanced dialogue and empowering technologies and models to people at the heart of the system as well as on the margin, to help a transition to a better world. Twitter: @HeleneFinidori
Flitcroft Tim (UK). Member of the Economics Working group of the School of Commoning and member of the  Occupy London movement.

Fuhr Lili (Germany). Head of department Ecology and Sustainable Development at the Heinrich Böll Foundation. She considers the lack of participation in decisions on how we use and share our natural resources to be at the heart of the current ecological crises.

Fuster Morell, [[Mayo_Fuster_Morell|Mayo]] (Spain & USA). Fellow at Berkman center for Internet & Society (Harvard University), and Internet, public policies and Commons (igopnet.cc) (Autonomous University of Barcelona). PhD thesis on the Governance of digital commons (http://www.onlinecreation.info/outline_design) and co-organizer of International forum on digital commons, and school of the commons Barcelona. CV with works on the commons: http://www.onlinecreation.info/commons E-mail: mayo.fuster@eui.eu @lilaroja 


Gechter Julia (Germany). Film maker, producer of the short documentary ‘Commons-the principle of sharing’.
Georgiev Nikolay (Germany/Bulgaria). Social entrepreneur and organisational developer who intervenes for an open holistic development of society.

Gottschlich Daniela (Germany). Political scientist at Leuphana University in Lüneburg, academic interests concentrate on theories of international politics, sustainable development and feminism. She analyses how environmental policy focusing on sustainability can contribute to democratising democracy.

Grassmuck Volker (Germany). Sociologist and media researcher at the Leuphana University in Lüneburg. He leads the project ‘Basic services 2.0 -- Internet-TV for a new generation of media focusing on the public, peer structures and information technologies’ and is involved in initiatives that deal with current copyright structures.

Prof. Dr. Graupe Silija (Germany). Assistant professor philosophy and economics at the Institute for philosophical and aesthetic education of the Alanus University of Arts and Social Sciences. Her academic interests revolve around reshaping the economics and has published on this topics articles such as ‘The Power of Ideas. The Teachings of Economics and Its Image of Man’.

Dr. Habermann Friederike (Germany). Economist and historian, author and self-employed scientist. She works on intersectionality, global social movements and alternative economic systems. She published among others ‘Halbinseln gegen den Strom. Anders leben und wirtschaften im Alltag’.
Haerlin Dorothea (Germany). Member of ATTAC Germany.

Hatzfeldt Herman (Germany). Forester, author on environmental politics and forest decline, Board member of the HKH Foundation.

Heimrath Johannes (Germany). Editor and author of ‘Post-collape society’ and publications on frontier sciences, philosophy of nature and history of culture founder and director of Human Touch Medienproduktion GmBH.

Dr. Iaione Christian (Italy). Assistant Professor of Public Law at the Business School of Niccolò Cusano University of Rome and Adjunct Professor of Institutional Communication at the School of Political Science of LUISS University of Rome, Editor-in-chief of Labsus.org. He has published articles in the field of public and administrative law, urban commons, urban planning and land use law, government contracts, public utilities and judicial review.
 
Dr. Kaiser Gregor (Germany). Social Scientist and Biologist. Activist against biopiracy and gene technology. Phd dissertation title: ‘Propriety and the Commons. Genetic resources and the quest for alternatives to intellectual propriety’.Currently he runs a small family owned forest enterprice in Sauerland Region, 100km North-East of Cologne.  kaiser@vielfalt-wald.de
 
Kalinowski Wojek (France/Poland). Executive member of Veblen Institte for economic reforms. Former journalist at the French monthly ‘Alternatives Economiques’, scientific editor at the Institute for research on governance and assisting director at the French think tank La République des Idées, founder and previous editor-in-chief of the journal ‘La Vie des idées’.
 
Prof. Dr. Kennedy Magrit (Germany). Architect, ecologist and financial expert. As a Professor she headed the department of Technological Advancement and Resource Efficient Construction at the University of Hannover's architecture school. She has published books, articles and reports on community school planning and building, women and architecture, urban ecology, permaculture, money, land and tax systems, the latest book as a co-author being ‘The promise of regional currencies’.
 
Dr. Knapp Natalie (Germany). Philosophical consultant on changing awareness, freelance author and editor at the German South West radio broadcaster. As a philosopher, she is asking what we can learn from traditional wisdoms of different culture as well as from science and philosophy for the shaping of our future. Author of  'A Compass of New Thinking: How to orientate oneself in a disorientated world' (Rowohlt 2013) and 'The Quantum Leap of Thinking: What modern physics can teach us' (Rowohlt 2011)
 
Krausz Nicolas (France). Programme Manager at the Charles Léopold Mayer Foundation (FPH), in charge of Rio+20 related activities (transition and commons-oriented) and FPH programmes on Ethics and responsibility, and interreligious dialogue. Former director of World Mountain People Association and parliamentary Assistant.
 
Dr. Lapniewska Zofia (Poland). Academic teacher, independent researcher and trainer.  She cooperates with a number of feminist organizations and informal groups working for more equal and ethical societies. She is a lecturer at the Gender Studies at the Jagiellonian University in Krakow and Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw. Currently - Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Center for Transdisciplinary Gender Studies at the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Her areas of scientific interest: feminist economics, new institutional economics, theory of commons.
 
Lauinger Holger (Germany). Journalist writing about urban and regional planning, articles include ‘Reclaim the Commons’, ‘Vergesellschaftung von Grund und Boden?’, producer of documentaries such as ‘Nicht-mehr/Noch-Nicht’, a film on the cultural opportunities of unused buildings.
 
MacBryde David (USA/Germany).Graduated from Yale, with studies in Bonn, Munich and Austin. Focus: ontology in eras of social changes. Work: Setting pins in a bowling ally, IBM Corporation, The Armadillo Press publishing cooperative with IWW union print-shop in Austin, Texas. In Germany: Center for Regional Conversion of "swords to plowshares" in ecumenical church work for Justice, Peace and the Integrity of Creation with experiments in computer assisted education and participatory publishing, e.g. www.vun.org
 
Mallien Lara (Germany).Chief-editor of the OYA Magazine which publishes on new ways of thinking and living, manager of Human Touch Medienproduktion GmBH.
 
Medak Tomislav (Croatia).Member of Multimedia Institute/MAMA in Zagreb where he organizes theory and publishing activities, project lead of Creative Commons Croatia. His interests focus on constellations of contemporary philosophy, media theory and aesthetics. He also(co)- organized various conference ad public debates about enclosures, commons and spatial justice, the most recent one being ‘Economy of Crisis Capitalism and Ecology of the Commons’.
 
Dr. Müller Christa (Germany). Sociologist and director of the Stiftungsgemeinschaft anstiftung & ertomis. She researches and publishes about sustainable lifestyles, urban gardening and sustainable concepts of welfare. She is editor of "Urban Gardening" (2011) and co-author of "Stadt der Commonisten" (2013).
 
Mulqueen Tara (UK). Phd student at Birbeck University of London. Her dissertation title is: Co-operation and Social economy in Critical perspective: History, Politics and Law.
Nommesch Kim (Luxembourg/Germany). Conference Assistant at the Heinrich Böll Foundation. BA in International Relations and Politics at the University of East Anglia, prospective Master International Public management at Sciences Po Paris. Kim.nommesch@gmail.com
 
Norbu Tsewang (Germany).
 
Peltokoski Jukka (Finland). Educational producer and political researcher KSL Civic Association for Adult Learning.
  
Ressel Eva (Germany). Freelance facilitator in the project Open Space Germany and consultant on participatory processes.
 
Dr. Roof Nancy (US). Founder of "Kosmos Journal: The Journal for World Citizens Creating the New Civilization" in consultative status with the United Nations. She works closely with James Quilligan who is on the Board of Directors of Kosmos Associates which publishes feature articles on the Commons. She is co-founder of the Values Caucus and the Spiritual Caucus at the UN.
 
Dr. Rosen Richard (US). Executive Vice-President and a founding member of Tellus Institute (research and policy organization working towards a sustainable, just, and livable global civilization). His current research focus is on alternative economic visions and models for the global economy over the long-term.
 
Ruche Alain (Belgium). Deputy Head of Unit Asia, Horizontal Matters in Directorate –General External Relations, European Commission. He has taught on EU‐Asia relations, EU integration
and Disaster Preparedness at universities in Belgium, Latin America, Africa and researched on sustainable development and energy.
 
Dr. Sachs Wolfgang (Germany). Senior Research Fellow at the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy, Honorary Professor in the  Department of Social Sciences at the University of Kassel. His research focuses on globalization and sustainability, environment and development, new models of wealth.
 
Prof. Dr. Scherhorn Gerhard (Germany). Consultant at the Wuppertal Institute, former head of the   working group ‘New models of wealth’ and ‘Sustainable production and consumption’, former head of the Academy of Economics and Politics in Hamburg and professor for theories of consumption ath Hohenheim University in Stuttgart. His focus points are informal economy, sustainable lifestyles and consumption, market evolution, ethical and ecological assessment of companies.
 
Schlechte Thomas (Germany). Economist. Freelancer at the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy (Research Group: Sustainable Production and Consumption), potential PhD Candidate at the Alpen-Adria-University Klagenfurt in Austria (October 2013), research interest: potentials/implications of patten languages as a learning tool for civil society with regard sustainable development (paradigm).

Schroeder Siegfried (Germany). Political scientist. Director of East African Regional Office of the Rosa Luxemburg Foundation, Dar es Salaam. schroeder@rosalux.de. He is cooperating with civil society organisations which share a common rights-based and governance approach in regard of access to land, water, minerals and other commons. The work is guided by following principles: Sustainable development can't be achieved without social justice; and: social justice can only be accomplished by empowered communities.    
 
Seravalli Anna (Sweden/Italy, PhD candidate at MEDEA and K3 Malmö University, anna.seravalli@mah.se). Design researcher with a background in industrial and service design based at MEDEA Malmö Unversity where she is part of the Malmö Living Labs. Her work focuses on how commons-based organizations could be used as a platform for prototyping alternative ways of generating goods and delivering services. Her research is based on a long-term involvement in Fabriken, a maker-space in Malmö.
 
Dr. Siefkes Christian (Germany).  Freelance software engineer and author with research interest in the emancipatory potential of free software, open hardware, and other forms of commons-based peer production, Co-founder and blogger on keimform.de. Publications include ‘From Exchange to Contributions’, 'The Emergence of Benefit-driven Production’ (Proc. OKCon 2011) and ‘The Boom of Commons-Based Peer Production’ (in The Wealth of the Commons 2012).
 
Dr. Snick Anne (Belgium). Department Coordinator in the Flora Network of Expertise on Gender, Sustainability and Interconnected Economics (this network links people and organisations active in different domains working towards a sustainable, egalitarian and interconnected socioeconomic system), former researcher and senior researcher at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Her research interests are gender, commons-based peer-production and systems thinking.
 
Dr. Stalder Felix (Switzerland). Lecturer at the Insitute for Contemporary Art Research at the Zurich University of Arts with a focus on media economics and co-founder of Openflows (an international open source research and development network. Publications include ‘Open Cultures and the Nature of Networks’ and ‘Open Source Projects as Voluntary Hierarchies’.
 
Prof. Dr. Steinvorth Ulrich (Germany). Philosopher and chair at Bilkent University in Ankara, professor of philosophy at the University of Hamburg. He researches on ethics, political philosophy and metaphysics. Recent publications include ‘Rethinking the Western Understanding of the Self’, co-editor of ‘Alternatives within/to Capitalism’.
 
Stuart Tara (US).  Treasurer of the Board of Directors of Kosmos Associates, Inc. She has a diverse professional background as educator, speaker, author, illustrator and CEO of her own business and has taught Ethics in Communication, Interpersonal Communication, Intercultural Communication, Advanced Public Speaking and Group Interaction.
 
Tang, Jia Lyng (Brazil/Germany). Research Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS Potsdam). Coordinator in Berlin of the Young Scholars Initiative (YSI Commons), a network supported by the Institute for New Economic Thinking which fosters early-career researchers to rethink our economies and economic theories. Areas of interest: Development and Urban Studies, Behavioral Economics, Sustainable Finance, Complex Systems.
 
Dr. Thie Hans (Germany). Advisor on economic policy for DIE LINKE (Left Party) in the German Bundestag. Latest publications: Exit not Exitus: The Red Project for Green Transformation in 16 Theses (Rosa Luxemburg Foundation, Policy Paper 03 / 2011). Towards Energy Democracy: The Current State of Germany’s Energy Transition (Trade Unions for Energy Democracy, Newsletter 01/2013). Forthcoming book: Thie, Hans (2013). Rotes Grün. Pioniere und Prinzipien einer ökologischen Gesellschaft. Hamburg: VSA-Verlag

Toivanen Tero (Finland). Teacher, independent researcher and co-founder of the Commons.fi online magazine. Currently he is working on his PhD thesis on the field of World politics at the University of Helsinki. The thesis explores the meaning of commons in historical theories of the origin of capitalism. Toivanen has also a great interest on theorizing political economy of the commons based on re-readings of the work of classical political economist from Smith to Marx. https://twitter.com/TTToivanen
 
Toner Alan (Ireland).
 
Dr. Tönnis Antje (Germany). Geographer.  Public relations manager at GLS Treuhand (umbrella  organisation for individuals and institutions working on giving money for the common good), Manager of the Foundation for Renewable Energy.

Tuschen Stefan (Germany). Member of the Economy and Ecology unit at Bread for the World - Protestant Development Service's Policies department. He works on sustainable development and transistion with a special focus on change agents within German civil society. 

Ulatowska Lisinka,PhD. (Netherlands, USA) co-founded with James Quilligan, the Commons Action for the UN (12/09) to give people worldwide a voice in global consultations and decision making via the UN; and with Wolfgang Hoeschele the Commons Abundance Network (06/12) to eg help to foster a commons-based economy at all levels centred on the well being of all people and nature; coordinates the Commons Cluster at the UN; wrote book on implementing Kooistra's approach to a basic income income for all people.
Unmüßig Barbara (Germany). President of the Heinrich Böll Foundation, a position she has held since 2002. At the foundation, she is responsible for its strategy and development for Latin America, Africa, Asia, the Middle East and for the Gunda Werner Institute for Feminism and Gender Democracy. Her work focuses on issues of globalisation, international climate and agricultural policy, national and international gender policy and the promotion of democracy and conflict prevention. The foundation has published the German book "Commons - Für eine Politik jenseits von Markt und Staat", edited by Silke Helfrich and the Heinrich Böll Foundation. 

Vaillant Christophe (Germany).

Vrodljak Nikola (Croatia). Member of the Board at the Academy for Political Development, director of Gingernet (digital marketing specialist), co-founder of member of Weekend Media Festival, founder of  Projekt 404 (platform for enabling creative projects that promote the use of Internet and new technologies by providing them with free media space).

Walljasper Jay (US). Speaker, writer, editor specializing  in community and urban issues, sustainability, cultural commentary and the  commons. He edited ‘All That We Share A Field Guide to the  Commons’ and is a Senior Fellow at On The Commons and editor of Commons Magazine. Formerly  the editor of Utne Reader, he is also a Senior Fellow at Project for Public Spaces and Augsburg College's Sabo Center for  Citizenship and Learning.

Wessling Gerd (Germany). He has been involved in the Transition Network in the UK and Germany, helping to bring the Transition model to Germany, Austria and Switzerland. He is a certified Transition trainer, speaker about Transition and related topics and founding member of the Post-Fossil Institute and Transition Town Bielefeld.

Dr. Weston Burns (US). Bessie Dutton Murray Distinguished Professor of Law Emeritus at the University of Iowa (UI) and Senior Scholar at the UI Center for Human Rights, Co-director of the Commons Law project, co-author of ‘Green Governance: Ecological Survival, Human Rights, and the Law of the Commons’

Witt Susan (US). Executive Director of the Schumacher Center for a New Economics, (heir to the legacy programs of the E. F. Schumacher Society founded in 1980), co-founder of the BerkShares local currency programme, founder of the Community Land Trust in the Southern Berkshires. Her essays appear in ‘Rooted in the Land’, ‘A Forest of Voices: Conversations in Ecology’, ‘The Money Changers: Currency Reform from Aristotle to E-cash’, ‘Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People Mattered’. She speaks regularly on the topic of citizen responsibility for shaping local economies. centerforneweconomics.org

Dr. Zelik Raul (Germany). Author and political scientist. He is, among others, the author of ‘Vermessung der Utopie’ (with Elmar Altvater), ‘Nach dem Kapitalismus. Perspektiven der Emanzipation‘ and co-author of ‘ Andere mögliche Welten‘. Associated professor for Political Science at the National University of Colombia in Medellín. (www.raulzelik.net)
 


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Bios]]