=Description=

Thomas K. Rudel:

"For the past 20 years natural scientists (Botkin 1990) and
social scientists (Thornton 2005) have routinely disparaged
the grand theories of development in the natural and the social sciences. These approaches have been characterized as
‘ahistorical’ and ‘teleological’ in their emphases (Thornton
2005, 232). Developmentalism is probably best exemplified
in human ecology by Eugene Odum’s (1969) “The Strategy of
Ecosystem Development.” Odum’s theoretical scheme had its
origins in the early 20th century work of Frederic Clements,
an ecologist, who conceived of change in ecological communities as an endogenously driven process in which a ‘developmental’ stage gives way to a ‘mature’ stage of vegetation.
Clements (1916) referred to this process as ‘succession.’ His
depiction of the process became ‘succession theory.’

Despite its currency as a grand theoretical construct in
ecology, succession theory did not figure centrally in the efforts of social scientists to build a comprehensive human
ecology during the 20th century (Hawley 1950, 1986). Only
biological ecologists like Odum made any attempt to use succession theory to model the relationship between economic
development and environmental change, and these efforts offered no more than a sketch about how one might use succession theory to understand interrelated changes in plant and
animal communities (Odum 1969).

Critics of this approach assert that, contrary to the central tenet of succession theory, history has no discernible direction (Worster 1994, 424), that its course reflects irreproducible conjunctures of historical conditions and events.

Certainly, the critics’ contentions are correct in some basic
respects. The idea (Clements 1916; Odum 1969) that ecological or human ecological communities represent organisms that guide themselves through ‘stages’ of succession, an
idea that anticipates ‘the gaia hypothesis,’ seems difficult to
substantiate. While the critics’ argument has to be correct at
a high level of detail, it takes on some of the characteristics
of the approach that it means to criticize. Like ‘anti-essentialism’ in women’s studies which becomes ‘essentialist’ in
its assertions about the primacy of subjective ways of knowing (Fuss 1989), this argument verges on becoming essentialist through its denials of the possibility that empirical conjunctures of events could occur through a gradual unfolding
of endogenously driven processes.

Some ecologists have not rejected succession theory so
much as they have reformulated it. While some, like Botkin
(1990), see random, externally determined disturbances as the
predominant pattern of change, other ecologists have argued
that the source of change is an empirical question. For them,
the endogenously driven trajectories of change outlined in succession theory may characterize places and peoples for limited
periods of time which follow or precede reorienting, externally driven disturbances (Pickett et al. 1987; Odum et al. 1995).

This ‘stop and start’ understanding of succession allows for
disturbances to influence or redirect succession without stopping it. During the periods of relative stasis in ecological communities it might be appropriate to think that largely endogenous processes would, as outlined in succession theory, govern
change in ecological communities."
(http://www.humanecologyreview.org/pastissues/her161/rudel.pdf)

[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]