
'''* Policy Report: The Ecological Limits of Work: on carbon emissions, carbon budgets
and working time. By Philipp Frey. Autonomy, April 2019'''

URL = http://autonomy.work/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/The-Ecological-Limits-of-Work-final.pdf

=Description=

"Faced with accelerating technological progress and a
deepening ecological crisis, a growing discussion sees a
reduction in working hours as a multiple dividend policy,
increasing, among other things, individual wellbeing,
productivity and gender equality whilst simultaneously
potentially contributing to a reduction in unemployment
and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. One cannot help
but feel reminded of some earlier sociotechnical visions
of a society in which productivity gains would be shared
broadly to allow for radically shorter working hours and
thus a qualitatively better life."
(http://autonomy.work/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/The-Ecological-Limits-of-Work-final.pdf)

=Excerpt=

"The climate crisis calls for an
unprecedented decrease in the economic activity that causes
GHG emissions, and this confronts us with, to adapt Paul
Lafargue’s phrase, the ‘necessity to be lazy’. If ecological
sustainability requires an overall decrease in material
consumption, a vast expansion in terms of leisure time and
thus an increase in “time prosperity” would be less of a luxury
and more of an urgency."
(http://autonomy.work/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/The-Ecological-Limits-of-Work-final.pdf)


=More information=

* Knight, K.; Rosa, E.A.; Schor, J.B. (2012). ‘Reducing Growth to Achieve
Environmental Sustainability: The Role of Work Hours’; Political Economy
Research Institute Working Paper Series, Number 304, University of
Massachusetts: Amherst, MA, USA.

* Nässén, J.; Larsson, J.; (2015). ‘Would shorter working time reduce
greenhouse gas emissions? An analysis of time use and consumption
in Swedish households’, Environment and Planning C: Government and
Policy, vol. 33, pp. 726–745.

* O’Neill, D.W.; Fanning, A.L.; Lamb, W.F.; Steinberger, J.K. (2018) ‘A good life
for all within planetary boundaries’, Nature Sustainability, 1, pp. 88–95.

* Stronge, W.; Harper, A. (2019). ‘The Shorter Working Week: a radical and
pragmatic proposal’. Hampshire: Autonomy. (online at: http://autonomy.
work/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Shorter-working-week-docV6.pdf) 


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Statistics]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]