
=More information=

Bibliography sourced from podcast discussion of radical environmental strategies, at https://www.againsttheinternet.com/post/39-destroying-the-world-destroyers


==Bibliography==

Brown, G., et al. (2005) Analyzing the Vulnerability of Critical Infrastructure to Attack and Planning Defenses. Tutorials in Operations Research. pubsonline.informs.org


Cohen, A., et al. (2011) Coordinated Terrorist Attacks on Global Energy Infrastructure: Modeling the Risks. Heritage Foundation Special Report. reports.heritage.org 


Davies, P. (2013) Busting Bottlenecks in the Bakken. FedGazette. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. minneapolisfed.org 


Franks, D., et al. (2014) Conflict translates environmental and social risks into business costs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(21).  


Giannopoulos, G., et al. (2012) Risk assessment methodologies for Critical Infrastructure Protection. Part I: State of the Art. European Commission Joint Research Committee Technical Research Notes. 


Giroux, J., et al. (2013) Research Note on the Energy Infrastructure Attack Database (EIAD). Perspectives on Terrorism vol. 7 no. 6. terrorismanalysts.com 


Institute for the Analysis of Global Security. (2008) Attacks on Iraqi oil pipelines, oil installations, and oil personnel. Iraq Pipeline Watch. iags.org 


Iyengar, R. & Monten, J. (2008) Is There an Emboldenment Effect? Evidence from the Insurgency in Iraq. http://people.rwj.harvard.edu/~riyen gar/insurgency.pdf 


Koknar, A. (2009) The Epidemic of Energy Terrorism. In Gal Luft and Anne Korin, eds. Energy Security Challenges for the 21st Century. Praeger Security International. 


Malm, A. (2021) How to Blow Up a Pipeline: Learning to Fight in a World on Fire. Verso Books. 


McBay, A. (2011) Decisive Ecological Warfare. In Lierre Kieth, Aric McBay, and Derrick Jensen, eds. Deep Green Resistance. Seven Stories Press. 


Oil Change International and Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis. 2014. Material Risks: How Public Accountability Is Slowing Down the Tar Sands. priceofoil.com 


Steinhäusler, F., et al. (2008) Security Risks to the Oil and Gas Industry: Terrorist Threats. Strategic Insights vol. 7 no. 1.  


US Army Training and Doctrine Command. (2006) Critical Infrastructure Threats and Terrorism. us.army.mil 


US Energy Information Administration. (2015) 2015 Short-Term Energy Outlook in Brief. eia.gov 


Williams, J. (2013) A History of Oil Supply Side and the Oil Price. Swiss National Bank. SNBF.com

[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]