

A summary of important projects, in which we investigate the relation between the global ecological crisis and the potential of peer production to be an important part of the solution:


=[[P2P Accounting for Planetary Survival]]=

* '''P2P Accounting for Planetary Survival: Towards a P2P Infrastructure for a Socially Just Circular Society. By Michel Bauwens and Alex Pazaitis. Foreword by Kate Raworth. P2P Foundation, June 2019.'''

URL = http://commonstransition.org/p2p-accounting-for-planetary-survival/ 

How shared perma-circular supply chains, post-blockchain distributed ledgers, protocol cooperatives, and three new forms of post-capitalist accounting, could very well save the planet.


==The [[Thermodynamic Efficiencies of Peer Production]]==

= research project of the P2P Foundation, in collaboration and under the leadership of the Blaqswan's Collective and others

Report: PEER TO PEER AND THE COMMONS: A MATTER, ENERGY AND THERMODYNAMIC PERSPECTIVE. By Xavier Rizos and Celine Piques.

URL = http://commonstransition.org/peer-peer-commons-matter-energy-thermodynamic-perspective/  

(bibliography of material: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Dpds5FgVhqyCpItXCHansLz7wK95rGy5DxavZaQDgYg/edit)

The aim is to calculate the potential drastic reduction of resource use, if all the elements of the peer production stack were used concurrently and integratively. The original document was prepared by Céline and Xavier @ BlaqSwans Collective in Dec-March 2016.


[[Category:P2P Foundation]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Ecology]]