=Source=

'''* Paper: [[Free Technology Academy]]: [[Towards Sustainable Production of Free Educational Materials]]. Authors: Wouter Tebbens (Free Knowledge Institute), David Megías (Open University of Catalonia), David Jacovkis (Free Knowledge Institute), Lex Bijlsma (Open University Netherlands)'''

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf


=Discussion=

Wouter Tebbens et al.:


==Context: Free Software Business Models==

"FLOSSmetrics [1], an EC funded research project about the economic models
behind 451 Free Software projects, mapped these projects along three axis:
control (software model), collaboration (development model) and revenue
(business model). The software model axis runs from proprietary to Free
Software. The development model axis runs from closed to open to participation,
and is not directly related to the software model: there is proprietary software
which encourages active participation in the development (like SAP), while some
Free Software projects are developed by one developer without any external
participation. The third axis contains the business models: the way software
projects generate income. 

Various business models are defined, which can be
summarised into these main categories:

•fully Free Software, revenue is generated with training, custom development,
consultancy, certification and other services

•business models based on proprietary add-ons, known as open core (like
SugarCRM) or on publishing software both under a proprietary license and a
free license, known as dual licensing (like MySQL)

•platform providers which generate revenue by aggregating applications into
one coherent platform and certifying its quality (like some GNU/Linux
distributors such as RedHat or Novell)

From the projects analysed and models described by the FLOSSmetrics research,
we can conclude that service provision is the dominant way to generate revenues
from software.

...

One interesting business model analysed in the FLOSSmetrics research is the
R&D Cost sharing model. This is defined as cooperation between interested
parties to achieve economic efficiency in the R&D of new software. It is observed
that this model works best in a community when all participants have equal
rights. Free licenses, open standards and open development practices can assure
such a level playing field."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf)


==Models Applied to Education==

"In education, the analogue to fully free software would be 'fully
free knowledge' - where knowledge is understood as explicit expressions of
culture, technology, research. If we think of services in the educational domain,
the most typical ones would be: tuition and guidance of learners in a course,
assessment of learner's participation and assignments, certification of the
acquired knowledge. The main ways of generating direct revenue with course
books are as commissioned production of materials, and through a service to
distribute printed copies, i.e. Print on Demand. Other forms of revenue can be
generated by organising special events for specific target groups, like master
classes for people in management positions.

In addition to the above, forms of "open core" exist in education. In MIT's
OpenCourseWare, some parts of the courses are published under free licenses,
while enrolment is required to access the full course contents. The model of
"platform providers" can also be observed in some form in the open educational
community. A university or network of universities offering a coherent
educational programme could be seen as a platform provider, where the
organisation invests in bringing a coherent programme with assured quality and
certification and formal recognition of obtained results. This is very different
from informal education, be it self learning or an informally organised course
with no direct recognition and no guarantee to fit into a larger educational
programme."

...

Regarding the R&D Cost sharing model

"Regarding the development of educational materials, we find a wide range of
models, from open to closed development. Benkler analyses the differences
between intra-firm, market based and peer production. He uses economic theory
to show that, in certain cases, peer production can be more economically
efficient than market-based or intra-firm production. Important reasons for that
to occur are 1) the lack of transaction costs (no contracts need to be managed,
there is almost no hierarchy), 2) motives other than monetary may induce people
to participate in the production process, and 3) the results of the collaborative
effort are available for all participants under equal conditions. 


The following options for developing course materials are thus available:

•internal production (intra-firm or intra-university)
•hire external experts (market based)
•peer production (non-monetary, social production between peers)

The shared R&D costs-model can be a combination of these three forms of
production through cooperation between partner organisations and peers."


==The SER Model==

"From the area of course design, a hybrid model is suggested by De Paula et al. 

In the Courses as Seeds model, an initial course material is Seeded at the
beginning of a course, which is Enhanced in the educational process and the
enhanced version is Reseeded before or at the start of the next edition of the
course. Therefore, this model is also known as the SER-model. It is conceived as
a meta layer based in Fischer's Meta-design conceptual framework.

This model could build on any of the earlier mentioned economic production
models and facilitate the maintenance of educational materials via a peer-to-peer
process, eventually complemented by paid staff for editorial and quality
assurance tasks."


==The FTA as case study==

Wouter Tebbens et al.:

"The production of OER must be sustainable both in the production and the
economic points of view. The FTA project addresses, among other issues, both
objectives by incorporating an OER development cycle and a set of services
around these OER which generate revenues.


The FTA tackles the development cycle of educational materials by offering
different production models: 

a) the production of a course material by a single
partner of the project (“inhouse”); 

b) collecting feedback to update and improve
future versions of the materials; and 

c) the distributed production by a set of interested parties. 

In any case, the materials considered as “official” within the
project must be supervised and approved by a set of experts belonging to any of
the HE institutions which constitute the FTA consortium or associate partners to
guarantee their scientific and academic correctness.

From the economic point of view, the FTA generates revenues by offering a set
of services around the produced OER. These services are mainly (though not
exclusively) educational, since courses are delivered on-line using the FTA
campus with expert tutor guidance, and diplomas are issued when students
accomplish the learning objectives of each course. These diplomas are
recognised by the official educational programmes offered by the HE institutions
integrated in the FTA network. In addition, the FTA also offers a Print on
Demand service which allows to obtain physical copies of the books at a reduced
price. Obviously, both the production of materials and the services provided
involve a set of costs. The FTA has worked on several scenarios including fixed
and variable costs and how these can be covered by the generated revenues,
which show that the economic sustainability of the process is possible under
some realistic conditions, which include a target number of students and
courses.

Hence, the FTA tries to solve the sustainability problem of OER production and
sets up an example which may be replicated in fields different from Free
Software and Open Standards by interested parties."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf)


=References=

#FLOSSmetrics project, http://flossmetrics.org
#Rogerio dePaula, Gerhard Fischer, Jonathan Ostwald, Courses as Seeds: Expectations and Realities, 2001


[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Education]]