

==A==

===Arnsperger, Christian===

Full Profile: [[Christian Arnsperger on the Economics of Sustainability]]

Bio: [[Christian Arnsperger]]

Books: 

* [[Full-Spectrum Economics]]. Christian Arnsperger. Routledge, 2010

==B==

===Brown, Ellen H.===

Full Profile: [[Ellen Brown on the Economics of the Credit Commons]]

Bio: [[Ellen Brown]]

Books:

* [[Web of Debt]]: The Shocking Truth About Our Money System and How We Can Break Free (Revised and Updated) By Ellen Hodgson Brown.


===Brown, Marvin T.===

Full Profile: [[Marvin Brown on the Economics of the Commons]]

Bio: [[Marvin Brown]]

Books:

* [[Civilizing the Economy]]. A new economics of provision. Marvin T. Brown. Cambridge University Press, 2010 

Articles:

* Brown, Marvin T. Article: Marvin Brown. Designing the Future Economy. Catalyst. Business Models, Design Management, Economy, ISSUE 10: CIVILIZING THE ECONOMY. Available via http://catalystsdr.com/2012/05/designing-the-future-economy/ . See: [[Designing an Economy of Provision]]



===Butcher, Allen===

Full Profile: [[Allen Butcher on Allocation Mechanisms for Community Economics]]

Bio: [[Allen Butcher]]

Books:

* 1997. [[Time-Based Economics]]: A Community Building Dynamic. Self-published. Contains the typology: [[Anti-Quota Labor System]] ; [[Fair-Share Labor System]] ; [[Labor Quota System]]

Articles:

* “[[Communal Economics]].” Encyclopedia of Community: From the Village to the Virtual World. Christensen, Karen and David Levinson (editors). Sage Publications, 2003. . [ http://www.culturemagic.org/PDF/c3Communal%20Economics.pdf]

==H==

===Hoeschele, Wolfgang===

Full Profile: [[Wolfgang Hoeschele on the Economics of the Commons]]

Bio: [[Wolfgang Hoeschele]]

Books:

* Wolfgang Hoeschele. The [[Economics of Abundance]]: A Political Economy of Freedom, Equity, and Sustainability. Gower Publishing, 2010

Articles:

* The [[Role of the Commons and Common Property in an Economy of Abundance]]. Wolfgang Hoeschele.
Available via http://www.icape.org/b5-Hoeschele.pdf




==Q==

===Quilligan, James===

Full Profile: [[James Quilligan on Achieving a Commons Economy]]

Bio: [[James Quilligan]]

Articles:

* [[Beyond State Capitalism]] The Commons Economy in our Lifetimes. By James Quilligan [http://www.onthecommons.org/beyond-state-capitalism]
* Interest Rates and Climate Change: Realigning our Incentives through the Power of the Commons. By James Bernard Quilligan. Kosmos Journal, Winter 2010.  See: [[James Quilligan on Cap and Rent for Climate Change]]

==R==

===Ronfeldt, David===

Full Profile: [[David Ronfeldt on Commons Policies]]

Bio: [[David Ronfeldt]]


Articles:

* [[David Ronfeldt in Dialogue with the Partner State Concept]]. Discusses: 1) Bauwens anticipates the “partner state” ; 2) The big picture of which the partner state is a part; 3) P2P as the transforming form; 4) P2P networks vis à vis other forms of organization. Available via http://twotheories.blogspot.com/2011/07/bauwens-partner-state-part-1-of-2-vis.html

==S==


===Schor, Juliet===

Full Profile: [[Juliet Schor on the Plenitude-Based Commons Economy]]

Bio: [[Juliet Schor]]


Book:

* Plenitude: The [[New Economics of True Wealth]]. By Juliet B. Schor. Penguin, 2010



==V==


===Verzola, Roberto===

Full Profile: [[Roberto Verzola on the Commons-Oriented Economics of Abundance]]

Bio: [[Roberto Verzola]]


'''Articles:'''

* Verzola, Robert. [[Abundance and the Generative Logic of the Commons]]. Keynote speech for Stream III of the [[Berlin Commons Conference]]: “The Generative Logic of the Commons” of the International Conference on the Commons, Berlin, Germany, Oct. 31 - Nov. 2, 2010.

* Verzola, Roberto, [[Studying Abundance]]. Available via http://rverzola.files.wordpress.com/2008/11/studying-abundance-1.pdf

* Verzola, Roberto, [[Undermining Abundance]] (Counter-Productive Uses of Technology and Law in Nature, Agriculture and the Information Sector)(July 14, 2008). INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ACCESS TO KNOWLEDGE, Gaelle Krikorian and Amy Kapczynski, eds., Zone Books, Forthcoming. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1160044


'''Books:'''

* [[Towards a Political Economy of Information]] /(Constantino Foundation, Quezon City: 2004) (http://rverzola.wordpress.com/2008/01/26/towards-a-political-economy-of-information-full-text/)

==W==

===Wainwright, Hilary===

Full Profile: [[Hilary Wainwright on the Economics of the Commons]]

Bio: [[Hilary Wainwright]]


Articles: 

* The commons, the state, and transformative politics. Hilary Wainwright [http://www.networked-politics.info/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/comons-berlin-renewal-mag.doc]. See: [[Commons, State, and Transformative Politics]]

* [[Co-Creative Labor, Productive Democracy and the Partner State]]: By Hilary Wainwright. a very important text to reset government policies for the p2p age. The text discusses: 1 A value revolution in labor; 2 Re-constituting industrial strategies based on co-creative labor ; 3 The Co-Creative Economy needs a Partner State [http://www.redpepper.org.uk/unleashing-the-creativity-of-labour/]

* [[From Labour as Commodity to Labour as a Common]]. Draft of an article by Hilary Wainwright



[[Category:Commons Economics]]