
* Book: The Economic Person. By Peter Danner.

URL = 

=Review=

Edward J. O’Boyle:

"The Economic Person is a direct challenge to neoclassical economists to re-think economics by
replacing the concept of the individual, which dates from the 17th and 18th centuries when
economic affairs were predominantly local, with the concept of the person which is much more
relevant to the overwhelmingly global economic affairs of the 21st century. Danner’s
understanding of the person originates with the classical Greek philosophers Plato and
Aristotle and the economics of the ancient Jews. His argument is that a proper analysis of
economic affairs begins with the economic agent, specifically the economic person. Several
insights from The Economic Person help capture the tone of Danner’s extended argument.
(1) The economic person disappeared into the rationality and gain-seeking of homo
economicus and the mathematical and quantitative methods of neoclassical economics
(Chapter Two).

(2) Person is an amalgam of contraries -- body and spirit, male and female, individual and
social, “I” and “Thou,” unified and changing, free and constrained -- whose
development depends on sorting out the conflicts between those contraries (Chapter
Four).

(3) Neoclassical economists exclude the person from economic analysis by absorbing all
personal values, however important in economic decision-making, into price. Economic
rationality transforms into moral perversion when “Thou” is completely disregarded.
(Chapter Six).

(4) Gain-seeking in the form of profits, economic rent, and consumer surplus by itself does
not assure the common good (Chapter Seven).

(5) Though the hopeful expectation of acquiring economic gain is necessary to motivate
economic agents to compete in economic affairs and the actual experience of taking
possession of that gain is necessary for them to remain engaged, some limit on gainseeking is required to elicit the cooperation needed to work together and live in
community. Three virtues or good habits -- moderation, justice, and generosity -- help
constrain gain-seeking and thereby make community a possibility (Chapter Eight).

(6) The economy can be described as an assortment of physical things such as factories,
farms, forests, mines, roads, bridges, and the like. However, it is much more
fundamentally a network of human persons acting as buyers and sellers, employers and
employees, borrowers and lenders, producers and resource-holders, and in other
economic roles (Chapter Nine).

(7) The social values of liberty, equality, and fraternity are the necessary foundations for
the three principles of competition, government mediation, and cooperation that
organize the central activities of a market economy: buying and selling, employing and
producing, borrowing and lending, innovating and investing (Chapter Ten).

The Economic Person challenges everyone in economics, whether orthodox or heterodox, to
begin at the beginning, to construct their economics around flesh and blood economic agents
primarily and physical things only secondarily, to examine more carefully how humans
conduct themselves in economic affairs especially in matters where conflicts must be resolved,
and to draw their conclusions with greater appreciation for the profound mysteries which are
at the heart of the human condition and greater acceptance of the uncertainty that necessarily
follows from not knowing human beings more fully."

(https://socialeconomics.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/OBoyle-ASE-history-essay.pdf)

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Ideologies]]