
'''* Book: ECONOMY FOR AND AGAINST DEMOCRACY. Edited by Keith Hart. Berghahn, 2015'''

URL = http://berghahnbooks.com/title.php?rowtag=HartEconomy

Published in the context of a 'human economy' movement

=Description=

"Political constitutions alone do not guarantee democracy; a degree of economic equality is also essential. Yet contemporary economies, dominated as they are by global finance and political rent-seekers, often block the realization of democracy. The comparative essays and case studies of this volume examine the contradictory relationship between the economy and democracy and highlight the struggles and visions needed to make things more equitable. They explore how our collective aspirations for greater democracy might be informed by serious empirical research on the human economy today. If we want a better world, we must act on existing social realities."



=Contents=

* Introduction, Keith Hart [http://berghahnbooks.com/downloads/intros/HartEconomy_intro.pdf]

==PART I: ECONOMY VERSUS DEMOCRACY==

* Chapter 1. Habits of austerity: financialization and new ways of dealing with money
Jürgen Schraten

* Chapter 2. What financial crisis? The global politics of finance: distributional consequences and legitimizing narratives
Horacio Ortiz

* Chapter 3. Party funding for and against democracy in Zimbabwe and South Africa
Booker Magure


==PART II: THE STRUGGLE FOR ECONOMIC DEMOCRACY==

* Chapter 4. Women as mediators in post-war Mozambique: pushing lobolo from price to propriety
Albert Farré

* Chapter 5. Negotiating state and market: the South African HIV/AIDS movement and social change
Theodore Powers

* Chapter 6. Beyond the market: the case of white workers in Pretoria
John Sharp & Stephan Van Wyk

* Chapter 7. Waves of unrest: wildcat strikes and possible democratic change in Swaziland
Vito Laterza


==PART III: VISIONS OF HUMAN ECONOMY AND DEMOCRACY==

* Chapter 8. Solidarity economy in contemporary Greece: ‘movementality’, economic democracy and social reproduction
Theodoros Rakopoulos

* Chapter 9. Money for a human economy: a reflection from Argentina
Hadrien Saiag

* Chapter 10. Human economy: the revolutionary struggle for happiness
Keith Hart

* Chapter 11. Building a human economy movement: the precedent of transnational feminism
Camille Sutton-Brown


=Excerpts=

From the introduction, by Keith Hart:

"The real task is to work out how
states, cities, big money and the rest might be selectively combined with
citizens’ initiatives to promote a more democratic world society. A first
step would be to cease viewing the economy in predominantly national
terms.

This idea is not new. It is just that many activists in the SSE field (‘social
and solidarity economy’ – see Rakopoulos in this volume), not to mention
more radical groups, will not consider working with bureaucracies which
they think of as the enemy. Yet the French Revolution only succeeded because
it was backed by the shippers of Nantes and Bordeaux, the Italian
Revolution by the industrialists of Milan and Turin. Kenya’s world-leading
experiment in mobile money, M-pesa (M for mobile, pesa is Swahili
for money), was launched by a subsidiary of the communications group,
Vodacom. Hewlett-Packard has been developing research stations in outlying
areas for some years now as part of an attempt to make computers
accessible to the world’s ‘poorest four billion’.

The notion of a ‘popular economy’ has been emerging in Latin America
since the 1990s, bringing new coalitions (peasants, urban informal
workers, unions) into an alliance with progressive governments. Brazil
under Lula introduced a community banking system combining microfinance
and complementary currencies with strong local democratic input.

The government of Uruguay has sponsored a ‘3C’ alternative circuit of 
exchange and credit for SMEs in which national utilities and local tax
offices anchor the circulation of unpaid invoices as currency. South Africa
is speeding up SMEs’ access to liquidity through an Invoice Clearing
Bureau that brings together, in a fast and efficient service, banks, corporations
and potentially two hundred thousand small businesses, many
of them black. It does not make sense to go it alone on a small scale,
but equally one has to be selective in picking capitalist firms and state
regimes to work with."
(http://berghahnbooks.com/downloads/intros/HartEconomy_intro.pdf)


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Books]]