'''* Article: Andreas Wittel (2013) Counter-commodification: The economy of
contribution in the digital commons, Culture and Organization, 19:4, 314-331, DOI:
10.1080/14759551.2013.827422'''

URL = http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2013.827422 [https://www.academia.edu/3740895/Counter-commodification_The_Economy_of_Contribution_in_the_Digital_Commons]


=Description=

Andreas Wittel:

"I have recently published an article where I try to explain why the difficulties in building the digital commons are not due to the exploitation of free labour (an argument which has has come to dominate the debate). Instead these difficulties are due to the fact that volunteering is hard when everyone is struggling to get by financially. Those areas of the digital commons that grow nicely (software commons, knowledge commons etc) are often produced by paid labour disguised as free labour."


=Abstract=

"This is an article about digital production and the crisis of capitalism. It is about
production in the digital commons and its implications for the building of
alternatives to a commodified world. As digital production is at the very heart of
cognitive capitalism, the digital commons is not just any other disruption of the
process of commodification. This is the field of a fierce struggle over the future
of the Internet and the future of capitalism itself. It is potentially the moment
which moves back the frontiers of measurement, value and quantification
towards qualities, values and an expansion of the gift economy. For this
potential to unfold, it is vital that those who are giving, sharing, and contributing
for the benefit of humanity are supported by global policies that enable them to
do so. They have to be supported because their gifts are not based on reciprocity
and the obligation to return the gift. This is an argument about the future of
digital labour. The article concludes that this could be achieved through a global
basic income scheme."

[[Category:Contributive Economy]]

[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Articles]]