
* Book: Economy of Experiences. By Albert Boswijk, Ed Peelen & Steven Olthof. The European Centre for the Experience and Transformation Economy, 2013

URL = http://www.experience-economy.com


=Contents=

The content of this book

"In chapters 1 and 2
we present a concise synopsis of the various forms of value creation. Subsequently
we describe and delve deeper into the technological and societal shifts, as viewed
both from a business context and by individuals in their socio-cultural context
(chapters 3 and 4). Following that, we examine new forms of value creation
(chapter 5) and new income models (chapter 6). In chapter 7 we deal with the
design principles of meaningful experiences, while chapter 8 deals more
comprehensively than before with the five phases of intangible value creation. We
have also elected to probe more deeply into the experience economy in the health
sector (chapter 9), the financial services sector (chapter 10) and the creative city
(chapter 11). We concentrate particularly on the transformation that these sectors
are undergoing. In these particular areas there is sufficient urgency and potential
to facilitate the creation of intangible value and meaningful experiences.

The book has a broad approach: it does not adopt any particular economic,
management, philosophical or psychological methodology. A proper
understanding of society and its development requires an integrated approach.
We are concerned with what we perceive to be genuinely meaningful and the
question as to how we can create value in new ways amongst guests, visitors,
citizens, clients and organisations in order to create a playing field in which the
traditional lines between suppliers and clients gradually become blurred.
Throughout the book practical examples are cited, many of them drawn from our
own consulting practice, because – together with our clients – we too have
struggled with the challenges and the problems of finding new strategies and new
value propositions. We prefer to view ourselves as strategic architects and
developers of new forms of value creation rather than as builders of experience
concepts.

From a didactic viewpoint, each chapter concludes with a summary, some
questions on the contents of the chapter and a case study with accompanying
questions."


=Excerpt=



==From an economy of experiences to the economy of meaning==

From the Introduction:

"At the time of writing our first book in 2005, all sorts of other literature was being
published on experiences and we felt a need to clarify matters in terms of the
experience economy. In our view, the experience economy is about more than just
the embellishment of products and services. It is also more than simply setting the
stage in which products and services play their roles, because in fact the décor and
the story acted out by consumers or others represents the greatest value. Rather,
the experience economy is about putting people in the leading role, partly as
consumers or customers, in the particular world in which they live. It is about
asking how we can be meaningful to people, and how we can help them add
meaning to their lives. It is important to note that the role of material values – the
goods and services themselves – is decreasing, while that of intangible values is
gaining in importance. Those kinds of meaningful experiences are what this book
is about. We are not so much interested in the experience economy, but rather in
alternative ways of connecting up parties so that they can jointly facilitate and
create meaningful experiences.

Trying to help people add meaning to their lives is rather like searching for the
Holy Grail. Indeed, that explains the choice of illustration for the cover of this
book. (In effortlessly removing the sword that the wizard Merlin had set in the
stone, Prince Arthur proved he was the rightful heir to the throne of England. The
most important mission of the twelve Knights of the Round Table was the quest
for the Holy Grail.)

The quest for the essential connection with what people need, with what makes
their lives more enjoyable, fuller or, if you will, 'more meaningful' – that is what
this book is about. That is the Holy Grail for which organisations need to search.
That is the art of making essential connections. And that is not as easy as it may
seem.

These insights have evolved substantially in the six years since our first book was
written. Societal changes are taking place so quickly that we have been able to
observe them with, as it were, our boots in the mud, while we ourselves were
immersed in those changes. The 'democratisation of the future', so eloquently
described by Josephine Green, is upon us. Even television shows such as the
X-Factor and The Voice of Holland carry within them elements of the democratisation
of talent. It is the public who can identify and choose those whom they regard as
talented, their social heroes. At this stage, programme-makers still have total
directional control and our social heroes are being 'exploited', but that too is set to
change in the next few years. The world in which we live is gradually evolving into
a transparent society and, we must vehemently hope, a social context and an
economy in which we will be able to trust one another."





[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Books]]