'''= “The notion of ecopoiesis  .. focuses attention on all the conditions for living the best possible life, not only of individuals but of communities at all scales, including broader biotic communities”.''' [https://www.academia.edu/43252621/Toward_an_Ecological_Civilization_-_An_Interview_with_Arran_Gare?]


=Description=
  
[[Arran Gare]]:

'''1.'''
 
“According to Aristotle, politics is about organizing society to enable
people to live the best possible lives. This is the first principle or
Arche of politics. The best possible life is a fulfilling and fulfilled life achieved
through the pursuit of excellence. It is achieved by participating in public
life concerned to uphold the conditions for living the best life and
participating in efforts to advance knowledge. The complexity of the
modern world has led to cynicism about or complete ignorance of this
claimed first principle of politics. The notion of ecopoiesis facilitates its
updating. It focuses attention on all the conditions for living the best
possible life, not only of individuals but of communities at all scales,
including broader biotic communities. Humanity should be conceived of
as communities of communities, participating in these broader biotic
communities, and the whole of humanity should aim to augment the
conditions of its multi-level component communities to realize their
potential to augment the life of all these communities. These conditions
of life are their “homes,” extending this notion to include the “home” of
humanity – the current regime of the global ecosystem, the “homes” of
national communities, local regions, cities and towns and non-human
organisms and biotic communities, as well as the homes of individuals
and families. A good “home” for people is not only a matter of
architecture and town planning; it is one in which they have security,
can realize their potential to augment life, can assert themselves without
fear of retribution, and can govern themselves. Homes are the condition
for genuine communities and for living a fulling life by augmenting the
life of these communities. A successful precursor to such politics was
the policy of ‘folkhemmet’ of the Swedish Social Democratic Party from
1932 to 1976 – conceiving society as the ‘people’s home’ with no
unwanted stepchildren.”

(https://www.academia.edu/43252621/Toward_an_Ecological_Civilization_-_An_Interview_with_Arran_Gare?}


2.

"As  I  have  argued  elsewhere  (Gare,  2010),  ecology  provides  the  basis  for  rethinking ethics and politics as ‘ecopoiesis’, that is, as ‘home making’ at multiple levels. Thinking in terms of communities, where even individuals are regarded as communities  within  broader  communities  while  consisting  of  communities  of  individuated living structures and processes, all communities must be concerned with maintaining themselves against destructive trends in their environments and constituents,  while  also  augmenting  the  conditions  for  the  communities  that  augment   the   conditions   for   their   existence.   These   can   be   overlapping  communities,   communities   within   communities,   or   communities   in   more   complex relations. Ultimately, this involves functioning in a way that augments the life of all broader communities, including humanity as a whole and the global ecosystem,  of  which  each  community  or  complex  of  communities  is  part.  The  ethics  and  politics  of  ecopoiesis  generalizes  the  injunction  of  Rabbi  Bar  Hillel  2000   years   ago   from   individuals   to   all   communities,   including   national   communities: ‘If I am not for myself, Who for me. If I am not for others, What am  I?  If  not  now,  When?’  That  is,  in  opposition  to  chauvinistic  nationalism  it  promotes the liberation and development of each nation as the condition for the development of all nations.  

The notion of ecopoiesis provides support for the Idealist tradition of political philosophy according to which society should be designed to remove all obstacles to the development of people’s potentialities to contribute to the common good (Tyler,  2012;  Higgins  &  Dow,  2013),  and  to  this  end,  sought  to  institutionalize  rights  to  pursue  and  uphold  truth  and  justice  without  fear  of  retribution.  However,  these  ideas  should  now  be  understood  and  defended  on  naturalistic  foundations  and  thereby  extended  (Gare,  2017b:  183-193). The  notion  of  ecological   civilization   supports   institutionalist   ecological   economics   which   examines what kind of institutions are required to control markets to ensure they serve  the  common  good  of  communities  and  to ensure  that  economic  activity  advances  the  real  wealth  of  society  and  individuals,  including  improving  the  health of the ecosystems of which we are part and the psychological well-being of  each  individual   (Vatn,  2005;  Spash,  2015).  At  the  same  time,  institutional  economics upholds a different idea of what it is to be human in opposition to homo economicus, implying the potential through the development of humanity to create superior   forms   of   society   than   those based   on   possessive   individualism.   Institutionalist  ecological  economics  can  incorporate  the  quest  to  be  free  of  macro-parasites, the oligarchs and other rentiers who have perfected the financial institutions  to  put  people  and  countries  into  debt  to  enslave  people  to  extract  rents,   and,   as   Michael   Hudson   (2022)   has   shown,   have   been   subverting   democracy  and  crippling  economies  in  the  West.  Human  ecology  can  then function  as  a  transdiscipline,  integrating  the  most  important  ideas  from  post-reductionist,   post-Cartesian   economics,   politics,   psychology,   sociology   and   geography   to   provide   a   coherent   framework   for   understanding   all   the complexities  of  communities,  societies  and  civilizations  and  the  relationships  between people in the broader context of nature, including power relations in all their  complexity,  in  so  doing,  providing  the  perspective  required  to  formulate  public policy (Adams, 1975; Gare, 2002)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691)
 
 
=Discussion=
 
From an interview by A.I. Kopytin:
 
* “AK: '''What are the ethics and politics of ecopoiesis? Is it possible to create a global civilization that empowers people to augment their ecological communities?'''
 
''Arran Gare'': The ethics and politics of ecopoiesis involve the claim that a good,fulfilling life is achieved by living to augment life. Once this is understood, the opposition between self-interest and morality can be overcome. Our ‘homes’ should be providing the conditions to develop our full potential to augment the life of our human and broader biotic communities, and the struggle for life should be seen as the struggle to augment these homes and thereby our power to augment life. This is what liberty is all about, not freedom from constraints to exploit others and consume endlessly. The goal of politics should be to uphold and advance such liberty. The first condition for achieving liberty is having a clear idea of what we should be aiming at, and then working out how to achieve these ultimate ends. Ecological thinking, granting a central place to ecopoiesis, allows us not only to define our ends but to rethink how to go about achieving these ends through augmenting the conditions for the life and liberty of others, providing them with the niches where they themselves can work towards these ends, rather than reducing others to predictable instruments.
 

* '''AK: Do you believe that conceptions of what humans are is at the core of cultures and that redefining humanity from the ecopoiesis perspective could help to resolve the major cultural, social and political conflicts within civilization?'''
 
''AG:'' This I do believe. That conceptions of humans are the core of cultures became evident through comparative studies of cultures via history and anthropology. The current dominant conception of humans tacitly accepting a form of Cartesian dualism leads people to see nature as simply there to be controlled, or occasionally, to function as pleasant spectacles. An ecopoietic perspective situates us within nature,appreciating ourselves as components of the homes of others, both human and non-human, including huge numbers of micro-organisms which make up a significant part of our biomass and without which our bodies could not function. It forces us to appreciate our dependence on the life of ecosystems and to appreciate that we ourselves are part of the homes of others, and that living virtuously augments the homes of other members of our communities and augments the life of these communities.”
 

==Source==
 
* Kopytin, A.I. (2020). Toward an ecological civilization - an interview with Arran Gare. Ecopoiesis: Eco-Human Theory and Practice, 1 (1). [http://ecopoiesis.ru ]

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Ecology]]