=Contextual Quote=

"The current focus on reducing greenhouse gas emissions is completely inadequate to prevent irreversible planetary tipping points in the available time frame unless we take a holistic approach by immediately investing at scale in restoring the ecosystems which regulate climate and enable biodiversity. Biosphere/climate interactions such as the carbon cycle and the water cycle play a significant part in causing the disruptive impacts of climate change."


- EcoRestoration Alliance [https://www.ecorestorationalliance.org/about]


=Description=

"ERA promotes restoration of healthy biodiverse ecosystems as a holistic response to the urgent crises of climate and biodiversity.

We bring together scientists, earth stewards, storytellers and grassroots leaders to accelerate the restoration of degraded lands and waters, foster biodiversity, and cool the planet."

ERA cross-pollinates Indigenous and grassroots leadership with resource partners and platforms to advance nature-based solutions that are actionable, affordable, effective, and self-sustaining. [https://www.ecorestorationalliance.org/]

...

ERA’s niche is building synergistic collaborations among effective grassroots organizations and other resource partners to catalyze ecosystem restoration and promote biodiversity.  

 

We convene members, partners and the general public in both virtual and in-person gatherings to co-evolve momentum, develop programs, and collaborate with Indigenous, rural and urban communities worldwide to advance ecosystem restoration, human health, youth leadership, and community development."

(https://www.ecorestorationalliance.org/about)


=History=

"The EcoRestoration Alliance was co-founded in 2021 by Jon Schull as a project of Biodiversity for a Livable Climate (BLC). The initial goal was to challenge "carbon tunnel vision" by competing in the Carbon Removal XPRIZE, so we assembled individuals and organizations who had already regenerated over a million acres, and successfully qualified for the 2024 competition. But more importantly, we became a synergistic group of like-minded people, with a shared conviction that ecosystem restoration is an essential climate strategy.

Following a year of generous support from BLC, ERA's fiscal sponsorship moved from BLC to e-NABLE.earth, while maintaining close ties with BLC.

ERA members have demonstrated that restoring ecosystem functions is effective in sequestering carbon, rebalancing the water cycle, and providing food security and resilience to lands and waters. It is cost-effective and provides numerous co-benefits. Now it is time to apply our methods to the other 20 billion acres of degraded land around the world and to all oceans."

(https://www.ecorestorationalliance.org/about)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Ecology]]