

=Description=

Andrea Farias:

"An ecosystem is a biological community of interacting organisms, their physical environment, and the forces that act on them. Every organism, whether it's a plant, animal, microbe, or human, depends on the flows of energy within the system to survive. We live within a single ecosystem: planet earth. However, breaking down the planetary ecosystem into smaller components, such as a pond, forest, ocean, city or bioregion, can help us understand it better."

(https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/Ecosystem+Health)


=Characteristics=

Andrea Farias:

"A healthy ecosystem has the ability to maintain its structure (organization) and function (vigor) over time in the face of external stress (resilience). This involves the interrelationship between organisms (biodiversity), the ability to complete essential processes (productivity), and the capability to adapt under pressure (adaptability). Maintaining ecosystem health is essential for ensuring the continued flow of energy, vital services and resources, therefore supporting the well-being of all life on Earth.

+ Organisation: Bio(cultural)diversity, the interrelationship between creatures. A diverse system generally has more adaptive capacity and is therefore more likely to cope with change.

* Vigor: what is its ability to complete essential processes, the productivity of a system.

* Resilience: to what extent can health be maintained under pressure, capability to adapt."

(https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/Ecosystem+Health)


=More information=

* [[Ecosystem Health]]


[[Category:Complexity]]

[[Category:Ecology]]