=Contextual Quote=

Earthlight:

"The future will be worked out in the tension between those committed to the Technozoic, a future of increased exploitation of the Earth as resource, all for the benefit of humans, and those committed to the Ecozoic, a new mode of human-Earth relations, one where the well-being of the entire Earth community is the primary concern. 
 
This is the jumping-off point, the razor's edge, the great divide, the call to action and commitment. Will we be about the Technozoic, or will we be about the Ecozoic? Our response will reverberate through every future epoch. "

(https://earthlight.org/challenge28.html)


=Description=

Earthlight:

"The narrative of the creative development of the universe from the primordial flaring forth to the emergence of the Ecozoic Era is at once a scientific account and an epic myth of origins. This story relates how things came to be and what significance and role humans have in the ongoing drama of the cosmos. The dual nature of the story, its blending of the scientific and the meaning-giving mythological, is what makes it the "New Story." A primary source for learning about this story is Brian Swimme and Thomas Berry's The Universe Story. 
 
The New Story needs to be told in myriad ways. It needs to be taught. It needs to be read in bedtime stories and told at the hearth and campfire. It needs to be sung, danced, and expressed in liturgy and art. It needs to be beaten on drums. Orchestral works, operas, and oratorios need to resound in celebration of the evolutionary adventure taking place throughout the universe. 
 
But, you might ask, as fascinating as this New Story is, why is it so important? There are three reasons. First, the New Story awakens a sense of the awe and mystery of existence and of our participation in the cosmological order of the universe. Second, the New Story reconnects the self (and so restores the self) with that which is more primordial than family, tribe, clan, or nation-the natural world from which it came and of which it is a part. Third, the New Story provides a unifying mythology for all human cultures and a basis for common action in the realization of the Ecozoic Era. If we take all these together, we might think of the New Story as the "knowing" dimension of an Ecozoic Society."

(https://earthlight.org/challenge28.html)

[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]