'''* Essay: - Pour une politique de civilisation. Edgar Morin.  Revue: Economie et Societe. Pekea.'''

URL = [https://www.scribd.com/document/273263200/Pour-Une-Politique-de-Civilisation-Edgar-Morin scribd version]

This is the last article in the above issue was not found directly in this Pekea version online)


=Summary=

From the reading notes of Michel Bauwens, 2006:

Edgar Morin starts by describing the crisis of our civilization, which is destroying the biosphere and no longer produces well-being. He notes that about 10% of the population is altruistic. 


We need a politics of civilization, based on four planks:
    
- 1) a politics of solidarity ("Maisons de Solidarite")
    
- 2) a quality of life policy
    
- 3) a re-sourcing policy
    
- 4) a re-moralisation policy


For achieving solidarity, he suggests the creation of widespread solidarity centers to cover both 'moral emergencies as well as for the revival under new forms of the mutualist economy.


A quality of life policy has  aspects:
    
- 1) the ecological
    
- 2) the 'affective participation' (conviviality).


Morin calls for a 30 hour working week in the context of a revitalized family life based on full activity.


=More information=


==In French==

* Book (conversation): Edgar Morin, Pour une politique de civilisation, Arléa, coll. « Arléa-poche », avril 2002, 79 p

URL = 

"Pour une politique de civilisation est un essai issu d'un ouvrage éponyme d'entretiens entre Sami Naïr avec Edgar Morin, publié en 19971. Edgar Morin a extrait le texte écrit de sa main qui traite des déficiences et des carences de notre civilisation, qui ne sont pas qu'économiques et monétaires, et invite à mettre en place une politique de civilisation basée sur la régénération de la vie sociale, de la vie politique incluant l'écologie et de la vie individuelle2.

Il s'agit d'« une voie et non d'un programme politique, ni d'un projet de société »3. Il appelle à refuser la régression, à résister à la mort pour œuvrer vers la métamorphose de notre civilisation."

See also, related versions:

* https://archive.mcxapc.org/docs/reperes/edil38.pdf

* POUR UNE POLITIQUE DE CIVILISATION. Edgar Morin. Actes sud | La pensée de midi, 2002/1 - N° 7, pages 40 à 50 [http://palimpsestes.fr/quinquennat/2012/octobre/sem27oct/morin_politique_civilisation.pdf]

(https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pour_une_politique_de_civilisation)


[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Bauwens_Reading_Notes_Project]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]