

'''* Article: JOHN WILLINSKY. The Educational Implications of Networks'''

Version without notes.

This article is also a book review of [[Yochai Benkler]]'s [[Wealth of Networks]].


=Source=

*  Article: [[Symposium on the Wealth of Networks]]. Policy Futures in Education Volume 6 Number 2 2008 

URL = http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/pfie.2008.6.2.152

Also reproduced as chapter 11 of the book: [[Education in the Creative Economy]]
 

=Text=

John Willinsky:

"With The Wealth of Networks, Benkler takes on Adam Smith’s epoch-defining work, first published
in 1776, at the very point in history when the economic system that Smith so carefully describes in
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations appears to have finally realized its global
destiny, with market economies having now taken root around the world. It may seem an odd
moment, then, for Benkler to turn the tables on Smith’s vision; that is, to displace nations with
networks and transform markets through social production (into nonmarkets, as it turns out).
Although Benkler does not anywhere else in his book make such direct use of Smith’s influential
book, The Wealth of Networks establishes the economic viability of what is, at many points, much
the opposite of what Smith was describing then as a new economic regime and what has
subsequently taken on the qualities of natural law.

In the process, Benkler takes hold of capitalism’s two dearest concepts, wealth and freedom, and
gives them both a second economic life. He identifies project after project which is driven not by
national and personal self-interest – which figured so prominently in Smith’s work, as well as the
continuing stream of economic theory following that tradition – but operates instead cooperatively
through global, collaborative networks. These networks represent for Benkler a revolution in
individual autonomy and democratic action, given how they freely distribute the means of
participation to others, and those two concepts have a certain resonance with other events from
1776.

Yet if Benkler’s book plays off the Wealth of Nations, concept by concept, it still resembles
Smith’s book in form. Both books describe new developments by identifying the logic and
economic benefits in each case. Both give name and shape to what are already growing segments
of the economy; both deploy prime instances, like the pin factory and open source software,
leading to improvements in quality and increases in productivity and creative application. By
rendering these developments sensible and visibly part of a larger development, Smith and Benkler
accelerate their take-up by others over the longer term, if Smith’s success is anything to go by.
To begin at the beginning: when Smith introduces on the first page of the Wealth of Nations the
‘division of labour’ as the new best hope of ‘the productive powers of labour’, Benkler’s opens with
‘the networked information environment’ which represents the evolution of ‘liberal markets and
liberal democracies’ that have prevailed since Smith’s day (p. 1). To stay with Benkler’s key term,
the networked information environment brings to the fore what is most valuable and what might
otherwise be overlooked in ‘the Internet Revolution’ (p. 1). At a time when, as he rightly points
out, academics are dismissing such revolutionary talk as ‘positively naïve’, Benkler compresses into
a triple-decker phrase like networked information environment the pervasive and encompassing flow of
information through our lives and work, whether in call centres or college campuses. But if Benkler
had left it at that, we would have little that was not already well known and often stated. Instead,
he follow this initial portmanteau of a phrase with, in quick succession, the new terms of this
revolution, marked by ‘cooperative nonmarket production’ (p. 2), ‘decentralized individual action’
(p. 3), ‘nonproprietary strategies’ (p. 4), ‘large-scale cooperative efforts’ (p. 5), and so on.
Recombinant possibilities soon emerge, with the likes of ‘networked information economy’ (p. 3),
‘radically distributed nonmarket mechanisms’ (p. 3), and ‘nonmarket, nonpropriety production’
(p. 106). Each of Benkler’s phrases has its own way of rewriting one or more of Smith’s basic
economic principles, whether one thinks of Smith’s sense of market, exchange value, self-interest,
nation, or the division of labour.

Benkler’s forceful linguistic turn makes him a strong candidate for what the late philosopher
Richard Rorty identified as the transformative poet. Benkler makes no pretence to being a poet, but
he is certainly a writer capable of generating ‘increasingly useful metaphors’, in Rorty’s term, who
thus changes how the world is viewed and read (1989, p. 9). Benkler does appear to have an
inexhaustible ability, again in Rorty’s seeming simplification of things, ‘to redescribe lots and lots of
things in new ways’, leading to ‘a pattern of linguistic behavior which will tempt the rising
generation to adopt it’ (pp. 7, 9). For Rorty, there is no greater intellectual or poetic power than this
particular knack; the ‘talent for speaking differently, rather than arguing well, is the chief
instrument of cultural change’ (p. 7).

Now in addition to speaking differently, Benkler also argues these cultural changes, and
exceptionally well, to my way of thinking. He makes fine distinctions, sets up sensible categories,
and marshals myriad on-the-ground instances to substantiate them, from Free High School Science
Texts in South Africa (p. 101) to NASA’s use of the public to mark crater maps and undertake other
scientific work (p. 69). Yet this particular talent for naming what these various projects have in
common contributes, in its own way, to ‘an increasingly robust ethic of open sharing’, as Benkler
names what many of us hope will indeed carry the spirit of the age (p. 7).

By naming this economic model, if only in the negative terms, as both nonmarket and
nonproprietary, Benkler makes it clear that the creation and distribution, for example, of free
software code is not simply a circumvention or aberration in what is software’s rightful market.

Rather, open source software represents a highly productive way for people to work together
toward a public good. And while Benkler allows that people work on developing open source
software because it provides people with access to what has become one of our basic
communication systems, he also holds that it is about more than an ethics of openness. It is also
about efficiency and productivity, those two critical wealth factors. Benkler very clearly sets out
how cooperative approaches are contributing to ‘the greatest improvement in the productive
powers of labor’ since the division of labour, to borrow from the opening from Adam Smith’s first
chapter (2006, p. 5). By demonstrating the effectiveness of cooperative ventures, such as open
source software and Wikipedia, Benkler undermines what might otherwise have seemed, at the
close of the twentieth century, to be the ubiquitous triumph of the market.

In the context of Policy Futures for Education, it makes sense to ask what the new terms of this
alternative economy mean for the schools. When Benkler writes of the Internet’s democratic spirit
– in terms of how the ‘network allows all citizens to change their relationship to the public sphere’
as ‘creators and primary subjects’ – he could as easily be addressing what the public schools have
long promised, if not always delivered (p. 272). This overlap is nowhere more clearly at issue than
with the educational challenge posed by Wikipedia.

Benkler regards this multilingual free encyclopedia, not surprisingly, as a leading instance of an
‘open, peer-produced model’, and ‘one of the most successful collaborative enterprises that has
developed in the first five years of the twenty-first century’ (pp. 71, 70). And yet Wikipedia is not
like anything taking place in the schools today. It is the exact opposite. Ask yourself, as I have more
than once in the face of Wikipedia’s heart-felt learning, what in today’s schools can be said to really
prepare students to collaborate anonymously, without credit or deadlines, on a drop-in basis, at the
risk of being overwritten and vigorously attacked by equally anonymous strangers, as they press
together collectively in the name of a ‘neutral point of view’ (as Wikipedia puts it), while being
governed by a loosely organized (and enforced) series of principles having to do with verification
and structure? Wikipedia demonstrates what a life of learning outside of school, for the sake of
learning, can mean. It is a demonstration for the schools that continues to grow daily on a global
scale and in a remarkably organic way. For all of its shortcomings, Wikipedia serves for most people
as the primary educational gateway into this networked information environment. That this open
and vibrant model of learning is so removed from the everyday world of schooling surely has
implications for the policy futures for education.

I am not suggesting, however, that Benkler has fallen short in addressing the educational
implications in The Wealth of Networks. He is above reproach on this count. He has done more than
enough by pausing for a moment and offering a brilliantly sweeping educational vision based on
‘the possibility that teachers and educators can collaborate, both locally and globally, on a platform
model like Wikipedia, to coauthor learning objects, teaching modules, and more ambitiously,
textbooks that could then be widely accessed by local teachers’ (p. 315). It seems only fair to say
that the onus for pursuing this book’s educational implications falls on those who profess education
for a living, at least in so far as they are persuaded by this book.
And that would be me, as I am an obvious enthusiast for Benkler’s approach, and have already
been involved in opening access to knowledge online (through work over the last 10 years on the
Public Knowledge Project). This symposium may not be the appropriate place to pursue all of the
educational implications of this work, although a few initial observations do seem in order,
especially as it seems to me that Benkler’s particular rhetorical casting of the new non-Smithean
economics cannot be directly applied to the public schools. The schools may already be an
information commons of sorts, operating outside of the commercialized world of markets. Yet
schools that are going to have their students actively contributing to the intellectual commons
within their communities will have to teach these students many orders of propriety and property.
In other words, the need is not, then, for a nonproprietary programme in the schools or a
programme that engages in the nonmarket production of knowledge, per se. This is because,
unlike the open revolt against the restrictive marketing of intellectual property represented by open
source software, there has never been a market for the intellectual work coming out of the schools.
In fact, some thought needs to be given to cultivating such a market, to finding ways for students
to direct their learning toward work that serves others.

The educator, entering the school with The Wealth of Networks in hand, has now to assemble a
curriculum that provides opportunities for learning about proprieties and properties, including the
different forms of producing and utilizing intellectual property. It not simply that one must learn
the rules in order to break them. It is to understand that Benkler’s nonproprietary economics is
nonproprietary in very particular ways. It says no to only certain limited aspects of this broad
concept. For instance, with open access research, another of Benkler’s leading instances of markets
transformed, we are seeing a number of scholars and librarians challenging an extremely damaging
proprietary element of scholarly publishing, namely, the exorbitant pricing of scholarly journals
that results in reduced access (which is further compounded by the impossibility of being able to
subscribe to all journals even if they were reasonably priced). Yet the open access movement in
scholarly publishing leaves untouched the proprieties of intellectual ownership that demands that
authors duly credit those whose work they draw on, just as open access is not about the proprieties
of grammar, genre, bibliographic formatting, graphic representation, and on and on.

But then when it comes to Benkler’s particular focus on nonproprietary forms of cooperation and
production, what seems clear is that schoolwork is already all too nonproprietary, in the sense that
students’ work lacks any value, as intellectual property. At a time when schools seem increasingly
like training grounds for large-scale test-score production, there are few opportunities for students
to engage in working on something that has value in its own right. The preparation for, and
writing of, such tests has taken on such importance that it can end up teaching the students that
their learning has nothing to do with creating a property. In this sense, the test-driven school is
entirely a nonmarket and nonproprietary entity, and discouragingly so, given Benkler’s sense that
such entities otherwise are leading to increases in individual creativity and autonomy, as well as
democratic responsiveness.

Yet there has always been a river running through the schools that is given to the cooperative,
collaborative production – as students gather with paints, paper, glue, scissors, and computer – and
it is now time to think about the market for what these students could produce, as they are
gathered at perhaps the sole centre in their community engaged in non-commercialized intellectual
production. The schools need to begin to think of the work that students do, as a result of their
learning, as having value and interest for others, as itself one of the properties of intellectual work.
Students can indeed, as Benkler suggests, help others in their learning, by developing resources for
teachers and students; they need to contribute to Wikipedia, creating intellectual properties that
begin with the local.

This suggests that students will have first to learn about their own capacity to produce
intellectual properties of value to others, as well as learn, in the process, about the qualities (and
proprieties) that such properties entail. Once students are thinking about producing intellectual
properties of potential interest (and thus of value) to others, they could then take their first lesson
in nonproprietary production by selecting one of the various Creative Commons licences for their
work. In helping people select a licence, the Creative Commons provides a clear and readily
comprehensive introduction to such issues as attribution, derivatives, share-alike, non-commercial
use, etc. In thinking about their own work, students would be in a good position to learn about
how properties of this sort – whether for photographs, maps, music, etc. – are marketed within and
outside of traditional corporate economies. If terms such as nonproprietary are indeed metaphors,
in the spirit of Rorty, then a basic concept like property can be further stretched and turned, rather
than simply negated, as if it referred but to one thing, even within the economic realm.
By the same token, Benkler’s use of the term nonmarket for this new economy is directed at
negating but one aspect of market, by which goods are distributed on a commercial basis, with the
goal of maximizing profits and, in the case of public corporations, increasing shareholder value.
The nonmarket of (nonproprietary) open source software exists within the well-defined market of
operating systems, which is dominated by Microsoft, while the growing success of Linux, Apache
and other open source software is measured in their ‘market share’. That is, the nonmarket is itself
a portion of the market that has grown out of the refusal of the current commercial model. It
operates within an existing market of users.

As well, in the world of scholarly publishing, open access could be said to be creating a new
manner of marketing research among authors and readers, one that ensures that the ability to find
and read the relevant research on a topic is no longer unduly influenced by price structures and
profit margins. But that said, scholarly publishing, as infused as it is today with various open access
models, is no less a marketplace of ideas governed by long-standing proprieties. So, before the
schools foster students of the nonmarket and nonproprietary aspects of this new economy, they
would do well to consider using the very idea of market as a way of thinking about how students
could direct some part of their learning toward the interests of those within their community, who
could benefit from the sort of intellectual work that students are capable of producing, whether
one thinks of local history, language services, performing arts.

Such work would still entail the proprieties of both student accountability and audience
expectations, in terms of how this work is marketed within school districts and communities. On
the question of accountability, for example, some educational jurisdictions have been
experimenting for some time with students assembling portfolios for evaluation purposes, which
represent a range of projects to which they have contributed (Tierney et al, 1998). These portfolios
can capture the nature of the students’ contributions, as well as – following the model of open
source software development – provide evidence of the students’ growing reputations for a certain
quality of work (which will have been enhanced and developed in the hands of inspired teachers).
In the process, the students learn the value of responding to the expectations of the market for their
work. By virtue of their work in the community, the students would have a stake in the game,
and be able to see that their work within a public institution, like the schools, is already part of this
knowledge economy.

Progressive forces within the schools have long sought to embrace the commons, and take full
advantage of the John Dewey moment that Benkler champions: ‘There is emerging a broad
practice of learning by doing that makes the entire society more effective readers and writers of own
culture’ (p. 299, emphasis added). Today, and in light of Benkler’s book, what needs to be learnt by
doing is how to direct one’s learning toward sharing with others, even as learning how to establish a
market for one’s writing is exactly what being an effective writer is all about. Inspired by Benkler,
educators have their own part to play in learning to do, by going back to public education’s basic
democratic promise, in examining how the schools can do more to ensure that, in fact, ‘a
networked information economy overcomes some of the structural components of continued
poverty’ (p. 307). To return, finally, to the title of Benkler’s book, the schools should be able to use
this model of social production, which they are so well suited for, to transform the current market
for achievement-test scores into a new account of what students are learning and achieving in
school, and they could do so in ways that would very much support the ‘thickening of preexisting
relationships with friends, families and neighbors’ that Benkler notes as another effect of this new
economy (p. 357). Such could be the wealth of networks when it comes to policy futures for
education."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Books]]