
= concept, and article (series)


=The Concept=

John Corrigan:

"The term Education 3.0 was coined by Cisco Systems Inc, the IT company (and disseminated through a White Paper: Equipping Every Learner for the 21st Century - the Centre for Strategic Education, Cisco Systems, Inc., and McKinsey & Company) and is rooted in the following four goals for all learners:

•	acquire a range of skills needed to succeed in a modern, globalised world
•	receive tailored instruction that enables them to reach their full potential
•	connect to their communities in person and digitally, and interact with people from different cultures
•	continue learning throughout their lives"



=The Article=

'''= proposed scenario for the future of education'''

URL = http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_3/keats/index.html

From Derek W. Keats and J. Philipp Schmidt [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_3/keats/index.html]:

"Education 1.0 is, like the first generation of the Web, a largely one-way process. Students go to universities to get education from professors, who supply them with information in the form of a stand up routine that may include the use of class notes, handouts, textbooks, videos, and in recent times the World Wide Web. Students are largely consumers of information resources that are delivered to them, and although they may engage in activities based around those resources, those activities are for the most part undertaken in isolation or in isolated local groups. Rarely do the results of those activities contribute back to the information resources that students consume in carrying them out.

Education 2.0 happens when the technologies of Web 2.0 are used to enhance traditional approaches to education. Education 2.0 involves the use of blogs, podcasts, social bookmarking and related participation technologies but the circumstances under which the technologies are used are still largely embedded within the framework of Education 1.0. The process of education itself is not transformed significantly although the groundwork for broader transformation is being laid down.

Education 3.0 is characterized by rich, cross-institutional, cross-cultural educational opportunities within which the learners themselves play a key role as creators of knowledge artifacts that are shared, and where social networking and social benefits outside the immediate scope of activity play a strong role. The distinction between artifacts, people and process becomes blurred, as do distinctions of space and time. Institutional arrangements, including policies and strategies, change to meet the challenges of opportunities presented. Education 3.0 as used here is embraces many of the concepts referred to by Downes (2005) in his concept of e-learning 2.0, but complements them with an emphasis on learning and teaching processes with a focus on institutional changes that accompany the breakdown of boundaries (between teachers and students, higher education institutions, and disciplines)."
(http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_3/keats/index.html)

Source: The genesis and emergence of Education 3.0 in higher education and its potential for Africa by Derek W. Keats and J. Philipp Schmidt. First Monday, volume 12, number 3 (March 2007),

==Discussion==

"Three aspects of Education 3.0 are of particular importance. Firstly, there is the role of students in making choices of a different kind than are available today. Secondly, the concept of students as producers of reusable learning content is vital which is available in abundance under licenses that permit the free sharing and creation of derivative works. Thirdly, institutional arrangements permit the accreditation of learning achieved, not just of courses taught.

However, while Education 3.0 holds much promise for higher education in general, it also poses serious challenges to existing universities. One of the key elements of what is happening with Web 2.0 is people-forming communities, making choices, and doing things for themselves without the need for institutional involvement. Only the vehicle is provided by sites such as MySpace, Flickr, Blogspot, etc. Applying these developments to the field of higher education, it is likely that we will see emergence of new types of organizations and institutions, which might begin competing with today’s universities in any combination of higher education services, including research, teaching, and accreditation.

The implications of these developments on the role that universities will play as part of Education 3.0 is not clear. We must ask, what will happen to education when the vehicles are provided, and students begin to make their own choices facilitated by an abundance of open content, and flexible opportunities for accreditation? What will happen to those institutions who are not able to survive on reputation alone, and who have not embraced Education 3.0?

We are still far from Education 3.0, even Education 2.0 is not as widespread it is might seem to the already initiated, especially in the developing world and particularly in Africa. However, we may be close enough to a tipping point to engineer crossing it in a way that is advantageous to education and educational institutions."
(http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1625/1540)


=The Series=

By Group 8 Education ; John Corrigan et al.


Summary by John Corrigan et al.:

"The first two make excellent background reading for the general reader and numbers 3 to 5 provide further detail around how people relate to each other under 3.0.  Article number 6 shows how Education 3.0 has a much broader effect within society itself and supports the growing trend for schools to connect with their communities.


These six articles can be summarized as follows:

“Over the last two hundred years state compulsory schooling has undergone a shift from a time of rote learning and harsh discipline to a time of personalised and life-long learning.  This shift has involved three different phases – Education 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 – each of which has shaped and developed our young people’s brains differently: 1.0 over-developed the habit-forming part of the brain, making children obedient and very resistant to change; 2.0 encouraged higher order learning but kept children risk averse and uncreative; 3.0 allows the full development of our children to be optimistic, collaborative, creative and resilient adults – exactly what we need today – and which will give schools better behaviour and rising academic outcomes.

Education 3.0 has been emerging since the early 1980’s but unlike 1.0 and 2.0 it is a substantial change from the preceding phase and its emergence requires shifts in underlying behaviour as well as changes in policies, technologies and training.  These underlying behaviours are very persistent and explain the long delay in the emergence of 3.0.

Simply, most leaders have been successful in their careers using the skills of Leadership 2.0 and operating within Education 2.0.  A shift to 3.0 requires a significant change in personal behaviours, a change that is difficult to make for successful people whose very success has been based on the behaviours that now need to change.  It is hard for an individual leader to make this change without both assistance and support.  It is this assistance and support that Group 8 Education offers to leaders and others within the broader education sector.

As the shift to 3.0 begins to move properly into gear then many problems that appear intractable under Education 2.0 will become soluble such as: how do we integrate parents properly into the education of their children?  How can we raise the status and relative earnings of teachers?  How can we overcome the achievement gap for children from low socio-economic backgrounds?”

The shift to Education 3.0 is a long journey but an essential one to be able to create a future, viable society that operates within our planet’s physical constraints."
(http://gr8education.com/)



==More Information==

Contact John at jcorrigan@gr8education.com or +61 418 432 316.


=More Information=

* [[Third Generation Leadership]]


[[Category:Education]]