

=Description=

Excerpt from Christine Axe in http://fhochx.de/download/region_en.pdf

(I tried to improve on the english translation I received - MB)


"At the end of the era of “mass production”(Piore/Sabel) today we note the
perspective of a “post-industrial” structural change which condenses
itself in the model of the “virtual production” (Davidow/Mallone). This
model of production and economics, developed on the base of new
technologies, in the past was mainly examined from the perspective of the
industry and is discussed in the contemporary literature as
“mass-Customization” (B.Joseph Pine) or “clients individual
mass-production” (Frank Piller).

But the new technologies are not only a new challenge for the industry but
also for the handicraft. For a joiner, the example in this study, 10
to 15% of all enterprises are connected with the internet and have
CNC-machines. So for the first time since the beginning of the
industrialisation 150 years ago the handicraft is technologically and
economically competitive.

Nevertheless many requirements still need to be met for a renaissance of a
workman's production. Using the particular forces of the new informational
and computer-controlled production - technology an extensive structural
change is necessary who embraces like the shoemakers the whole process
chain – development of a product, clients-communication, production and
distribution.

The neo-handicraft kind of production which is characterised by some
features like production of single pieces, direct clients contact, use of
universal tools, small working units and decentralized structures,
requires and favours both in industries and the handicraft sector a “neohandicraft
style of production” as well as “virtual design”.

For Ruskin and William Morris and also for other representatives of Arts
and Crafts the mechanical production of “art” and of pretentiously
designed products lied beyond the possible. An estimation that related to
the technological standard of the machines at the end of the 19th century
was quite clear. The contrast of the mechanical products and the results
of genuine arts and crafts for every artificial educated observer of that
time had to be a real catastrophe.

 
It was the beginning of the “industrial design” which at least with the
“Bauhaus” creates the bridge towards a new, “functional” aesthetics.

The vision of an electronic handicraft might perhaps stand at the end of a
process which has the target that the handicraft assumes the new arranging
possibilities which result in the flexible tools and transform them in an
economic successful model of production and consumption. To this we need
laboratories and workshops in which the artistic use of the new
technological and designing possibilities are in the centre of
professional formation and experimental production. Locations of freedom
and communication in a quickly changing world who is always seeking its
(individual or collective) suitable shape. The gateway Hamburg might not
be a bad place for this."



[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]