
'''= "we’re heading into an energy-tech cold war defined by electrification vs. hydrocarbons, with China trying to win the load (electrons, motors, grids) while a loose petro-alignment (US–Saudi–Russia) tries to keep price, molecules, and chokepoints on its side".''' [https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/electro-v-petro]


=Contextual Quote=

"The climate will not be decided by which bloc “wins,” but by which habits scale. If the habit is electrons over molecules, China’s sprint drags the world forward. If the habit is “one more gas train, just in case,” the petro-bloc wins on inertia—and the atmosphere keeps the tab."

- Chor Pharn [https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/electro-v-petro]


=Description=

Chor Pharn:

"Think of two partially overlapping blocs:

* Electro-bloc (China-led): rewires demand (EVs, heat pumps, motors), flood-builds supply (solar, wind, batteries), and races to grid-scale flexibility. It wins if it keeps crushing cost curves and exporting the kit.

* Petro-bloc (US–Saudi–Russia with assorted swing states): holds fuels (oil/LNG), price-stabilizes with OPEC+ policy and sanction-workarounds, and uses molecule leverage (and FX flows) to shape geopolitics.

...

Facts first:

China is electrifying at planetary scale.

China reached >1 terawatt of solar PV capacity in 2025; wind+solar capacity now exceeds thermal, and PV output in H1-2025 covered China’s power-demand growth (solar generation up ~45% y/y) (IEA). Clean-energy investment ran >$625B in 2024, and China hit its 2030 wind+solar target six years early (IEA). EVs? China was ~50% of new car sales in 2024, ~two-thirds of global EV sales, with monthly EV sales surpassing ICE since mid-2024 (IEA).


The US set record oil and is turbo-charging LNG.

US crude hit record 13.2–13.6 mb/d in 2024–2025 (world #1) and keeps edging up, led by the Permian (eia.gov). The “next wave” of US LNG is underway: projects that took FID will lift peak export capacity by ~75% to ~30 bcf/d by 2030; Plaquemines Phase 1 and Corpus Christi Stage 3 have already started up in 2024–25 (etftrends.com).


Saudi–Russia coordination persists.

OPEC+ maintains coordinated supply management into 2026; producers are now debating easing cuts from late-2025 as prices wobble in the $60s–$70s (Reuters).


Europe is quietly locking into US LNG.

EU LNG dependence is rising toward ~48% of gas supply, with the US poised to deliver ~70% of EU LNG in 2026–29—a structural shift that raises price/volatility risks versus legacy pipelines (Reuters).


Globally, renewables just passed coal in power generation (H1-2025)—driven above all by China and India—even as policy back-pedals in some places dim the 2030 outlook (The Guardian):

...


Energy becomes a sanctions-resistant network game. OPEC+ discipline + US shale flexibility + Russian re-routing + Gulf capital → a durable hydrocarbon backbone. Simultaneously, China + suppliers dominate clean-tech manufacturing (solar, batteries, rare earths), exporting capex deflation to the world. Expect CBAMs, tech-export controls, rules-of-origin wars.

Europe is the hinge. If EU doubles down on grids, permitting, and demand electrification, it migrates off gas faster; if it leans on LNG as insurance, petro-bloc leverage persists.

India is the prize. Whoever helps India add cheap electrons + clean miles at scale (rooftop PV, e-2/3-wheelers, buses, green industry) will bend the global curve. China has the kit; US/EU have finance/market access; Gulf has cheap molecules and capital."

(https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/electro-v-petro)


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Geopolitics]]