====Background====

Born in Berlin, business economist (since 1988, FHW Berlin), 1993-96: Neustadt/Weinstraße: Projekt A, WESPE (Werk selbstverwalteter Projekte und Einrichtungen), from 1996 on in Berlin again. Working for different organisations in the Social Economy, that create jobs for unemployed people until 2005, than for cooperatives in the field of finance, organisation and real estate.

Publications around selforganisation in economy and society, specially in the alternative and solidary economy.

Involved in workshops and conferences, f.e. 2006 [http://www.solidarische-oekonomie.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=35&Itemid=90 Congress Berlin]: "Wie wollen wir wirtschaften? Solidarische Ökonomie im globalisierten Kapitalismus"

====Areas of Work====

Since many years working as business economist and publicist for social projects and cooperatives, involved in networks around the alternative economy.

====Current Projects====

Monthly magasin for selforganisation in economy and society: [http://www.contraste.org/ CONTRASTE – Monatszeitung für Selbstorganisation] 

Germanwide association for an alternative economy with social and ecological aims: [http://www.netz-bund.de/ NETZ für Selbstverwaltung und Selbstorganisation e.V.]

The same for Berlin-Brandenburg: [http://www.netz-bb.de NETZ für Selbstverwaltung und Kooperation Berlin-Brandenburg e.V.]

Cooperative of small businesses, that manages its own business park (a former brewery) in Berlin - Prenzlauer Berg: [http://www.gidak.de Gewerbehof Saarbrücker Straße eG]

Germanwide Attac-group for solidary economy: [http://www.attac-netzwerk.de/ag-solioeko/ Attac AG Solidarische Ökonomie]

====Publications====

Many articles in [http://www.contraste.org/ CONTRASTE] since 1988.

[http://www.solioeko.de/voss Wegweiser Solidarische Ökonomie ¡Anders Wirtschaften ist möglich!] Neu Ulm, 2010.

Video-discussion: [http://www.oya-online.de/article/read/107.html "Solidarisch Wirtschaften. Neue Wirtschaftsformen in der Praxis starkmachen"] in: Oya – anders denken. anders leben, Nr. 3/2010.

[http://www.schmetterling-verlag.de/page-5_isbn-3-89657-052-8.htm "Gemeinsam wohnen und arbeiten – Kommunen und andere selbstorganisierte Lebensgemeinschaften"] in: H. J. Degen / Jochen Knoblauch (Hrsg.): Anarchismus 2.0, Stuttgart, 2009.

[http://www.vsa-verlag.de/pdf_downloads/VSA_Giegold_Embshoff_Solidarische_Oekonomie.pdf "Solidarische Ökonomien als Alternativen zum Neoliberalismus" und "Solidarische Alternativen in der Gesundheitsversorgung"] in: S. Giegold / D. Embshoff (Hrsg.): Solidarische Ökonomie im globalisierten Kapitalismus, Hamburg, 2008.

[http://helmer.txt9.de/cgi-bin/WebObjects/TXTSVHelmer.woa/54/wo/NKuaM124QzypRTZeYb/7.0.15.1.5.1.7.0.1.ShopArtikelSmall.11.0 "Versorgung selbst organisieren"] in: C. Möller, U. Peters, I. Vellay (Hrsg.): Dissidente Praktiken. Erfahrungen mit herrschafts- und warenkritischer Selbstorganisation, Königstein/Taunus, 2006.

[http://www.leibi.de/jahrbuch/ Jahrbuch Nachhaltiges Wirtschaften / Yearbook Sustainable Economics], co-edited with Waldemar Schindowski, Neu Ulm 2001.

And much more…

====Contact====



====More Information====
=====Internal Links=====
*[[Peer to Peer]]

=====External Links=====
*[http://www.solioeko.de/voss My Home Page]
*Facebook Page
*Twitter
<!--Comment - this section, more info, is optional, but a good place to add additional links or to summarize those included in the text above -->
<!--Comment - Remove the first colon from :Category:Bios below (so it reads Category:Bios insures your page shows up in the directory.-->
[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]