
Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqCz-baNdEY&t=4s

Interview conducted by Daniel Christian Walh.

=Description=

A conversation between Elisabet Sahtouris and Daniel Wahl

"On July 28, 2020 I caught up with Elisabet Sahtouris, who I used to go and visit in Deya, Mallorca, when we both still lived on the same island. Now she lives on Hawaii. We overlap in a number of circles. We are both members of the Findhorn Foundation Fellows circle and the Evolutionary Leaders (in Service to Conscious Evolution). We also share a background in biology and evolutionary theory, as well as bio-inspired design and consciousness studies.

At over 80 now, I invite Elisabet to look back at her path. From a childhood in the Hudson Valley spending lots of time in the forest and on the riverbanks during the latter part of the Great Depression, when she was very inspired by her biology teacher but sent to art school by her parents. Eventually she did a degree and a doctorate in biology and work at the National History Museum in New York, before she started to look beyond the scientific way of seeing and knowing to many other sources and traditions of insight in an attempt to “expanding her worldview”.

Later she went back into evolutionary science and started collaborating with Jim Lovelock and Lynn Margulis attending a series of symposia on Gaia Theory and Earth Systems Science that Teddy Goldsmith funded in the 1990s in Cornwall.

Elisabet explains how she increasingly became aware of the limitations of the theory of thermodynamics and conventional Darwinian science that is still too focussed on competition (alone) as the driver and stated to explore the cooperative and syntropic (neg-entropic) patterns of life’s evolution.

Elisabet thinks of evolution in phases she sees as part of the ‘maturation cycle’ (immature or juvenile stage of a species evolution and the mature phase of a species functional membership in the wider community of life).”


(https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/evolving-into-a-mature-species-b3bd45fd949b )

[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]