
'''= social network that aims not to sell the personal data of its users, but a freemium model'''

URL =


=Discussion=

Gideon Rosenblatt:

"What Ello Founders have said is “look, you are not a product; we don’t want to sell your eyeballs or data to advertisers.” Their model is to treat you, the end user, as the actual customer of this social network. You can use the network for free, and may choose to purchase add-on functionality, such as a special layout for your page, or maybe an advanced analytics feature. This is a “freemium” model that has been proven in many other contexts, including by Automattic, the makers of WordPress.


Ello launched with a powerful manifesto:

- We believe a social network can be a tool for empowerment. Not a tool to deceive, coerce, and manipulate — but a place to connect, create, and celebrate life. You are not a product.

Many observers, myself included, were initially skeptical, especially on hearing that Ello had received venture funding. But the company’s funders are giving every indication that they’re comfortable with Ello’s model and in it for the long haul. 


Most promising of all, Ello’s management and investors have agreed to transform the company into a Public Benefit Corporation, legally bound not to:

* Sell user-specific data to a third party;

* Enter into an agreement to display paid advertising on behalf of a third party; and

* In the event of an acquisition or asset transfer, the Company shall require any acquiring entity to adopt these requirements with respect to the operation of Ello or its assets.”

This is a clear signal that Ello is aligning itself with a strong customer mission, or as they put it in their announcement: “Ello exists for your benefit, not just to make money.” I hope the company will take the additional step of full B Corporation certification, even though right now their primary focus has to be on building a critical mass of users and engagement."
(http://www.the-vital-edge.com/not-the-product/)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]