

= The Embassy in San Francisco, a co-living space

URL = https://sf.embassynetwork.com/about/


=Discussion=

Alberto Cottica:

"It is clear that these guys, like many others (myself included), are trying to reinvent inhabiting.

Two things seemed particularly interesting in The Embassy: the franchise model and the groupware.

The franchise model means this: The Embassy wants to be a network of spaces, just like our very own unMonastery. “One rent, many homes”: you can be nomadic while still staying inside of your tribe – in fact nomadism is a necessity, because your tribe now inhabits a cultural space instead of a physical one, and is smeared all across the globe. This is exactly Neal Stephenson’s idea of phyle. Some edgeryders have started mesoscale social arrangements that they call phyles (for example Indianos and Aesir in Spain). This kind of arrangement seems to be an attractor for a highly connected society: Edgeryders itself has some of the characteristics of a phyle. (see [[Phyles]])

The groupware is simply a web platform called Modernomad that functions as the hub and janitor of the whole arrangement. For now it does mainly reservations, guest management etc., but the idea is to be a sort of close community management tool. Another attractor: most co-living experiences with over 4-5 people have some kind of groupware, even just a mailing list."
(http://www.cottica.net/2014/08/06/reinventing-the-family-co-living-as-a-system-attractor/)


=More Information=

* The [[Embassy Network]]


[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Nomadic Infrastructures]]