

=Description=

"“Embedded knowledge: is knowledge which resides in systemic routines. The notion of 'embeddedness' was
introduced by Granovetter (1985), who proposed a theory of economic action that, he intended, would neither be
heavily dependent on the notion of culture (i.e. be 'oversocialized') nor heavily dependent on theories of the market
(i.e. be 'under-socialized'): his idea was that economic behaviour is intimately related to social and institutional
arrangements. Following Badaracco (1991), the notion of embedded knowledge explores the significance of
relationships and material resources. Embedded knowledge is analyzable in systems terms, in the relationships
between, for example, technologies, roles, formal procedures, and emergent routines. This is how, for example,
Nelson and Winter (1982) analyzed an organization's capabilities. They noted that an individual's skills are
composed of sub-elements which become co-ordinated in a smooth execution of the overall performance, impressive
in its speed and accuracy with conscious deliberation being confined to matters of overall importance; thus, they
maintained, may an organization's skills be analyzed. In addition to the physical and mental factors that comprise
individual skills however, organizational skills are made up of a complex mix of interpersonal, technological and
socio-structural factors. Similar approaches include Levitt and March's (1988) development of the notion of
organizational routines (which, they suggest, make the lessons of history accessible to subsequent organizational
members) while other writers refer to 'organizational competencies' (Prahaled and Hamel 1990). A related
orientation has been proposed by Henderson and Clark (1990) who distinguish between the knowledge of specialist
elements in an organization ('component knowledge') and knowledge about how such elements interact
('architectural knowledge'); architectural knowledge is often submerged within an organization's taken-for-granted
routines and interactions, yet is central to an understanding of its strengths and weaknesses.” Knowledge, knowledge
work and organizations: an overview and interpretation . Organization Studies, Mid-Winter, 1995 by Frank
Blackler)."
(http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/commonsbasedresearch/sites/commonsbasedresearch/images/Genomics_Knowledge_Governance.pdf)



[[Category:Intelligence]]