
Essay: The Emergence of New Corporate Forms: The need for alternative corporate designs integrating financial and social missions. Susan Mac Cormac, with assistance from Jonathan Glass and Julie Cooke

URL = http://www.corporation2020.org/pdfs/SummitPaperSeries.pdf


=Abstract=

"The inadequacy of the rigid line dividing for-profit vs. nonprofit has been recognized by two different
movements gaining momentum. For-profits are pursuing social mission while nonprofits are taking on
profitable subsidiaries. These movements raise questions about the adequacy of existing corporate
forms, which in key ways seem to prevent organizations from successfully blending profit making with
social mission. This analysis examines and critiques various emerging solutions and novel proposals. It
concludes that there is a clear case to be made for the creation of new corporate forms, yet the
complete answer to the puzzle is not yet fully in hand."
(http://www.corporation2020.org/pdfs/SummitPaperSeries.pdf)


=Methodology : Quality Space necessary for Emergence=

Michel de Kemmeter:

Key success factor for emergence is quality space.
Like at the playground or in the sandbox, one of the principal keys of success in the creation process within this sandbox is the ability of the animators and leaders to open a space of emergence and maintain this space open for the entire term of the process. This is the “Holy Grail”: internal and external quality space. If there is one element missing, a lot of the magic and creative spirit will be lost and you will waste your time, money, and above all your credibility impeding the future collaboration of the participants.

To succeed, five key elements:
1. '''Inner space''': No judgment, authenticity, ethics, respect, possibility of making mistakes, humility, confidence, power of intention, alignment, emotional security (personal interiority). If the discussions are around egos, clearly implied with jealousy and judgment, it won’t work - emergence will be blocked.
2. '''Physical space''': a place where you won’t be disturbed, suitable place for creativity, bright, ventilated, with a garden-view if possible.
3. '''Time space''': a regular timeslot, on the long-term, with a beginning and an end. For example half a day per week, over a year. Everyone is asked to arrive on time and stay for the entire duration. The opposite is very negative to the group dynamic.
4. '''Operating rules''': everyone stays focused and respectful, turns off his mobile phone, respects the others and their time. A minimum of tags and etiquette. The rules should be decided upon together.
5. And from time to time, a '''disturbing element''' pulling the participants out of their daily routine, such as an unexpected place, an animal, a symbol, an original activity, a surprise.
There are seven ways to disturb our neurons from time to time, at the service of creativity, just as the impurity becomes a pearl at the heart of the oyster:
Place: out of the city, or another unusual place
Time: very early, very late, during the night
Diversity of the public: blinds, deaf, young, old, disabled, trans-hierarchy
Rules: invented rules imagined to nudge surprise and openness
The unexpected object: a beehive, a narwhal tooth, an inspiring video, …
An animal: a cow, a horse, …
Effort: climb trees, night’s march, martial arts, yoga, …


[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Articles]]