'''Book: The Emergence of The [[Relationship Economy]]. By Scott Allen, Jay T. Deragon, Margaret G. Orem and Carter F. Smith. HappyAbout, 2007'''

URL = http://www.happyabout.info/RelationshipEconomy.php


=Description=

"The Web is steadily becoming a utility of the masses. We have become familiar with using the Web for communicating, surfing, shopping, receiving information in different forms, and a host of other usage attributes--both personal and professional.

The Web economy has largely been fed by advertisers vying for eyeballs and attention. Advertisers have been a fundamental resource of the Web economy. When a change occurs that alters the old models and creates improved models with a promise of higher returns, then changes are likely to create systemic shifts across the entire Web that influence the system from end to end.

Innovation inevitably spawns further innovation throughout the supply chain of interconnected elements that fuel Web usage patterns, and the social Web facilitates systemic changes which are fueled through such innovation. The social Web brings more influential human elements with global reach than any previous technological development in the history of the Web. Combine the influence of the human elements with the economic power of relationship driven commerce and you have a scenario that will create further changes unforeseen, unpredictable, and unimaginable.

These changes are profound and create historical shifts that open opportunities for those who prepare and embrace the factors that enable a successful transition from the old economy to the new."
(http://www.happyabout.info/RelationshipEconomy.php)


=Summary=

From the publisher:

"The convergence of technology that accelerates the power of relationships and facilitates dynamic communications--peer to peer and to entire communities--is revolutionary to say the least.

    
The book defines The Relationship Economy as “The people and things we are connected with in our personal networks, who or that distribute or consume our capital, which in turn influences our individual production outputs.” The book analyzes the factors that are influencing an emerging economy based on the sum of factors driving massive and significant changes to the way everyone will work, play, and live.

    
This emergence will have an especially profound effect on businesses and individuals. While individual factors are self-evident, the collective factors, taken as a whole, are the basis for individual conclusions for strategic opportunities that can be gained from the new economy.

    
The book provides the knowledge, tools, and suggested skills necessary for improved comprehension of the strategic issues required to succeed in The Relationship Economy, and provides the context of actions that enable success. It covers an emerging opportunity for the global community of users/consumers/prosumers/citizens, consumer brands, corporations, non-governmental organizations, and governments to play a critical role in forging this new carbon-neutral economy: The Relationship Economy.

    
This book details an emerging economy, driven by factors that are affecting massive changes to the way people work, play, and live. This emergence will have an especially profound effect on business. While individual factors are self-evident, when taken collectively, they are the basis that individuals use to identify strategic opportunities to be gained from the new economy.

    
This book is a foundational resource for individuals and entities to use as each begins to plan for participation in the accelerated changes brought on by technological advances of the World Wide Web. The goal of the book is to enable each person to gain perspective, knowledge, and insight as to the dynamics of technology, the impact of changes brought on by the social Web, and what factors should be considered for the purposes of planning for success."
(http://www.happyabout.info/RelationshipEconomy.php)

    


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Business]]