'''* Article: The Silent Revolution: A New Perspective on the Emergence of Commons, Guilds, and Other Forms of Corporate Collective Action in Western Europe. By TINE DE MOOR. IRSH 53 (2008), Supplement, pp. 179–212'''

URL = https://www.ris.uu.nl/ws/files/20096187/_PUB_SilentRevolution_IRSH_53_Suppl.pdf


=Introduction=

Tine De Moor:

"During the late Middle ages, to an extent and with an intensity previously
unknown, Europeans formed alliances which were based primarily not on
kinship, but on some other common characteristic such as occupation.
Guilds and fraternities were organizations providing good examples of
that in urban settings, while in rural areas the late Middle Ages were the
period when communal land tenure arrangements, or simply ‘‘commons’’,
were increasingly frequently formed and then institutionalized. It is not
the actual formation of such types of collective action that is so striking,
nor did their institutional characteristics make the region in that period at
all exceptional, for as the essays in this volume demonstrate, craftsmen
and merchants formed guilds elsewhere and in other times.

It was, however, the great intensity of the formation of new units of
such collective action that makes this movement striking enough to refer
to it as a ‘‘silent revolution’’. A revolution, inasmuch as it was a movement
which started from below, and because it might prove to have been as
important to the ultimate course of European history as any other
revolution; and silent, in that it was at first based primarily on tacit
agreements between powerful rulers and demanding subjects, whether
villagers or townsmen, and became explicit, which is to say written down,
only after a time.

Mostly such agreements were formed peacefully. The rather discreet
development of the forms of collective action described here means that
for a long time it remained an unnoticed revolution too. Most attention in
research into collective action has been devoted to short-term demands
for change in the form of riots, protest demonstrations, and the like
as motors of democratization and political change. In this article I will
argue that the silent revolution to a large extent created the institutional
infrastructure for socio-political change, and so for other forms of collective
action which became characteristic in western Europe and came to be
considered as a vital ingredient in preparing for its exceptional economic
head start."

=Excerpt=

==Conditions for collective action: weak families, tolerant states, and legal recognition==

Tine De Moor:

"One hypothesis to explain conditions favourable to the choice of
collective institutions has been suggested by Michael Mitterauer, who
stresses the importance of the disappearance of family bonds as a factor
explaining the so-called European Sonderweg.

He argues that more
‘‘open’’ forms of social organization than systems based on kinship or
tribal relations might have played a part in the development of collective
action, particularly its corporate form, whereas in societies based on strict
family lineage, tribal structures, or clans, there might not have been
any ‘‘room’’ for the development of collective action. Anthony Black
considers the European guilds ‘‘artificial families’’, which is probably one
of the best descriptions of the status of guilds.104 Perhaps the term
‘‘surrogate families’’ would still better emphasize their difference from
other societies.

Besides such an open relatively non-kinship-based society, there must
be the freedom to organize. Guilds and commons emerged in western
Europe in a situation of fragmented sovereignty and a relatively weak
state in which different social classes and groups such as the nobility,
the Church, and independent cities vied with each other for control of
what ‘‘state’’ there was and any established state-like institutions, such
as independent communes.

It was typical for western Europe during
the Middle Ages that power became negotiable, in which sense the
‘‘cooperative revolution’’ has already been noted, though by other historians
and using other terminology. Cooperation then evolved into the
broader form of ‘‘negotiation’’ accompanied by an institutionalization
of estates into parliaments and imperial and territorial diets.

In sum, guilds needed the political institutions to allow them to develop.

One last point is the legal and political recognition of groups. Legal
changes made it possible for corporations to act as single bodies in the
name of their members, so that whatever their purpose they had sufficient
recognition to function properly. In medieval Europe that was possible
because canon law attributed rights of assembly to collectivities, as well as
ownership and internal and external representation.

These organizations received their legal recognition according to the principle of
universitas, which gave a group a legal personality distinct from that of its
individual members.

The concept of universitas was newly introduced to European law in
the late eleventh and twelfth centuries, and although the term, meaning
‘‘corporation’’, was derived from Roman law, the twelfth-century western
European interpretation was substantially different from what the term
had meant to the Romans. It would carry us too far from our path to
expound the discussions among jurists of the period, but the core of
the concept important here is that a debt owed by a corporation was not
owed by the members as individuals; and an expression of the will of a
corporation did not require the assent of each separate member but rather of
a majority.110 The principle of universitas established the existence of fictive
personalities that are treated as real entities in courts of law and in assemblies
before kings and princes.111 Those entities could be economic, such as
guilds, educational bodies such as universities, or religious, and so on.
Besides recognition of the group as an entity, their regulation needed
support from local and state powers. Although the attribution of the right
to be a member can itself be considered a property right, since it gives the
right to appropriate some of the resources, it differs significantly from the
later modern property rights devised from the late eighteenth century
onward, which were state-backed ‘‘rights to exclude’’ and, unlike the
guild’s and common’s regulations, were not devised to solve an economic
problem but to support a newly constructed political order in which
individuals rather than groups formed the pillars of society.

Given these conflicting backgrounds, it should be no surprise to us that
in the century preceding their almost simultaneous dissolution at the end
of the eighteenth century, both guilds and commons were the subject of
fierce debate. The abolition of both types of organization was fuelled by
the same arguments: these remnants of a feudal, medieval past were the
enemies of innovation and economic progress, and the kind of rhetoric
that attacked the organizations during the eighteenth century was to a
large degree applicable to both types.

The struggle for life by guilds and commons at the end of the eighteenth
century shows that corporate collective action needed backing from the
state in order to succeed. As soon as that backing disappeared, members
of guilds and commoners found it hard to survive."

[[Category:Guilds]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Europe]]