
=Discussion=

Alexander Bard:

"To make any sense of neuropsychoanalysis, the question remains how an art form like psychoanalysis and a science like neuroscience could ever merge in any meaningful way. What is neuropsychoanalysis itself, an art project or a brand new science? It can not be both simultaneously. As any phenomenologists is well aware of. Scientific phenomenology and philosophical phenomenology are distinctly different for understandable reasons.

Which is why I propose emergence vector theory to explain the mutual irreducibility between neuroscience and psychoanalysis.

And as for subjectivity, Thomas Metzinger's "Being No One" and Bard & Söderqvist's "The Body Machines" have both torn down any assumption left to find any subject in neuroscience. Subjectivity is dealt with in psychoanalysis. And then as a social phenomenon, as a network effect. As a trick (a project) to create a subject and an object in relation to one another, speaking Hegelese. With project first.

Which is why socioanalysis is prior to psychoanalysis and not the other way round. So we should look for a neurosocioanalysis first too.

Cadell's lecture laid out his ambition, which is admirable. But I did not answer anything that neuropsychoanalysis has achieved that we do not already know.

Emergence vector theory has already solved the hard problem or exposed it as a pseudo-problem. Mind and matter are simply totally different emergence vectors. Within the same neutrally monist universe."
([https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/intellectual-deep-web/CAPgYmjVm7G-2%3Dc6h-vn0sJDwoqbuCFSRjA%3DY4G0bbE-O%3D%3D2QQw%40mail.gmail.com])

[[Category:Network Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]