
'''* Book: Periphery of Empire is Free: Empire's Citizens Soon Will Be Free. J.W. Smith. Institute for Cooperative Capitalism Worldwide,''' 

URL = http://www.iccw2.org/

=Discussion=

J.W. Smith:

"The first three primary monopolies we are told do not exist are exposed in the next two minutes of this 10 minute read, and in the addendum, http://www.iccw2.org/category_s/1904.htm., These are the first three of 14 originals which are no where else. 

1.Technology: Paying inventors well once a concept is proven, and placing those inventions in the public domain, eliminates the monopoly structure we are told does not exist (85% of the stock market) and drops consumer prices 50-to-80 percent as that same percentage of unnecessary offices, labor, and overcharges within the stock market disappears. The first of three primary monopoly structures Identified, quantified, eliminated, and Western culture's unequal/unjust/wealth extracting/aristocratic/highly inefficient property rights laws exposed, in one sentence. For each to purchase their share for a quality life, the remaining jobs must be shared. Under this full and equal rights economic thesis, everybody's employed working hours must be reduced at least 50%, and we believe far more, as those unnecessary offices, labor, and resource uses disappear. 

2. Publicly Owned Banks: Banking is a concept known for centuries. Except for brick and mortar, there are no labor-created values to own. Paying all publicly owned bank profits-and newly created money into the "social fund" to finance education, health care, retirement, etc, virtually all essential services except infrastructure. Under those honest property rights laws, publicly owned banks and conditional titles to nature's wealth, next subject, all essential social services are fully paid for even as taxes disappear. Again, all remaining jobs must be shared. Those socially owned banks will never enter into derivatives, the bets which triggered the last, and are ready to trigger the next, great financial crash. Normal savings and created money will build all needed infrastructure, modest use charges operate them (highway charges to be in gas prices). For a society whose banks were publicly owned for a century, read Ellen Brown's Public Banking in Costa Rica: A Remarkable Little Known Model, http://www.globalresearch.ca/public-banking-in-costa-rica-a-remarkable-little-known-model/5357764).

3. Nature's Wealth: As nature offers everything to everybody for free, all rental values of all nature's wealth should be paid into the same social fund. Bank charges, interest, and rental values of nature's wealth fully covers the costs of all essential social services as just discussed above. The third primary monopoly eliminated by changing monopoly property rights to full and equal property rights law. This honest property rights structure provides a quality life for all, even as employed labor hours and resources consumed per unit of production/consumption drop well over 50% (a keyword search for "quick summary" in the book showcased below proves the savings goes far far beyond 50%. Establish full and equal rights economies worldwide and all nations currencies will function efficiently as "world," "national," and "local" currencies). Thousands of professors who could have told you all this were stripped out of the universities at the start of the Cold War (Ellen Schrecker, No Ivory Tower). Thus the world was denied the knowledge this was actually a "wealth extraction" system, not an efficient wealth production/distribution system. If you are one of those potential authors who can carry this story forward, please contact us at iccw10@outlookl.com."I certainly can endorse your three points. They're the ones I'm making. Thank you Michael Hudson, to me the leading economic theorist in the world.


Professor Michael Hudson outlines the 130 year battle to prevent those full and equal rights laws, as applied to land and resources, being put in place: http://michael-hudson.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/0801GeorgesCritics.pdf). Those rental values of nature's wealth are unearned if privately collected. If socially collected, and including the profits of socially-owned banks, all essential social services are fully funded and both taxes and unjust debts disappear. Fully productive, earned, finance capital is then operating an honest "market" economy. Statistics on the addendum page, http://www.iccw2.org/category_s/1904.htm, measures that currently unearned/wasted finance capital at 98%, only 2% is earned and productive (that analysis copyrighted 2009, the date of that cited blog, and the alerting of Hudson and Black). That unearned money just since WWII far exceeds safe investment possibilities, and ends up as bets in the $1.4 quadrillion derivatives market. That unearned money, and the purposes, the needs, and the wastes of the massive military worldwide disappear if these principles of full and equal rights economics are followed. Together, that is enough money to, over a period of 20 years, fully develop the world, and give every world citizen a quality life. The French are right, tear up the public debt, most of it is illegitimate anyway, http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/09/french-public-debt-audit-illegitimate-working-class-internationalim.. Simply apply those French principles on unjust public debt to unearned money, restructure property rights laws worldwide to those laid out above, and there will be no poverty within 20 years even as massively lower resource consumptions, as well as soil and ecosphere rebuilding, point the way to reversing global warming. A daily study of Tom Feely's Information Clearing House, http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/, and Rob Kall's OPEDNews, http://www.opednews.com/, both arriving by email daily, alerts one that a Great Crash of imperialism similar to the Great Depression of the 1930s, will be the ideal moment to declare the $1.4 quadrillion in derivatives just as unearned as those national debts, recover it all, and use it to develop the entire world as addressed just above. Iceland has proven that twice and, just as nations trading in equalized currencies, her economy is still going strong, http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article37023.htm. This should alert Greece, Portugal, Cyprus and Spain. Berlin and Brussels claimed half the deposits in Cyprus and Greek banks, and are squeezing Portugal and Spain. All four nations can join together and declare their debt to the European Central Bank unjust, unequal, and null and void.

Eighty to 90% of the economic problems discussed by economists, as well as current massive debts, do not exist when honest property rights law is applied as we have just done: "There is one thing stronger than all the armies of the world, an idea whose time has come," Victor Hugo. Alert authors building on this school of thought and, as we are looking for authors--and that could include you--their books will be right in time with fast unfolding history as the current unequal rights economies collapse, the emerging world finish equalizing their currencies, and they rapidly build honest economies. Contact this publishing house, iccw10@outlookl.com, if you can expand upon this school of thought, the periphery of empire already breaking free, how they can rapidly develop, how rapidly poverty will disappear, what the restructured economy would look like, etc. Please alert all your contacts and ask that they alert all their contacts, there may be budding authors among them and we will publish any quality book building on this school of thought. 

Currently wealth belonging to us all is extracted from the economy and then loaned back to us. This explains the "money is debt" theory which is not fully understood even by those making that statement. In contrast, within honest capitalism (which means a total restructuring of property rights law (run a search for "property" in the book showcased below). There are no debts within the production and distribution of all essential social services, thus proving, it is only current property rights law which transposes unearned money for a few into unjust debt for the many. To assure relatively equal buying power, the workweek must be reduced in step with the increased efficiencies of technology. Slavery-in all its modern forms-disappears.
 
Establishing exclusive, aristocratic, wealth extraction property rights across the world was the very purpose of periphery-of-empire-wars, the cause of poverty, the only reason for taxes, and--in its current hyper stage--is sucking the lifeblood out of the economy. With property rights laws restructured into a full and equal rights economy, so long as each are paid fairly for their labor, and so long as the workweek is reduced accordingly, each receives his or her one/seven billionth share of nature's wealth while gainfully employed less than 20 hours a week. With entrepreneurial Mondragon style cooperatives already proving this can be done (only one failure in 47 years), an "efficient market economy" is assured. 

If you think 98% of finance capital is unearned, and 50% of employed labor hours wasted are wild figures, ask yourself this question. "How come my wages, allowing for inflation, have actually decreased for the past 30 years even as production/distribution efficiency doubled, redoubled, and then doubled again?" Every dime of those gains, which should have been shared by all through reduced working hours and lower consumer costs, became the massive "unearned" finance capital, 98% of all finance capital, currently collapsing the world economy.

The above, plus the Addendum, http://www.iccw2.org/category_s/1904.htm, measure the wealth extracted from you, me, and every other citizen of this earth. Eliminating those wasted labors and resources, as this 20 minute read total economic thesis does, can provide a quality life for every one of the over seven billion people on this earth. “Dear Dr. Smith, To me the work you are doing represents the highest expression of patriotism and compassion for humanity found on the planet today. After reading your work, one has to totally reset one’s mind. Let me know how I can be of assistance to your efforts to create a sustainable, socially just world for all"- Respectfully, Peter Lorenz, Editor of Peter's Picks. Please "totally reset your mind" as you read how simple a full and equal rights economy would be. It is so simple a high school student can understand it. 

See our Creative Commons, http://www.iccw2.org/category_s/1895.htm, under which you can paste this copyrighted materiel directly into your manuscript (contact iccw10@outlook.com) and, remembering that 80 to 90% of what we are currently taught is not even relative once you have pushed those managed perceptions aside, write your book in 20% the normal time.

Chapter two of the book below is crucial to understanding how today's property rights laws were established in the Middle Ages. Monopolization and wealth extraction is the very purpose of those unequal property rights. Perception management, Chapter six, addressing the silencing of those thousands of professors, the CIA's "Operation Mockingbird" (Google for that and "The Cultural Cold War") denied you, and the world, from learning about the massive savings and efficiencies possible under honest property rights law as laid out above, in the addendum, and throughout our books."

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]