
=Discussion=

CARLOS A. MALLMANN and GUILLERMO A. LEMARCHAND:

“The cyclical economical analysis for the capitalist period started
with Clement Juglar in 1856. He emphasized periodicity in economic activity whereas
most earlier writers had tended to interpret interruptions of growth as random ﬁnancial
crises. As early as 1884, William Stanley Jevons noticed the possible existence of “long-
cycles” in prices and economic activity,he quotes an early work by Hyde Clarke,
published in 1847, where the long-term economic ﬂuctuations are situated within crises.

Although empirical evidences of long-waves in economic activity has existed since
the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, there is still a big controversy, whether such
waves are essentially consequences of the inner dynamics of economic growth, generated
by random ﬂuctuations or whether they are simply nonexistent. Van Gelderen
was one of the ﬁrst authors to make the hypothesis of long-cycles in economy and
anticipated much of what was later “rediscovered” by N. D. Kondratieff whose
classic work resulted in his name being associated with the phenomenon (usually known
as K-waves).

In the 1940s, Rogers showed evidence for the existence of an economic 54-year rhythm from 1260 to 1940 in the wheat prices in England. Because wheat in its
average value is closely associated with the price of commodities in general, it provides
us with a rather useful index. His data clearly show 13.5 recurrences of a 54-year
wavelength. Recently, Modelski and Thompson have taken a worldwide Kondratieff 
analysis still much further back and seek to identify these about 50-year long-cycles
back to 930 AD. That makes the present long-cycle the 19th, and not just the 5th as
most followers of Kondratieff would afﬁrm. Others like Frank, Goldstein,
Berry, Boswell and Misra, and Dassbach et al. believe that the present
long-cycle is approximately the 12th. Modelski and Thompson ﬁnd a set of four K-waves
in Song China between 930 and 1250 AD. Extensive work performed by Marchetti,
Nakicenovic, Grubler and Nakicenovic, Metz, and others show the existence
of 50–60 year billows in a large set of different social and physical indicators.

'''The empirical results on economical recurrences seem to indicate that it is possible to distinguish at least three different groups of the'''m, characterized by their average billow-length, namely: 

(1) Long-waves or K-waves, with billow-lengths of approximately 48–60 years; 

(2) Long-swings or Kuznetz-cycles, with recurrent processes of 20–24 years; and 

(3) Business cycles, with different interpretations between 7–14 years.

In general, the so-called long-waves are presented as economic cycles because they
were originally discussed by economists. Goldstein made an extensive analysis of 
the different arguments—in favor and against—presented by the traditional schools
(e.g., capital investment, capitalist crisis, innovation, etc.). Marchetti showed that
these waves extend beyond economics and that a more precise denomination would
be Long-Term Pulsations in Social Behavior. Intuitively it is rather obvious that the
appearance of these long-term patterns of social behavior are of an interactive nature.”

(https://www.academia.edu/13103863/Generational_Explanation_of_Long_Term_Billow_Like_Dynamics_of_Societal_Processes)

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Statistics]]