'''* Book: Ellen Meiksins Wood. Empire of Capital. Verso, 2003'''

URL = http://www.versobooks.com/books/94-empire-of-capital

== Description ==

"What does imperialism mean in the absence of colonial conquest and imperial rule?

Capitalism makes possible a new form of domination by purely economic means, argues Ellen Meiksins Wood. So, surely, even the most seasoned White House hawk would prefer to exercise global hegemony in this way, without costly colonial entanglements. Yet, as Wood powerfully demonstrates, the economic empire of capital has also created a new unlimited militarism.

 
By contrasting the new imperialism to historical forms such as the Roman and Spanish empire, and by tracing the development of capitalist imperialism back to the English domination of Ireland and on the British Empire in America and India, Wood shows how today’s capitalist empire, a global economy administered by local states, has come tom spawn a new military doctrine of war without end, in purpose or time."
(http://www.versobooks.com/books/94-empire-of-capital)

== Review ==

(W. I. Robinson / Historical Materialism 15 (2007) 71–93)

William I. Robinson:

"The dynamics of the emerging transnational stage in world capitalism cannot be understood
through the blinkers of nation-state-centric thinking. In her study Empire of Capital, Ellen
Meiksins Wood exhibits the reification and outdated nation-state-centric thinking that plagues
much recent work on world capitalism and US intervention, expressed in the confusing notion
of a ‘new imperialism’. Th e overarching problems in Wood’s study – and, by extension, in much
of the ‘new-imperialism’ literature – is a reified notion of imperialism, a refusal to draw out
the analytical, theoretical, methodological, and epistemological implications of capitalist
globalisation, and an incessant reification of the state. Instead of a ‘new US empire’, the current
epoch is best understood as a new transnational phase in the ongoing evolution of world
capitalism, characterised in particular by the rise of truly transnational capital, globalised circuits
of accumulation, and transnational state apparatuses. ‘US imperialism’ refers to the use by
tansnational élites of the US state apparatus to continue to attempt to expand, defend and
stabilise the global capitalist system. US militarisation and intervention are best understood as a
response to the intractable contradictions of global capitalism."
(http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/robinson/Assets/pdf/woods.pdf)


== Discussion ==

===Globalisation vs. nation-state imperialism===


William I. Robinson:

"Wood puts forward as a key tenet of her thesis the continued existence
and causal centrality of national capitals. Th e global capitalist system, for
Wood, is characterised by discrete national economies, national capitals, and
national circuits of accumulation connected through an international (not
fully integrated) market, that is, by trade and financial flows. Asserting that
‘the national organization of capitalist economies has remained stubbornly
persistent’,7 she repeatedly refers to ‘US’ capital, to other competing national
capitals, and to economic competition among core nation-state rivals. Over
and again, we find this insistence on the existence of ‘US’ capital and its
defence as the driving force in the ‘new imperialism’. We are told that
globalisation represents the continuation of a US effort to expand, not markets
more generally for transnational capital, but ‘its own markets’,8 and that
globalisation is all about ‘changing the specific rules of the world economy . . .
in keeping with the changing needs of US capital’ (my emphasis).9 ‘

The purpose of military power shifted decisively away from the relatively well
defined goals of imperial expansion and interimperialist rivalry to the openended
objective of policing the world in the interest of (US) capital’ (parenthesis
around ‘US’ is in original, but emphasis mine).10 US foreign policy is an effort
on the part of Washington to shore up ‘its own domestic capital’ (my emphasis),11
to ‘compel other economies to serve the interests of the imperial hegemony in
response to the fluctuating needs of its own domestic capital’,12 and so on and
so forth.

We are expected here to assume, as Wood does, without providing one
shred of empirical evidence, that capital remains organised, as it was in earlier
moments of the world capitalist system, along national lines and that the
development of capital has stopped frozen in its nation-state form. Yet this
insistence on a twenty-first-century world of national capitals flies in the
face of all the empirical evidence we have of the transnationalisation of capital.
The actual evidence strongly suggests that the giant conglomerates of the
Fortune 500 ceased to be ‘US’ corporations in the latter part of the twentieth
century and increasingly represented transnational capitalist groups.13 Indeed,
one is hard pressed to understand what Wood is referring to by ‘US’ capital.

That the global capital conglomerates that dominate the world economy
represent distinct national capitalist groups is something that must be
demonstrated, not assumed. Wood’s essay is entirely void of any empirical
evidence to support its proposition that what predominates in the world is not
transnational but ‘US’ and other national capitals. We have entered a world,
according to Wood, of ‘universal capitalism’ (a proposition with which I agree),
yet, at the same time, we are to suppose that this universal capitalism remains
organised as national capitals in competition with one another.

On what basis does Wood reject the notion of the transnationalisation
of capital? First, she says, ‘the most elementary point is that so-called
“transnational” corporations generally have a base, together with dominant
shareholders and boards, in single nation states and depend on them in
many fundamental ways’.14 Yet she presents no evidence for this assertion.
Th e mounting body of evidence actually does suggest the process of the
transnationalisation of share ownership, of boards of directors, and so on, is
well underway.15

Second, says Wood, the globalisation thesis is off the mark because markets
are not necessarily more integrated that in earlier moments of the world
economy. In fact, the data does show, contrary to Wood, that global trade
integration is considerably greater in the twenty-first century than at any
previous time. But this is largely a straw-man argument (the first of several
such straw-men) because the globalisation thesis is not particularly concerned
with the quantitative increase in trans-border trade but rather with what is
qualitatively different in the world economy in the current epoch. Earlier
integration was through ‘arms-length’ trade in goods and services between
nationally based production systems. In that period, national capitalist classes
organised national production and service chains and produced commodities
within their own borders that they then traded for commodities produced in
other countries. It is in contrast to the transnationalisation of the production
of goods and services. Suffice it to note that up to two-thirds of world trade by
the turn of the twenty-first century was not arm’s length trade but intra-firm
trade. Such intra-firm trade, far from the arm’s length transactions in an
international market between discrete nation-state-based economic agents
that characterised pre-globalisation world trade, is itself but a commercial
expression of the rise of a globally integrated production system.

Marxist analyses of globalisation are less concerned with trade flows, as Wood
suggests, than with transnationalised circuits of production, accumulation,
and finance. The transnationalisation of capital in the late twentieth and
early twenty-first centuries is qualitatively different from internationalisation
processes of the early twentieth century, in that it involves not merely the
geographical extension of economic activity across national boundaries (a
phenomenon that may be consistent with Wood’s thesis) but also the functional
integration of such internationally dispersed activities. Th e globalisation of
production has entailed the fragmentation and decentralisation of complex
production chains and the worldwide dispersal and functional integration of
the different segments in these chains. Th e formula for the circuit of capital,
M-C-P-C'-M', representing accumulation, has transnationalised. In the earlier
period, the first part of this circuit, M-C-P-C', took place in national
economies. Commodities were sold on the international market, and profits
returned home, where the cycle was repeated. Under globalisation, P is
increasingly globally decentralised, and so too is the entire first part of the
circuit, M-C-P. Globally produced goods and services are marketed worldwide.
Profits are dispersed worldwide through the global financial system that has
emerged since the 1980s and which is qualitatively different from the
international financial flows of the earlier period. Th is transnationalisation of
production involves not merely the spread of transnational corporate activities,
but the restructuring, fragmentation, and worldwide decentralisation of the
production process. Global capitalism is, therefore, not a collection of ‘national’
economies. It is not, as Wood insists, made up of discrete national economies,
national capitals, and national circuits of accumulation connected through a
(not fully integrated) international market.

Th e restructuring crisis that began in the 1970s signalled the transition to a
new transnational stage of world capitalism, in which truly transnational capital
has emerged through globally integrated production and financial circuits
made possible by information technology and organisational innovations in
capitalist production, and that have modified how value is created, circulated,
and appropriated.16 Transnationally-oriented capitalists in each country shift
their sights from national markets to global markets. Th ese circuits are global
in character, in that accumulation is embedded in global markets, involves
global enterprise organisation and sets of global capital-labour relations, especially
deregulated and casualised labour pools worldwide. Competition dictates
that firms must establish global as opposed to national or regional markets.
Each ‘national’ economy has experienced over the past several decades a rearticulation
through globalisation that has affected capital, labour, and the
state in all their dimensions and is linked to global circuits of accumulation,
not the national economy of the US or any other particular country (or sets of
national economies in competition).

Th e picture Wood paints of discrete national economies and national
capitals in a not-fully integrated market is what I term a world economy, put
in place during the formative centuries of the world capitalist system. In this
world economy, each country developed a national economy and the different
national economies were linked to each other through trade and finance in an
integrated international market. Different national economies and modes of
production were ‘articulated’ within a broader social formation. Nation-states
mediated the boundaries between a world of different national economies and
articulated modes of production. In the new transnational phase of the
capitalist system, we are moving from a world economy to a global economy,
in which the increasing globalisation of the production process itself breaks
down and functionally integrates national circuits into expanding global
circuits of accumulation.

Yet this unprecedented fragmentation and decentralisation of production
processes has involved as its flip side the unprecedented concentration and
centralisation of worldwide economic management, control, and decisionmaking
power in transnational capital and its agents. Th ere is a new transnational
bourgeoisie or transnational capitalist class (TCC), a fraction of capital
grounded in global markets and circuits of accumulation over national markets
and circuits. Th is TCC is comprised of the owners of transnational capital,
that is, the group that owns the leading worldwide means of production as
embodied principally in the transnational corporations and private financial
institutions. Th is class fraction is transnational because it is tied to globalised
circuits of production, marketing, and finances unbound from particular
national territories and identities, and because its interests lie in global over
local or national accumulation. Th e TCC therefore can be located in the global
class structure by its ownership and/or control of transnational capital.

Th is does not mean, as Wood would suggest in her rejection of the globalisation
thesis, that there are no longer local, national, and regional capitals, or that
the TCC is internally unified, free of conflict, and consistently acts as a
coherent political actor. We can study the relationships among these different
capitals and between them and transnational capital. Such relationships may be
contradictory and conflictive. Nonetheless, the TCC has established itself as a
class group without a national identity and in competition with locally or
nationally-based capitals. What distinguishes the TCC from national or local
capitalists is that it is involved in globalised production and manages globalised
circuits of accumulation that give it an objective class existence and identity
spatially and politically in the global system above any local territories and
polities, and a set of class interests distinct from local and national capitalists.


Transnationally-oriented fractions achieved hegemony over local and national
fractions of capital in the 1980s and 1990s in most countries of the world.
Th ey captured a majority of national state apparatuses (or key branches within
those states), and set out to advance their project of capitalist globalisation
and to achieve a transnational hegemony. Transnational capital constitutes
the ‘commanding heights’ of the global economy and has become the
hegemonic fraction of capital on a world scale. Globalisation creates new forms
of transnational class alliances across borders and new forms of class cleavages
globally and within countries, regions, cities, and local communities, in ways
quite distinct from the old national class structures and international class
conflicts and alliances that frame Wood’s analysis.

Wood points out that labour still remains subject to national borders and
distinct national jurisdictions, an observation with which I concur. In my
view, the continued existence of the nation-state becomes functional to global
capitalist accumulation and to the power of transnational capital over popular
classes worldwide. But there is nothing in this observation that justifies the
conclusion that the world is still characterised by national capitals in competition,
rather than the conclusion that a fragmentation of formal political authority
is functional to global capital accumulation. In fact, I believe there have been
major changes in the nature of state power, class relations, and domination in
the epoch of globalisation, as I will allude to below. But, even when we
acknowledge the particular political structure of a nation-state-based world
order in which economic globalisation has unfolded, there is no logical reason
to conclude, on this basis alone, as Wood does, that capital therefore still
remains national capital. Th e one does not flow from the other.

Th e national state, for Wood, is more important than ever before, and hence
‘popular struggles for truly democratic states, for a transformation in the
balance of class forces in the state, with international solidarity among such
democratic national struggles, might present a greater challenge to imperial
power than ever before’.17 While no one in their right mind is suggesting that
popular forces should abandon struggles for local (national) state power, the
fact is that capitalist globalisation in recent years has altered the global balance
of class and social forces away from popular and working classes and towards
transnational capital and its allies and agents.18 Th e globalisation of the circuit
of capital and concomitant processes unfolding under the global economy
redefine the phase of distribution in the accumulation of capital in relation to
nation-states. Specifically, the circulation of capital tends to become de-linked
from production and removed more directly from nation-state-based political
and institutional control relative to earlier epochs.19 Th is ‘liberation’, by help ing
to free emergent transnational capital from the compromises and commit ments
placed on it by working and popular classes in the nation-state phase of
capitalism, dramatically altered in the late twentieth century the balance of
forces among classes and social groups in each nation of the world and at
a global level towards emergent transnational capitalist groups. Th is was
expressed as the enhanced structural power of transnational capital over the
direct power of nation-states and nationally-based popular classes in the
momentary historical juncture of the late twentieth and early twenty-first
centuries, as such popular and revolutionary forces in Cuba, Brazil, Venezuela,
and elsewhere discovered. Th is does not mean that we should abandon
struggles for local state power. Rather, we need more than ever to link these
to transnational popular struggles, political strategies, and transformative
projects, well beyond the ‘international solidarity among democratic national
struggles’ that Wood calls for."
(http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/robinson/Assets/pdf/woods.pdf)

===The [[Transnational State]]?===

(W. I. Robinson / Historical Materialism 15 (2007) 71–93)

William I. Robinson:

"Wood dismisses the proposition that a ‘global state’ – or what I have termed
in my own work a transnational state (TNS) apparatus – may be coming into
existence because, in her view, any such argument is based on the idea that the
territorial state is increasingly obsolete. In Wood’s view, those who refer to
current world processes as globalisation define them as ‘the decline of the
territorial state’.22 Yet this is an outright straw-man. No one, beyond a few
bourgeois commentators,23 suggests that the nation-state is disappearing. I
know of no Marxist or critical analysis of globalisation that maintains that
capital can now, or ever has been able to, exist without a state. Wood’s claim
that global capital needs (local) states is neither original nor particularly
controversial. Indeed, I, among others, have argued for many years that a
fundamental contradiction of global capitalism is that, for historical reasons,
economic globalisation has unfolded within the political framework of a
nation-state system. Th e real issue is not whether global capitalism can dispense
with the state – it cannot. Rather, it is that the state may be in a process of
transformation in consort with the restructuring and transformation of world
capitalism. Th e question is: to what extent and in what ways may new state
forms and institutional configurations be emerging, and how may we theorise
these new configurations?

Wood, here as elsewhere,24 sees the nation-state not as an historical outcome
but as immanent to capitalist development. But why should we assume that
the nation-state is the only possible political form for organising social life in
the capitalist system? Wood’s reasoning in emphasising territoriality seems to
be tautological: capital needs the state and the states that we have happen to
be national states. What is the theoretical justification for assuming that the
state is necessarily territorial? If the state is an institutionalised class relation,
why must it have to be territorially conceived? Concomitantly, why should we
assume that social classes – and specifically with regard to the topic at hand,
the capitalist class – are necessarily organised along national lines? That they
have been is something which must be problematised, that is, explained with
reference to how the course of history actually unfolded and not by reference
to some abstract law or principle of the capitalist system and the modern
world. Th e nation-state system, or inter-state system, I suggest, is an historical
outcome, the particular form in which capitalism came into being based on a
complex relation between production, classes, political power and territoriality.

In order to understand the transformation of the state and the rise of a TNS,
not to mention twenty-first-century imperialism, we need to return to an
historical-materialist theoretical conceptualisation of the state, not as a ‘thing’,
or a fictional macro-agent, but as a specific social relation inserted into larger
social structures that may take different, and historically-determined, institutional
forms, only one of which is the nation-state. Nothing in the current
epoch suggests that the historic configuration of space and its institutionalisation
is immutable rather than itself subject to transformation. Th is is to say that the
political relations of capitalism are entirely historical, such that state forms can
only be understood as historical forms of capitalism.25

There are vital functions that the national state performs for transnational
capital, among them, sets of local economic policies aimed at achieving
macroeconomic equilibrium, the provision of property laws, infrastructure,
and, of course, social control and ideological reproduction – and, here, Wood
and I are in agreement. However, there are other conditions that transnational
capitalists require for the functioning and reproduction of global capitalism.
National states are ill-equipped to organise a supranational unification of
macroeconomic policies, create a unified field for transnational capital to
operate, impose transnational trade regimes, supranational ‘transparency’, and
so forth. Th e construction of a supranational legal and regulatory system for
the global economy in recent years has been the task of sets of transnational
institutions whose policy prescriptions and actions have been synchronised
with those of neoliberal national state that have been captured by local
transnationally-oriented forces. Marxists who theorise a TNS apparatus do
not argue, as Wood would have us believe, that supranational institutions such
as the IMF or the WTO replace or ‘render irrelevant’ the national state. Rather,
25. Although the proposition cannot be explored here, I suggest that the explanation for the
particular geographic expression in the nation-state system that world capitalism acquired is to
be found in the historical uneven development of the system, including its gradual spread
worldwide. Territorialised space came to house distinct market and capital accumulation
conditions, often against one another, a process that tended to be self-reproducing as it deepened
and became codified by the development of national states, constitutions, legal systems, politics
and culture, and the agency of collective actors (e.g., Westphalia, nationalism, etc.). This
particular spatial form of the uneven development of capitalism is being overcome by the
globalisation of capital and markets and the gradual equalisation of accumulation conditions this
involves.


We cannot, as Wood does, simply shrug off the increasingly salient role of
a transnational institutional structure in co-ordinating global capitalism and
imposing capitalist domination beyond national borders. Even if one were to
disagree with my particular thesis of a TNS, this transnational institutionality
needs to be theorised. Clearly, the IMF, by imposing a structural adjustment
programme that opens up a given country to the penetration of transnational
capital, the subordination of local labour, and the extraction of wealth
by transnational capitalists, is operating as a state institution to facilitate
the exploitation of local labour by global capital, and is hence engaging
in imperialism as defined by Wood. How are we to understand these
IMF practices? Standard dogma would reduce them to instruments of ‘US’
imperialism. Yet I know of no single IMF structural adjustment programme
that creates conditions in the intervened country that favours ‘US’ capital in
any special way, rather than opening up the intervened country, its labour and
resources, to capitalists from any corner of the world. Th is outcome is in sharp
distinction to earlier imperialism, in which a particular core country sealed off
the colonised country or sphere of influence as its own exclusive preserve for
exploitation. Th erefore it is more accurate to characterise the IMF (or for that
matter, the World Bank, other regional banks, the WTO, etc.) as an instrument
not of ‘US’ imperialism but of transnational capitalist exploitation."

...

In Summary:

"We argue that the national state is being transformed and increasingly absorbed
functionally into a larger transnational institutional structure that involves
complex new relations between national states and supra- or transnational
institutions, on the one hand, and diverse class and social forces, on the other.
A TNS apparatus is emerging under globalisation from within the system
of nation-states. An emergent TNS apparatus need not have a centralised form
as historically developed in modern nations; it may exist in both transnational
institutions and the transformation of national states. Transnational bodies
such as the IMF and the WTO have worked in tandem with national states to
re-articulate labour relations, financial institutions and circuits of production
into a system of global accumulation. As national states are captured by
transnational capitalist forces, they tend to serve the interests of global over
local accumulation processes. Th e TNS, for instance, has played a key role in
imposing the neoliberal model on the old Third World and therefore in
reinforcing the class relations of global capitalism."<br />
(http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/robinson/Assets/pdf/woods.pdf)

== More Information ==
* Compare [[Empire]]

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]