=Empty Homes JV Solution=

*Private owner invests empty, disused home into joint venture at cost given current use and condition.
*Developer invests cost of refurbishment and redevelopment into the JV.
*Developer works with social firms that train and employ long-term unemployed, ex-convicts, people that have experienced homelessness, re-skilling them with skills in the building and construction trade.
*Home is sold at market.
*Cashflow waterfall:  
:1.[Repay any joint borrowings including cost of finance/ interest]
:2.Payback initial JV investment (cost of house and development costs)
:3.Split net proceeds on agreed basis (could be 50/50 or based on proportion of site cost to development cost)

==Motivations==
*Owner:  Habitable house is easier to sell than a disused house, development costs are borne by someone else.
*Social firm:  Employment opportunity and possibly chance to share in upside upon sale of the house.
*Developer:  Possible upside/ share of profit intended to fund future projects.

==Risks==
*Owner probably prefers selling the site as-is and avoid risk of re-sale and market forces on selling price.
*Selling price might not cover site and development cost.
*Can be mitigated through research into local area and talking to local estate agents about potential re-sale value.
*Target homes are individual disused homes on otherwise good streets (i.e. obvious outliers) in attractive neighbourhoods.
*Using a social firm for the construction work might extend redevelopment period and increase costs of construction (especially if there is loan finance and interest).
*How does developer fund the costs of the first project?

==Outcomes==
*Disused home is put back into use.
*Training and employment opportunities for beneficiaries of social firms.

==Alternatives==
*Can this be done with homes owned by local councils?
*If this were done with a council-owned home, could the home be sold at a pre-agreed price (with a built-in profit) to a registered social landlord and kept as affordable housing, on condition that the profit be used towards future projects?
*Can this be done with home owned by registered social landlords/ housing association?

==Links==
*[[P2P Property Management Network]]
*This is one of several property-related projects being explored by [[Bonnie_Wong|Bonnie Wong]].