
'''Article: ENABLING REPRODUCIBLE RESEARCH: OPEN LICENSING FOR SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION. By Victoria Stodden.'''

URL = http://www.stanford.edu/~vcs/papers/Licensing08292008.pdf


=Abstract=

"There is a gap in the current licensing and copyright structure for the
growing number of scientists releasing their research publicly, particularly
on the internet. Scientific research produces more than the final paper: the
code, data structures, experimental design and parameters, documentation,
figures, are all important for communication of the scholarship and
replication of the results. I propose the [[Open Research License]] for scientific
researchers to use for all components of their scholarship. It is intended to
encourage reproducible scientific investigation, facilitate greater
collaboration, and promote engagement of the larger community in scientific
learning and discovery.

There is an analogy between the development of culture postulated by
the Creative Commons licenses and fundamental scientific methodology:
both envision advances through building on work that has come before. The
Creative Commons licenses are designed to facilitate the creation of culture
through the modification of existing media, whereas scientific understanding
grows through the reproduction and extension of current scientific research.
Providing an Open Research License in the spirit of the Creative Commons
licenses serves to allay fears that prevent a scientist from publicly releasing
all the scholarship by including an attribution component, as well as a
provision that derivative works carry the same license. I argue using the
ORL can only increase our scientific understanding, at very minimal cost."
(http://www.stanford.edu/~vcs/papers/Licensing08292008.pdf)


=Author=

Research Fellow, Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard Law School;
M.L.S. Stanford Law School; Ph.D., M.S. Stanford University (statistics); M.A.
University of British Columbia (economics).


=More Information=

#[[Open Research License]]


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Articles]]