'''The End of the Line for Global Corporations ?'''

URL = http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2005/10/23/RVGC9F7EK31.DTL&type=books

'''Book: End of the Line. The Rise and Coming Fall of the Global Corporation. By Barry C. Lynn DOUBLEDAY'''

"Cataclysmic images of the future are typically the stuff of Hollywood directors, science fiction writers and fear-mongering politicians -- not international business reporters.

Yet iconoclastic Barry Lynn, former executive editor of Global Business magazine, argues that 21st century global corporations have rendered us vulnerable to conflict, social disruption and economic collapse.  Today's global assembly line, he notes, is "a system so hyperspecialized and so lean that a relatively small glitch in production on the far side of the world has the potential to devastate large swaths of the American economy."

To understand how things got to this point, Lynn takes the reader on a historical journey. Early in the 20th century the most successful corporations were "vertically integrated" firms controlling production at multiple stages. For example, in the 1920s Henry Ford's Detroit factories received iron ore at one end and delivered shiny automobiles at the other. But since the 1980s many corporations have "outsourced" work, transferring jobs to subcontractors in low-wage countries such as China and India.

More recently, corporations have employed advanced logistics for coordinating the global movement of components, allowing them to "single-source" parts (that is, receive parts from a single supplier) for cell phones, snowmobiles or sneakers. Single-sourcing, in conjunction with "just-in-time" delivery, can reduce inventories, thereby cutting rent, insurance and security costs. Although shareholders might applaud such changes, there is a potentially high social cost associated with this system, for today's ultra-efficient global "supply chains" have been reduced to dangerously fragile threads. Lynn provides vivid examples of how supply chains stretched to the breaking point can easily snap. A September 1999 earthquake in Taiwan led to factory shutdowns in scores of countries, since semiconductor exports were cut off. In 2002, a 10-day U.S. longshoremen's strike forced the closure of Honda, General Motors, Toyota and Mitsubishi assembly plants. The Sept. 11 attacks grounded airplanes for a week, and slowed traffic through ports and border crossings, harming many industries. With so many recent examples, Lynn needs only to suggest how "cascading economic breakdowns" would occur if political turmoil or war were to erupt in China, India or Korea."

[[Category:Books]]