'''* Book: THE END OF THE MEGAMACHINE. A Brief History of a Failing Civilization. by Fabian Scheidler. Zero Books, 2020. '''

URL = https://www.end-of-the-megamachine.com

German: [http://www.megamaschine.org Promedia, 2015] ; French: [https://librairie-quilombo.org/la-fin-de-la-megamachine]


=Summary=

The End of the Megamachine brings to light the roots of the destructive forces threatening the
future of mankind today. Investigating five thousand years of human history, the book leads
us to the very origins of economic, military and ideological power. The author retraces the
prehistory and formation of the modern world-system, which has subjected man and nature to
radical exploitation. Dismantling Western progress mythologies, Scheidler shows how the
logics of endless capital accumulation have devastated both human societies and ecosystems
from the outset – eventually culminating in a planetary crisis.

With the growing instability and looming collapse of the Megamachine in the 21st century
however, new possibilities for systemic change open up. In the face of climate chaos,
dwindling resources, financial breakdown, and mass poverty, the time has come for a
profound transformation of our civilization.

The End of the Megamachine draws from a great variety of sources, ranging from
anthropology, history and world-system analysis to chaos theory. It challenges patterns of
thinking and creates surprising connections across time, space and intellectual traditions.
The book has been published in German by Promedia (Vienna, Austria) in March 2015,
comprising about 270 pages (ISBN 978-3-85371-384-6). It does not require any specialized
knowledge and addresses a large audience interested in social and ecological change. It takes
up the current debates about the limits to growth, global justice, and the future of democracy
and puts them in a larger historical context. The combination of economic, cultural, and
ecological perspectives in a large historical arc of narration makes The End of the
Megamachine a unique book."


=Contents=

Structure:


'''PART I: PRELUDE (THE 4 TYRANNIES)'''

1. POWER: The formation of military, economic, and ideological power in ancient history

2. METALS: The roots of the metallurgical complex and the concept of dominance over nature

3. MARKETS: The birth of coinage, early market systems and standing armies

4. POWERLESSNESS: Collective traumatization and the evolution of apocalyptic thinking

5. MISSION: The roots of Western universalism


'''PART II: THE MEGAMACHINE'''

6. MONSTERS: The formation of the modern world-system

7. MACHINE: Mechanistic science, the modern state, and the disciplining of man

8. MOLOCH: Coal power, global markets, and total wars

9. MASKS: The governance of the Megamachine and the fight for democracy

10. METAMORPHOSES: Resistance and limits to the system

11. POSSIBILITIES: Exit from the Megamachine


=Synopsis=


==1. POWER.==

Chapter one points out that the power of people over people is a relatively recent
invention. For most of human history, our ancestors were not able to assume command,
neither over nature nor over other people, they were – willy-nilly – obliged to cooperate.

However, a significant change occurred in ancient Mesopotamia 5000 years ago when the
first militarized city-states emerged (the first tyranny). The chapter narrates how a small class
of leaders step by step managed to assume a certain amount of command over a majority.

Privatization of land ownership and increasing indebtedness paved the way to a concentration
of economic power – the second tyranny. With the invention of writing, the first medium was
created granting privileged access to knowledge and information to an elite – the foundation
for ideological power (tyranny number three). With the consolidation of social power
structures, imagination and cosmology radically changed as well: for the first time in human
history, gods disposing of a royal household and absolute power appeared, imitating the
image of earthly rulers. „Subdue the earth“ as the Book of Genesis puts it: The rule of God
over creation became the model for the dominance of man over nature (the fourth tyranny).

The era of hubris – the fatal misapprehension that we are able to dominate nature – began.


==2. METALS.==

The power over metals – and the threats that it poses – is a recurring motive in
Western mythologies. But not only in myths and fantasy metals play a key role: Since
antiquity, economical and military power was founded to a large extent on the control of gold,
silver, copper, iron and today aluminum and uranium. The metallurgical complex is the origin
of the arms industry: From the bronze axe to the aircraft carrier, it delivers the weapons
indispensable to the creation of states and armies. The control of precious metals is a key to
economic power, with coinage being at the root of all finance systems. Not least, metal
mining is the prototype of all extractive industries, including the coal and oil industry – the
most powerful and dirty industry on the planet. This chapter shows how war, ecological
devastation, and monetary economy are inseparably interwoven in this complex, from
antiquity to our own days. But the power of metals is rooted not only in our institutions but
also in our minds: Through millennia, metallurgy has fed into a technocratic delusion of total
feasibility. Its marks can be traced from medieval alchemy to the nuclear industry and to the
fantasies of geo engineering.


==3. MARKETS.==

Today markets are considered a kind of natural force. Whoever dares to oppose
them will be wiped away. Markets, so the Darwinist logic goes, reward the brave and punish
the weak – like nature itself. Markets are seen as the epitome of freedom where the homo
economicus can thrive, unhindered by the chains of morals and the state. But are markets
really as free and natural? Have they evolved, as common economic textbooks claim, from a
„natural propensity of human beings to truck, barter and exchange“? The third chapter
examines the development of economic power from antiquity until today. It exposes the
common tale of the free and peaceful emergence of markets as a myth. Historical evidence
shows that monetarized market economies were in fact closely tied to slavery, natural havoc
and military expansion from their very beginnings. States are not, as often presented, the
antagonists of markets, but their creators. Coinage and markets were not invented by people
as a consequence of free barter trade, but by states to maintain their armies, in order to expand
their empires. The mercenary was the first wage laborer. And one of the first merchandises to
be traded on markets were human beings. The slave and the mercenary: human beings as
recipients of orders and mere objects that can be disposed of mark the dawn of market
economies.


==4. POWERLESSNESS.==

History is usually written from the perspective of the victor, from the
point of view of the powerful. In historical accounts, the fates of those who are crushed by the
wheels of the war and business machineries usually remain invisible. This chapter takes a
different point of view and elucidates the effects of the four tyrannies on communal life and
collective imagination. With reference to sources from the Hebrew bible and the gospels, The
End of the Megamachine relates how ancient societies were deeply traumatized. The extreme
concentration of power based on monetarized economies and metallurgy finds its counterpart
in the experience of powerlessness at the edges of the Empire where people were exposed to
radical exploitation and violence. One type of response to these traumatic experiences was the
emergence of apocalyptic thinking. The chapter tells the story of early apocalyptic prophets
trying to compensate traumatic experiences by visions of divine revenge and the birth of a
New World. But instead of abandoning the principle of power and dominance, they reproduce
its logic. Especially the dream of a second creation, a „Heavenly Jerusalem“, will become
formative for Western civilization. This motive resonates in the technocratic visions of
artificial life as well as in the expectation of salvation in religious sects; in the communist 
idea of a „new man“ as well as in the capitalist vision of the „end of history“. Not
coincidentally, the rectangular layouts of modern cities from LA to Shenzhen with their glass
facades look like a materialization of the Heavenly City. But the downside of the City of Gold
and Glass already appears in John’s Revelation: The „lake of burning sulfur“, designed for
those who are not admitted to the Brave New World. The division of mankind into a selected
few and a mass of castaways, as it is generated by the four tyrannies, is thus perpetuated and
justified by apocalyptic thinking.


==5. MISSION.==

One of the key features of what we call “Western civilization” is its missionary
zeal, its universalism, its claim for superiority, founded in the idea that the West (or
Christianity) is playing a special role in a global salvific history. This narrative has outlasted
all major historical shifts of the past 2000 years and remained a central pillar of ideological
power until today. Western universalism has changed its garments several times, ranging
from Christian mission to Enlightenment values and free market ideologies; its core, however,
has remained the same: As the West is deemed to be the source of a superior religion or
rationality, a superior social system, a superior technology and economy, it is bound to
expand over the earth, while “heathen”, “uncivilized”, or “underdeveloped” cultures are to
disappear. This chapter traces the history of universalist ideology, which has been pivotal in
justifying colonial and neo-colonial expansion, from its roots in the writings of Apostle Paul
to the first Crusades and early colonial expansion.


==6. MONSTERS.==

Chapter six explores the formation of the modern world-system – the
Megamachine – at the dawn of the Modern Era. In schoolbooks, this era is presented as an
age of light: finally mankind awakes from the superstition and serfdom of the middle ages; at
last, a self-conscious individual enters the stage of history. However, reality looked quite
different: the beginning of the Modern Era was above all an „age of fear“, marked by
eschatological expectations, witch hunts and a war against the poor. What does this contrast
between the two versions of history stem from? And what are the root causes of the collective
paranoia afflicting Europe for centuries? The chapter reveals how the rise of early capitalism
and the proliferation of firearms – the second revolution of the metallurgical complex –trigger
off a new spiral of economic and military violence, forming the foundations of the modern
world-system as it has spread over the earth since then. War, plague, hunger and expulsion 
lead to mass uprooting and traumatization in Europe, while the gold and silver rush in
America is fueling the most severe genocide hitherto. The reader recognizes the „war of all
against all“ – which Thomas Hobbes (mis)took for the natural state of man – as a mirror
image of the brutal realities of Europe and its colonies. The blooming apocalyptic visions and
radical utopian dreams in this era turn out to be responses to an unbearable present. Modern
progress ideologies, rooted in this experience, prove to be an attempt to escape the terror in an
endless flight forward.


==7. MACHINE.==

Amidst the violence of the Early Modern Age, modern science was born. Some
of its most prominent pioneers held the idea that nature is nothing but a machine that can be
arbitrarily disassembled, manipulated and subjected to human ends. How has this idea –
which became extremely influential in modern societies – evolved? Where did the godfathers
of mechanist science like René Descartes and Francis Bacon draw their ideas from? The End
of the Megamachine demonstrates that the concept of life as a machine is closely tied to the
formation of modern state apparatuses in the very same era. In the newly formed standing
armies, the bodies of the subjects were drilled and disciplined until they functioned as a huge
machine. State bureaucracies, corporations and schools were organized according to similar
principles. Human relations to nature followed the same pattern: Was nature not made to
serve the aims of its masters? The machine eventually became the model for a society based
on commanding and obedience – and on an unlimited exploitation of nature. On the eve of the
French Revolution, militarism, economic exploitation and utilitarism merge into the vision of
a mechanical society.


==8. MOLOCH.==

The industrial revolution – the third revolution of the metallurgical complex –
finally created the means to make the vision of a mechanical society real. With the large-scale
use of fossil coal as an energy source, a new geologic era began: the Anthropocene. Within
only 200 years, man has deeply reshaped the Earth’s crust – and triggered off one of the
biggest mass extinctions of species in the history of the planet. What has led to this dramatic
development? Chapter seven explores how the logics of an endless accumulation of capital
and a fossil energy system form an explosive amalgam from which our world today emerges.
The consequences were brutal, not only for nature but also for societies: The mechanization
of labor and the logics of competition and profit tore apart social networks and turned the 
worker into an object of global production logistics. As the result of this radical uprooting,
two counter-movements emerged: on the one hand the labor movement, initially fighting
against „wage slavery“ and mechanical work but later narrowing their focus on the control of
the means of production; on the other hand the nationalist movements. State elites picked up
and promoted the second type of movements in order to canalize rage and resistance of the
uprooted people into the artificial identity of the nation state and eventually into the big wars.
The metallurgical complex including the rising oil and chemical industries deliver the means
for the first industrially conducted wars of extermination, sacrificing large parts of European
and extra-European populations to the Moloch of the modern world-system.


==9. MASKS.==

Democracy is often considered a European invention, market economy and
democracy are portrayed as twins. However, as chapter nine points out, the modern worldsystem
and the logics of endless capital accumulation are structurally contradicting
democratic self-organization. Moreover, the expansion of the Megamachine has destroyed
local self-organization in Europe as well as in large parts of Africa, Asia and America. While
popular movements have been striving for self-determination for centuries, “liberal
democracy” was – starting with the US Constitution in 1787 – de facto designed as an
oligarchical system, keeping the majority of the population – especially poor people, women,
and people of color – out of the political process. As these limitations were severely
challenged by revolutionary movements at the end of the 19th century and after World War I,
the choices for system control became more radical, leading to modern concepts of a “guided
democracy” (Walter Lippman) on the one hand and totalitarianism on the other hand. Facing
economical and political turmoil which threatened the viability of the world-system, industrial
and political leaders in continental Europe and Japan opted for fascism in order to keep the
Megamachine running.


==10. METAMORPHOSES.==

How have economic, military, and ideological power transformed
themselves since World War II? Chapter ten deals with five major dynamics of this period:
the economic boom of the “trente glorieuses” from 1945 to 1973 with the rise of consumerism
and technocratic hubris; the anticolonial movements in the Global South with the violent
reactions of the West and the traps of development policies; the “world revolution of 1968”
shaking the political and ideological fundaments of the Megamachine; the “neoliberal” (in 
fact conservative) rollback since 1973, amounting to a global “corporate coup d’état in slow
motion” (Chris Hedges) destabilizing societies around the world; and finally the economic,
social, and ecological limits that the world-system is facing in the first half of the 21st century.
This chapter argues that the combination of social, financial, and ecological crises on a
planetary scale is about to lead into a hyper-complex, “chaotic” transformation that makes
global governance impossible, eventually dismantling the global Megamachine. However, the
outcomes of this process are inherently unpredictable. At the same time, the military
machines continue to build up in order to defend the way of life and the property rights of the
privileged.


==11. POSSIBILITIES.==

What does it mean to break with the logics of the four tyrannies und to
learn from the errors of failed utopian dreams in the 20th century? Chapter eleven points out
that this learning process is already under way. In contrast to many of the former advocates of
state socialism who countered the tyranny of markets with an extension of the other three
tyrannies – militarism, ideological conformity, and technocracy –, ecological and social
movements today aim at all four tyrannies. Protests against the nuclear and fossil fuel
industries, large dams, genetic engineering, and other technocratic projects do not only
challenge the power of states and market players but also the ideologies of growth and
mastery of nature. Ranging from the Zapatistas, indigenous and landless movements in Latin
America to Occupy Wall Street and the Arab Spring, people all over the world are searching –
sometimes successfully, sometimes helplessly – for new ways of democratic self-organization
beyond the ossified and corrupted forms of representation. They do not only aim at political
structures but at economic foundations as well: by reclaiming public goods and creating
enterprises and banks dedicated to the common good instead of private profit; or by
developing technologies focusing on cooperation with nature instead of dominance. However,
all these approaches are facing a huge power complex constituted by fossil fuel corporations,
banks, media corporations, and militarized states who seem determined to continue their path
even at the cost of a devastated planet. The End of the Megamachine points out that the fight
for a livable future cannot be won without confronting these power structures and the four
tyrannies mirrored in our own minds."


=About the author=

"[[Fabian Scheidler]], born in 1968, studied history and philosophy in Berlin and theatre directing
in Frankfurt/M. He works and lives in Berlin as a writer for print media, television, theatre
and opera. In 2009 he co-founded the independent newscast Kontext TV, producing a
monthly broadcast on global justice issues; guests include Noam Chomsky, Vandana Shiva,
Immanuel Wallerstein, Jeremy Scahill, Amy Goodman, Saskia Sassen, Maude Barlow, Silvia
Federici and many others. Numerous lectures at conferences by Greenpeace, Attac, Deutsche
Welle, Brot für die Welt, and Heinrich Böll Stiftung; publications, especially on issues related
to the limits to growth, in books and journals, including the Blätter für deutsche und
internationale Politik (edited by Saskia Sassen, Jürgen Habermas et al.). Otto Brenner Media
Award for Critical Journalism (2009). As a dramaturge and playwright he worked for the
world-renowned Grips Theater in Berlin for several years. In 2013, his opera „Death of a
Banker“ (music: Andreas Kersting) was premiered at the Gerhart-Hauptmann-Theater in
Görlitz (Germany)."

=More information=

* Video interview with the author (in English): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9_2hScMJj1I&t=251s [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9zhqPWSOOZQ&t=135s Zero books interview]

* A series of video talks with prominent guests, including Noam Chomsky and Vandana Shiva, highlights key aspects of the book:

**Part I: Vandana Shiva and Fabian Scheidler: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q2E3FNSz7xM 
**Part II: Noam Chomsky and Fabian Scheidler: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3wSTyHTG90&feature=youtu.be 

The talks are moderated by Nermeen Shaikh. More videos are to be published in the coming weeks.

*There is also a short video introduction to the book: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nsyvh-dse7k

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P History]]