
= The SuperAbundance Hypothesis: < overbuilding renewables is not waste — it’s the cornerstone of a post-scarcity energy future. >

"we dive deep into current research on overbuilding renewables – examining its feasibility, cost-effectiveness, and implications."

See: Nafeez Ahmed reviews the research at [https://ageoftransformation.org/inside-the-breakthrough-science-of-clean-energy-superabundance/]


=More information=

'''References:'''

American Solar Energy Society (ASES). (2023, March 4). Feasibility and Requirements of a 100% Transition to Renewable Energy (Firm Power Generation 2023). https://ases.org/firm-power-generation/

Dorr, A., Arbib, J., & Seba, T. (2025). Understanding Stellar Energy: How SWB Superpower will create clean energy superabundance.  https://www.rethinkx.com/publications/understandingstellarenergy2025.en

Gaster, R. (2024). Why Wind and Solar Need Natural Gas: A Realistic Approach to Variability. ITIF Report https://itif.org/publications/2024/09/30/why-wind-and-solar-need-natural-gas-realistic-approach-to-variability/

IEA PVPS Task 16. (2023). Firm Power Generation: IEA PVPS T16-04:2023 Report. International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme. https://iea-pvps.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/Report-IEA-PVPS-T16-04-2023-Firm-Power-generation.pdf

Perez, M., Perez, R., Rábago, K. R., & Putnam, M. (2019). Overbuilding & curtailment: The cost-effective enablers of firm PV generation. Solar Energy, 180, 412–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.12.074

Pierro, M., Perez, R., Perez, M., Prina, M. G., Moser, D., & Cornaro, C. (2021). From solar imbalance regulation to firm 24/365 solar generation: An Italian protocol for massive solar integration. Renewable Energy, 169, 425–436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.01.025

Wang, S., Tarroja, B., Schell, L. S., & Samuelsen, S. (2021). Determining cost-optimal approaches for managing excess renewable electricity in decarbonized electricity systems. Renewable Energy, 178, 1187–1197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.06.093

Way et al., (2022) Empirically grounded technology forecasts and the energy transition. Joule, 6, 9, 2057-2082,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2022.08.009