
Overview page:

'''* Introduction: [[Energy from the Perspective of the Commons]]‎''' 

* Article: [[Energy Commons as a Governance Framework for Climate Stability and Energy Security]]‎ . Charles Elworthy.


=Energy in the context of Commons Regimes=

Larry Lohman:

"Commons regimes are regions
of life in all societies that are
neither private nor public. They
may vest in their members the
power to determine access to
almost anything: land, forests,
water, fish, radio wavelengths,
seeds, streets.

Commons regimes are perhaps
better defined through
social characteristics than
physical domains: local or
group power, distinctions
between members and nonmembers,
rough parity among
members, a concern with
common survival and security
rather than individual accumulation.
The rules, regulations and
practices of the commons
ensure checks and balances
on members’ activities and
shared responsibilities, but are
also adaptable to change.
Commons regimes do not arise
simply out of shared values, or
common property or specific
institutions – although all three
play a part in shaping governance.
Critically, they depend on
an everyday struggle to limit the
power of any one group or
individual to exert control over
others.

Commons are ubiquitous in
industrialised and urbanised
societies as well as in rural or
historical societies. Contemporary
commons include inshore
marine commons, irrigation
systems and forests as well as
many city spaces.

In Denmark, wind power took off
in the 1980s and 1990s as local
residents set up wind turbine
cooperatives. Planning permission
for one turbine only on
each farmer’s land was conditional
upon cooperative shares
being owned by local members
only, thereby excluding those
unconnected with the area,
while the number of shares that
each member could hold was
limited. The ownership model
led to high public acceptance of
wind power, faster deployment
and tremendous good will.

The structure was disrupted
only in the late 1990s when the
national government abolished
restrictions on planning permission
and ownership. Outside
financial investors muscled their
way in to build more and larger
turbines, resulting in local
opposition, bitter conflicts and
long delays or cancellations."



=History=

Larry Lohman:

"The political influences over the concept of energy are no accident, but
have had a particular historical development. The abstract concept of
“energy” that we use today – call it Energy with a capital “E” – was
not always there, with all its elusiveness and biases. Creating it took a
lot of hard work. Just as commons were not always conceptualised as
resources, water not always seen as H2O, and forests not always
viewed as stands of timber or quantities of industrial pulpwood, a charcoal
fire or a bullock drawing a plough through a field were not always
regarded as an instance of characterless, quantifiable “energy consumption”.

Nor, in many societies, are they necessarily seen this way
today. Understanding today’s notion of upper-case Energy as a relatively
new development requires trying to recapture what was there
before, and what will always remain as one foundation of energy politics:
namely, the vernacular, varied, lower-case subsistence “energies”
of commons regimes.

Lower-case “energies” are multiple, incommensurable. Each is associated
with a particular survival purpose. Indeed, it is part of their logic
that in ordinary speech they seldom go by any single name – least of all
“energy”. Heat from burning biomass is used for cooking, washing,
keeping warm, preparing land for seed. Light from the sun drives the
growth of crops. Mechanical energy from animal muscle (or diesel
engines) is used to get around the country. The amount of each “energy”
used is fitted to the task at hand. What would be the point of
using twice as much wood as you needed to bake a loaf of bread? In
times of hardship, moreover, it is expected that specific “energies” will
be shared around so that even the poor have a crack at them. On
remote mountain roads in the global South (and the North), it is a given,
not a choice, that drivers of pickup trucks will give lifts to whomever
they encounter on foot, even if there is hardly any room.

Outside the ambit of fossil fuels, what we now call energy had a different
relationship to time – and still has today. The accumulation of plant
growth required for food for muscle power depends on the annual rhythm
of the seasons, and the growth of wood over several years if not
decades of sunlight. Work has to be done mostly during the hours of
daylight. Before the age of coal and oil, plant (and marine life) energy
stored and concentrated over millions of years deep underground played
little part in either livelihood or commerce.

Outside the fossil-fuelled world, energy has always also been tied to a
multitude of disparate but particular activities that have no omnibus
category or abstract quantity linking them all. There was seldom any
reason, for example, to treat heat and mechanical energy as equivalent
or exchangeable, physically or economically. 


As economic historian Joel Mokyr notes:

“the equivalence of the two forms was not suspected by people
in the eighteenth century; the notion that a horse pulling a treadmill
and a coal fire heating a lime kiln were in some sense doing
the same thing would have appeared absurd to them.”

Agriculture was driven by sunlight and muscles, long-range trade by
wind and water currents. Cooking and heating depended on wood and
sometimes coal, which, together with charcoal and falling water, helped
power industry. People did not think of themselves as “energy constrained”
in the contemporary sense: an energy unbounded by seasons
and the land still lay in the future. Capital “E” Energy as we know it
today was in fact nowhere to be found.

What we now recognise as Energy was also embedded in particular
places in a fairly non-flexible geographical pattern. In European countries,
grain-milling was scattered across the countryside, depending on
where rivers could provide sufficient mechanical energy. As late as
1838, water still powered one-quarter of Britain’s cotton factories (and
even the coal-powered upstarts were nevertheless called “mills” in a
mark of their watery heritage). The size of towns depended on how
much firewood was available within range of horse-powered transport.

Global trade relied on understanding geographically specific wind patterns
that had to be worked with, not against. Energy was not mobile,
liquid, transferable in large quantities over long distances. The age of
Btus, kilojoules and oil-equivalents lay in an unimagined future.

As a result, there was no politics of energy of the kind that has become
familiar in the fossil-fuel era. Controlling muscles meant controlling
people and animals. Amassing power over production meant, above
all, amassing human bodies – through slavery, for example. Exploitation
of firewood and charcoal depended on access to land. How energy
was used was subject to different kinds of monitoring: for example, the
practices of millers scattered along rivers were vulnerable, to a certain
extent, to surveillance by the local peasants whose business they sought.
One person could control only limited quantities of energy, both in absolute
terms and relative to others."



=Source=

* Report: Energy Security For What? For Whom? Corner House, February 2012


=More Information=

See also:

#http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Energy
#http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Energy

Related items:

#[[Petroleum Commons]]
#[[Solar Commons]]


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Energy]]