


=Discussion=

Source:

* Report: The energy transition to energy democracy. Power to the people. Final results oriented report of the REScoop 20-20-20 Intelligent Energy Europe project. By Dirk Vansintjan.

URL = https://rescoop.eu/system/files/REScoop%20Energy%20Transition%20to%20Energy%20Democracy%20-%20English.pdf

==The energy cooperative boom and the energy transition from 2000 to the present==

By Dirk Vansintjan:

"A number of EU Member States supported the deployment of renewable energy
in such a way that most of the investments came from citizens and citizen
groups. This is especially the case in countries such as Denmark and Germany,
with more than half of such projects being financed in this way. 

In Germany, the Feed in Tariff encouraged citizens, farmers and community
power initiatives such as REScoops to invest in the energy transition. By the end
of 2012, 46% of the total installed renewable energy capacity, was in the hands
of citizens, farmers included. Only 5% was owned by the ‘big four’ power companies.

Each year DGRV, the German Cooperative and Raiffeisen Confederation, conducts
a survey on energy cooperatives in Germany. The resulting report gives
us clear insight into the significance of, the growth in, and the uncertainty now
being caused by a changing government policy. On the next pages, we are
publishing a part of the report with the approval of DGRV.

In 2014, for the third successive year, DGRV conducted a study of energy cooperatives
based on a questionnaire. Here are the most important findings.
718 new energy cooperatives were set up within member associations of the
DGRV since 2006. 216 of these coops took part in the survey. All of these were
founded between 2006 and 2013. Older energy cooperatives were not examined
in the survey.

In 2012, 129 energy cooperatives
were set up within member associations
of the DGRV. Although this is still
a significant number, high levels of
uncertainty and restraint have been
detected among founders and representatives
of energy cooperatives in
recent months due to the uncertain
legal framework. The DGRV estimates
that investments of around 300 million
euro were postponed in 2014. The number of new energy cooperatives
reflects this uncertainty. Since a peak in 2011 with 167 newly established cooperatives,
the numbers have been declining. In the first quarter of 2014, only 17
new energy cooperatives were founded, a decrease of nearly 50% compared to
the first quarter of 2013.

The structure of energy cooperatives
is quite stable compared to previous
years. On average, new energy cooperatives
have 43 members. The
number of founding members varies
between 5 and 427. Membership
tends to grow quickly after a cooperative
has been set up. At the time the
survey was conducted, average membership had grown almost fivefold to 198.
Around 60% of cooperatives have between 50 and 200 members; only 16% have
fewer than 50 members. Most energy cooperatives are owned by citizens: more
than 90% of the cooperative members are private individuals.

Cooperatives enable people of relatively
modest means who may not own
a roof of their own to take part in the
energy transition. Shares in some cooperatives
can be bought for less than
100 euro. The average minimum shareholding
in an energy cooperative is 738
euro.

Nearly three-fourths of the cooperatives
enable members to participate
with shares of less than 500 euro. On
average, individual members have a
shareholding of 3,298 euro. The average
shareholding in two thirds of the
cooperatives is between 1,000 and
6,000 euro.


'''Business activities of energy cooperatives in Germany'''

Most energy cooperatives are in the
business of generating electricity from
renewable resources, particularly from
photovoltaic systems. 16% of the cooperatives
produce energy for heating
from renewable energy sources (biomass)
that is used to supply households
from a cooperative-run heating network.
On average, cooperatives have an
installed capacity of 1,034 kWp. This
capacity is distributed across 7 plants
on average, which means that each
plant has an average installed capacity
of around 150 kWp.


'''Economic data'''

Energy cooperatives have an average seed capital of just under 686,000 euro.
At the time the survey was conducted, cooperatives had invested on average
just under 1.9 million euro in renewable energies. Energy cooperatives have a
comparatively high average proportion of equity: 54%. Almost one in four cooperatives
invests with no debt capital at all. 64% of the outside capital borrowed
comes from cooperative banks.

Energy coops generate an annual turnover of around 337,000 euro on average.
One out of two cooperatives paid out a dividend last year. These dividends
averaged 4.26%.

Over 145,000 people in Germany have already invested around 470 million euro
of equity in energy cooperatives. In total, cooperatives have already invested
around 1.35 billion euro in renewable energies.

Cooperatives produce 830,000 MWh of electricity, enough to supply approximately
230,000 average households. Based purely on the figures, this means that
new energy cooperatives already produce significantly more electricity than is
required to supply the households of all their members."
(https://rescoop.eu/system/files/REScoop%20Energy%20Transition%20to%20Energy%20Democracy%20-%20English.pdf)

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]