'''* Paper: Interrogating the Civil. Engaging Critically with the Reality and Concept of Civil Society. By Jai Sen.'''

Source: Forthcoming in :

Jai Sen and Peter Waterman, eds, forthcoming (2010b) - Worlds of Movement, Worlds in
Movement. Volume 4 in the Challenging Empires series. New Delhi : OpenWord

Author contact via jai.sen@cacim.net


=Excerpts=

==Introduction==

Jai Sen:

"In our times, in both social and political literature and the media, the phenomenon called ‘civil
society’ – or, by extension, ‘global civil society’ – is increasingly accepted and celebrated as a
powerful contribution to the democratisation of politics and to bringing common sense and civility
to difficult situations. This is so especially in the North, and among those in international
organisations, but increasingly so also in the north in the South.
In this essay, I put forward the argument that civility – which I submit is at the core of
civil society – is structurally suffused with what in effect are profoundly anti-democratic
undercurrents, and has always been so. I argue further that today, at a time when the world is
dramatically changing, with the historically oppressed becoming new actors on the stage, the
power of civility is – even as civil society makes its contributions – undermining processes of
much deeper and wider democratisations that are opening up. This, I suggest, should be reason
enough to give pause for thought to members and leaders of civil organisations to reflect on and
rethink their politics (and their lives); and to give those who do not see themselves as necessarily
belonging to civil society, a critical lens through which to view it.
This is difficult terrain, however, because the term ‘civil’ and the concept of civility (and
their equivalents in perhaps all languages and cultures) are so embedded in our everyday lives
and our self-images. They are part of our everyday language, norms, and customs; they are
deeply buried in stories and storybooks; they are contained in all our textbooks. Almost by
definition the term and the concept are today normatively positive, without question. This is
perhaps true of all societies that are conscious of themselves as being ‘civilised’, past or present.
But it is especially in the past two decades that the term ‘civil society’ has been vigorously
introduced into common usage, in governmental policy, in academia, and in the media – three
key circuits of the propagation of ideas – as a part of neoliberal globalisation; and in these circles
it has been made a given and a good – a virtually unquestionable good.
It is difficult terrain also because the word ‘civil’ in the term civil society is very beguiling,
especially for those who feel that they are civil and belong to civil society. However, we need to
see the word for what it is – a veil – and to take care not to get seduced by it.

I therefore try to critically visit and examine this apparent good, by looking at two issues: 

- One, the dynamics of power relations in the building and exercise of civil society in the world as
it is unfolding today, especially in relation to emerging movements and alliances among the
historically and structurally oppressed and marginalised; 

- and two, the structural politics and
dynamics of the global civil cooperation that underlies what is called ‘global civil society’, taking
the World Social Forum as an example.

In particular, even as I acknowledge the many contributions in history of civil
organisations and civil societies, I try to look critically at the question of power relations within
such organisations and processes, and at the internal contradictions of civility. The question of
the power of conventional market corporations, and of (market) corporatism, has been well
explored, as has the question of the corporate State.2 But for some reason, when we talk of
‘power’ we automatically refer to the state or the market. What I attempt to do here is a parallel
exercise, to look at power not among and between state and market and of their power over
society, but at power within the non-state (and also non-market) world and among and
between non-state actors; in short, at power in the world of civil society.

I do this at two levels. I argue first that the concept of civility is central to (though not
alone in) the exercise of power in the non-state world. And second, I reflect critically on the
democratic options that global civil society is offering us, not normatively but in structural reality,
with the aim of getting practitioners and theorists both in the civil world and in what I term the
incivil world to engage with this hard question.
I do not, however, try to define, or re-define, the terms. On the one hand, this has been
done so richly by others, such as social theorist John Keane;4 and on the other, fixing their
meanings is not my objective. Rather, it is to critically engage with and interrogate them, to open
them up for debate.

Along the way, I argue that part of the problem lies precisely in the relations of the
production of knowledge : Since it is (usually prominent, rule-making) members of ‘civil society’
who, as the brahmins of society, produce the knowledge that most of us are brought up on (that
defines what society is and how it works, and establishes the values that it stands for), it is a
self-fulfilling and self-reinforcing process. But I also argue that this is changing, with new actors
emerging on the stage – including, crucially, in terms of production of knowledge."


==Civility as oppression==

Jai Sen:

"My first submission is that ‘civil society’ is not what it is said, and assumed, to be, as outlined in
the previous section; nor is it what the textbooks say it is, a neutral (and neutered) ‘space
between the individual (or the family) and the state’. Rather, it is just what common sense tells
us, and what the term itself indicates : Civil society – a society, or better, a community that is
bounded and governed by norms of civility that its thought- and rule-givers define for it; and a
section of any given society that has become – in its own terms, and by its own definition –
‘civilised’. The etymological linkage between these various terms is self-evident and unavoidable,
and the very fact that theorists like to give a different spin to a particular term within the family,
without reference to the others, should itself raise questions.

As perhaps in all contexts, the rules of civility that prevail are always set by individuals
and institutions that consider themselves to be civil and civilised; and the primary aim of the rules
is to ‘civilise’ and mainstream everything and everyone : To bring order into society by making
sure that everything operates within defined limits. These limits and norms change over time, in
all societies, but generally speaking the change is incremental and highly conservative, tightly
controlled by the rule-giving institutions and individuals. In particular, there is little or no room
for deviants – for all those sections in society that do not follow the rules of being civilised.
In addition, it is generally the case that the civilised feel threatened – sometimes
vaguely, sometimes directly – by those who do not conform and by the very existence of such
worlds. And so they variously term such sections ‘anti-social’, ‘deviant’, ‘wild’, and ‘uncivil’, and
seek relentlessly to marginalise, subjugate, convert, or tame them; in short, to civilise them. This
has been the case historically, and it is true today – though the boundaries are constantly
changing, as social relations evolve, through processes of negotiation and struggle. If some such
people become sufficiently docile and domesticated, they are left alone and ignored; on the other
hand, if they resist or are too assertive, the tactics change and may even include attempts to
destroy and exterminate them (only in the most civilised of ways, of course).

One of the most infamous examples of this in history has been the savage treatment by
settler societies – largely immigrants from what is now Europe – of the Aborigines of Australia,
the Indians of Latin America, and the First Nations in Canada and the USA. All of this, including
genocide, was done in the course of “the great cause of civilisation”.17 Indeed, the rise of
colonisation coincides precisely with the formation of so-called ‘civil societies’ in colonising
countries; the two took place together. Equally barbarous has been the treatment of slaves,
throughout history and across the world; and the horrors of Hiroshima, and more recently Iraq,
were again committed in the name of the protection and promotion of civilisation.
But this behaviour is not only a function of what we commonly understand as
colonisation. It is equally true of the behaviour of self-styled civil societies within their own
societies, and it is as true of what we today call the North as it is of the South. Just as two
examples, we have the barbaric treatment of dalits in South Asia by upper caste Hindus –where
discrimination and exclusion have historically been defended by the upper castes as a means of
protecting their own purity, and the purity and order of ‘society’ – and the manner in which the
civilised gentlefolk of, say, the Netherlands ‘treated’ and ‘processed’ the Dutch peasantry and
working classes in special ‘homes’ even as recently as early twentieth century, teaching them
reading, writing, dressing, table manners, and bathroom manners in their attempt to ‘civilise’
them into ‘proper’ citizenship.

...

In particular, all so-called ‘civil societies’ have historically emerged through intensive
processes of the civilising of societies, especially through the establishment of enforcement
agencies such as the police and of prisons, homes, mental ‘homes’, and other institutions where
these ‘unruly elements’ were – and continue to be – incarcerated and ‘civilised’. I submit that
this, and the treatment that aboriginals across the world have been subjected to, comes from the
same root – and that we need to search for that root.20 Conversely, we need to recognise that
colonisation, and the process and treatment of ‘civilisation’, are not restricted to the conquest
and domestication of alien lands and peoples.

In short, I suggest that for colonisers and civilisers alike it is their self-appointed
historical task to domesticate and civilise the world and to establish a civil order. Most centrally,
this means establishing hegemony over all those who (and all that) they consider to be wild and
uncivil.

The civil, and the task of civilisation and of building a civil society, is therefore umbilically
and dialectically tied to the uncivil. In my earlier writings on cities, borrowing the term from
someone who specifically used the term to refer to the ‘deviant’ in society, I used the term
‘unintended’ to describe the dynamic tension that I sensed between the different worlds I could
see in cities. I argued that the unintended build separate, parallel societies, and ‘cities’, of their
own, but through a complex dynamic of relationships with the intended world.21 Given the
contemporary resonance of the term ‘civil society’, I feel that the terms civil and uncivil – and, as
I will argue, incivil – are equally relevant and useful.


In this narrative, the ‘civil’ are those who are otherwise referred to as the middle and
upper classes, and earlier as ‘the gentlefolk’. In the part of India I come from, Bengal, we have
the term bhadralok, the ‘proper’, ‘civil’, or ‘well-mannered’ people. Beyond good manners,
however, a crucial aspect of civility is power, where this civil class sees itself as being
permanently in power. Although the proponents of civility would prefer it to be represented as
merely a benign and well intentioned rule by those who have a superior understanding, in reality
civility is interpreted and manifested as power-over – as a force of control, not of emancipation.22
In West Bengal for instance, even though there has been a government of the left continuously
in power for over thirty years now (since 1977), which according to any conventional
understanding of the left might have been expected to challenge such an order, there has been
no reduction in the power and hold of the bhadralok over the state. To the contrary, there have
been several instances during this reign of massive repression of dalits, of which the Left Front
government has on each occasion made strenuous efforts to suppress media coverage.

This is unlike, for instance, the neighbouring state of Bihar – which the Bengali bhadralok
typically sees as being an ‘uncivilised’ state – where despite continuing caste warfare and
extreme caste atrocities, the OBCs (Other Backward Classes) have come into power during this
same period; or in the also-neighbouring state of Jharkhand where the adivasis have come into
power. This speaks volumes about the power, reach, and resilience of civility."


==The political productivity and emancipation of the incivil==

"Let me now explain why I propose and use the terms ‘incivil’ and ‘uncivil’ as analytical
categories, in contradistinction to ‘civil’ : First, in order to focus on the dialectical reality of civility;
second, in order to make clear how ‘we’ see not only ‘them’, as ‘the other’, but also ‘ourselves’,
and for ‘us’ to be constantly conscious of this; third, by contradistinction and opposition, to signal
the resistance of such peoples to the singular and hegemonic norms of the civil – and indeed, to
implicitly suggest that there are many civilities, many different forms and modes of civilisation
and of life; and finally, to politicise the term ‘civil’ and to draw out its political content and reality.

As I see it, the dynamic of civility plays out as a function not only of class but also of
caste, in those contexts where this applies (right across South Asia, reaching into Southeast Asia,
covering over a billion and a half people); of ethnicity and race; of faith and cosmology; of
sexuality and sexual preference; of language; and of gender, especially as it intertwines with
some or all of the above.

In this view, those who constitute the core of ‘civil society’ are in general middle or upper
class, middle or upper caste, white (or at least ‘fair’, where in many societies ‘fairness’ of
complexion is something that the upper castes and classes aspire to), heterosexual male, actively
or passively practising the dominant religion in the region, and speaking its dominant language
(and which is often colonial); and also people of colour and other differentiations and preferences
who are allowed by such sections to join them, on condition of loyalty and adherence to the
rules. Those who constitute the ‘incivil’ – as perceived and stigmatised by the civil – are the lower
classes, the lower castes (and the outcastes), and in general people of colour, especially the
black and the indigenous, and all those of other languages, faiths, and preferences. There are of
course those who have been successfully domesticated and ‘civilised’, but such people are often
left hanging in a tragic middle world, as second-class denizens.

...

The new reality is that all over the world we are now seeing precisely these sections of
society – peoples who have been historically oppressed and marginalised by civil society and
state – organising themselves; and in contexts such as Bolivia and parts of India, where they
constitute the majority of the population, they are slowly not just accumulating power but also
asserting it, often (though not always) in independent and insurgent ways that challenge ruling
civil society. They are also building their own transnational linkages and associations and
increasingly putting forward their own visions of the world. These historically ‘unintended’ worlds,
which I term the incivil, are new societies in the making – of their own making and on their own
terms.

This is of course not a linear process, nor automatically successful in emancipatory
terms. There is plenty of evidence already available of inversions and implosions. One reason for
this seems to be the tendency of the leadership of such sections to, once they are in power,
adopt and reproduce the laws and customs of their former oppressors; another, the tendency to
use organisational forms and cultures developed in dominant civil society and that they inherit,
and therefore also the hierarchical social relations embedded in them, as a part of the biopolitics
of state and society.30 But these are inversions that are natural enough; and when seen in a
longer historical perspective there is surely no question that we are today at a new threshold of
human history, a historic deepening and widening of the democratisation of local and national
societies and of global society – a re-imagining and re-building of the world – that is being
undertaken and led not by civil societies but by the incivil of the world."


==The uncivil underworld==

Jai Sen:

"Beyond the incivil, however, lie other worlds : Worlds of gross exploitation such those of
child prostitution and trade in women, of bonded labour and other forms of slavery, and of trade
in organs, drugs, and arms. These worlds, which overlap with the incivil, are broadly the sections
of society where the criminal, the mafia, and the criminalised lumpen rule. As films such as The
City of God make so dramatically clear, large sections of contemporary society live these very
other lives.32 Even while recognising that these worlds too are often ultimately controlled and
exploited by members of civil society - and at the risk of oversimplifying things - in order to
distinguish this world from what I am referring to as the incivil, I refer to this world – this reality
– as the uncivil.

Without elaborating further on this complex point, I suggest that we need to make a
distinction between these two realities, incivil and uncivil, and that this is of vital strategic
consequence to the task of building other worlds. As a contribution to this rethinking, I propose
that we use the term ‘incivil’ for the victimised and oppressed who are building insurgent
societies and challenging existing power structures dominated by the civil; and ‘uncivil’ for those
who, while also resisting civil society and subverting it, do so with motives and actions are that
far more limited, material, and in general criminal and exploitative. In lived reality, it is true that
the dividing line between ‘incivil’ and ‘uncivil’ is often blurred – but I believe and urge that we
need to recognise that these are different worlds, and crucially, that they co-exist in dynamic
tension."



==The World Social Forum as instrument of civil domination and the role of the incivil movements within and against it==

"At the risk of taking several liberties at once, I suggest – on the basis of my research on
the history and dynamics of transnational civil alliances and of involvement in the World Social
Forum process – that there is much reason to believe that the broad sketch of a process of ‘civil’
domination that I have attempted here applies also to emerging civil alliances and to the World
Social Forum; not uniformly, nor absolutely, but all too widely.38 An examination of the WSF also
yields some insights into other, related tendencies, of civil corporatisation and the exercise of civil
power.

To speak of civil domination is not to say that indigenous peoples of the world are not
establishing transnational or global alliances – they are;39 but it is to suggest that the centres of
power in global civil alliance are still very strongly located in the North, and in the ‘North within
the South’; that they still very much lie with the middle and upper castes and classes and among
white males; and that transnational incivil alliances are still all too dependent on these power
centres. This remains the case even if some incivil alliances are acutely aware of this centrality
and reality of power, and strategically work with it. An example is the Minga process that has
been launched by the indigenous peoples of Latin and Central America, with one foot in the
WSF;40 another is the struggle of third generation dalits in India, who have also consciously used
the WSF as a convenient platform.

...

However, wherever mixed alliances have appeared to take shape, or even in most of the
big actions in multicultural contexts such as the US (such as Seattle in November 1999 or
Washington, DC in April 2000), Canada (Quebec City in 2001), or the UK (Gleneagles, 2005),
people of colour, indigenous peoples, or the incivil in general have so far hardly been seen. By
and large, all such initiatives are still dominated by members and organisations of ‘civil society’.


==The WSF is ruled by a transnational civil class==

"I turn now to the question of corporatisation within civil processes, and of the power relations
that are contained therein, which build and consolidate on the structural relations and realities of
civility and civil society. I will again take the WSF as an example.

The WSF is ten years old in 2010, and even though I myself have argued that it is an
extraordinary example of a process in organic emergence, in terms of learning from its own
experience,55 I believe that it has also reached a stage where it is showing strong tendencies of
becoming corporatised, and thereby losing its soul, its essence. Since I have already presented
these arguments in detail elsewhere,56 I will only summarise them here.

The WSF resonantly calls itself an ‘open space’ – open to pluralism and diversity –but
its history shows strong tendencies both towards cooption, as discussed above, and also the
periodic articulation of strict and exclusionary rules for membership and / or participation.

Examples are the requirement, at one point, of a written declaration of adherence to the Charter
of Principles of the Forum for membership of its committees; and the coercive question to those
registering for the Mumbai Forum in 2004 as to whether or not they agreed with the Charter of
Principles. As in many corporate structures, this gate-keeping takes place not only through
articulated rules but also through a ‘tyranny of structurelessness’ where a barely visible
leadership makes (and breaks) the rules and decides who is eligible to join, without making the
procedures public.58 The social and political dynamics that lie behind such control are always
disguised by a veil of civility, and it takes determined investigation to lift the veil and show the
real face behind.

The tendencies also include an increasingly intense discourse about the
representativeness of the International Council (IC), even though the Charter of Principles
declares that the WSF is not a representative organisation and does not seek to represent world
civil society.60 Although the IC has taken some steps in recent years towards systematising the
processes of application and approval, the rules and criteria by which decisions are made remain
undeclared. This notionally democratic ideal and debate about representativeness therefore
contrasts sharply with the long-standing non-democratic and non-transparent organisational
culture of the IC.

There was some possibility that this might change after the IC adopted a Resolution in
Nairobi in January 2007 regarding the need for an assessment of the internal functioning of the
WSF. As it turned out, despite public reminders61 the Commission established to undertake this
review chose to focus only on the much simpler question of the logistical organisation of events,
and ducked the far more difficult issues that are involved in regulating relations between different
bodies, including relations of power. Moreover, the final report of the committee remains
unavailable, and the new rules therefore invisible.

This behaviour is also manifested in the degree to which the WSF has become real estate
at local and national levels, especially for those with political ambitions. Despite protestations to
the contrary in its Charter of Principles, it is often a piece of territory to be struggled over,
gained, and retained, at almost any cost. The experience of the WSF in Mumbai in January 2004,
of the ESF in London in 2004, and of the WSF India process as a whole, are classic examples of
this.63 In most cases the leadership of the Forum, once installed, never changes, because there
are no procedures established for doing so. This is again a classic manifestation of the tyranny of
structurelessness, where it is always the already powerful who take advantage of such a
situation.

Furthermore, we need to recognise that those who are in the leadership of the WSF – as
manifested in the membership of its International Council – are also in the leadership of many
other significant civil alliances and coalitions at national, regional, and global levels; not only
among civil organisations but also among social movements. In social and structural terms, this is
remarkably similar to the case of the conventional corporate world, which Sklair has described as
the emergence of a ‘transnational capitalist class’.64 On the one hand, this prominence in national
and global society has been the driving logic behind the formation and expansion of the IC; on
the other, it makes the IC a hugely powerful body – in effect, a supra-board of the activist civil
world – despite the WSF’s Charter’s and spokespersons’ very civil insistence that it does not see
itself as a locus of power. It is again precisely the formal denial of this power that is a
manifestation of civility’s power.

Over the years, and through all these actions, the leadership of the Forum has also at
times behaved like that of an organised and orthodox religion, or party. It has its priests, its
faithful constituency, and its rituals. 

...

Notwithstanding the declared progressive political intentions of these calls,
the social reality of the Forum is that it remains largely led by aging males, mostly white or
honorary white, from middle and upper class and caste sections from settler societies around the
world, despite the recent widening of the membership of the IC to include more movements.
On the whole, the spirit of openness and consensus that characterised the Forum in its
early days – which I too have written about and celebrated – is tending to get lost and be
progressively replaced by what seems to be a far more categorical, hierarchical, and corporate
civil structure. I assert this even while I repeat that the WSF has been an extraordinary example
of institutional emergence (where the process of horizontal spread and proliferation is far more
important than any single event), and even while I recognise that the leadership of the Forum
has often been unusually creative in terms of responding to challenges and introducing change.
All this however is not mutually contradictory; and indeed, this ability to learn and adapt is an
intrinsic attribute of civility – and more broadly, of retaining control and power."


==NGO's and the pacification,cooptation of emancipatory movements and their leaders==

"While one result of NGO mobilisation is a greater exposure for those who
have been historically marginalised and excluded, and through this some degree of selfawareness
and self-confidence, there are many other results as well. One is that those in the
leadership of popular organisations often get ‘lifted off’ the ground by the experience, and
uprooted. They either get progressively more drawn into international level work by their
sponsors, to whom they provide legitimacy, or they get attracted by the perks and power of
international work. But as important is the fact that it is in fact the NGOs that sponsor them, and
their leadership, who tend to move to constantly more powerful positions through such actions,
often behind the scenes. This does not happen by accident. We therefore need to be more
critically aware of the structural dynamics involved in such situations.

Secondly, we live in a time when the incivil, more than ever before, are independently
and insurgently building their own organisations and their own transnational coalitions and
alliances within and beyond ‘national’ societies. In many instances, they reject the concept and
project of the dominant ‘nation’ within which they find themselves located and which they seek
now to transcend. In some cases these initiatives are emancipatory and progressive, and in
others, regressive – just as in the case of civil society. But in relation to the much celebrated
thesis of ‘globalisation from below’, in which civil organisations (‘NGOs’) have been projected as
playing the key role, we need to recognise that this is not globalisation from below (GfB) but
globalisation from the middle. More importantly, the real globalisation from below is taking place
in very different ways and largely quite independently of the celebrated version.

...

Equally possible and real is the well-established practice of civil organisations co-opting
(and thereby ‘civilising’) incivil movements and tendencies. To cite just one example of stark
differences of praxis, there is a world of difference in the manner in which many dalit
organisations perceive neoliberal globalisation – as potentially one more tool to blow open the
caste structure that has imprisoned them for over a thousand years, which they regard as their
primary issue – versus the formal ideology of the WSF and the alter-globalisation movement, of
opposing neoliberal globalisation. Despite this major contradiction, the WSF never objects to their
presence, and to the opposite, wants it and celebrates it. We need to question this selective
openness, and reflect on it. If we accept that the WSF’s opposition to neoliberalism is based on
principle, then we need to recognise that there are deeper reasons than mere opportunism why
its leadership is willing to accept this contradiction but not, for instance, the participation of
armed organisations. The answer, I suggest, lies in the historical task of civil organisations to
civilise the incivil; in this case, by co-opting them.

Third, we need to far more seriously read and recognise, especially in this context of
competing alter-globalisms, the degree to which the leadership of international civil
organisations, private foundations, and many social movements promoted by such organisations
is coagulating into what has many of the characteristics of a powerful ‘transnational social class’.
As I have argued above in terms of the WSF, these characteristics include key individuals (mostly
males) across the world being on the boards of each other’s organisations, thereby building everlarger
webs of interlinked control.82 This is not only true of the WSF.

Fourth, it is important to remember that the recent phenomenal growth and expansion of
civil society and transnational civil organisations is not only a result of spontaneous association
and action, though this has played an important role. It is also a function of Northern
governments being far more flexible in terms of funding international NGOs from the 1990s
onwards, as a part of the neoliberal project and as a part attempting to secure global hegemony
through the dominance of the Washington Consensus.83 Governments now see civil organisations
at local, national, and transnational levels as useful, if not yet critical, role players in their larger
geopolitical ambitions."


==Conclusion==

Jai Sen:

To conclude, the emerging global alliance and cooperation between civil, social, and
political actors – that is collectively referred to as ‘global civil society’ – is first and foremost a
crucial vehicle for transnational civil solidarity, which translates into the consolidation of the hold
of civil societies transnationally. 

In a very limited sense, it is true that this coming on to the world
stage of non-state actors contributes to the democratisation of world politics, a stage that has so
far been monopolised by nation-states. But seen through the lens of the historic larger and wider
democratisation that is beginning to unfold in our times, this cooperation and consolidation is,
more importantly – due to the dynamics of civility and its internal tendencies to corporatisation
that I have tried to discuss in this essay –, an instrument for the consolidation, strengthening,
and imposition of historically unequal social and political relations and entrenched interests at
local, national, regional, and global levels. In fundamental terms, what is fondly called ‘global civil
society’ is therefore today arguably contributing to less democracy, not more."



[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]