'''Engagement Marketing'''

=Description=

"The new way is engagement marketing, very much a reflection of The Experience Economy’s authors Joe Pine and Jim Gilmore’s dictum that “the experience is the marketing." Moore and Ahonen clearly understand that '''provider and consumer can each better meet their respective objectives when they are co-creators in product development and marketing processes. Bilateralism versus unilateralism marks the differences between postmodern engagement marketing and modern interruptive marketing'''."
(http://communities-dominate.blogs.com/brands/2005/03/postmodern_enga.html)


"Engagement Marketing is built upon the power of the meritocracy of ideas, and the strategic combinations of different media to propel that idea into the world, stimulating and facilitating the involvement of its audience to a commonly shared goal.

Engagement Marketing is about connecting large or small communities with engaging content to a commercial or social agenda. Rather than boiling everything down to a unique selling proposition, Engagement Marketing creates bigger ideas that emotionally engage its audience, who have a desire to participate.

Rather than focus on the one single proposition which would be a manufactured communication strategy, Engagement Marketing is built upon the fundamental notion of shared experience, something which 'interruptive' communications cannot do.

Mass media, presumes, only one thing of its audience that they are passive and they will consume as much as marketers can persuade them to.

Mass media is cold media, its push, its myopic, its about as relevant to the 21st Century as First World War military strategy. The age of set piece competition is over.

If the 20th Century was about managing efficiencies, then the 21st Century will be about managing experiences."
(http://www.henryjenkins.org/2007/01/an_interview_with_alan_moore_p.html)


=Eight Characteristics of Engagement Marketing=


Here are 8 key points to consider:

1). Attraction = Pull to engage. We are deeply social

2). Co-creation / participation / peer production / collaboration / persistent conversations

3). Transparency and authenticity are key components of any engagement initiative.

4). Flowability of content across all media platforms

5). Valuable and contextual content

6). Idea driven

7). Deliver a memorable experience

8). Editorial can link to commercial revenue streams
(http://www.henryjenkins.org/2007/01/an_interview_with_alan_moore_p_1.html)


=More Information=

See or read this webcast with [[Alan Moore on Engagement Marketing]]

Book: [[Communities Dominate Brands]]


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]