'''EngageMedia'''


URL = http://engagemedia.org/



'''EngageMedia is a website and a network for distributing social justice and environmental video from South East Asia, Australia and the Pacific. It is a space for critical documentary, fiction, artistic and experimental works that challenge the one-way communication model of traditional media.'''


=Description=

"In essence, EngageMedia is a video content management system for the
web, focusing specifically on video distribution as a tool for social
justice and media democracy.

In a more technical language, Garton says "One could place their
videos on http://YouTube.com or the Internet Archive, but as a content
developer, you can't take the YouTube back-end and add it to your own
server. It's not open source. One can't create a custom application
for your specific video publishing needs. You have to use YouTube
itself. What we are working towards is to allow users to opt for
either http://EngageMedia.org, or install the open source EngageMedia
toolset(s) on their own server, customising it how they see fit. It
ought to be so flexible one could literally plug in an EngageMedia
video publishing module into another system, like the APC Toolkit for
instance."

This system is being designed for low-bandwidth as well. "You'll be
able to pop a video out there with both Flash video and bi-torent
support. And as a content provider you'll have a range of licensing
options to choose from. For instance, you could choose IPLeft,
CreativeCommonsAustralia or CreativeCommonsThailand," he adds.

It's not a one-stop shop, but it's designed to make the process of
getting your critical content out to the communities that seek it as
simple as possible."
(from a email distributed by BytesforAll.org)


=Directory=

10 short documentaries between 2006-2009, 

'Voices of Transition' (2009) 8x3 min short statements on transition
to safe climate, in conjunction with Sustainable Living Festival.

‘Climate change, the real options’, (2007) filmed and directed with
Kurt Diegert.  12min, aired on C31 and web.  Examines the various
option available in addressing climate change.

‘Another world is on her way’, (2007) filmed and directed with Sal
Castro. 10min, aired on C31 and web. Explores the globalisation of
indigenous struggles against neo-liberal economic globalisation.

‘What moves us’, (2007) filmed and directed. (Narrated by Frank
Fisher). 12min, aired on C31 and web. A critique of  privatised
transport in Melbourne and exploration of alternative possibilities.

‘What is the G20?’ (2007)  written and narrated. 12min, aired on C31
and web.  Examines the global economic and geo-political dimensions of
the G20 group of nations, along with possible transformations.

 
‘Happy School’ (2006) 8min, aired on C31 and web. An inspiring story
about how Australian community development students, backpacking
through Cambodia, started the ‘Happy School’ and Australians for
Cambodian Education.

‘Oases’ (2006) 5min, aired on C31 and web. Looks at one of Australia’s
most innovative and inspiring educational initiatives.

‘The World Social Forum process’ (2006) 12min, aired on C31 and web.
Highlights the emergence of both global and local social forums.

‘Cyclovia’ (2006)  7min, aired on C31 and web. Documents a community
development experiment in cyclists and pedestrians reclaiming their
streets.


=More Information=

* [[Jose Ramos]] of EngageMedia has created a new company and documentary production cooperative called [[Peer Productions]]


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]