'''= documentary, and conference'''


=Conference=

'''* Report: The first Steady State Economy Conference'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/6469130/Resources_Wastes_Enough_is_Enough_Ideas_for_a_Sustainable_Economy_in_a_World_of_Finite_Resources_The_Report_of_the_Steady_State_Economy_Conference?email_work_card=view-paper

"Held in Leeds, UK, on 19th June 2010. The conference had two main aims. 


The first was to raise awareness about the substantial volume of scientific evidence that shows that economic growth (i.e. continuously increasing production and consumption of goods and services) is 

(a) not environmentally sustainable, and 

(b) not improving people’s lives in wealthy countries like the UK. 


The second aim was to identify specific, implementable policies to achieve a steady state economy  (i.e. an ecologically and socially responsible alternative to economic growth) within the UK. Over 250 economists, scientists, NGO members, business leaders, government employees,and interested citizens attended and contributed.

...

A key theme that came out of the conference, and one that unites many of the ideas in this report, is the concept of  enough. This report summarises the ideas generated at the conference, and provides insights into the structures and policies that would be needed in an economy where the goal is enough instead of  more. The hope is that these ideas will contribute to the development of a new “macro-economics for sustainability”, and help us build a prosperous, non-growing economy in the UK."

=Documentary=

A visionary but realistic alternative to the perpetual pursuit of economic growth—an economy where the goal is enough, not more. Based on the best-selling book by Rob Dietz and Dan O'Neill

URL = http://steadystate.org/enough-is-enough [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xQ-LYElvtEU&feature=youtu.be Youtube]


==Description==

"Enough Is Enough lays out a visionary but realistic alternative to the perpetual pursuit of economic growth—an economy where the goal is enough, not more. Based on the best-selling book by Rob Dietz and Dan O'Neill, the film explores specific strategies to fix the financial system, reduce inequality, create jobs, and more. Drawing on the expertise of Tim Jackson, Kate Pickett, Andrew Simms, Natalie Bennett, and Ben Dyson, Enough Is Enough is the primer for achieving genuine prosperity and a hopeful future for all. 

Enough Is Enough is produced and directed by film-maker Tom Bliss, and includes illustrations by cartoonist Polyp (see http://polyp.org.uk for more), animations by Henry Edmonds, and title graphics by Cassandra Chu. Funding for the film was provided by the Climate and Geohazard Services hub at the University of Leeds, Berrett-Koehler publishers, and the Urbal Institute."

[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]
[[Category:Conferences]]
[[Category:UK]]