== In English ==
B.A. and M.A. studies in Political Science at the Free University of Berlin (1989) and Ph.D. in Economics at the University of Notre Dame (1996). Since 1993 he works as a full time professor at the Graduate School of Economics at Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM). He has taught more than 90 courses at the B.A, M.A. and Ph.D. level in Mexico and internationally, and participated in more than 260 national and international seminars and conferences. His research has concentrated on theory of industrial organization, economic development, political economy, as well as on the manufacturing sector, trade and regional specialization patterns in Latin America and Mexico. He has collaborated and coordinated projects with Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Economic Commission for Latin America and the Carribean (ECLAC), the International Labour Organization (ILO), Ford Foundation and the Interamerican Development Bank (IADB), among other institutions.

He has received several research distinctions in 2000 and 2004.

== In Spanish ==
Realizó sus estudios de licenciatura y maestría en la Facultad de Ciencias Políticas en la Universidad Libre de Berlín (1989) y es Doctor en Economía por la Universidad de Notre Dame (1996). Desde 1993 trabaja como Profesor de Tiempo Completo y Titular en la División de Estudios de Posgrado de la Facultad de Economía de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM).

Miembro del Sistema Nacional de Investigadores (SNI), nivel 3. Sus actividades de docencia (desde 1993 incluyen más de 90 cursos a nivel de Licenciatura, Maestría y Doctorado en instituciones nacionales e internacionales y más de 260 participaciones en seminarios nacionales e internacionales. La investigación se ha concentrado en teoría de organización industrial, del desarrollo económico, economía política, así como en torno al desarrollo del sector manufacturero, comercial y regional en América Latina y México. Ha colaborado y coordinado investigaciones y consultorías para la UNAM, la Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL), la Organización Internacional del Trabajo (OIT), la Fundación Ford y el Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo (BID), entre otras insttuciones.

Distinción Universidad Nacional para Jóvenes Académicos en el Area de Investigación (2000) y Docencia (2004) en Ciencias Económico- Administrativas otorgado por la UNAM. Premio de Investigación (2004) otorgado por la Academia Mexicana de Ciencias.

= External links =
* [http://dusselpeters.com/ Personal site]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Mexico]]