

=Description=

By Wolfgang Hoeschele:

"Public utilities require proper public oversight to ensure that the entities operating them do
not exploit their monopoly positions to drive up costs for the communities they serve. In
addition to regulatory oversight, another way to instigate public accountability is the
creation of trusts, which put control over the utility in the hands of the people.

In 1993, New Zealand established the Auckland Energy Consumer Trust (AECT) to own and oversee
the companies that operate the electricity distribution networks. AECT was one of 30
energy trusts that the New Zealand government established following national reforms to
its electricity system.

In 2016, it was renamed to Entrust. Entrust owns a majority share of Vector, the largest
electricity distribution company in New Zealand. Entrust equally distributes profit dividends
from Vector to all of its beneficiaries, over 320,000 households and businesses across the
country. The beneficiaries, who are all customers of Vector, vote trustees into office. Two
of Entrust’s trustees serve on Vector’s board of directors to monitor the company’s
performance. This system ensures that the monopoly energy provider serves the
consumer's interests. If excessive bills were charged, the profits would ultimately be
returned to the consumers."
(https://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2(1).pdf)


[[Category:New Zealand]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Energy]]