'''Enterprise 2.0 = the use of freeform [[Social Software]] within companies.'''

According to McAfee it consists technically of SLATES: search, links, authoring, tags, extensions, signals. More explanations in his original [http://sloanreview.mit.edu/smr/issue/2006/spring/06/ paper].

=Definition=

AIIM's definition: 

"A system of web-based technologies that provide rapid and agile collaboration, information sharing, emergence and integration capabilities in the extended enterprise".
(http://mikeg.typepad.com/perceptions/2008/04/aiim-completes.html)


=Description=

Andrew MacAfee:

"Enterprise 2.0 is the use of emergent social software platforms within companies, or between companies and their partners or customers.

Social software enables people to rendezvous, connect or collaborate through computer-mediated communication and to form online communities. (Wikipedia’s definition).

Platforms are digital environments in which contributions and interactions are globally visible and persistent over time.

Emergent means that the software is freeform, and that it contains mechanisms to let the patterns and structure inherent in people’s interactions become visible over time.

Freeform means that the software is most or all of the following:

    * Optional
    * Free of up-front workflow
    * Egalitarian, or indifferent to formal organizational identities
    * Accepting of many types of data"

(http://andrewmcafee.org/2006/05/enterprise_20_version_20/)




=Discussion=

==Why it is difficult to achieve==


Ross Mayfield: "The second front, that Enterprise 2.0 is Egalitarian, or indifferent to formal organizational identities, not only flys in the face of enterprise culture and convention, but previously encoded political bargains.  For example, a primary property of social software is easy group forming -- but most enterprise systems expressly prevent it.  To form a group, you not only need permission from IT, but complex configuration and in many cases even software development.  Beyond applications, ever come across an LDAP implementation that supports easy group forming?  This runs counter to the way many enterprises actually work today, where ad hoc cross-functional teams drive more than professional services organizations.

A second example is fine grained security.  Content management, document management, portals and poorly designed wikis highlight per object/page permissioning.  Certain expert users have the ability to control access and rights for a specific document.  This harms productivity -- when a user needs to access a document to perform a task and has to incur the overhead that can unlock it, plus the overhead of locking (structure upfront) and unlocking itself.  This harms knowledge sharing -- documents go undiscovered and are decidedly static, despite how the knowledge in the document is never finished.  This harms competitive advantage -- any system that exhibits inertia compromises a firm's ability to adapt to it's dynamic environment."
(http://ross.typepad.com/blog/2006/05/enterprise_20_s.html)


=More Information=

#Check out these [[Video Presentations on Entreprise 2.0]]
#Perhaps the best recommendations, from Dave Pollard, at
http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2009/05/29.html#a2386

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]