'''* Essay: Episodes of [[Collective Invention]]. Peter Meyer. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Office of Productivity and Technology, 4 August 20031'''

URL = http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/meyer.pdf


=Abstract:=

"The process of developing a new technology through open discussion has
been called collective invention. '''This paper documents two episodes of
collective invention''' and proposes a general model based on search theory.
'''The first episode deals with the development of mass production steel in the U.S. (1866-1885), and the second with early personal computers (1975- 1985)'''. 

In both cases technical people openly discussed and sometimes
shared technology they were developing. Both technologies advanced to the
point that they supported substantial economic growth. Open source software
development is partway through a similar process now.

The episodes have common features. The process begins with an invention
or a change in legal restrictions. Hobbyists and startup firms experiment with
practical methods of production and share their results through a social
network. The members of the network form a new industry or change an
existing one. The network then disappears if the new firms keep their
research and development secret. A model of the search for innovations can
describe this process if it is expanded to include independent hobbyists and
consultants as well as profit-seeking firms."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]