
=Description=

Desperados:

"Equalitarian Peoples Associations are NGO’s with charitable, service, participatory or empowering orientation. Examples can be parties, social movements associations, workers unions, etc. They may provide services or goods in addition of political activities.

They are similar to other solidarity businesses and enterprises in which the main aim is to put into the parallel economy a service or a good. These enterprises need to have a positive or not negative result. For them, the kind of currency that is better suited is a currency based on a contract to deliver the product. An example could be a cooperative to grow vegetables.

The special feature of Equalitarian Peoples Associations when they provide services or create goods is that they rely on donations in money, donations in goods and or voluntary work. These wares are the commons. The logic is that of a public service. Nevertheless, the boundaries are not sharp.

By Equalitarian we mean that these associations are voluntary and all members have the same rights and obligations at their decision making process, the discussion and voting process. It is the democratic civil rights.

Equalitarian Peoples Associations members may have different rights and obligations towards the organisation activities and organisation benefits, like donations or voluntary work, according to needs and capabilities. Obligations are voluntarily accepted on a case by case basis as an individual voluntary decision linked to a contract or at accepting a mandatory collective decision involving the participation at an activity (i.e. payment of the membership fee), the non acceptance implying loss of membership. It is the public welfare rights.

At small scale an example could be a charity association running a charity kitchen functioning with regular or occasional donations in money, donations in food and voluntary work.

At large scale could be a local or national state, delivering welfare state benefits, functioning with taxes and public servants.

'''Statutes and mission'''

Equalitarian Peoples Associations have democratic statutes, or constitution, which is a statute contract signed and committed by all members. Equalitarian Peoples Associations statutes include a mission. The statute defines the democratic processes and the bodies running them, and the types of actions to achieve the goals of the mission and the bodies in charge of executing them. The statute, and the mission, can be changed following a democratic process according rules included in the statute, and by a majority indicated in the statute.

Equalitarian Peoples Associations have a periodic action plans implying periodic budgets.  By default, the period is a year. The action plans are social actions for the benefit of the Equalitarian Peoples Association members and other social targets specified in the mission. The action plan and the budget are decided trough a democratic process as indicated in the statute.  The action plan and the budget are periodic contracts that are ancillary annexes of the statute contract, and need to be signed by a majority of the members, a majority specified in the statutes. The management of the action plan may include further democratic consultations during the period for the details or adaptations of parts of the action plan."
(http://desperado-theory.blogspot.be/2014/06/commons-sovereigns.html)

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]