

=History=

Cathryn Townsend:

"An explanation of the evolutionary emergence of the egalitarian predisposition is 
required in order to account for the range of political behaviors observed in contemporary human societies (from extremely egalitarian to extremely hierarchical), compared  with the consistently present dominance hierarchies of nonhuman primates such as 
chimpanzees, gorillas, and (to a moderate extent) bonobos. Te fact that by way of 
contrast with these, a wide range of political behaviors exists for humans, indicates that 
egalitarian tendencies came about due to unique selection pressures on our particular 
hominin lineage within the Homininae subfamily of the Hominidea (great ape) taxonomic family. An inference of this kind rests on the comparative phylogenetic method  in evolutionary biology in which it is expected that related species will exhibit similar 
adaptations not because they evolved them due to separate evolutionary pressures 
but because they belong to the same common phylogeny. Tis phenomenon is known
as “phylogenetic autocorrelation.” Divergence from autocorrelation is what needs 
to be explained in terms of selection pressures. While there are likely to have been 
precursor behaviors among early bipedal hominins, cooperative egalitarian behaviors 
may have emerged due to unique selection pressures during the Homo erectus to Homo 
sapiens phase of the human lineage. Early hominin morphology shows greater sex/size 
dimorphism compared with the genus Homo, which is indicative of higher male–male 
competition in the earlier hominin species because such an association is observed 
in nonhuman primates. Te selection pressures involved may have been multiple and 
thus are best understood from the vantage point of various cross-disciplinary and 
complementary perspectives. 

From the perspective of behavioral ecology and optimal foraging theory, some 
aspects of the egalitarian ethos are adaptive in that they are effective risk-mitigation 
strategies. Behavioral ecology works from the premise that organisms have 
risk-sensitive adaptations that help them to survive. 

THe risk-reduction strategies  adopted by mobile hunter-gatherers tend to be: 

(1) the pooling of resource harvests  within a sharing network, 

(2) mobility and/or fLuid local-group composition that 
allows people to distribute themselves in accordance with resource distribution, and 

(3) future discounting in which receiving a smaller reward immediately is preferred to 
the potential for a greater reward in the future. 


These strategies match with the egalitarian practices of immediate-return hunter-gatherers in: 

(1) their demand sharing, 

(2)  the avoidance mechanism, which allows people to move away from sources of conflict,  and 

(3) emphasis on the subsistence needs of the present alongside a lack of storage 
and investment. 


The risk-mitigation strategies of mobile hunter-gatherers are plausibly associated 
with the evolution of genus Homo because of the archaeological evidence of medium- to 
large-game procurement commencing in the Pleistocene. Large-game hunting is a relatively risky subsistence strategy. It provides a food source that is worthy of sharing but  its acquisition requires cooperation. In addition, there is evidence that the Pleistocene 
brought climate change—specifically increased dry seasons with associated resource 
scarcity. These are the environmental conditions in which sharing is most beneficial. 


Cognitive science also brings its insights. Developmental psychologist Michael 
Tomasello suggests that shared intentionality or intersubjectivity in pursuit of a com- 
mon objective is the hallmark of human interaction as opposed to that of other apes. 
For example, the gesture of pointing requires a mutual understanding of the intention 
of the pointer to share information. In support of this, the “cooperative eye hypothesis” 
proceeds from the corollary that only the genus Homo has a specific physiology—eyes 
that are almond-shaped with white sclera—that make it easy to see others’ focus of 
attention and suggests that this evolved to facilitate communication and cooperation. 
Shared intentionality requires high levels of trust between people in a social group and 
the ability to understand another’s intention to help or to share. The skills and motives 
of shared intentionality have transformed the individualistic and competitive primate 
social behaviors such as gaze following, manipulative communication, group action, 
and social learning into the human cultural behaviors of joint attention, cooperative 
communication, collaborative action, and instructed learning. Shared intentionality is 
thus the cognitive capacity that makes egalitarianism and related cultural capacities 
possible. In principle, specific mutations to eye shape and color could be traced 
genetically to historical social changes in the Pleistocene."

(https://www.academia.edu/29417676/Egalitarianism_the_evolution_of)


=Discussion=

Francois Tremblay

"The word evokes two general extremes. One is the total dehumanizing equality that reduces man to a machine, famously parodied in the story Harrison Bergeron, where people are made scrupulously equal in capacities by burdening them with crippling handicapping devices or weights. The other is the absurd capitalist concept of “equality of opportunities,” meaning nothing more than “you can get what you can get” (which leads today’s “socialists,” who are in fact as capitalists as everyone else, to try to make opportunities available to everyone, instead of correcting the more fundamental problems).

Therefore the question is: if you seek social equality, what is it that you seek to equalize?

To Benjamin Tucker, equality means “the greatest amount of individual liberty compatible with the equality of liberty,” or more clearly, to first equalize everyone’s freedom to a straight level, and then to maximize that level. But then we must ask: what is freedom? I think a simple definition can be given along the lines of “to be free means to be able to act according to one’s own desires to a certain degree.” It is of course impossible to act as one desires in an unlimited manner: no matter how much humans would like to have a native ability to fly, this is not possible."

(http://accesstoinfo.blogspot.com/2010/03/any-hierarchy-that-exists.html)


==[[Hierarchy]] and Equality==

Francois Tremblay:

"Why are hierarchies inherently anti-freedom and anti-equality? Because they are predicated on the principle that a small group of people must and should control the vast majority, which implies a severe limitation of freedom. Their operating mechanism is organized and formalized control for the benefit of a few (and, by extension, for the survival of the hierarchy), leading to the accumulation and acceleration of inequality. Certainly, if we look at history, we see that inequality stems, in an overwhelming majority, from the accumulation of inequality inherent to the existence of hierarchies (organized religion, government, corporations, etc), and very little from man’s bodily or mental inequalities, which are much more limited in scope.

The opposite of a hierarchy, which is predicated on a strict relation of obedience between superior and inferior, is equality of authority. None may order anyone else to act against his values, because every individual’s values are as important as everyone else’s. Following the universality principle, if one person or a group of people have the authority to issue orders regarding a specific domain, then all people have that authority, or none may have it. Any hierarchy is therefore eliminated."

(http://accesstoinfo.blogspot.com/2010/03/any-hierarchy-that-exists.html)


==Chinese ('[[Pingdeng]]'), vs Western notions of equality==

Jeng-Guo Chen:

"Although Tan Sitong was sympathetic with imperialist projects that he witnessed
and envisaged in Asia, his idea of pingdeng was a far cry from modern Western
notions of equality. Western ideas of equality have a long and complicated history that
lies outside the scope of this paper. Suffice it to say, Western equality is, by and large,
concerned with economic rights and political rights. Different schools of philosophy
might disagree on how equal human beings were or should be, but they shared a
tendency to believe that equality had to be measured by legal forms in one way or
another. From the natural law tradition and the notion of property rights to modern
constitutionalism, the notion of equal moral capacity in political choice or
cooperational competition, legality is the predominant feature of Western
conceptualizations of equality. Modern Western imperialism, inheriting the dual
concept of dominium and imperium, also evolved around the contractarian frame of
mind. Equality was represented in equality of treaties and reciprocality of trade. On
the other hand, Tan Sitong’s concept of equality is not bounded with legality or right
to possession. In Tan’s ideal world of pingdeng, every person regarded his or her own
family as mere hotel lodging. He or she was passing temporarily on the earth so that
there was no need for possessions. In short, Tan’s idea of equality has little in
common with a Lockean notion of individualism, which is in part derived historically
from the idea of equity in political economy. Possession stemmed from desire. Tan
argued that nothing but eradication of the fountain of desire, namely, ego, could give
rise to true pingdeng.

- When the consciousness of self-caring is eradicated, then the ego is
submerged; when the ego is submerged, then distinctions die away, then
pingdeng emerges; when pingdeng is obtained, human beings are able to
understand one and another completely, as mirrors reflecting the other
without any dirt on them, thus the perfection of connecting others and
myself.

Though he mentioned in passing “equal distribution of wealth,” Tan’s vision
lacked a truer jurisprudential scheme. The Western idea of equality was
individualistic in nature, while Tan’s idea of equality was situated in the simultaneous
coexistence of the self and others."

(https://www.harvard-yenching.org/wp-content/uploads/legacy_files/featurefiles/CHEN%20Jeng%20Guo%20Tan%20Sitong%204.6.09.pdf)

=More Information=

* Extended discussion of the concept at http://accesstoinfo.blogspot.com/2010/03/any-hierarchy-that-exists.html

* an extensive discussion by Daniel Bitton, in his critique of The [[Dawn of Everything]]: "what the term “egalitarian society” implies, followed by an examination of the history of the anthropological literature on egalitarian hunter gatherer societies." [https://worldwidescrotes.wordpress.com/2021/10/27/10-1/]

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Politics]]