'''= The ''Equitable Project'' "develops open source tools to make founding and operating a housing coop as easy and efficient as possible".'''

URL = https://www.the-equitable-project.org/

=Context=

Michel Bauwens:

For the P2P Foundation, '[[Protocol Cooperatives]]', are global open design deposities to mutualize our main provisioning systems, and which could be funded by leages of cities, coops and ethical finance players to start transforming cities worldwide. THIS IS NOT YET HAPPENING, but civil society actors are starting to do this. For example, [[Partago]], the originally Ghent-based electronic carsharing coop has done this. Here is a potential a protocol coop to create housing coops.

=Description=

"We develop open source tools to make founding and operating a housing coop as easy and efficient as possible. With our tools coops can manage information, equity, and governance at every stage of the coop lifecycle — from founding to operation. Information is recorded on a distributed ledger to make operations verifiable for members and partners.

...

Using our open-source tools, we facilitate aspiring housing coops by doing the heavy lifting in founding and running a housing coop. Our services include vetting aspirant members, financing, project development, legal compliance and all administration. 

This service drives our revenue through a coop-as-a-service business model."

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Housing]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]