'''* Article: ÉLAN. Equity-Linked Affinity Network: Interpersonal Process, Financial Structures and Legal Designs for Landed, Spirited, Joyous Urban Community. A Allen Butcher.'''

URL = https://we.riseup.net/assets/4969/ELAN.pdf


=Summary=

"This paper is intended to support the founding and
growth of intentional communities in which there is no
commonly-owned property, meaning that member's
housing payments go into equity accounts which they
take with them when they leave. Such communities
may be described as involving the sharing of
privately-owned property, which for this author is also
the definition for the term "collective community."

Although cohousing is discussed in the following
article "Communitarianism in a Market Culture," the
intent of this paper is to focus on forms of community
that are less expensive than cohousing, and therefore
accessible to more people. This would tend to
emphasize collective households, yet the ideal and
goal may be more toward the "urban cooperative
block" or "urban ecovillage" as represented by the
graphic on the cover of this publication.

Community projects involving the remodeling of
several existing structures on one block would be
similar to "retro-fit cohousing," yet if the properties
involved in such a community are not contiguous but
scattered around a city or town, or if such a community
were to involve on-site businesses or a particular
spiritual or cultural orientation (other than that of the
dominant culture), the term "cohousing" would not be
appropriate. Thus the need to create a new term for
a different form of intentional community.

The term "èlan" works well for community as it
suggests enthusiasm in pursuing a mission. The word
is from the French for a lancer exhibiting esprit de
corp. As the term refers to a militaristic brashness it
is good to adapt it to the communitarian culture as
that is one of the themes of this paper, adapting what
originally supported the values of competition and
possessiveness to the support of the communitarian
values of sharing and cooperation. The first article in
this paper addresses the transformation of aspects of
the dominant culture into forms of communitarianism,
specifically by utilizing the market system to support
the creation of community.

Given that the market system has tended to destroy
community, the reverse co-optation process of using
market capitalism to create communitarianism
essentially involves fighting fire with fire, turning the
tables to use the force of market economics against
itself. This could be said to utilize a form of "culture
magic" in the deliberate effort to change both consciousness
and culture. Introducing the basic elements
of that process is the intent for this publication,
presented in three primary sections offering models
for interpersonal and group process, financial strategies
and legal designs.

As an acronym, the name ÉLAN could be said to link
the three important aspects of community; the social
bonds or affinities that define a community, the
wealth or equity owned by it or its members, especially
with regard to land, and the system of governance
that manages the group or network of groups.

The original concept for ÉLAN, and the term itself,
was developed in 1995. It remained dormant until
world events and contemporary American culture
progressed along their respective historical cycles to
where interest in communitarianism showed signs of
beginning to build toward a new wave of movement
activity. Such waves have occured many times in the
past, in America and Europe in particular, such as
during the 1960s and '70s, and it was only a matter of
time until another would begin to build. The beginning
of the 21st Century is very similar in many ways to
the mid '60s. Also, with the many successful communitarian
movements and traditions that have survived
from earlier waves, there are now various models
available for working to build the next wave of
communitarianism. This paper draws from those to
present some of the specific tools most useful for
urban intentional community, with many more models
and tools available among various other sources.


=Discussion=

==[[Financial Structures for Community]]==

A. Allen Butcher:

"Common forms of equity financing for both personal
housing and for investment properties can be adapted
for the creation of an intentional community. Simply
take the basic strategy that people use to build their
personal real estate empires and instead modify it for
use in building community.

People use the accumulated equity in one property as
down payment to buy another, use equity from those
two to buy a third, and so on, but the problem is that
one would have to become a landlord, renting out
those properties not used for personal living space
(including vacation homes). However, this could be
done as a community. If a couple people in a given
town owned homes with accumulated equity, they
could join that equity and buy another property, and
someone in their community network who didn't own
a house could move in as one of several joint owners.

Instead of being a renter they would be a co-owner,
and their housing cost would go into an equity account
in the community rather than paying rent. They could
get their share of this equity if they left the community.

Obviously, the group would have to write
community agreements on shared real estate equity
as a means of building urban community. Signed
community membership agreements that are fair and
reasonable are upheld by courts."

More at: [[Equity Sharing]]



=Excerpts=


==Introduction==

A. Allen Butcher:

"For the ÉLAN community a primary value is sharing
land ownership and real estate equity. This sharing of
land value is a way to use the dominant culture's
economic system to build the parallel culture. Creating
a community of affinity groups sharing real estate
equity affirms the values of social and of environmental
responsibility.

Culturally engineering an intentional community, or
"intentioneering" is the deliberate effort to live by the
values of our choice, rather than the values of the
dominant culture.

The ÉLAN community or "equity-linked affinity
networks" uses real estate equity as a community
asset to be shared and stewarded for the good of the
affinity group. And if extended among several
affinity groups, this equity is shared for the good of an
entire ÉLAN community.

In the ÉLAN proposal, each person's housing payments
go into equity accounts, moving people away
from paying rent as quickly as possible. When people
leave the ÉLAN community they may have their full
equity account (or limited-equity in some cases) paid
to them according to a formula and schedule agreed
upon when the member joined. This encourages each
resident of an ÉLAN property to care for it as they
would their own.

The practice of shared real estate equity in the
ÉLAN community uses the dominant economic
system's dynamics in a way that creates and nurtures
community, rather than breaking down our connections
with one another and "atomizing" society.

The accumulation of appreciated value of ÉLAN
properties or real estate is available for the community
to use for acquiring additional properties, permitting
more ÉLAN community members to move from
paying rent to paying into equity accounts. All
members have a role in deciding how the aggregate
equity accounts are invested for the good of the
affinity group or community. The group can also
decide whether or when a member of an ÉLAN
affinity group can make a withdrawl (cash out) from
their account for private purposes. When members
leave they may take their equity out of the ÉLAN
affinity group or community, or offer it as a loan.
Using real estate equity to build community through
the ÉLAN proposal is just one way to turn the
dominant economic system of possessiveness and
competition into a parallel culture economic system of
sharing and cooperation."


==[[Communitarianism in a Market Culture]]==

A. Allen Butcher:

"Intentional community itself will likely always be a
parallel society, moving through time apace with the
dominant culture, the two influencing each other in
sometimes subtle, sometimes fundamentally challenging
ways. Both the dominant and the parallel cultures
have always adapted or co-opted what each found to
be of value in the other, and ignored or discarded
what it disliked or did not understand. The opportunity
in this relationship for the communities movement
is to develop a concerted effort to nurture that
dynamic for the benefit of all.

As intentional communities can be seen to be research
and development centers for society, the
movement challenges the dominant culture to acknowledge
the innovations found in community as
opportunities for positive cultural change. Intentional
community in general exists as a response to the
perceived problems or inadequacies of the dominant
culture, and with that the movement can generate
some excitement around the idea of communitarian
lifestyles as activist vocations!

Communitarian values, increasingly discussed by
theorists on all points of the political spectrum, stress
the benefits to all when individuals acknowledge
responsibility to a social group larger than the immediate
family. Some of the perspectives on this include
the work of M. Scott Peck (see: The Road Less
Traveled, 1978 and A Different Drum, 1987), and of
The Communitarian Network (see: Amitai Etzioni,
The Spirit of Community: The Reinvention of
American Society, Touchstone, 1993).

As fifty years of the post-war housing industry has
shown, communitarian values are luxuries that we do
not absolutely need if all that we are trying to do is
acquire housing. Today, however, the challenge is to
build a social fabric that provides, in addition to mere
shelter, a culture that engenders in the individual an
awareness of and appreciation for others, and for the
environment that we all share.

Communitarian values include a safe and mutually
beneficial environment for children and seniors,
community food service and childcare, landscaping
for common areas, building and auto maintenance and
various collective services involving people working
together for mutual advantage and greater efficiency.
Other communitarian values may include neighborhood
forums to resolve disputes or address challenges
from both within and outside of the community,
alternative dispute resolution, neighborhood-based
primary health care services, and architectural and
site designs that facilitate interactions among neighbors,
the development of friendships, and resulting
"random kindness and senseless acts of beauty."


* '''Trust, Social, Spiritual and Environmentally Responsible Luxuries'''

There is quite a list of luxuries inherent in community.
Consider the priceless value of the peace of mind that
comes with knowing on a first name basis everyone
in your neighborhood, because you talk and work with
them regularly as a matter of course in day-to-day
living. This we might call a "trust luxury." The
informal ambience of the common facilities such as
for food service, child care, workshops and agriculture
we might call a "social luxury."

Consider the luxury of inter-generational community,
in which both young and old are encouraged to care
for the other. More than mere luxury, compared to
the usual pattern of age segregation in America, this
is cultural elegance. Consider too how much more
completely than living separately does the fellowship
of community come to the spiritual ideals of brotherhood
and sisterhood, of living by the Golden Rule, or
of practicing a love-thy-neighbor ethic. The opportunity
of conforming our lifestyle to our spiritual ideals
can be cast as a "spiritual luxury" that not many
outside of community enjoy. This is in addition to the
obvious potential for quantifying how much more
ecologically responsible than tract-house-living
community can be; perhaps this one we would call an
"environmentally responsible luxury."

An additional luxury is how people living in community
have a kinship with people in other communities
around the country. The networking carried on among
communities builds relationships that provide friends
for us to visit while on vacation, even potentially
around the world. Call this one a "holiday luxury." The
point to be stressed is that community, and communitarian
values, are luxuries that money alone cannot
buy; they are priceless commodities that we should be
careful not to undervalue.

Promoting the communitarian values experienced in
intentional community is an opportunity for us to take
advantage of the greatest set of new-found luxuries
since the invention of indoor plumbing. In a sense,
what we want to do is repeat history, at least that part
of our history that led to the replication of housing
design innovations across our country and increasingly
around the world. Understanding how we
arrived at our fabled American Dream of ubiquitous
suburban monocultural design can help us to build a
marketing plan for the diffusion of the innovations of
communitarian design throughout the world."
(https://we.riseup.net/assets/4969/ELAN.pdf)


==[[Balancing Individualism and Communitarianism]]==

A. Allen Butcher:


"Much is being said about values today by the media,
by government, by religious groups, by social organizations
and others. Conservative rhetoric challenges
the teaching of "moral relativism" as a cause of social
decay, while liberal litanies of cultural demise decry
the individual's focus upon what Gregory Bateson
termed the "skin encapsulated ego." Note that there is
a level of agreement in the views espoused by these
two cultural poles. Focusing upon this common
concern about the excess of individualism in our
society can provide a foundation for a consensus,
upon which a program of advocacy for communitarian
values may be built.

To successfully advance intentional community it is
important to not permit the debate to be defined as
the individual versus society, or vice versa, but rather
to advance the anthropologist Paul Radin's preference
that".. .the individual and the group .. . resist submergence
of one by the other" (Arthur Morgan, Guidebook
for Intentional Communities, Community
Service, Inc., 1988). 

A dynamic balance between
individual and society is the goal, encouraged in the
local community by its provision of a human scale,
knowable society in which individuals have reflected
to them, and recognize, the importance of their
personal roles. The community is comprised of a
range of different types of families, always changing
with the lifecycles of birth, growth, new births and
deaths.

Through all this the local community seeks to maintain
itself as an ongoing entity, providing a fixed context
against which to measure the changes in our personal
microcosms, and of the ever quickening and often
unsettling changes in the vast, global culture beyond
the community. Through first identifying just what
communitarian values are, then how they relate to the
issues of the day, a basic strategy can be developed
for creating a community-building industry. And we
may not be as far from this ideal as it may seem."
(https://we.riseup.net/assets/4969/ELAN.pdf)

=Historical Resources=

==Historical Efforts in Developing Community as Industry==

A. Allen Butcher:

"There have been many efforts in the past to develop
community as industry, and we can see some of these
in the "material feminist" proposals, projects and even
patents presented in writings by Dolores
Hayden (see: Redesigning the American Dream:
Gender, Housing, and Family Life, and The Grand
Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist
Designs for American Homes, Neighborhoods,
and Cities), Hayden's work includes mentions of
Ebenezer Howard's "Garden Cities," Frederick Law
Olmsted's "Garden Suburbs," and Franklin D.
Roosevelt's "Green Belt" housing and community
development program, part of the 1930s New Deal
initiatives. 

See the following.

• Hayden: http://www.architecture.yale.edu/faculty/
professors/hayden/hayden.htm

• Howard and Olmsted: http://www.asu.edu/caed/
proceedings98/Garvin/garvin.html

• Roosevelt: http://www.mdmunicipal.org/cities/
index.cfm?townname=Greenbelt&page=home

We can certainly find both earlier and current examples
of investor-backed communities, such as the
"Phalanstery" designs created by 19th Century
Associationists including Brook Farm in
Massachusettes (see: http://www.age-of-thesage.org/transcendentalism/brook_farm.html), and as
advocated by Horace Greeley, editor of the New
York Tribune, for whom Greeley, Colorado was
named. In these community designs non-resident
investors contributed the capital while others built the
developments as community residents. This strategy
continues today in simple "equity-sharing" arrangements,
such as is being used for financing small-scale
collective households like the Walnut Street Cooperative
in Eugene, Oregon (see: http://icetree.com/
walnut/revloan.html in the "Financial Structures for
Community" section of this paper.). In these examples
investors are paid interest on their loans made
specifically for the goal of creating not just the
economic value of housing or businesses, yet the
larger sociological value of community."


For more, see: [[Community as Industry]]


=More Information=

* ÉLAN—Fourth World Services, PO Box 1666, Denver, CO 80201-1666—A. Allen Butcher—4thWorld@consultant.com

* For those interested in forms of intentional community which involve the accumulation of commonly-owned property, information can be found at:
http://www.culturemagic.org/TimeBasedEconomics.html

* More detail on the subjects introduced in this paper
are available as free PDF file downloads at the
website: www.CultureMagic.org 

#For process material see: "Light and Shadows." 
#For incorporation: "Community, Inc." 
#For land trusts: "Geonomics and Community Power." 
#For nonmonetary economies: "Time-Based Economics."


See also:

#[[Community Economics]]
#[[Time-Based Economics]]



[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Community Economics]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]