
==Description==

'''1. Jorge Ferrer:'''

"Transpersonal cocreation refers to dynamic interaction between embodied human beings and the mystery in the bringing forth of spiritual insights, practices, states, and worlds (Ferrer, 2002, 2008b). This dimension is groundedin the
principle of equiplurality, according to which there can potentially be multiple spiritual enactions that are nonetheless equally holistic and emancipatory.

This principle frees participatory spirituality from dogmatic commitment to any single spiritual system and paves the way for a genuine, metaphysically and pragmatically-grounded, spiritual pluralism. Transpersonal cocreation affirms the importance of being open to spirit beyond (i.e., the transcendent dimension of the mystery) and makes participatory spirituality fundamentally inquiry-driven."
(https://www.academia.edu/3803021/Introduction_to_Participatory_Spirituality)


'''2. Michel Bauwens:'''

Transpersonal co-creation refers to interaction with the mystery. It is grounded in the Equiplurality principle, which affirms there are potentially multiple enactions that can be emancipatory. It fees from allegiance to any single spiritual system. It is fundamentally open and inquiry-driven.

(summarized from chapter 1 of [[Participation and the Mystery]])

==Source==

'''* Book: Participation and the Mystery. Transpersonal Essays in Psychology, Education, and Religion.'''

==More information==
[[Participatory Spirituality]]:
#[[Equipotentiality]]
#[[Equiprimacy]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Cosmobiological]]