
=Typology=

As summarized by Micha Narberhaus:

"But what is really so dangerous about our current situation, and what do our political leaders really mean when they say that democracy is in danger and we must save it?


Subscribed

Democracy is often said to mean 'rule by the people'. Our representative democracies are a form of government in which the people elect representatives to make decisions 'on behalf of the people'. This is what the physicist and cultural commentator Eric Weinstein calls Type A democracy. The essence of this definition of democracy is that it is ultimately about the will of the people, as opposed to the rule of a few (oligarchy) or the rule of one (monarchy).

Contrary to what many people who hear the slogans about saving democracy every day probably fear, I don't think our political elites really believe that it is likely that Donald Trump or the European populist right-wing parties will abolish Type A democracy. Meloni in Italy and Orbán in Hungary don't seem to be trying, and Trump didn't try during his first term. Of course, one could speculate and argue that if Trump won't accept the results of the 2020 election and still says he won, he's capable of anything. Some people apparently really believe that he is a new Hitler, and after the AfD came first in the recent elections in the German state of Thuringia, a senior journalist on German public broadcaster ZDF compared the moment to the beginning of the Second World War, when Nazi Germany attacked Poland in 1939.

While this journalist, and I'm sure many others, genuinely believe that we are on the brink of a new Nazi era, it doesn't seem that this is what the strategists in our political elites who are driving the global campaign to save democracy really fear. They are motivated by something else entirely, and the will of the people is the last thing they are interested in protecting.

When asked on a talk show why the German AfD and other European populist parties could be dangerous for democracy, the renowned German historian Michael Wolffsohn cited their dangerous proximity to Putin's Russia and their sceptical, even negative attitude towards NATO membership as his two main reasons.

This, of course, has nothing to do with Type A democracy. Rather, Wolffsohn seems to define democracy as something quite different, which could be described as a set of institutions and political dogmas of the West that cannot be questioned. He is referring to what Eric Weinstein calls Type B democracy, “a set of institutions that once grew out of democracy and that must be kept strong” as part of our rules-based international order, which includes NATO, the EU, NAFTA and so on. Type B democracy also implies a sometimes explicit and often implicit agreement between the United States and its European allies that the United States will use its military power to protect Europe and its global trade routes, and in return European nations will never undermine important political and commercial interests of the United States.

This international order has been hugely beneficial to Western elites and the wider Western educated professional managerial class. But in recent decades the Western working classes have been adversely affected by this international order of free trade and globalisation. Many manufacturing jobs have moved to lower-wage countries, and recent mass immigration has put downward pressure on wages across the West. The falling life expectancy of the American working class and the widespread poverty in the old industrial towns of northern England show how badly these people have been hit by what was supposed to be a win-win economic order.

The rise of populist nationalism across the West in recent years is a rebellion against Type B democracy. What unites the national populist movement is not fascism or Nazism, but a rejection of the primacy of universalism as the underlying principle of the Western order.

As Mary Harrington argues, the internationalist consensus that has prevailed since America's victory in the Second World War, and which lies at the heart of Type B democracy, rejects the idea that there should be a national in-group to be treated preferentially. The West's free trade treaties, open border policies and asylum treaties, as well as its adherence to human rights conventions and celebration of multiculturalism, can be seen as a direct consequence of this.

...

Our political and economic elites have a vested interest in maintaining the status quo of free trade and cheap labour through immigration. Type B democracy has brought them enormous power and wealth, which they are understandably reluctant to give up. They may even have legitimate reasons to defend the rules-based international order that go beyond self-interest. Fundamentally changing an existing order always risks creating chaos, and chaos is not preferable to the status quo.

But instead of allowing honest debate and discussion about what is at stake in the West, our elites demonise those who challenge the status quo as far-right, fascist and undemocratic. They make this about being morally good or bad, and thereby stifle any real conversation.

Ironically, the hysterical measures they take to preserve Type B democracy often clearly violate all the important principles of Type A democracy, which is what most people understand the term democracy to mean."

(https://michanarberhaus.substack.com/p/the-meaning-of-saving-democracy)

[[Category:Democracy]]