'''= Norwegian and international commons researcher and advocate'''

URL = http://www.sv.ntnu.no/iss/Erling.Berge/

== Bio ==

"Erling Berge is professor of sociology at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) and professor II of property rights theory at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences (UMB).

Berge has his MA from the University of Bergen and Ph.D. (sociology) from Boston University, 1981. At NTNU Berge has mainly taught research methods at master’s level, but he has also taught courses in institutional theory. Berge has presented research within demography, urban and regional development, economic sociology and the management of natural resources. His current research on land tenure in Malawi is in line with a longstanding interest in property rights systems and how these affect the usage of nature. 

'''Berge has been a member of the council of the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]] (IASC) during 1995-2006; during the period 2002-2004 he served as president.  He is founding co-editor-in-chief of the International Journal of the Commons''' (http://www.thecommonsjournal.org/)."

== Publications ==

Overview of papers and interventions by Erling Berge at http://www.svt.ntnu.no/iss/Erling.Berge/PapersPDFformat.html

A selection:

'''Reports:'''

Berge, Erling and Lars Carlsson, eds. 2003. Commons: Old and New.<br>
Proceedings from a workshop, 11-13 March 2003, at the Centre for Advanced Study, Oslo.<br>
Trondheim: Department of Sociology and Political Science, NTNU.

Berge, E., ed. 2006. Legislation on commons (Community property/ bienes comunales) in Navarra
and some notes from visits to Ultzama and Ituren.<br>
Trondheim: Department of Sociology and Political Science, NTNU.

E. Berge, D.Kambewa, S.Khaila, A.Munthali, and H.Wiig. 2009. Malawian Land Tenure and Social Capital. Documentation.<br>
Trondheim: Department of Sociology and Political Science, NTNU. 

'''Papers:'''

2007.  Common Property Debate: A review<br>
Paper for the Ph.D. Course "Political Ecology in Marine and Terrestrial Contexts - The Social Science of Natural Resource Management", Tromsø, 23-24 April 2007

2006. Paper for the Sixth International Conference in Aix en Provence 25-28 June, 2006<br>
From multiple stakeholders to dominium plenum and back again: from rights of common to World Heritage Sites<br>
Published in French as<br>
Berge, E. 2007. De la multiplicité des ayant droits à la propriété pleine et entière et inversement. Des "Commons" aux sites de valeur mondiale. In "Les Ressources Foncières. Droits de Propriété, économie et environnement, ed. Max Falque, Henri Lamotte, and Jean-Francois Saglio, 379-395. Bruxelles: Bruylant.

A short version of the paper (3 pages) From rights of common to World Heritage Sites

2005. Land Reform: Formalising Sámi Land Rights in Norway.<br>
In Discourses and Silences. Indigenous Peoples, Risks and Resistance, eds. Garth Cant, Anake Goodall, and Justine Inns, 87-102.<br>
Christchurch: Department of Geography, University of Canterbury.

== Engagements ==

=== Commons specific ===

* The international Journal of the Commons http://www.thecommonsjournal.org/
* International Association for the Study of Commons < http://www.iasc-commons.org/>, See also < http://www.indiana.edu/~iascp/index.html>

Erling Berge has performed various research studies of commons organization in Norway, Spain, and Malawi

=== Other ===

* Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) < http://www.ntnu.edu/>
* Norwegian University of Life Sciences (UMB) < http://www.umb.no/english> 

== More Information ==

More information is available at http://www.sv.ntnu.no/iss/Erling.Berge/

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Norway]]
[[Category:Commons]]