
=Discussion=

Russ Volckmann:

"I am getting interested in the implications of Ervin Laszlo’s (2004) Integral Theory of Everything (TOE) and how it informs an integral/developmental approach. His introduction of the Akashic field as an aspects of physics, cosmology and consciousness suggestions solutions to understanding nonlocality and other puzzles of physics. How do such suggestions relate to integral theory and inform ways we have of understanding leadership? We can bring in the work of just about anyone who has something to say that informs the development a theory, mapping and modeling as a way of making meaning that informs practice.

...

Ervin Laszlo posits a TOE that brings together the fields of cosmology, quantum physics, biology and the study of consciousness. He states,

"At its cutting edge, the new cosmology discovers a world where the universe does not end in ruin, and the new physics, the new biology, and the new consciousness research recognize that in this world life and mind are integral elements and not accidental by-products. All these elements come together in the informed universe—a comprehensive and intensely meaningful universe, cornerstone of the unified conceptual scheme that can tie together all the diverse phenomena of the world: the integral theory of everything."

— Erwin Laszlo, Science and the Akashic Field, p. 15.

He presents the idea of the quantum vacuum, which transports light, energy, pressure and sound. This transportation occurs through torsion waves that link the universe at a group speed of the order of one billion times the speed of light. Then he adds the additional factor of the comparable transportation of information at these rates. Furthermore, information is held holographically whereby all such types in the universe hold all information held by one of a “type” at the same time. Such a model accounts for anomalies like non-locality. Without turning this into a treatise on Laszlo’s work we can see that his theory sets up a way of understanding “everything” that is very different from Wilber’s work."

(https://integralleadershipreview.com/5492-dialogue-integral-theory-into-integral-action-part-1/)

[[Category:Integral Theory]]