
'''* Master's Thesis: Lucas Barreiro Lemos. COMMONS-BASED TECHNOLOGY IN THE DIGITAL ERA: THE CASE OF ESTCUBE. TALLINN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY,  2019'''

URL = https://digikogu.taltech.ee/en/Download/98e8bd52-7f70-4570-8f00-3ddb9c1dcfaa/hisomandilphinevthnoloogiadigitaalajastulES.pdf

=Contextual Quote=

Lucas Barreiro Lemos:

"CubeSats have no commanders or crew; they are not piloted but programmed to perform
specific in-orbit tasks. ESTCube initiative was started by a generation that has grown up in
the Soviet Union, and ESTCube-1 was partially conceived like a spacecraft crew-like
mission, composed by commanders, officers and experts of different shorts. The imaginary
and narrative of the project shifted as a younger new generation took over the leadership roles
during ESTCube-2 development, leaving the soviet union space program references behind
them. What are the core values of this community of young practitioners, amateurs, students
and space enthusiasts? We will explore ESTCube values through three main areas:
hackerspace and CBPP values; open communication; hands-on education."


=Abstract=

"With the rise of digital manufacturing, [[Commons-Based Peer Production]] (CBPP) practices are
moving from distributed production of digital information into the realm of material
production. [[ESTCube]], a [[CubeSat]] Estonian grassroots initiative, represents an emergent case
of [[Design Global Manufacture Local]] (DGML), which is a new productive model that merges
CBPP with digital manufacturing, proposing a blueprint for CBPP practices in physical
manufacturing. Three points support our conclusion: ESTCube represents an in-progress
extreme case of Open Source Hardware (OSH) innovation practice; a critical case of CBPP in
digital manufacturing, presenting the main features of hackerspaces/makerspaces; moreover,
ESTCube's global organization also resembles CBPP ecosystems in the realm of digital
manufacturing."

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]

[[Category:Estonia]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]