
=Discussion=

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

“The Estonian Student Satellite Program (ESTCube Program) is a  locally adapted version of the CubeSat Program. Through this  program, a workforce of volunteers is recruited to work on  ESTCube CubeSats (Noorma et al., 2013; Slavinskis, Reinkubjas,  et al., 2015). Tartu Observatory (TO) and the University of Tartu  (UT) have been the main hosts of the program. Since 2018, the  former is an institute within the latter. They provide working  space, labs, and testing facilities (Iakubivskyi et al., 2020).  Several ESTCube members have become department leaders,  researchers, and engineers in these host institutions. 

Typically, college-level students join the ESTCube  Program, but the recruitment process starts earlier. To inform  about space science and their work, ESTCube members  organize and take part in several activities: workshops, presentations, and science outreach events. During summers,  there are special activities to train high-school students. The  Summer Academy brings together high school and university students to TO (Janson, 2018). There, students can participate in ESTCube activities through the Science Camp  
(Teaduslaager) and the Science Task Force (Teadusmalev). The ESTCube Program provides hands-on education for  students, complementing their formal education. Students  work on goal-oriented tasks related to some aspect of the  CubeSat. Responsibilities, the difficulty level of the work  tasks, and other features are decided on aptitudes, capacities,  experience, and disponibility of the students. Team leaders  supervise and coordinate students, but students are expected  to work independently on their work tasks. Recruitees often  write their theses (BSc, MSc, or PhD) on some aspect of the  CubeSat. The first satellite produced by ESTCube, called  ESTCube-1, has resulted in over 30 BSc, 20 MSc, and 2 PhD  defended theses (Slavinskis, Reinkubjas, et al., 2015). ESTCube members are also involved in other peripheral  activities, often as amateurs. Passion for science and technology is their core intrinsic motivation, along with meeting  like-minded people. Their areas of interest include radio  communication, robotics, science Olympiads, hackathons,  programming, game development, or desktop fabrication.  For example, an ESTCube member has created an online  database on nanosatellites (nanosats.eu). This database was  originally supported by an EU grant, but since 2014 it is regularly updated every 2 or 3 months. 

During the development of their ESTCube-1 (2008- 2013), the ESTCube community did not formalize the initiative into any legal form. ESTCube members were tied by  shared values, having a common goal: to produce and launch  a CubeSat, making Estonia a space nation (Noorma et al.,  2013). They envision space exploration as an activity that  should benefit humanity as a whole. Membership is open for  everyone who shares their vision and their values and is will ing to contribute to the project with inclusive community  development prioritized over efficiency. 

Community building on shared values is crucial for  ESTCube community persistence through the long CubeSat  development periods. The principal stress factor came from  working with an accelerated schedule after accepting an earlier-than-expected launch opportunity from Arianespace  (Slavinskis, Pajusalu, et al., 2015). The iterative prototyping  of satellites is only possible through successive prototypes  and models of the flight-ready satellite. Once a CubeSat is in  orbit, there is no possibility to bring it down to Earth for  hardware improvements or reparations. Simulations (digital  models) and physical tests in testing facilities (e.g., testing  functions, systems integration tests, and environmental tests)  are performed to test the technology. ESTCube members  report strong life-long bonds with other team members,  developed through years of close collaboration—especially  during the latest stages of development of ESTCube-1.

In the case of ESTCube, researchers, engineers, and space  enthusiasts were the instigators. ESTCube is “a combination  of various initiatives—education, science, technology, as  well as student and volunteer organizations” (Kalnina et al.,  2018, p. 2). The ESTCube community does not own fixed  assets or property: the host organizations provide working  space and lab access. 

To this day, ESTCube does not have one principal source  of funding. Several outlets are used to finance the costs of  manufacturing technology for the CubeSats, the launching  costs, and to financially support its members. The European  Commission, The European Space Agency (ESA), and  Estonian grants and scholarships (Lätt et al., 2014), a crowd 
funding campaign (Kalnina et al., 2018), donors, or sponsor ships, are some of the funding sources that ESTCube has  been tapping through the years. 
The complexity of ESTCube’s organizational model  gradually expanded. Having an international network of  partners, over 200 students divided into a larger number of  working tasks, involvement in international regulatory bod ies, partnering with ESA, among other areas of activity,  become an administrative burden. The organization could  not operate much longer without a formal legal structure. At the beginning of 2017, 32 new and old members of ESTCube  founded the Estonian Student Satellite Foundation. The initial objective of ESTCube was to build one  CubeSat and launch it into orbit. The mission was accomplished in 2013, when ESTCube-1 was launched into Earth's  orbit. The initiative was refounded after launching  ESTCube-1. The transition period from ESTCube senior  leaders to the new generation leading ESTCube-2 satellite  took approximately 2 years. Currently, the second CubeSat  (ESTCube-2) is in an advanced development phase under the  guidance of the Estonian Student Satellite Foundation. ESTCube-1 provided Estonia with the space technology  proficiency needed to attain permanent membership status in  the ESA. The status of Estonia as a member in ESA brought  new opportunities for ESTCube and its host organizations to  expand their involvement in new activities, both locally and  internationally. The same year that Estonia joined ESA,  ESTCube-1 micro-camera was selected to be a payload of  the European Student Earth Orbiter satellite (the third mission within ESA's Education Satellite Program; Noorma,  2016). Also, in 2019 Estonia was invited to participate in  ESA's “Comet Interceptor” mission. ESTCube also influences some decisions of its hosting institutions. Acquisition  of lab testing machinery, rearrangement of departments and  academic curricula, selection of grants and project proposals  take into consideration the ESTCube needs and outcomes. Producing knowledge and technology in-house is one of  the priorities of ESTCube and its hosting organizations.  However, procuring the machinery to manufacture space  technology was never an option. Instead, a network of exter nal partners is used to produce components designed and  developed by ESTCube members."

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)

[[Category:Estonia]]
[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Design]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Cases]]