'''= "Alliance to coordinate policy efforts among the teams building core onchain infrastructure".''' [https://paragraph.com/@epaa/announcing-ethereum-protocol-advocacy-alliance]

URL =

''"The Alliance is a voluntary coordination forum and is not a legal entity."''


=Description=

EPAA:

"the Ethereum Protocol Advocacy Alliance to coordinate policy efforts among the teams building core onchain infrastructure. Together, we secure over $100 billion in assets through open, non-custodial protocols that operate without intermediaries. Drawing on our pragmatic and technical experience, we will advocate for onchain solutions to regulatory challenges.

...

The Alliance is launching with an initial cohort of leading Ethereum protocols with strong track records, including Aave Labs, Aragon, Curve, Lido Labs Foundation, Spark Foundation, The Graph Foundation, and Uniswap Foundation. These protocol builders bring deep experience from years of stewarding Ethereum infrastructure. They have learned from past challenges and are uniquely positioned to help shape practical solutions for the future.

...

We’re partnering with aligned organizations including the DeFi Education Fund, the Decentralization Research Center, the European Crypto Initiative. These groups are already leading critical advocacy efforts. The Alliance aims to bolster their work by contributing technical and pragmatic input from teams building core infrastructure."

(https://paragraph.com/@epaa/announcing-ethereum-protocol-advocacy-alliance)


=Policy=

EPAA:

"Our Priorities

To ensure Ethereum’s core infrastructure remains resilient and globally accessible, we have aligned on the following priorities to guide our policy engagement and define the outcomes we work toward.

Protect the neutrality of the protocol layer: Non-custodial, open protocols form the foundation of decentralized finance. They must remain neutral and permissionless. Regulation should not interfere the with code itself or how it is developed.

Advance onchain transparency as a compliance path: Onchain data provides a real-time, verifiable source of compliance for protocols. Regulation should not duplicate onchain information offchain or treat permissionless infrastructure as if it were an intermediary requiring registration, reporting, or disclosure.

Preserve flexibility for protocol innovation: Tests, criteria, and definitions should reflect how onchain protocols function today and are evolving in practice. Regulation should avoid overly broad rules and requirements or rigid standards that constrain innovation or hamper the diversity of technical infrastructure implementations, now or in the future.

Uphold global permissionless access: Protocols must be able to operate globally, enabling borderless and permissionless access and participation. Global guidance should avoid fragmenting access along jurisdictional lines or undermining composability, interoperability, and liquidity."

(https://paragraph.com/@epaa/announcing-ethereum-protocol-advocacy-alliance)

[[Category:Crypto_Politics]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:Policy]]