Excerpts from https://lists.thing.net/pipermail/idc/2008-February/003139.html.

=Description=


Adam Arvidsson introduces the third circuit of value:


"Brands can be understood to embody a third important form of capital  
in the knowledge economy, along with material capital and knowledge  
capital. Like knowledge capital (IPs) they work to establish a  
monopoly rent from a resource that is essentially socially produced.  
Unlike IPs this resource mainly consists in accumulated affect and  
sociality. (The value of a brand depends on a mass of people  
maintaining a relatively stable pattern of affectivity around it, a  
brand is in this sense something a kin to, almost , a loosely knitted  
community, or maybe a community of weak ties) This way brands are a  
form of ethical capital: they build on the ability and desire of free  
(that is not entirely commanded) actors to create community, in the  
absence of given hierarchies or monetary obligations (cf.  
Aristoteles’ etikos).


'''Brands thus establish a third circuit of value (M-C-M’) that is  
central to informational capitalism.''' 

The first, material, circuit of  
value is the classic one described by Marx, value is extracted by  
submitting commanded labor to discipline. In this situation the means  
of production are monopolized by capital and labor time can work as  
an (approximate) measure that allows the systematic abstraction of  
concrete labor into abstract value. 

The second circuit is that of  
knowledge capital. This builds in part on the direct command over  
salaried labor and the ‘classic’ abstraction of surplus value. To an  
increasing extent however it builds on the ability to appropriate  
socially produced resources that are not directly ‘owned’ by capital  
and that, consequently cannot be directly commanded. This can be the  
results of state sponsored investments in research and development,  
it can be the synergic productivity of social interaction among  
knowledge workers, research institutions and knowledge intensive  
firms (learning regions, creative cities) and increasingly it is a  
matter of the direct appropriation of knowledge and innovation  
generated in the everyday interaction among ordinary consumers (user- 
led innovation systems, crowdsourcing, etc.). 

'''Brands constitute a  
third circuit that appropriates and commodifies the ethical practice  
of ordinary consumers: their ability and desire to build community.'''  

This ethical practice is itself the dialectical result of the  
(virtual) completion of the capitalist subsumption of the social.  
That process has produced two important outcomes. 

First, the  diffusion of consumer goods, media culture and ultimately networked  
ICTs has greatly enhanced the ability of ordinary people to produce a  
symbolic and affective – ethical- framework for life. What Marx has  
called ‘General Intellect’ has thus come at the disposition of  
everybody, as mass intellectuality. 

Second, the subsumption of the  
social has shattered traditional life forms and generated a  
widespread isolation and alienation. Networked ICTs enable people to  
overcome this condition by generating new forms of sociality. Indeed  
as new media scholars like Danah Boyd and Jean Luis Prada (among  
others) have argued it is mainly the desire for sociality that  
motivates the use of social media. The source of brand value is  
thus the immanent ethical productivity of the social, its new and  
empowered ability and desire to produce community."
(https://lists.thing.net/pipermail/idc/2008-February/003139.html)



=Discussion=


==The Value of Ethical Capital==


Adam Arvidsson:

"What creates these ethical values? They are not the direct results of  
investments in labor time. You can work as much as you want on your  
music and style, that, in itself will not make you a rock star.  
Rather, suddenly something happens and then, you’ve made it. What  
determines your value are the quality and quantity of affect  
(attention) that you have been able to accumulate. The relation  
between the productive time invested in a project and the mass affect  
that it is able to attract is non-linear, or viral, to use a popular  
marketing term.[2] Models could be found in contemporary mathematical  
theories of network dynamics, and perhaps in Gabriel Tarde’s theories  
of the role of public sentiment.[3] Indeed, the logical relation  
between value and labor is rather the reverse of that usually  
associated with the capitalist economy. Once you have a sufficiently  
attractive brand, you will attract an abundance of free labor as well  
as other resources. Linux has no problems recruiting new programmers:  
people want to work for them for free; people pay to use brands in  
their everyday life and thus freely co-produce their ethical value  
through their constructive consumer practices. On financial markets,  
capital flows to the most attractive brands.  More means more in this  
case, if you have accumulated a significant stock of ethical capital,  
people will freely give you their time and further attention, or, on  
financial markets, their capital.


The logic behind ethical capital is political rather than economic.  
Or better it pertains to what Weber saw as the charismatic,  
irrational side of politics. If you, or your brand, can mobilize the  
affective energies of the polis, its members will freely put their  
resources at your disposition. (Fight for your cause; work for you;  
vote for you; give to you of their hospitality- indeed, as Weber  
claimed, peaceful charismatic leaders mainly live off donations from  
the community that they have created[4]). The source of this valuable  
charisma is, as in Weber’s classic analysis, the ability to create  
community. (By contrast the economic logic of value would be based on  
the ability to command labor (as in the oikos) and thus measure its  
contribution in terms of labor time.) The predominance of brand  
value, reputation, ‘ethical capital’, corporate ethics and similar  
entities as elements to the immeasurable intangible values that are  
increasingly important to contemporary capitalism is an empirical  
indication of the fact that this political logic of value is becoming  
increasingly influential in informational capitalism.


Today such political values can only be translated into one abstract  
equivalent, monetary exchange value. The question is however, can  
such political values be made tradable in other ways; and how, in  
that case, would such a system look like?"
(https://lists.thing.net/pipermail/idc/2008-February/003139.html)



==Towards a general exchange of esteem==

Adam Arvidsson:

"One point of departure could be Brennan & Pettit’s idea of an  
‘economy of esteem’. Coming from a background of academic economics,  
they show how that discipline has continuously devalued the  
importance of honor and esteem (central to its precursors like Smith  
and Hume) in favor of a monetary economy of commodities. Yet, they  
argue the economy of esteem is still at work as a powerful force in  
everyday life, in particular within academia (from which most of  
their examples derive). The point of the ‘economy of esteem’ is that  
esteem is a scarce good conferred on an actor by the public in  
relation to his or her performance in some area. This means that even  
though the actor might be motivated to perform well in an area in the  
prospect of achieving esteem, performance is never directly exchanged  
for esteem. There are two reasons for this. One, because esteem is  
subjectively and voluntarily conferred at the actor in question:  
there is no point at which he or she (or they) can righteously claim  
esteem from the public. And, two, because doing so, claiming esteem,  
goes against the principle that the charismatic actor must appear not  
to act directly in order to increase his or her charisma. A brand  
like Nike can acquire esteem if it donates an empty building wall in  
Berlin for young people to express themselves on. It will loose  
esteem in so far as the strategic intentions behind this ‘gift’  
become apparent and talked about. So esteem should not, as Brennan&  
Pettit do, be understood as something that is directly exchanged for  
performance. [5] Since the relation between esteem and performance is  
not subject to rational calculation- it is rather an unpredictable,  
non-linear relation, there is no possibility for any rational  
exchange. Rather the relation between esteem and performance should  
be understood along the lines of a gift economy. If I give this  
performance to the community, I can expect to receive roughly that  
amount of esteem. But there is no legitimate way I can complain, take  
action or withdraw my performance if I receive less esteem than I had  
expected.  But can esteem in one community be exchanged for esteem in  
another?


Traditional systems of honor and esteem have worked in close-knit  
communities. Scaling them towards the contemporary information  
economy will necessarily entail making esteem transferable between  
different communities with different value standards. What is needed  
to accomplish this is a general medium of exchange, which like  
monetary exchange value can guarantee the transferability to values.  
Such a medium would be different from traditional currencies however:


The amount of esteem an actor can acquire thus has a non-linear  
relation to his or her measurable performance. This is mainly because  
esteem is a multifaceted affective quality that originates in  
subjective judgment that cannot be entirely rationalized: it is an  
irrational quality in the Weberian sense of that term. So any  
objective measure of esteem- the first precondition for making it  
tradable- could not depart from some common measurable standard (like  
labor time)- but would had to consist in an aggregation of a  
multitude of subjective judgments. It would be a sort of bottom-up  
currency, where values are defined by the continuous input of public  
ratings.


Two factors speak for the possibility for the emergence of such  
general media of exchange of esteem. One factor is the increasing  
transparency and visibility of social action. The flip-side to  
increasing surveillance is in this sense the possibility for a new  
ethics: everything you do will be potentially visible to everyone.  
One’s public person could thus form a common point of reference that  
unites estimates of esteem from different communities. Personality  
becomes a generalized medium of communication. The second factor is  
the socialization of the means of organization in networked ICTs. The  
establishment of representative money from the Sumer and onwards has  
been contingent on the administrative capacity of the state apparatus  
controlling the money supply. Now such administrative capacity is at  
the hands of virtually everyone, and consequently we already see the  
emergence of alternative currencies like LETS or Open Money. Some of  
these currencies could be esteem-based. Indeed the world’s second  
largest currency, air-miles, already is.[6] Essentially air-miles is  
a measure of the affective appreciation that an airline has of you as  
loyal customer, and they can be traded for a wide range of gifts:  
free trips, upgrades, car rentals etc. (Again air-miles do not have  
an objective exchange value, strictly speaking, since their relation  
to possible gifts is subjectively and variably determined by the  
airline itself. Relationship should rather be understood as that of a  
stable gift economy. I give my loyalty to the airline. I can  
reasonably expect the airline to give me a certain kind of gifts in  
return.) Slashdot Karma is another one, quantifying the esteem you  
have accumulated by contributing to various blogs, by systematically  
integrating a multitude of subjective ratings of your performance."
(https://lists.thing.net/pipermail/idc/2008-February/003139.html)


=References=

See original article at https://lists.thing.net/pipermail/idc/2008-February/003139.html


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]