
= "Relational worldviews and ontologies are increasingly relevant for our understanding of humanity’s role in the Anthropocene"


=Description=

Zack Walsh:

"It is not surprising then that relational worldviews and ontologies like those found in Buddhism are increasingly relevant for our understanding of humanity’s role in the Anthropocene. The complexity of life in the Anthropocene not only questions the relationship between humans and nature; it also demands the development of an ethics that respects the dignity and agency of nonhuman actors, both living and nonliving. Extending commoning beyond peer-to-peer economics, so that we extend care to every being, becomes possible if it is enacted by commoners who follow an ethics of what I call intra-subjectivity. An ethics of intra-subjectivity demands understanding that nature is not an element separated from us, but co-produced in our daily interactions." 
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)


=Discussion=

Zack Walsh:

"An ethics of intra-subjectivity distinguishes itself from the notion of inter-dependence,
in so far as it highlights how relationships are not only
externally dependent, but internally dependent and always present to
one’s inner awareness. Intra-subjectivity thus explains how all beings
are related vis-à-vis our experience of one another. Thus, the deeper
we connect with our own suffering, the more we realize our suffering’s
constituent relation to the suffering of others and the more we act to
serve others as extensions of ourselves.

An ethics of intra-subjectivity allows us to more intimately understand
how we co-produce nature-cultures and how they may more
positively address systemic socio-ecological crises. Developing an ethics
of care that extends to the many differently abled, human and nonhuman,
beings in the Anthropocene entails queering our notions of
subjectivity and agency. This will help to answer complex questions
about what it means to be human, whose lives matter, how we gift and
protect human dignity, and how we envision the collective conditions
of transformation toward a more convivial and hospitable world.

Commoning is a mode of relating to each other, both materially
and interpersonally, through an enhanced understanding of our
non-separateness, our co-dependence, and together-ness. Well-established
commons that integrate cooperatives and grassroots organizations,
such as Cecosesola in Venezuela or Cooperativa Integral Catalana
in Spain, provide for the needs of everyone in their diverse communities
by practicing transparency, equality, and respect. Building trust
and exercising responsibility are the essential ingredients that allow for
successful self-management and self-organization.20 As described by
ubuntu21, I am because you are. Applied to the Buddhist figure of the
bodhisattva, one might understand that one’s liberation is co-produced
by another’s liberation, as an entanglement of our worldly and spiritual
fates. Expanding inclusivity becomes about enhancing everyone’s freedom—not
just the marginalized. And since consciousness is supported
and maintained by material infrastructures and desires, material transformation
and transformation of consciousness go hand-in-hand."
(https://arrow-journal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Dharma-Degrowth-Climate-Change-Vol.-5.1.pdf)

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]