=Overview=

Philippe Pochet, General director ETUI:

"The work of the ETUI as you know it would not be the same if our researchers and trainers could not rely on a broad range of thematic and non-thematic academic, experts and trainers’ networks. They assist in compiling information and developing lines of argument in areas that are relevant for European trade unions and they help us cover all EU member states on these topics. Researchers, experts and trainers, both internal and external, regularly participate in conferences, forums and workshops. They maintain regular contact with the European institutions and provide in-depth expertise to the ETUC. Examples of such networks are the Trade Union related Research Institutes (TURI) network, the research network on workers' participation in Europe (WPEurope ), the Transnational Trade Union Rights Experts Network (TTUR ), and the research network on Corporate Governance (GOODCORP).

The ETUI also regularly participates in European and international projects. On 25-27 October the CRIMT-SSHRC Partnership Project meeting on Institutional Experimentation for Better (or Worse) Work of which the ETUI is also a partner took place. The project seeks to build knowledge and understanding of how to make work better. It focuses on actors in the world of work who engage in social experimentation and on whether that experimentation leads to work being better or worse.

The ETUI is also an associated partner of the Economic POlicies for the Global transition (EPOG+) which is an Erasmus Mundus Joint Master Degree in economics, supported by the European Union. It offers an integrated Master's programme on the (digital, socioeconomic, ecological) transition processes with a pluralist approach and interdisciplinary perspectives and involves more than 40 partners and associate partners in Europe and the world. The ETUI’s input allows the linkage of several themes that are treated within the EPOG+ programme: the analysis of economic crisis and socioeconomic transition, sustainable development, industrial policy and digital transition, labour market analysis and the future of the EU.

The ETUI is member of the Advisory Board of InGRID which is a network of distributed but integrating European research infrastructures. InGRID research infrastructures serve the social sciences community that wants to make an evidence-based contribution to a European policy strategy of inclusive growth. As a member of the Stakeholder Advisory Platform we also support the project EUSOCIALCIT whose overarching objective is to provide scientific analysis and examine alternative policy scenarios that support the European Union's aim of strengthening EU social citizenship. Last but not least, the ETUI is an associated partner of SODITREC - a research project aimed at providing a more comprehensive analysis of company-level social dialogue in the European Union. The scientific results of the project will serve for orientation of EU policymaking and legislation in the field of industrial relations."
(email November 2019)

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Research]]