Eugene, Oregon, and the surrounding area have many P2P projects underway. [[User:Matthew_McNatt|Matthew McNatt]] began this list and will be adding more here.

== Incremental Housing ==
In the United States, the per-unit cost of public housing is often over double the per-unit cost of market-rate housing. Organizations in Eugene, Oregon, have been working to provide housing to marginalized people, some from historically under-resourced people groups, using innovative, incremental approaches.

What possibilities might develop if, parallel to or in lieu of public housing on top-dollar real estate, P2P-minded people supported the creation of housing cooperatives (whether in tiny homes, mobile homes, or common houses) located off robust public transportation routes, outside of but with easy access to cities.

If more cities subsidize the creation of such co-ops and the founding of community fab labs, might we have more people *owning* their homes, participating in community self-governance, and able to produce goods and services that they and others recognize as valuable? If this sounds too pie-in-the-sky, take a look at this chain of decentralized solutions, already being implemented in Eugene, Oregon, and surrounding communities. There really is an alternative to centralized bloat!

'''1.''' [https://communitysupportedshelters.org/ Community Supported Shelters] →<br>

(via [https://www.squareonevillages.org/ SquareOne Villages])<br>
'''2.''' [https://www.squareonevillages.org/opportunity Opportunity Village Eugene] →<br>
'''3.''' [http://emeraldvillageeugene.org/ Emerald Village Eugene] →<br>

(via [https://casaoforegon.org/ CASA of Oregon])<br>
'''4.''' [http://www.vidalea.coop/ Vida-Lea Community Cooperative] OR<br>

(via SquareOne Villages and [https://www.cultivateplace.com/ Cultivate, Inc.])<br>
'''4.''' [https://www.squareonevillages.org/c-street/ C-Street Cooperative]<br>

Here is SquareOne Villages' latest project: [https://eead3e67-3a27-4098-aa25-9fa572882b1f.filesusr.com/ugd/6e1afc_4a6677236fff44b3a18e0deef42d218c.pdf Peace Village] (PDF) 

All of this continues parallel to tent shelters run by St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County, which leads to (→) their more traditional subsidized housing, which they've taken to building above commercial spaces, where they run thrift stores or, even, rent out to defray expenses. Their efforts were among the only positive solutions chronicled in [https://www.foxnews.com/shows/tucker-carlson-tonight Tucker Carlson Tonight]'s survey of [https://youtube.com/watch?v=_heEF3rKB4I&t=183s how West Coast cities have been dealing with homelessness] (YouTube).

[[Category:Places]]