

ENCES is at http://www.ences.eu/

=Description=

"A new academic organisation dealing with copyright in a European context was founded on 29 June 2010 in Berlin. The "European Network for Copyright in Support of Education and Science (ENCES)" is working towards the improvement of the European Copyright legislation with a focus on the needs of education and science. The members of the group consider worldwide and unlimited access to information a necessity so that European researchers and academics can continue to work on the cutting-edge of research and stay connected to the international developments in science. Even though digital communication made information more available and accessible than ever before in the history of mankind, copyright regimes increasingly erect artificial borders that get in the way of scientific freedom and the pursuit of knowledge. 

In the European Union copyright legislation is no longer merely a national issue but operates on the level of a system of European framework directives. For that reason it is crucial for the European research community to come together and work through the pressing issues surrounding intellectual property and information regimes in order to be able to represent their essential interests. All individuals and organisations supporting the objectives of ENCES and residing in a European country are welcome to become members of the association. ENCES is presently in the process of completing the bureaucratic requirements to register as an association in accordance with the German law and subsequently plans to apply for charitable status. As soon as the registration will be accomplished the first full general meeting of ENCES will take place."
(http://www.urheberrechtsbuendnis.de/pressemitteilung0510.html.en)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Science]]