= formerly the [http://en.technocracynet.eu/index.php Network of European Technocrats]

= Description =

EOS aims to develop an alternative to our current system through the appliance of science. We aim to test out our ideas and to build on solid empirical foundations.

EOS is comprised of members and contributors that span the globe, for whom the internet is the main medium of communication. EOS is organized along decentralized principles and focuses largely on the development and dissemination of the ideas presented by EOS members. Local activities such as study circles, lectures and both formal and informal meetings are held and lead by members, as well as online conferences where members separated over large geographical distances may co-ordinate, discuss and debate technocratic theory. The large majority of academic material is published on the website, and debated in the forums.

EOS comprises of four functional sequences and a EOS director, for the purposes of coordinating organization wide activity and maintaining the website. The sequence of finance is responsible for raising revenue and accounting for EOS expenses, that include costs relating to EOS activities, events, and the maintenance of the website itself. The sequence of research is responsible for coordinating the research efforts of members and engaging organisation wide members in larger projects, such as the energy survey. The sequence of administration is responsible for the maintenance and development of the website and any other technical issues that arise on an organisational scale. The sequence of realtions deals with public realstions and membership. The role of the director is to co-ordinate the activities of the four sequences and provide guidance to members where necessary or appropriate.


'''Mission'''

The mission of EOS is to achieve the aforementioned vision with reference to:

   1. To investigate unconventional socio-economic and political paradigms, employing scientific methodology as the prime tool.
   2. To allow a community for the critical examination and development of the underlying philosophy of present potentially new social, economic and political paradigms.
   3. To perform the aforementioned in light of the contemporary challenges of energy availability, climate change, aging population, health and economic disparity.
   4. To elucidate means of socially, economically and technically implementing sustainable reforms in a practical and realistic manner.

'''Vision'''

The ultimate vision of EOS is to employ a solid research and empirical foundation as a means to create an achievable society of sustainability that technically, socially and economically evolves. We have a vision of the future that sees a network of autonomous communities, each forming a sustainable building block for a sustainable society. These communities of about 200 people each  would form parts of an urbanate of about 10 000 people each. These urbanates form our replacement for cities.  We have no fixed design form an urbanate. Instead we have some general principles and expect their implementation should take on many different forms.


=More Information= 

'''Links'''

EOS [http://www.eoslife.eu/ Homepage]

EOS [http://www.eoslife.eu/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=183&Itemid=100 Frequently Asked Questions]

The [www.technate.eu Technate]

Information on this site taken from the EOS [http://www.eoslife.eu/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=180&Itemid=96 Vision Page]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Europe]]