
'''* Article: In search of an adequate European policy response to the platform economy. By Brian Fabo, Jovana Karanovic, Katerina Dukova. Transfer: European Review of Labour and Research / ETUI, April 6, 2017'''

URL = https://t.co/7jiST5wLvJ


=Abstract=

"This article contributes to the debate on labour platforms (e.g. TaskRabbit, CoContest, ListMinut) by analysing the potential of such platforms. Although we see potential in online platforms in terms of job creation and providing opportunities to discouraged and disadvantaged people, we also address some of the challenges related to such work. Presenting empirical data, we argue that the current labour market and working conditions created by online platforms resemble 19th century laissez-faire. We thus call for the urgent creation of a regulatory framework taking into consideration the suggestions presented in our article."


=References=

Agrawal A, Horton J, Lacetera N, . (2013) Digitization and the Contract Labor Market: A Research Agenda. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w19525 (accessed 21 June 2016). Google Scholar

Beerepoot N, Lambregts B (2015) Competition in online job marketplaces: towards a global labour market for outsourcing services? Global Networks 15(2): 236–255. Google Scholar CrossRef

Berg J (2016) Income security in the on-demand economy: Findings and policy lessons from a survey of crowdworkers. ILO Working Paper, Conditions of Work and Employment Series No. 74. Available at: http://www.ilo.org/travail/whatwedo/publications/WCMS_479693/lang--en/index.htm (accessed 8 June 2016). Google Scholar

Burson-Marsteller, The Aspen Institute and Time (2015) The On-Demand Economy Survey. The Aspen Institute. Available at: https://www.aspeninstitute.org/publications/demand-economy-survey/ (accessed 22 June 2016). Google Scholar

CEDEFOP (2015) Skill shortages and gaps in European enterprises: striking a balance between vocational education and training and the labour market. Cedefop Reference Series. Available at: http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/en/publications-and-resources/publications/3071 (accessed 8 February 2017). Google Scholar

Codagnone C, Martens B (2016) Scoping the Sharing Economy: Origins, Definitions, Impact and Regulatory Issues. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2783662 (accessed 7 October 2016). EUR - Scientific and Technical Research Reports, Publications Office of the European Union. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/sites/jrcsh/files/JRC100369.pdf (accessed 22 June 2016). Google Scholar

Codagnone C, Abadie F, Biagi F (2016) The Future of Work in the ‘Sharing Economy’. Market Efficiency and Equitable Opportunities or Unfair Precarisation? EUR - Scientific and Technical Research Reports, Publications Office of the European Union. Available at: http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/111111111/41357 (accessed 22 June 2016). Google Scholar

de Groen PW, Maselli I (2016) The Impact of the Collaborative Economy on the Labour Market. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester: Social Science Research Network. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2790788 (accessed 21 June 2016). Google Scholar

De Groen WP, Maselli I, Fabo B (2016) The Digital Market for Local Services: A one-night stand for workers? An example from the on-demand economy. CEPS Paper, Centre for European Policy Studies. Available at: http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/epscepswp/11438.htm (accessed 13 October 2016). Google Scholar

Degryse C (2016) Digitalisation of the Economy and its Impact on Labour Markets. ETUI Working Paper 2016.02, Brussels: European Trade Union Institute. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2730550 (accessed 7 June 2016). Google Scholar

Dettling LJ (2016) Broadband in the labor market: the impact of residential high-speed internet on married women’s labor force participation. Available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201365/201365abs.html (accessed 8 February 2017). Google Scholar

Drahokoupil J, Fabo B (2016) The platform economy and the disruption of the employment relationship. ETUI Policy Brief 5/2016. Available at: http://www.etui.org/Publications2/Policy-Briefs/European-Economic-Employment-and-Social-Policy/The-platform-economy-and-the-disruption-of-the-employment-relationship (accessed 8 February 2017) Google Scholar

Eurofound (2015) New Forms of Employment: Case of Slovakia. Available at: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/new-forms-of-employment (accessed 8 February 2017) Google Scholar

European Commission (2016) A European agenda for the collaborative economy. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 

European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2016) 356 final, 2 June 2016, Brussels. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/documents/16881 (accessed 7 June 2016). Google Scholar

Eurostat (2016) Flash Eurobarometer 438: The use of collaborative platforms. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/COMMFrontOffice/PublicOpinion/index.cfm/ResultDoc/download/DocumentKy/72885 (accessed 8 February 2017) Google Scholar

Foden M (2015) Saving time, saving money, saving the planet, ‘one gift at a time’: a practice-centred exploration of free online reuse exchange. Ephemera 15(1): 41. Google Scholar

Goudin P (2016) The Cost of Non-Europe in the Sharing Economy: Economic, Social and Legal Challenges and Opportunities. European Parliament. Available at: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document.html?reference=EPRS_STU(2016)558777 (accessed 7 October 2016). Google Scholar

Heinrichs H (2013) Sharing economy: a potential new pathway to sustainability. GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society 22(4): 228–231. Google Scholar CrossRef

Huws U (2014) Labor in the Global Digital Economy: The Cybertariat Comes of Age. New York: New York University Press. Google Scholar

Huws U (2016a) Logged In. Jacobin, 6 January. Available at: https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/01/huws-sharing-economy-crowdsource-precarity-uber-workers/ (accessed 13 October 2016). Google Scholar

Huws U (2016b) Platform labour: sharing economy or virtual wild west? Journal for a Progressive Economy 1: 24–27. Google Scholar

Ipeirotis PG (2010) Analyzing the Amazon Mechanical Turk marketplace. XRDS 17(2): 16–21. Google Scholar CrossRef

Jenk J (2015) Theory Meets Practice in the Taxi Industry: Coase and Uber. MPRA Paper, University Library of Munich, Germany. Available at: https://ideas.repec.org/p/pra/mprapa/63206.html (accessed 21 June 2016). Google Scholar

Joyce S, Spencer N, Huws U (2016) Crowd work in Europe: Preliminary results from a survey in the UK, Sweden, Germany, Austria and the Netherlands. Available at: http://researchprofiles.herts.ac.uk/portal/files/10749125/crowd_work_in_europe_draft_report_last_version.pdf (accessed 12 December 2016). Google Scholar

Kerr D (2016, 10 28). UK court rules Uber drivers are employees, not contractors. CNET. Retrieved from https://www.cnet.com/news/uber-uk-court-ruling-drivers-employees-not-contractors/ (accessed 12 December 2016). Google Scholar

Kittur A (2010) Crowdsourcing, collaboration and creativity. ACM Crossroads 17(2): 22–26. Google Scholar CrossRef
Kuttner R (2013) The task rabbit economy. The American Prospect. Available at http://prospect.org/article/task-rabbit-economy (accessed 8 February 2017). 
Google Scholar

LaPlante R, Silberman MS (2016) Building Trust in Crowd Worker Forums: Worker Ownership, Governance, and Work Outcomes. Available at: http://trustincrowdwork.west.uni-koblenz.de/sites/trustincrowdwork.west.uni-koblenz.de/files/laplante_trust.pdf (accessed 14 October 2016). Google Scholar

Lehdonvirta V, Mezier P (2013) Identity and self-organization in unstructured work. Working Paper, The Dynamics of Virtual Work COST Action. Available at: http://dynamicsofvirtualwork.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/COST-Action-IS1202-Working-Paper-13.pdf (accessed 13 October 2016). Google Scholar

Maselli I, Fabo B (2015) Digital Workers by Design? An Example from the On-demand Economy. CEPS Paper, Centre for European Policy Studies. Available at: https://ideas.repec.org/p/eps/cepswp/11030.html (accessed 7 June 2016). Google Scholar

Maselli I, Lenaerts K, Beblavy M (2016) Five Things We Need to Know About the On-Demand Economy. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2715450 (accessed 7 June 2016). Google Scholar

Merton RK (1968) The Matthew effect in science. Science 159(3810): 56–63. Google Scholar CrossRef

Nosko C, Tadelis S (2015) The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets: An Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w20830 (accessed 13 October 2016). Google Scholar

Petropoulos G (2016) Uber and the economic impact of sharing economy platforms. Bruegel. Available at: http://bruegel.org/2016/02/uber-and-the-economic-impact-of-sharing-economy-platforms/ (accessed 8 February 2017) Google Scholar

Prassl J, Risak M (2016) Uber, TaskRabbit, & Co: Platforms as Employers? Rethinking the Legal Analysis of Crowdwork. Comparative Labor Law & Policy Journal 30(3): 604–619. Google Scholar

Puschmann T, Alt R (2016) Sharing economy. Business & Information Systems Engineering 58(1): 93–99. Google Scholar CrossRef

PwC (2015) The sharing economy. Available at: https://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/publications/assets/pwc-consumer-intelligence-series-the-sharing-economy.pdf https://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/publications/assets/pwc-consumer-intelligence-series-the-sharing-economy.pdf (accessed 8 February 2017). Google Scholar

Schmid-Druner M (2016) The Situation of Workers in the Collaborative Economy. European Parliament. Available at: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/fr/document.html?reference=IPOL_IDA(2016)587316 (accessed 7 October 2016). Google Scholar

Schor J (2014) Debating the Sharing Economy. Great Transition Initiative. Available at: http://www.tellus.org/pub/Schor_Debating_the_Sharing_Economy.pdf (accessed 21 June 2016). Google Scholar

Shevchuk A, Strebkov D (2015) The rise of freelance contracting on the Russian-language Internet. Small Enterprise Research 22(2–3): 146–158. Google Scholar CrossRef

Sundararajan A (2016) The Sharing Economy: The End of Employment and the Rise of Crowd-Based Capitalism. Cambridge: The MIT Press. Google Scholar

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]