
'''= The European Crowdfunding Network promotes and supports the development of Crowdfunding mechanisms as a viable funding source to European companies and investors.'''

URL = http://www.europecrowdfunding.org/


=Description=

"The European Crowdfunding Network AISBL (ECN) is a professional network promoting adequate transparency, (self) regulation and governance while offering a combined voice in policy discussion and public opinion building. Founded in 2011 as an interest group, we formally incorporated as an international not-for-profit organisation in Brussels, Belgium in 2013.

We support our members in carrying initiatives aimed at innovating, representing, promoting and protecting the European crowdfunding industry. We aim to increase the understanding of the key roles that crowdfunding can play in supporting entrepreneurship of all types and its role in funding the creation and protection jobs, the enrichment of European society, culture and economy, and the protection of our environment.

In that capacity we help developing professional standards, providing industry research, as well as, professional networking opportunities in order to facilitate interaction between our members and key industry participants. On behalf of our members, the ECN will maintain a dialogue with public institutions and stakeholders as well as the media at European, international and national levels."
(http://www.eurocrowd.org/about-us/)


=History=

"A single European Crowdfunding organisation to be formed: The European Crowdfunding Network (ECN) and European Crowdfunding Association (ECA) have agreed to join forces.


The European Crowdfunding Network (ECN) and European Crowdfunding Association (ECA) have decided to join forces to create a truly European body that will lobby, promote and foster a more favourable and transparent environment for crowdfunding in Europe. Both organisations believe that the emergent European crowdfunding industry will be better served by a single representative organisation.

The new organisation will exclusively represent Europe-based crowdfunding platforms and crowdfunding professionals. It will act and communicate with EU bodies, representing the interests of its members and supporters, for a harmonised European regulation and ecosystem for crowdfunding. It will work with its members for improved customer protection standards, operational and financial best practies, as well as for growing the opportunies of the European crowdfunding industry.

Both organisations have entered into an agreement with the aim to collaborate closely in building a joint effort by the end of 2012."
(http://www.europecrowdfunding.org/Default.aspx?pageId=1460063)

=Status=

December 2012:

"The European Crowdfunding Network (ECN) is maintained through representations in
Austria, Belgium, France, Finland, Germany, Great-Britain, Italy, Poland, Sweden & The Netherlands, currently counting : 700+ Supporters, 125+ Prospective Members .


=More Information=

"About European Crowdfunding Association (ECA) : This initiative was conceived in early 2012 by a group of entrepreneurs and investors with the intention of providing a unified voice promoting crowdfunding as a source of capital to support the development and growth of for-profit businesses, social enterprises and other projects.

About European Crowdfunding Network (ECN) : The network was formed in 2011 by crowdfunding industry professionals and platforms, in order to bring the European Crowdfunding Stakeholders together. It has local representation (so-called Ambassadors) in 10+ countries in Europe, and gathers crowdfunding platforms and subscribers from the entire European Union. "



[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Europe]]