
'''= a catalogue of civic software and services across Europe that help governments work better.'''

URL = http://www.europecommons.org/

Changed its name to [http://www.civicexchange.eu/ Civic Exchange]


=Description=

"The Europe Commons is a catalogue of civic software and services across Europe that help governments work better. By capturing applications and information about how and where they’ve been deployed, and with what impact, we want to encourage greater collaboration and reuse of civic solutions. This includes tools to support public service delivery, apps/services built on government APIs or initiatives piloted with a local authority and created by others.


We are looking for apps and services that:

* Have a civic focus, are aimed at improving the lives of citizens.

* Are relatively mature. They should be deployed or used in at least one location.

* Ideally provide evidence of use and effectiveness.

* Support open innovation, such as releasing as open source software, or use and/or provide open data.


The site is for those who want to search for solutions to their own civic challenges, and those who have apps and services they would like to share.

You can search for solutions according to civic function, location and licence.

You can also upload your own apps and services. All you need to do is create an account and fill out a simple form telling us about the service.


We’re keen to share examples with proven impact, so for each service we also want capture as much evidence as possible related to:

* How effective was the deployment?

* In how many places is it being used?

* How much is  the app or service being used

* What feedback have you had on the app or service?

* Has it generated cost savings?"
(http://www.europecommons.org/about)



[[Category:Civil Society]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Europe]]