

=Description=

"The European Progressive Economists Network has been launched at the Firenze 10+10 forum meeting 
promoted by Euromemorandum, Economistes Atterrés from France, Sbilanciamoci! from Italy,  Another 
Road for Europe, bringing together a variety of groups of economists and think tanks including 
Econosphères from Belgium, Econonuestra from Spain, the Transnational Institute, Critical Political Economy 
Network, Transform! and many other organisations. The European Progressive Economists Network has 
launched the document on policy alternatives for Europe below and will participate to the initiatives and 
events emerging from Firenze 10+10."


=Discussion=

==A Common Call for Another Economic Policy for Europe==

"The European Progessive Economists Network brings together groups of economists and other researchers, 
institutes and civil-society coalitions who are critical of the dominant economic and social policies that have  brought Europe to the current crisis.  We seek to promote a European wide debate on policy alternatives  based on the following six points.


1. Austerity policies should be reversed and the drastic conditionality imposed on countries receiving EU 
emergency funds must be radically revised, starting with Greece. The dangerous constraints of the “fiscal 
compact” need be removed, so that countries can defend public expenditure, welfare and wages, while the 
EU assumes a greater role in stimulating demand, promoting full employment and taking a new course of 
sustainable and equitable progress. European policies should reduce current account imbalances by 
obliging surplus countries to also adjust. 

2. Policies must favour a redistribution that reduces inequalities, and move towards fiscal harmonization, 
putting an end to tax competition, with a shift of the tax burden away from labour and towards profits and 
wealth. Policies must favour public services and social protection. Labour and collective bargaining have to  be defended; labour rights are a key part of Europe’s democratic rights.


3. Facing Europe’s financial crisis – marked by the interaction between a banking crisis and the public debt  crisis – the European Central Bank must act as a lender of last resort in the government bond markets. The  public debt problem has to be solved with a common responsibility of the eurozone; debt should be assessed by a public audit.


4. A radical downsizing of the financial sector is needed, with a financial transaction tax, the elimination of speculative finance and the control of capital movements. The financial system must be brought under  social control; it must be transformed so that it promotes socially and environmentally sustainable  productive investment and employment.

5. A fundamental ecological transition provides a way out of Europe’s crisis. Europe must reduce its 
ecological footprint and its use of energy and natural resources. Its policies must enhance new ways of 
producing and consuming. A major investment programme promoting sustainability can provide  high 
quality jobs, expanding capabilities in new innovative fields and enlarging possibilities for action at the local  level, especially on public goods.

6. Democracy has to be expanded at all levels in Europe. The European Union has to be reformed and the 
concentration of power in the hands of few states and unaccountable institutions that has taken place 
during the crisis has to be reversed. The aim is to achieve greater citizens’ participation, a major role for the  European Parliament, and a much more significant democratic control over key decisions. 
Facing a risk of collapse, Europe’s policies need to change course. An alliance between civil society, trade  unions, social movements and progressive political forces is needed to lead Europe out of the crisis created  by neoliberalism and finance. The European Progressive Economists Network seeks to contribute to this change."
(http://docente.unife.it/paolo.pini/blog-paolo-pini/E-PEN-%20Florence-%209.11.12%20Press.pdf)

=More Information=

For information: anotherroadforeurope@gmail.com, atterres@gmail.com

The websites of the main groups involved:

# http://www.euromemo.eu/
# http://www.atterres.org/
# http://www.anotherroadforeurope.org/
# http://www.sbilanciamoci.org/
# http://www.sbilanciamoci.info/
# http://econonuestra.org/
# http://www.econospheres.be/
# http://www.transform-network.org/
# http://www.tni.org/
# http://criticalpoliticaleconomy.net/


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Movements]]