
'''= conference theme of the 18th General Meeting on the Common Core Project of European Private Law'''

URL = http://www.iuctorino.it/content/18th-general-meeting-common-core-european-private-law-1


=Description=

""European Constitutionalism from Below: Constructing a Bottom Up Constitutional Process in the European Union", which seeks to encourage an interdisciplinary platform for renown scholars, jurist, and policy makers  from around the world to develop innovative critiques and alternatives that might address the urgent crises  facing Europe and the depoliticisation of the European landscape as a result of over 20 years of neoliberal order.  In the wake of urgent global challenges to both the European Union and the global system, here we are  particularly interested in opening the Common Core Project as a platform for exploring and advancing the Commons‟ as a paradigm and strategy for initiating a process of bottom up constitutionalism in Europe. 


The  Common  Core  Conference  has  been  hosted  by  the  IUC  for  the  past  five  years  and  the    2012 Conference  is  hosted by  the  International  University College  of  Turin  (IUC)  and  the  Institute  for  the study  of  Political Economy and Law (IPEL).  Drawing upon scholars and students from around the globe, the IUC is an academic centre for the critical, interdisciplinary study of law, economics and finance.  Its faculty and advisory  members  include  such  eminent  figures,  such  as  Guido  Calabresi,  Duncan  Kennedy,  Stefano  Rodotà,  Amartya  Sen,  and  Gustavo  Zagrebelsky.    The  Institute  for  the  Study  of  Political  Economy  and  Law  is  a  collaborative  effort  of  scholars  and  practitioners  to  respond  to  the  urgent  need  for  a  new  politics  that  includes  systemic  critique and productive self-interrogation of existing institutional governance arrangements, as well as organized  normative contestation of mainstream ideologies and practices.  The Institute operates under the Directorship of  Prof. Gunther Teubner and Prof. Josef Halevi."


[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]