'''= EDCAB is a public policy platform for virtual currencies and distributed ledger technology.'''

URL = http://edcab.eu/


=Description=

"Our aim is to help shape a sound regulatory and policy agenda for virtual currencies and distributed ledger technology in the European Union. We engage with EU policymakers, legislators and key stakeholders on live and upcoming issues, addressing both  challenges and opportunities.

Independent, non-profit, Brussels-based, EDCAB provides a forum for dialogue on live issues and future policies; creating better understanding and building trust and transparency.

Membership is open to businesses, non-profit organisations, think tanks, academic and research institutions, and anyone with an interest in virtual currencies and distributed ledger technology.

In addition to responding to consultations and providing briefing papers, EDCAB organises roundtables, seminars and workshops in Brussels throughout the year. Our 2016 flagship event is an expo to be held inside the European Parliament from 18 to 22 April alongside a series of roundtables involving MEPs, legislators from Member States, officials from the Commission and EU institutions, academics, civil society, and industry stakeholders.

EDCAB's founder, Siân Jones, is a regulatory compliance professional specialising in digital currencies and blockchain. She has briefed national and EU legislators, spoken at Commission workshops and roundtables, and was one of three stakeholder representatives asked to address the European Parliament public hearing on virtual currencies in January 2016."
(http://edcab.eu/read/about)


=More Information=

EDCAB (European Digital Currency & Blockchain Technology Forum) is at Rue Chares Martel, 6-8, 1000 Brussels, Belgium and can be reached using our contact form or by phone: +32 2 588 7232.

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Europe]]