'''= "a Montreal-based data cooperative: It provides the digital infrastructure for cooperatives of drivers without accessing local passenger data".''' [https://publicseminar.org/essays/data-cooperatives-for-pandemic-times/]

URL = https://www.eva.coop

=Description=

'''1. Trebor Scholz and Igor Calzada:'''

"To serve such a vision of a digital commonwealth, localized data need to be federated into data ecosystems. Distributed ledgers are likely able to help. Communities will be using their data gathered in local repositories. This is the case with Eva.coop, a Montreal-based data cooperative: It provides the digital infrastructure for cooperatives of drivers without accessing local passenger data. Eva.coop is built on the EOSIO blockchain protocol as a way to show how the cooperative model could mark a new blockchain-based iteration of the ‘sharing economy’ driven by a democratically centralized system that respects the privacy of workers and meets local needs. Local communities have more input, and drivers are treated more fairly, riding members maintain their privacy, and comforted by a locally supported app. Such federated, democratically centralized data ecosystems can be arranged by sectors (e.g., health-related data, environmental data, transport, and mobility data, energy and consumption data). Communities can then decide to release those data meaningfully."
(https://publicseminar.org/essays/data-cooperatives-for-pandemic-times/)


'''2. F. Tomesco:'''

"Eva, a Montreal-based cooperative that bills itself as a ‘’socially acceptable’’ alternative to the U.S. ride-sharing behemoth, officially began carrying local residents Monday after a three-week trial period. Its signature black and gold logo now adorns the vehicles operated by more than 100 drivers — some of whom also work for Uber as independent contractors.

“This is the culmination of more than 20 months of work and 20,000 lines of code,’’ co-founder Raphael Gaudreault said Monday in an interview in downtown Montreal after unveiling the ride-sharing application.

Eva’s launch comes as Quebec’s legacy taxi companies grapple with unprecedented turmoil as ride-sharing becomes commonplace and the provincial government mulls ways of rewriting industry rules.

While Eva is focused on picking up customers in the greater Montreal area, its founders have already set their sights on expanding operations to Quebec City and Gatineau in 2019. Uber and Eva are currently allowed to operate in Quebec as part of a pilot project authorized by the government.

Eva is the brainchild of two newly minted university graduates: Gaudreault, a 23-year-old software engineer with a degree from Laval University, and Dardan Isufi, a 22-year-old political science graduate from McGill.

So far, more than 6,000 people have downloaded the Eva app and created an active account, said Gaudreault.

Jean-Christophe de le Rue, a Canadian spokesman for Uber, said Eva’s arrival is positive because it will increase the number of transport options available to Montreal-area residents.

“The idea behind Uber is to offer a reliable alternative to the solo ownership of cars,” de le Rue said Monday by telephone. “So any time you add mobility options for Montrealers, it’s good news.”

Unlike Uber, a for-profit corporation that raised about US$8 billion last week via an initial public offering on the New York Stock Exchange, Eva isn’t necessarily seeking to turn a profit. Both drivers and riders can become members and vote at its annual meeting.

To meet an expected surge in demand, Eva plans to train 400 additional drivers during the next few weeks — an expansion that Gaudreault insists won’t compromise the vetting process. Under Quebec law, local police are responsible for conducting background checks on every would-be driver for ride-sharing services.

Eva’s financial partners include Progitech, a Saguenay-based information technology company, and Caisse d’economie solidaire, a unit of Mouvement Desjardins, Canada’s biggest credit union. Gaudreault declined to outline Eva’s annual budget or say how many rides annually the cooperative needs to break even.

Eva is holding talks with Investissement Quebec, an investment arm of the provincial government, over additional funding, Gaudreault also said. He declined to provide specifics given that negotiations are ongoing.

Assuming Quebec permanently allows ride-sharing services, Gaudreault envisions a day where Eva is active in most cities of more than 50,000 people — including Drummondville, Saguenay and Sherbrooke."
(https://www.saltwire.com/prince-edward-island/business/uber-competitor-eva-launches-in-montreal-311190/)

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Data_Commons]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Platform_Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Canada]]
[[Category:Transportation]]