'''* Article: Evaluating Spiritual and Utopian Groups. Arthur J Deikman. AntiMatters, ISSUE 2 (4) 2008'''

URL = http://anti-matters.org/articles/90/public/90-83-1-PB.pdf


=Abstract=

"Spiritual and utopian groups will always exist because they answer to fundamental
human needs. However, not all of those needs are spiritual or utopian and that is the
problem. Some groups may fulfill their announced goals, benefiting their members and
society, others may turn into a nightmare of exploitation, fear and violence. This article
offers criteria for evaluating such groups."


=Excerpt=

Arthur Deikman:

"Judging a spiritual group is complicated by the fact that spiritual leaders often
present a unique problem. The outsider as well as the member may be intimidated by the claim that the leader has special knowledge, is “enlightened,” able
to perceive and know what the ordinary person cannot and, therefore, immune
from ordinary criteria of behaviour. Such leaders say that what they might do
in their wisdom may make no sense to the unenlightened. Indeed, the mystical
tradition in the various forms it has taken throughout history has been quite
consistent in defining its teachers as people whose spiritual development had
progressed to the point that they could “see” what others could not. If we grant
that such people do exist, how can it be possible for the ordinary person to
judge them?

Actually, the problem is not as difficult as has been thought, for the spiritual
traditions are quite consistent about their goal and the requirements for
reaching it. It is this fact that permits us to make a functional assessment of
spiritual groups and thereby avoid cultural bias. We can make a judgement
based on how well the activities of a group and its leader are suited to its stated
aims.

A careful study of the literature of the mystical traditions — Vedantic, Taoist,
Zen and Tibetan Buddhist, Sufic, Hasidic and that of the English and Spanish
Catholic mystics, as well as the writings of such people as Jacob Boehme and
Meister Eckhart — shows that they share the same basic goal. Their diverse
procedures represent different ways of reaching that goal, according to the
type of people being taught and the culture in which the teaching is taking
place. The aim of the mystical traditions is the development of the ability to
perceive directly (intuitively) the reality that underlies the world of appearances, whatever that reality may be called. All the traditions agree that the
primary requirement for the development of this capacity is that a person shift
from a self-centered orientation to one of serving the Truth. This service must
be without concern for personal gain."

(https://antimatters2.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/2-4-04deikman_utopian.pdf)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]