

=Directory=

*Conferences in Croatia
**Economy of Crisis Capitalism and Ecology of the Commons" (http://commons.mi2.hr/, 2012), 
**A Squandered Future?: Austerity Policies, Public Sector Marketization and Privatization of Public Goods (http://www.slobodnifilozofski.com/2012/01/tribina-potrosena-buducnost-politike.html, 2012), 
**Open Institutions: Institutional Imagination and Cultural Public Sphere (http://zagreb.openinstitutions.net/, 2011),

* The James Quilligan seminars on commons economics,  in London, May 2012. its materials organized here: http://www.debategraph.org/commons

* International forum on digital commons. Barcelona, October 2011. Organized together with Amical Viquipedia (Wikimedia Cat).Panel on digital commons and cooperative dialogue. http://www.digital-commons.net/

* Networked Labour seminar. International seminar. Amsterdam 7-9 May 2013. Organized with the Transnational Institute and Transform! Europe. http://www.networkedlabour.net/


==Details==

* The [[Quilligan Seminars on the Emergence of a Commons-Based Economy]]

= Video footage & Debategraph of Quilligan Seminars (UK 2012, by the School of Commoning

The series of twelve inter-related seminars presented by James B.Quilligan - Raw film footage

Debategraph of Quilligan Seminars: http://debategraph.org/Stream.aspx?nID=156721&it=01


1. Democratising the Global Political Commons - SIMPOL: Simultaneous policy

Seminar 1 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLED54C2C7A63A153E&feature=edit_ok


2. Political Economy and the Inclusive Commons - House of Commons

Seminar 2 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6F791252F23582C8&feature=plcp


3. Restoring the Commons or Terminal Decline - Fiscal Reform & Nature and Society

Seminar 3 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL0A6F958AF6812557&feature=view_all


4. Financial Innovation and the Commons - Finance Lab

Seminar 4 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6A99228DD9D11B8F&feature=plcp


5. Property Value and the Commons - Henry George Foundation

Seminar 5 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL3EEC4865FC1833AA&feature=plcp


6. The Crowd and the Commons - Westminster Hub

Seminar 6 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL10DB9932D3959694&feature=plcp


7. Covenant, Stewardship and the Inclusive Commons - St.James Piccadilly

Seminar 7 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL0D82EA900DC84066&feature=plcp


8. The Great Transition and the Commons - NEF

Seminar 8 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDD21BE167E79DCA3&feature=plcp


9. Organisational Practice and the Commons - Civil Society Forum, Working in Trust, GAIA network

Seminar 9 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1FD8E679F44E58A6&feature=plcp


10. The Commons and the New Era Economics - Synthesis, IPPR

Seminar 10 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL385ED65D000A2664&feature=plcp


12. Convergence for a Commons-based Economy - School of Commoning and CCMJ

Seminar 12 playlist: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDEA1A25DB43FF718&feature=plcp


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]