'''* Article: The Evolution of War. By Morris, Ian. Cliodynamics, Volume 3, Issue 1, 2012'''

URL = https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8jr9v920


=Abstract=

'''1.'''

“War and governance have co-evolved across the last 15,000 years, but much remains unclear about the process because historical narratives have not been integrated well into social-scientific analyses. Under the conditions of circumscription/caging that emerged in a few places after the ice age, war became productive, in the sense of producing larger, safer, richer societies. However, the larger states produced by war changed the environment around them, and for more than 1,000 years war turned counterproductive in the places that it had previously been productive, breaking up large states. After about 1400 CE a new phase of productive war began. This too began turning counterproductive in the 20th century CE. The most important question for the 21st century is whether productive war is currently mutating into a new form."

(https://escholarship.org/content/qt8jr9v920/qt8jr9v920_noSplash_097f24a14d6a58bc31a1c32e37ecc949.pdf?)

=Author Summary=

Ian Morris:

“Collective  violence  is  an  evolved  part  of  human  biology,  but  war  also 
evolves  as  part  of  culture.  The  evolution  of  agriculture  subjected  human 
societies   to   circumscription,   making   it   harder   for   groups   that   lost  
conflicts  to  move  away.  Over  the  long  run,  such  groups  were  absorbed 
into  larger,  more  complex  societies,  which  formed  governments  that 
pacified the group internally and as a side-effect increased its prosperity.
In  the  short  run,  some  wars  broke  down  these  larger,  safer,  richer 
societies, and in particular cases—such as much of Eurasia between about
200  and  1400  CE—the  two  effects  of
war settled into an unstable
equilibrium. But the main function of
war in cultural evolution across the
past  15,000  years — and  particularly 
across  the  past  500  years — has  been 
to  integrate  societies,  increasing  material  wellbeing.  Even  though  wars 
became  more  and  more  destructive,  internal  pacification  lowered  the 
overall  rate  of  violent  death  from
10–20  percent  in  nonagricultural 
societies   to   just   1–2   percent   in   the   twentieth-century   industrialized  
world. By the mid-twentieth century
war had become so destructive that
rather   than   unifying   the   entire   planet,   another   great   conflict   could  
destroy  it.  However,  there  are  numerous  signs  that  institutions  are 
evolving even faster than the means of destruction, and that the twenty-
first  century  will  see  the  emergence  of  entirely  new  forms  of  conflict 
Resolution.”


=Excerpt=

From the Introduction:

"In  this  paper,  I  suggest  that  the  role  of  war  in  the  evolution  of  governance  is  simultaneously  simpler  and  more  complicated  than  most  current  theories  recognize. Some scholars suggest that war is atavistic, a leftover from the last common ancestor shared by humans and chimpanzees some five to seven million years ago  (e.g.,  Wrangham  and  Peterson  1996;  Keeley  1996;  LeBlanc  and  Register  2003).  Others,  developing  a  tradition  going  back  to  Margaret  Mead  (1940),  argue  that  war  is  an  invention,  something  humans  dreamed  up  only  as  their  societies became more complex (e.g., Kelly 2000; de Waal 2005: 143–45). The  evidence  is  certainly  mixed.  On  the  one  hand,  historians  like  to  point  out  that  the  twentieth  century’s  wars  were  the  bloodiest  in  history,  killing  probably a hundred million people (e.g., Ferguson 2006; Snyder 2010); on the other,  social  scientists  like  to  point  out  that  war  is  less  common  today  than  ever before (e.g., Pinker 2011; Goldstein 2011). In fact, they add, violence of all kinds  has  declined  sharply  in  the  last  65  years.  By  virtually  any  measure—deaths in battle, homicides, rapes, assaults, spousal and child abuse, cruelty to animals—our world is less violent than that of our grandparents.
       
Already   in   the   1930s,   Norbert   Elias   suggested   that   Europe   had   been   growing  less  violent  for  half  a  millennium  (Elias  1982  [1939]).  The  onset  of  World War II seemed to many people to have discredited his thesis, but more recent  quantitative  research  has  supported  it  strongly  (e.g.,  Richardson  1960;  Levy  1983;  Eisner  2003;  Spierenburg  2008;  Roth  2009).  Rates  of  homicide  have collapsed, and, despite spikes in killing during the Thirty Years War and Ming-Qing  Cataclysm,  the  Napoleonic  wars,  and  the  World  Wars,  population  has grown so quickly that the risk of dying violently seems to have fallen by an order of magnitude. In  the  last  few  years,  several  theorists  have  attempted  to  make  sense  of  these   conflicting   data   within   co-evolutionary   models,   seeing   conflict   and   cooperation  as  two  sides  of  a  single  process  (e.g.,  Gat  2006;  Bowles  2009;  Bowles and Gintis 2011; Turchin 2011). My aim here is to support this approach by bringing in a broader historical perspective, drawing on ideas that I am developing more fully in a book (Morris, forthcoming).        

The  historical  profession  is  as  full  of  debate  as  any  other  group  in  the  academy, but the one point that practitioners of most stripes seem to agree on is that the historian’s fundamental method is storytelling (or, in more technical terms,  narrative  emplotment:  see,  e.g.,  Stone  1979;  Appleby  et  al.  1994;  Berkhofer 1995). Social scientists often mock this technique as naïve (Diamond and Robinson 2010 have a useful discussion), but it does force us to think about the coevolution of war and governance as a continuous, ongoing process, rather than as a matter of successive stages in a more abstract model."


==the Western Way of War==

Ian Morris:

"In the last twenty-odd years, more and more historians have started speaking of a distinct “Western Way of War,” said to have been invented in ancient Greece   and   passed   down   to   modern   Europe   and   America.   The   military   historian  Victor  Davis  Hanson,  who  coined  the  term,  suggests  that  “For  the  past  2,500  years,  there  has  been  a  peculiar  practice  of  Western  warfare,  a  common  foundation  and  continual  way  of  fighting,  that  has  made  Europeans  the most deadly soldiers in the history of fighting” (Hanson 2001: 5).  Greek  city-states  regularly  settled  their  differences  with  head-on  charges  between  phalanxes  of  armored  spearmen.  “It  is  this  Western  desire  for  a  single, magnificent collision of infantry,” Hanson argues (1989: 9), “for brutal killing with edged weapons on a battlefield between free men, that has baffled and terrified our adversaries from the non-Western world for more than 2,500 years.”       In      his      History of Warfare, the most influential general book on the subject, John Keegan goes further. Since 500 BCE, he suggests, there has been “a line of  division  between  [the  Western]  battle  tradition  and  the  indirect,  evasive, and  stand-off  style  of  combat  characteristic  of  the  steppe  and  the  Near  and  Middle  East:  east  of  the  steppe  and  south-east  of  the  Black  Sea,  warriors  continued  to  keep  their  distance  from  their  enemies;  west  of  the  steppe  and  south-west of the Black Sea, warriors learned to abandon caution and to close to arm’s length” (Keegan 1993: 332–33). The  data,  however,  do  not  bear  this  out.  Rather  than  a  Western  Way  of  War,  there  has  been  what  I  would  call  a  Productive  Way  of  War,  created  by circumscription/caging  all  across  the  lucky  latitudes,  and  spread  from  there  across the rest of the world.  I  call  these  wars  ‘productive’  not  just  to  provoke  a  reaction,  but  because  I  believe  that  it  really  is  the  best  word.  Circumscribed  wars  produced  larger  societies,    which    pacified    themselves    internally,    increasing    wealth    and    population  and  simultaneously  reducing  the  overall  rate  of  violent  death.  These  wars  tended  to  be  even  crueler  and  deadlier  than  the  forms  of  warfare  practiced in prehistory, but despite their short-term costs, in the long term the violence made people safer and richer. ‘Productive war’ seems like a very good description of this process.  Through  most  of  human  history,  people  have  fought  more  through  raids  and   ambushes   than   through   pitched   battles   (Keeley   1996;   LeBlanc   and   Register  2003;  Gat  2006).  In  the  ancient  lucky  latitudes,  however,  as  war  drove the evolution of larger, safer, richer, and more sophisticated states, these larger,  safer,  richer,  and  more  sophisticated  states  in  turn  drove  a  series  of  revolutions  in  military  affairs.  Like  the  late-twentieth-century  revolution  in  military affairs (discussed in Krepinevich 1994 and Blaker 1997, and with more skepticism   in   Biddle   1998)   they   consisted   of   interlocking   technological,   organizational,   tactical,   and   logistical   advances;   and   again   like   the   late-twentieth-century  revolution  in  military  affairs,  we  should  think  of  these  as  being  social,  economic,  cultural,  and  political  transformations  as  much  as  military ones.       

==Generations of Military Transformations==

All  across  the  lucky  latitudes,  the  first  of  these  was  fortification,  which  meant organizing communities well enough to build walls that would keep out raiders. Southwest Asia clearly had the earliest fortifications, perhaps as early as 9300 BCE at Jericho (the evidence is disputed), and certainly by 4300 BCE at  Mersin,  with  a  handful  of  possible  cases  in  between  these  dates;  and  by  3500 BCE, fortifications were becoming quite common.  At  first  glance,  fortification  looks  like  example  of  what  some  evolutionary  biologists like to call the Red Queen Effect (Ridley 1995), in which adaptations in  one  species  (e.g.,  foxes  evolving  to  run  faster)  merely  produce  selective  pressures  for  adaptations  in  other  species  (e.g.,  rabbits  that  also  run  faster).  These cancel out the advantages of the initial change, and no species ever pulls ahead.  Better-organized  societies  that  could  build  fortifications  went  hand-in-hand with better organization of raiding, and, as destruction layers in settlements attest, raids turned into sieges.  Unlike the classic Red Queen effect, though, ancient revolutions in military affairs  did  have  major  long-term  consequences.  In  every  case,  a  revolution  could   only   succeed   if   a   society   reorganized   itself   with   more   powerful   governmental  institutions;  and  as  societies  did  so,  their  governments  pacified  them  internally  in  the  name  of  cohesion  against  external  foes  (see  Bowles  2009,  or  the  highly  mythologized  account  of  early  Rome  in  the  first-century  BCE historian Livy).

Second   (where   the   chronology   is   fine-tuned   enough   to   make   the   distinction)  came  the  substitution  of  bronze  for  stone  weapons,  in  the  Old  World  at  least.  There,  bronze  weapons  came  into  use  in  the  late  fourth  millennium  BCE,  around  six  thousand  years  after  cultivation  had  begun,  and  almost  completely  replaced  stone  weapons  by  2000  BCE.  Bronze  reached  the  Indus Valley by 2500 BCE and the Yellow River Valley by 2000 BCE, perhaps in  both  cases  by  diffusion  from  Mesopotamia,  and  rapidly  replaced  stone  for  weapons in both places.       The  New  World’s  lucky  latitudes,  however,  moved  more  slowly.  If  their  populations  had  followed  the  Old  World  timetable  and  begun  casting  bronze  weapons  six  thousand  years  after  cultivation,  these  artifacts  would  appear  in  Teotihuacán  and  Moche  sites,  but  they  do  not;  and  if  bronze  had  become  common   another   thousand   to   fifteen   hundred   years   later,   as   it   did   in   Southwest  Asia,  Cortés  and  Pizarro  would  have  met  Aztecs  and  Incas  with  bronze (although not iron) spearheads—which, of course, they did not. Andean metalworkers  did  experiment  with  copper  around  1000  BCE,  but  metal  never  replaced stone for tools or weapons. Just  why  the  New  World’s  early  states  were  not  major  bronze  producers  remains   an   open   question.   Jared   Diamond   (1997:   360-70)   suggests   that   geography  may  explain  why  innovations  (including  writing)  came  later  and  spread more slowly in the New World than in the Old. Eurasia, he points out, runs basically East-West, and ideas originating in Southwest Asia could spread thousands of miles to Europe or China within the same band of latitudes. The Americas, by contrast, run basically North-South. Ideas bubbling to the surface in  Mesoamerica  or  the  Andes  could  only  circulate  among  a  small  group  of  people (relative to the Old World) before having to be carried across latitudes with  very  different  ecologies.  Because  the  interlinked  populations  in  the  New  World  were  so  much  smaller  than  those  in  the  Old,  Diamond  suggests,  ideas  and practices took longer to appear and much longer to spread. The  third  of  the  Old  World’s  revolutions  in  military  affairs,  and  arguably  the  most  important,  was  in  command  and  control.  It  takes  proper  military  discipline and staff work to maneuver large bodies of men, feed them, and get them to go right up to enemies and stab them (particularly when the enemies are    stabbing    back).    Command    and    control    are    hard    to    document    archaeologically,  although  the  famous  Vulture  Stele  from  Lagash  in  Sumer,  carved  around  2450  BCE  (Figure  4),  seems  to  show  a  somewhat  disciplined  formation  of  infantry  with  officers.  (Even  if  there  is  a  good  deal  of  artistic  license  in  this  representation,  it  certainly  demonstrates  that  third-millennium  Mesopotamians  understood  the  concept  and  presumably  also  the  advantages  of  battlefield  formations  and  discipline.)  Most  likely,  command  and  control  began  evolving  soon  after  the  rise  of  states,  and  persuading  young  men  to  do  what  they  were  told  in  life-threatening  situations  may  have  been  Leviathan’s  major challenge.

Fourth — in   Eurasia—was   the   introduction   of   chariots.   Horses   were   domesticated in Ukraine on the steppes (Figure 5) around 4000 BCE, but not until  about  2200  BCE  had  herders  bred  beasts  big  enough  to  pull  carts.  By  1900 BCE such carts had crossed the Caucasus Mountains into Southwest Asia, and    before    1700    BCE    light    versions    carrying    archers    armed    with    composite/reflex   bows   were   being   used   on   battlefields.   Their   mobility   revolutionized  fighting,  and  by  1500  BCE  they  were  the  decisive  arm  in  Near  Eastern battles. At the Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BCE the Egyptians and Hittites each  fielded  about  3500  chariots.  By  this  point  chariots  were  beginning  to  be  used in Chinese war, and over the next few centuries they made their way into India too. (In the New World, where there were no horses, there were of course no chariots either.) 

The  fifth  ancient  revolution  in  military  affairs  was  the  appearance  of  mass  formations  of  iron-armed  and  armored  shock  troops.  This  began  in  Assyria  around  900  BCE,  with  dense  columns  of  heavy  infantry  used  in  combination  with  cavalry,  the  latter  made  possible  by  the  breeding  of  even  bigger  horses  that could carry an armored man for hours at a stretch. Between 700 and 400 BCE Greek armies that relied overwhelmingly on heavy infantry without much cavalry  support  became  the  most  effective  land  force  in  Western  Eurasia,  but  by  300  the  Macedonians  had  reintroduced  cavalry  and  designed  a  more  flexible phalanx. By 200 BCE, however, the Romans were able to get the better of the Macedonian kingdoms with armies that downgraded cavalry once again but exploited much more flexible formations of legionary infantry. In  East  Asia,  Chinese  armies  followed  a  similar  path  a  few  centuries  later,  with mass heavy infantry coming in by 500 BCE and cavalry by 400, although iron  did  not  fully  replace  bronze  until  the  second  century  BCE.  By  300  BCE  South Asia had produced yet another variant, with armored elephants playing the  decisive  shock  role  and  infantry  relying  more  on  the  bow  than  the  spear.  Everywhere  across  Eurasia’s  lucky  latitudes,  however,  the  first  millennium  BCE saw armies that regularly numbered in the hundreds of thousands seeking to win wars through battles decided by head-on collisions. 



=Discussion=

==how  war  has  made humanity safer and richer==

Ian Morris:

"The  historical  record  suggests  three  broad  conclusions  about  how  war  has  made humanity safer and richer. 

First,  while  violence  is  a  very  inefficient  way  to  create  bigger,  safer,  and  richer  societies,  war  (or  the  fear  of  war)  seems  to  be  pretty  much  the  only  mechanism  that  has  worked.  Hobbes  distinguished  between  “commonwealth  by institution,” a peaceful process in which “men agree amongst themselves, to submit to some man, or assembly of men, voluntarily,” and “commonwealth by acquisition,” a violent process in which “a man maketh his children, to submit themselves,  and  their  children  to  his  government,  as  being  able  to  destroy  them  if  they  refuse;  or  by  war  subdueth  his  enemies  to  his  will,  giving  them  their lives on that condition” (Hobbes 1962 [1651]: 133). The empirical details, however, show that in reality the two always go together. Soft power is the glue that makes large societies hang together, but it always depends on hard power. 

Second,  the  evidence  also  shows  that  war  is  an  evolutionary  mechanism  that  works  its  magic  only  on  very  long  time  scales.  Some  people  (particularly  on the winning side) do find war a positive experience, but most people do not. 

Third,  war’s  ability  to  produce  bigger,  safer,  richer  societies  is  shaped  massively by geography. This builds on the argument in my most recent book, that  geography  has  been  one  of  the  prime  movers  in  history,  but  in  a  rather  complicated   way:   geography   determines   how   societies   develop,   but   how   societies  develop  determines  what  geography  means,  in  a  back-and-forth  relationship (Morris 2010: 26–35)."

[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Evolution]]