
* The [[Evolving Role of Open Source Software in Medicine and Health Services]]. Technology Innovation Management Review, January 2013.

URL = http://timreview.ca/article/648


=Description=

"David Ingram and Sevket Seref Arikan from University College London in the United Kingdom explain how the problem of building a universal electronic health record system could be (mostly) resolved by a reliance on not only open source software, but also on a very open source process of development. The open development process would need to be clearly designed and implemented so that others can imitate it and truly hope to co-create a universal health record system. In their discussion of openEHR, the Opereffa framework, and archetypes and templates, they make evident the need for openness, governance, and controlled management to build not simply a local system but a universal electronic health record system. Their in-depth case is based in the United Kingdom National Health Service (NHS), but their offer of a possible solution has universal applicability and appeal."


=Source=

* Special Issue: Open Source Sustainability. Ed. by Chris McPhee and Maha Shaikh. Technology Innovation Management Review, January 2013.

URL = http://timreview.ca/article/643

Maha Shaikh:

"This issue contains seven articles relating to the theme of open source sustainability. The authors come from diverse backgrounds and geographical locations, including Canada, Finland, France, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States."



[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Health]]