'''* Article: Measuring the Longitudinal Evolution of the Online Anonymous Marketplace Ecosystem. By Kyle Soska and Nicolas Christin.'''

URL = https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity15/sec15-paper-soska-updated.pdf

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 24th USENIX Security Symposium August 12–14, 2015 • Washington, D.C.

=Abstract=

"February 2011 saw the emergence of Silk Road, the first
successful online anonymous marketplace, in which buyers
and sellers could transact with anonymity properties
far superior to those available in alternative online or of-
fline means of commerce. Business on Silk Road, primarily
involving narcotics trafficking, rapidly boomed,
and competitors emerged. At the same time, law enforcement
did not sit idle, and eventually managed to shut
down Silk Road in October 2013 and arrest its operator.
Far from causing the demise of this novel form of commerce,
the Silk Road take-down spawned an entire, dynamic,
online anonymous marketplace ecosystem, which
has continued to evolve to this day. This paper presents a
long-term measurement analysis of a large portion of this
online anonymous marketplace ecosystem, including 16
different marketplaces, over more than two years (2013–
2015). By using long-term measurements, and combining
our own data collection with publicly available previous
efforts, we offer a detailed understanding of the
growth of the online anonymous marketplace ecosystem.
We are able to document the evolution of the types of
goods being sold, and assess the effect (or lack thereof)
of adversarial events, such as law enforcement operations
or large-scale frauds, on the overall size of the economy.
We also provide insights into how vendors are diversifying
and replicating across marketplaces, and how vendor
security practices (e.g., PGP adoption) are evolving.

These different aspects help us understand how traditional,
physical-world criminal activities are developing
an online presence, in the same manner traditional commerce
diversified online in the 1990s."


=Excerpt=

==[[Online Anonymous Marketplaces]]==

By Kyle Soska and Nicolas Christin:

"The sale of contraband and illicit products on the Internet
can probably be traced back to the origins of the Internet
itself, with a number of forums and bulletin board systems
where buyers and sellers could interact.

However, online markets have met with considerable
developments in sophistication and scale, over the
past six years or so, going from relatively confidential
“classifieds”-type of listings such as on the Open Vendor
Database, to large online anonymous marketplaces. Following
the Silk Road blueprint, modern online anonymous
markets run as Tor hidden services, which gives
participants (marketplace operators and participants such
as buyers and sellers) communication anonymity properties
far superior to those available from alternative solutions
(e.g., anonymous hosting); and use pseudonymous
online currencies as payment systems (e.g., Bitcoin [33])
to make it possible to exchange money electronically
without the immediate traceability that conventional payment
systems (wire transfers, or credit card payments)
provide.

The common point between all these marketplaces is
that they actually are not themselves selling contraband.
Instead, they are risk management platforms for participants
in (mostly illegal) transactions. Risk is mitigated
on several levels. First, by abolishing physical interactions
between transacting parties, these marketplaces
claim to reduce (or indeed, eliminate) the potential for
physical violence during the transaction.

Second, by providing superior anonymity guarantees
compared to the alternatives, online anonymous marketplaces
shield – to some degree2 – transaction participants
from law enforcement intervention.

Third, online anonymous marketplaces provide an escrow
system to prevent financial risk. These systems are
very similar in spirit to those developed by electronic
2Physical items still need to be delivered, which is a potential intervention
point for law enforcement as shown in documented arrests.

Suppose Alice wants to purchase an item from
Bob. Instead of directly paying Bob, she pays the marketplace
operator, Oscar. Oscar then instructs Bob that
he has received the payment, and that the item should be
shipped. After Alice confirms receipt of the item, Oscar
releases the money held in escrow to Bob. This allows
the marketplace to adjudicate any dispute that could
arise if Bob claims the item has been shipped, but Alice
claims not to have received it. Some marketplaces
claim to support Bitcoin’s recently standardized “multisig”
feature which allows a transaction to be redeemed
if, e.g., two out of three parties agree on its validity. For
instance, Alice and Bob could agree the funds be transferred
without Oscar’s explicit blessing, which prevents
the escrow funds from being lost if the marketplace is
seized or Oscar is incapacitated.

Fourth, and most importantly for our measurements,
online anonymous marketplaces provide a feedback system
to enforce quality control of the goods being sold. In
marketplaces where feedback is mandatory, feedback is
a good proxy to derive sales volumes [13]. We will adopt
a similar technique to estimate sales volumes.

At the time of this writing the Darknet Stats service [1]
lists 28 active marketplaces. As illustrated in Fig. 1
for the Evolution and Agora marketplaces, marketplaces
tend to have very similar interfaces, often loosely based
on the original Silk Road user interface. Product categories
(on the right in each screen capture) are typically
self-selected by vendors. We discovered that categories
are sometimes incorrectly chosen, which led us to
build our own tools to properly categorize items. Feedback
data (not shown in the figure) comes in various flavors.

Some marketplaces provide individual feedback
per product and per transaction. This makes computation
of sales volumes relatively easy as long as one can
determine with good precision the time at which each
piece of feedback was issued. Others provide feedback
per vendor; if we can then link vendor feedback to specific
items, we can again obtain a good estimate for sales
volumes, but if not, we may not be able to derive any
meaningful numbers. Last, in some marketplaces, feedback
is either not mandatory, or only given as aggregates
(e.g., “top 5% vendor”), which does not allow for detailed
volume analysis."
(https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity15/sec15-paper-soska-updated.pdf)

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]
[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Articles]]