
'''= Evolutionary guidance media (EGM) is an emergent discipline offering a paradigm for the design of conscious media, green media, socially responsible media, and transformative media, arising from the convergence of ideas derived primarily from the fields of systems science, humanistic and transpersonal psychology and integral theory.''' [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolutionary_guidance_media]


=Description=

'''1. [[Dana Klisanin]]:'''

"Evolutionary guidance media  is a discipline offering a paradigm for the design of conscious media, green media, socially-responsible media, integral and transformative media, arising from the convergence of ideas derived primarily from the fields of systems science, humanistic and transpersonal psychology and integral theory.

Evolutionary guidance media is defined as “media designed both in content and context specifically for the purpose of guiding and/or facilitating the societal emergence of transpersonal consciousness – specifically planetary consciousness” (Klisanin, 2005). Planetary consciousness is “the knowing as well as the feeling of the vital interdependence and essential oneness of humankind, and the conscious adoption of the ethics and the ethos that this entails” (Ervin Laszlo, 1997, p. 143).

The evolutionary guidance media framework was designed using a generic blueprint for the creation of evolutionary guidance systems as described by Bela H. Banathy (1996, 2000). Evolutionary guidance systems are systems designed such that human beings can take responsibility and control for their own evolutionary processes."
(http://danaklisanin.com/research/evolutionary-guidance-media/)


2. From the Wikipedia:

"Research in evolutionary guidance media began at Saybrook Graduate School and Research Center by Dana Klisanin under the guidance of systems' scholars Bela H. Banathy, his son Béla A. Bánáthy, and Stanley Krippner, a distinguished scholar in the field of consciousness research and a leader in the transpersonal psychology movement.

Evolutionary guidance media is defined as "media designed both in content and context specifically for the purpose of guiding and/or facilitating the societal emergence of transpersonal consciousness – specifically planetary consciousness" (Klisanin, 2005). Planetary consciousness is “the knowing as well as the feeling of the vital interdependence and essential oneness of humankind, and the conscious adoption of the ethics and the ethos that this entails” (Ervin Laszlo, 1997, p. 143).

The evolutionary guidance media framework was designed using a generic blueprint for the creation of evolutionary guidance systems as described by Bela H. Banathy (1996, 2000). Evolutionary guidance systems are systems designed such that human beings can take responsibility and control for their own evolutionary processes. Evolutionary guidance media includes input from ten interactive dimensions: social action, economic, wellness, moral, learning and human development, aesthetic, scientific, technological, political, and environmental. These areas are not value neutral but rather value-laden (geared toward promoting a more just and equitable quality of life for all beings). The collection and use of such data is an integral aspect of the research, design, and production of evolutionary guidance media.

Fundamental to the design of evolutionary guidance media is the concept of transception, a term coined by Klisanin (2005) that posits the pairing of compassionate-seeing/action with that of cyberception, or humankind’s rapidly advancing technological abilities.

The core values of evolutionary guidance media include "the promotion of values that support conscious evolution, planetary consciousness, transpersonal experiences, and superconscious learning. These include but are not limited to being-values, compassion, love, personal and social responsibility, creative altruism, peace and conflict resolution skills, gender and racial diversity" (Klisanin, 2005).

Drawing heavily upon research in systems science, specifically evolutionary guidance systems as well as integral, humanistic, and transpersonal psychology, evolutionary guidance media was developed because of the perceived need for a method of rapidly advancing human consciousness due to the problematic conditions (environmental and social) confronting the global society.

Evolutionary guidance media has led to research in the area of digital altruism (Klisanin, 2009) and exploration of a new form of heroism: "cyberheroism," and delineation of a new archetype: the "cyberhero" (Klisanin, 2010).

Klisanin's application of Ken Wilber's Integral Theory to evolutionary guidance media, along with Kaplan's research in Integral Cinema has resulted in a new area of research, "Integral Media" (Klisanin, 2010; Kaplan, 2010).

Evolutionary guidance media has been featured in a special issue of the journal "Futures" on "Global Mindset Change," and is listed as a form of "Positive Futures Media" by the World Futures Studies Federation."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolutionary_guidance_media)


=Discussion=

"Dr. Klisanin began exploring this area based on many “voices” calling for transformative change and stewardship of media, most notably Duane Elgin, Ervin Laszlo, Barbara Marx Hubbard, Gail Holland, the National Organization for Women, and the Association of Transformative Media Arts. Over the years, many new voices have been added to the research base.

In addition to Bela H. Banathy’s design of evolutionary guidance systems, EGM includes various aspects of the works of humanistic and transpersonal researchers including Abraham Maslow, Roberto Assagioli, Ken Wilber, Stanley Krippner, Maureen O’Hara, and Donald Rothberg. A key aspect of EGM is research drawn from ten or more interactive dimensions of human activity including: social action, economic, moral, wellness, design (or learning), environmental, scientific, technological, aesthetic, and political. These areas are not value neutral but rather value-laden (geared toward promoting a more just and equitable quality of life for all beings). The collection and use of such data is an integral aspect of the research, design, and production of evolutionary guidance media.

Fundamental to the design of evolutionary guidance media is the concept of [[Transception]], a term coined by Klisanin (2005) that posits the pairing of compassionate-seeing/action with that of [[Cyberception]], or humankind’s rapidly advancing technological abilities.

The core values of evolutionary guidance media include “the promotion of values that support conscious evolution, planetary consciousness, transpersonal experiences, and superconscious learning. These include but are not limited to being-values, compassion, love, personal and social responsibility, creative altruism, peace and conflict resolution skills, gender and racial diversity” (Klisanin, 2005)."
(http://danaklisanin.com/research/evolutionary-guidance-media/)



=More Information=


==Bibliography==

Klisanin, D. (2010). A grand synergy: Applying the integral operating system to evolutionary guidance media. Journal of Integral Theory and Practice. 5(4).

Klisanin, D. (2010). Exploring the design of conscious media. Futures. 42(10), 1119-1125. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2010.08.012

Klisanin, D. (2009). The systems’ story: Fusing media technology with the spiritual dimension of human culture. Systemist. 31(3), 121-130.

Klisanin, D. (2008). Being Values and Beneficent Obsessions: Applying theories from Maslow and Assagioli to Evolutionary Guidance Media. In J. Wilby (ed.) “Systems That Make A Difference” Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Conference of the International Society for the Systems Sciences, Madison, WI.

Klisanin, D. (2007). Applying Banathy’s Design of Evolutionary Guidance Systems to Media: A protégée experience. United Kingdom: Systemist. 29(3), 83-90.

==Essay 1==

* '''Article: Transception: The Dharma of [[Evolutionary Guidance Media]]. By [[Dana Klisanin]].
'''
URL = http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings51st/article/view/455

Abstract: "We have at the present moment, communication technology that can be as powerful, in a creative sense, as the Atomic bomb was in the destructive sense. And remarkably, our children are some of its most fluent and ardent manipulators. Unfortunately, the stories and games being created for them are encouraging many of the values that contribute to social inequality and environment destruction. It is our challenge, as their stewards, to design communication technologies that will enable them to play and learn, while offering them real-life lessons in compassion. Systems scholar, Joanna Macy, presented the similarities between the systems view of reality and core Buddhist teachings in her groundbreaking book Mutual Causality in Buddhism and General Systems Theory: The Dharma of Natural Systems – using the parallels Macy demonstrated as a catalyst, this paper introduces transception – cyberception infused with compassion – considered a key component in evolutionary guidance media. The development of evolutionary guidance media was one of the final areas of research supervised by the late pioneer of evolutionary guidance systems, Bela H. Banathy. Specific examples of transception are presented through introducing key components of Project Milky Way, an experiment currently underway that was encouraged by Banathy as a means to test the theory of evolutionary guidance media in action. The experiment is designed such that it will allow the most privileged children (generally those with computers) the opportunity to share their wealth with those less fortunate. And, as Negroponte’s One Laptop Per Child initiative takes off, these same children will be able to communicate with children in the developing countries. Through transception, the children will be able to play, learn, and compassionately work together to become part of the solution to social injustice and environmental degradation. The paper concludes by suggesting that a generation of children who have come-of-age with transception at their fingertips would be better able to face the challenges they have inherited and more capable of making decisions that include concern for all beings, rather than those based on a NIMBY (i.e., not-in-my-backyard) mentality."


==Essay 2==

* '''Article: Evolutionary Guidance Media: An Overview. Dana Klisanin.'''

URL = http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings50th/article/viewArticle/401

Abstract: "Students of history are taught that the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand sparked the beginning of World War I. Today, we might wonder if the students of tomorrow will be taught that 12 cartoons ignited World War III. The importance and power of media continues to expand exponentially, increasingly asserting itself as a critical factor in our lives. As the world continues to interconnect, the potential exists for media to impact the individual and global psyche in a manner hitherto fore unimagined. Creating a new guiding mythos that promotes psycho-spiritual growth is considered necessary to create a sustainable world. Utilizing evolutionary guidance systems design, evolutionary guidance media (EGM) has been designed both in context and content specifically for the purpose of promoting planetary consciousness. This paper provides a brief overview of EGM for the purpose of generating strategic and evolutionary conversations within the international community."
(http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings50th/article/viewArticle/401)

[[Category:Media]]
[[Category:Facilitation]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]