'''= also called: "phase transitions" / “biospheric revolutions” / “canonical milestones” / “evolutionary turning points” / “complexity jumps”.'''


=Typology=

Andrey Korotayev:

==Modis==

"Modis “milestones” from his 2002 article in the
Technological Forecasting & Social Change:


(1) Origin of Milky Way, first stars –
10 billion years ago

(2) Origin of life on Earth, formation of thesolar system and the Earth, oldest rocks –
4 billion years ago

(3) First eukaryotes, invention of sex (by microorganisms), atmospheric oxygen, oldest photosynthetic plants, plate tectonicsestablished –
2 billion years ago

(4) First multicellular life (sponges, seaweeds, protozoans) –
1 billion years ago

(5) Cambrian explosion/invertebrates/vertebrates, plants colonize land, first trees, reptiles, insects, amphibians – 430 million years ago

(6) First mammals, first birds, first dinosaurs
– 210 million years ago

(7) First flowering plants, oldest angiosperm
fossil – 139 million years ago

(8) First primates/asteroid collision/mass
extinction (including dinosaurs) –
54.6million years ago

(9) First hominids, first humanoids –
28. 5million years ago

(10) First orangutan, origin of proconsul –
16.5 million years ago

(11) Chimpanzees and humans diverge,
earliest hominid bipedalism –5.1 million years ago

(12) First stone tools, first humans, Homoerectus –
2.2 million years ago

(13) Emergence of Homo sapiens –
555,000 years ago

(14) Domestication of fire/ Homo heidelbergensis –
325,000 years ago

(15) Differentiation of human DNA types –
200,000 years ago

(16) Emergence of ‘‘modern humans’’/
earliest burial of the dead – 105,700 years ago

(17) Rock art/protowriting –
35,800 yearsago

(18) Techniques for starting re –
19,200 years ago

(19) Invention of agriculture –
11,000 yearsago

(20) Discovery of the wheel/writing/archaic empires/large civilizations/Egypt/
Mesopotamia – 4,907 years ago

(21) Democracy/city states/Greeks/Buddha [≈ Axial Age] –
2,437 years ago

(22) Zero and decimals invented, Rome falls, Moslem conquest –
1,440 years ago

(23) Renaissance (printing press)/discovery of New World/the scientic method –
539 years ago

(24) Industrial revolution (steam engine)/ political revolutions (French, USA) – 225 years ago

(25) Modern physics/radio/electricity/automobile/airplane –
100 years ago

(26) DNA structure described/transistor invented/nuclear energy/WWII/Cold War/
Sputnik – 50 years ago

(27) Internet/human genome sequenced – 5 years ago "

(https://www.academia.edu/36810724/The_21st_Century_Singularity_and_its_Big_History_Implications_A_re-analysis)


==Panov==

Panov’s list of phase transitions:

“0. The origin of life – 4 · 10 9  years ago. The biosphereafter its appearance was represented by nucleusless procaryotes and existed the rst 2–2.5 billion years
without any great shocks.

1. Neoproterozoic revolution (Oxygen crisis) – 1.5 10 9 years ago. Cyanobacteria had enriched theatmosphere by oxygen that was a strong poisonfor anaerobic procaryotes. Anaerobic procaryotesstarted to die out and anaerobic procaryotefauna was changed by an aerobic eucaryote andmulticellular one.

2. Cambrian explosion (The beginning of Paleozoic era) –
590–510 · 10 6 years ago. All the modern phyla of
metazoa (including vertebrates) appeared during a few of tens of million years. During the Paleozoic era the terra firma was populated by life.

3. Reptiles revolution (The beginning of Mesozoic era) –
235 · 10 6 years ago. Almost all paleozoic Amphibia
died out. Reptiles became the leader of the evolution
on the terra rma.

4. Mammalia revolution (The beginning of the Cenozoic
era) – 66· 10 6 years ago. Dinosaurs died out. Mammalia animals became the leader of the
evolution on the terra firma.

5. Hominoid revolution (The beginning of the Neogene period) –
25–20 · 10 6 years ago. A big evolution
explosion of Hominoidae (apes). There were 14
genera of hominoidae between 22 and 17 millions
years ago – much more than now. The flora and
fauna became contemporary.

6. The beginning of Quaternary period (Anthropogene) – 4.4 · 10 6 years ago. The rst primitive Homo
genus (hominidae) separated from hominoidae.

7. Palaeolithic revolution – 2.0–1.6 · 10 6 years ago. Homohabilis, the first stone implements.

8. The beginning of Chelles period – 0.7–0.6 · 10 6  years ago. Fire, Homo erectus

9. The beginning of Acheulean period – 0.4 · 10 6 years ago Standardized symmetric stone implements.

10. The culture revolution of neanderthaler (Mustier culture) – 150–100 · 10 3  years ago.
Homo sapiens neandertalensis . Fine stone implements, burial of dead men (a sign of primitive religions).

11. The Upper Palaeolithic revolution – 40 · 10 3
years ago. Homo sapiens sapiens became the leader of cultural evolution. Development of advanced hunter instruments – spears, snares. Imitative art iswidespread.

12. Neolithic revolution – 12–9 · 10 3 years ago.
Appropriative economy [foraging] had been replaced by productive economy [food production].

13. Urban revolution (the beginning of the Ancient world) –
4000–3000 B.C. Appearance of state formations,
written language and the first legal documents.

14. Imperial antiquity, Iron age, the revolution of the
Axial time – 800–500 B.C.. The appearance ofa new type of state formations – empires, and aculture revolution. New kinds of thinkers such asZaratushtra, Socrates, Budda, and others.

15. The beginning of the Middle Ages – 400–630 CE.
Disintegration of Western Roman Empire, widespread Christianity and Islam, domination offeudal economy.

16. The beginning of the New Time [Modern Period],the rst industrial revolution –
1450–1550 CE Appearing of manufacture, printing of books, the New time culture revolution etc.

17. The second industrial revolution (steam and electricity) – 1830–1840. Appearance of mechanized industry, the beginning of globalization in the informationeld (telegraph was invented in 1831), etc.

18. Information revolution, the beginning of the postindustrial epoch –1950 . The main part of
population of industrial countries work in the field of information production and utilization or in the service field, not in the material production”

(https://www.academia.edu/36810724/The_21st_Century_Singularity_and_its_Big_History_Implications_A_re-analysis)



=Comparison=

Panov’s list of “biospheric revolutions” differs from the Modis – Kurzweil series of “canonical milestones” in many rather significant ways:

1) Modis – Kurzweil list contains 27 “canonical milestones”, whereas Panov’s series only includes 20 “biospheric revolutions”. Thus, at least 7 Modis – Kurzweil milestones have no parallels in the Panov series.

2) There is just one “milestone” for which both Modis and Panov have more or less exactly the same
name and date (Modis – Kurzweil 2 = Panov0). There is also one milestone (Modis – Kurzweil 26 = Panov 18), to which Modis and Panov give the same date, while giving to it totally different names.

3) There are a few milestones to which Modis and Panov give distantly similar names and roughly(but not exactly) similar dates (for example, Modis – Kurzweil 23 ≈ Panov 16; Modis –Kurzweil 19 ≈ Panov 12; Modis – Kurzweil 17≈ Panov 11; Modis – Kurzweil 9 ≈ Panov 5).


In one case Modis and Panov give to the same
milestone (Modis – Kurzweil 5 ~ Panov 2) the same name, but rather different dates.

4) However, for very substantial parts of those series
the correlation between them looks very distant indeed."

(https://www.academia.edu/36810724/The_21st_Century_Singularity_and_its_Big_History_Implications_A_re-analysis) 


=Source=

'''* Article: Korotayev, Andrey (2018) The 21st Century Singularity and its Big History Implications: A re-analysis. Journal of Big History, II(3); 71 - 118''' [http://dx.doi.org/10.22339/jbh.v2i3.2320 doi]

URL = https://www.academia.edu/36810724/The_21st_Century_Singularity_and_its_Big_History_Implications_A_re-analysis

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]