'''* [[Egalitarianism]], the evolution of. By Cathryn Townsend. The International Encyclopedia of Anthropology, 2018. [https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118924396doi]'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/29417676/Egalitarianism_the_evolution_of


=Description=

"Theory on the evolution of egalitarianism and its relevance to anthropology is described in three sections. The first section carefully defines and delimits usage of the term egalitarianism in anthropology, outlines the form of social organization empirically observed in egalitarian societies, and clarifies the difference between egalitarian and acephalous societies. The second section describes multidisciplinary perspectives on the egalitarian disposition and behaviors found in humans, and how these contrast with those of nonhuman primates. Theories on how these behaviors and dispositions may have evolved are summarized. Finally, the roles of gender relations, sexual reproduction strategies, and cooperative breeding are mentioned in relation to the theory on the evolution of egalitarianism."


=Excerpts=

=Anthropological History=

Cathryn Townsend:

"An explanation of the evolutionary emergence of the egalitarian predisposition is 
required in order to account for the range of political behaviors observed in contemporary human societies (from extremely egalitarian to extremely hierarchical), compared  with the consistently present dominance hierarchies of nonhuman primates such as 
chimpanzees, gorillas, and (to a moderate extent) bonobos. Te fact that by way of 
contrast with these, a wide range of political behaviors exists for humans, indicates that 
egalitarian tendencies came about due to unique selection pressures on our particular 
hominin lineage within the Homininae subfamily of the Hominidea (great ape) taxonomic family. An inference of this kind rests on the comparative phylogenetic method  in evolutionary biology in which it is expected that related species will exhibit similar 
adaptations not because they evolved them due to separate evolutionary pressures 
but because they belong to the same common phylogeny. Tis phenomenon is known
as “phylogenetic autocorrelation.” Divergence from autocorrelation is what needs 
to be explained in terms of selection pressures. While there are likely to have been 
precursor behaviors among early bipedal hominins, cooperative egalitarian behaviors 
may have emerged due to unique selection pressures during the Homo erectus to Homo 
sapiens phase of the human lineage. Early hominin morphology shows greater sex/size 
dimorphism compared with the genus Homo, which is indicative of higher male–male 
competition in the earlier hominin species because such an association is observed 
in nonhuman primates. The selection pressures involved may have been multiple and 
thus are best understood from the vantage point of various cross-disciplinary and 
complementary perspectives. 

From the perspective of behavioral ecology and optimal foraging theory, some 
aspects of the egalitarian ethos are adaptive in that they are effective risk-mitigation 
strategies. Behavioral ecology works from the premise that organisms have 
risk-sensitive adaptations that help them to survive. 

The risk-reduction strategies  adopted by mobile hunter-gatherers tend to be: 

(1) the pooling of resource harvests  within a sharing network, 

(2) mobility and/or fluid local-group composition that 
allows people to distribute themselves in accordance with resource distribution, and 

(3) future discounting in which receiving a smaller reward immediately is preferred to 
the potential for a greater reward in the future. 


These strategies match with the egalitarian practices of immediate-return hunter-gatherers in: 

(1) their demand sharing, 

(2)  the avoidance mechanism, which allows people to move away from sources of conflict,  and 

(3) emphasis on the subsistence needs of the present alongside a lack of storage 
and investment. 


The risk-mitigation strategies of mobile hunter-gatherers are plausibly associated 
with the evolution of genus Homo because of the archaeological evidence of medium- to 
large-game procurement commencing in the Pleistocene. Large-game hunting is a relatively risky subsistence strategy. It provides a food source that is worthy of sharing but  its acquisition requires cooperation. In addition, there is evidence that the Pleistocene 
brought climate change—specifically increased dry seasons with associated resource 
scarcity. These are the environmental conditions in which sharing is most beneficial. 


Cognitive science also brings its insights. Developmental psychologist Michael 
Tomasello suggests that shared intentionality or intersubjectivity in pursuit of a com- 
mon objective is the hallmark of human interaction as opposed to that of other apes. 
For example, the gesture of pointing requires a mutual understanding of the intention 
of the pointer to share information. In support of this, the “cooperative eye hypothesis” 
proceeds from the corollary that only the genus Homo has a specific physiology—eyes 
that are almond-shaped with white sclera—that make it easy to see others’ focus of 
attention and suggests that this evolved to facilitate communication and cooperation. 
Shared intentionality requires high levels of trust between people in a social group and 
the ability to understand another’s intention to help or to share. The skills and motives 
of shared intentionality have transformed the individualistic and competitive primate 
social behaviors such as gaze following, manipulative communication, group action, 
and social learning into the human cultural behaviors of joint attention, cooperative 
communication, collaborative action, and instructed learning. Shared intentionality is 
thus the cognitive capacity that makes egalitarianism and related cultural capacities 
possible. In principle, specific mutations to eye shape and color could be traced 
genetically to historical social changes in the Pleistocene."

(https://www.academia.edu/29417676/Egalitarianism_the_evolution_of)


=More information=

* [[Inequity Aversion]]

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]