'''= school of economic historians who attempt to link [[Technological Revolutions and Societal Transitions]], following the long wave theories of Kondratieff and Schumpeter'''


=Discussion=

Gérard Valenduc:

"Schumpeter’s writings leave many questions unanswered. Is economic
development inherently cyclical? To what extent is the periodicity of long
waves pre-determined? How do clusters of innovation emerge? Which
policies can governments adopt to influence the way in which the transition
from one wave to the next unfolds? The ‘neo-Schumpeterian’ school
of research – or evolutionary economics, which is the term preferred by
its main protagonists – has emerged to answer these and other questions,
with An evolutionary theory of economic change, published by Richard
Nelson and Sydney Winter in 1982, regarded as its seminal work (Arena
and Lazaric 2003). Other prominent researchers working within this tradition
include Giovanni Dosi, Christopher Freeman, Bengt-Åke Lundvall,
Mariana Mazzucato, Keith Pavitt, Carlota Perez, Mario Pianta, Nathan
Rosenberg and Luc Soete.

The concepts developed by evolutionary economists include systems
of innovation and technological trajectories. A system of innovation, defined
at national or regional level, is a network of institutions and actors
in the public and private sectors who interact in producing, adapting,
diffusing and using the new knowledge and
new technologies which contribute to social
and economic development. This is a broader
concept than the Schumpeterian cluster,
since it also incorporates those who play a
role in innovation and the social relations
which emerge between them. A technological
trajectory retraces the history of a group of
innovations with its associated twists, turns
and forks in the road, dead ends and fresh starts, and demonstrates that
technological innovations are always path-dependent – a path shaped by
the interactions between economic, institutional and social stakeholders.

A number of authors working in the field of regulation theory have also
drawn inspiration from evolutionary thinking, particularly in their analyses
of the Fordist mode of regulation which is the hallmark of the 1945-1975 period
of prosperity. The downfall of Fordism from the 1980s onwards can be
interpreted as the decline of the techno-economic paradigm which shaped
this period of prosperity (Boyer and Coriat 1984), and the very idea of a
‘post-Fordist’ revival implies the need for a new mode of growth based on
a techno-economic paradigm newly forged from controversy and upheaval
(Boyer 2002). "<br />
(https://www.etui.org/Publications2/Foresight-briefs/Technological-revolutions-and-societal-transitions)

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]