=Description=

Ian Morris:

"Evolutionists  are  theorists  

* who  see  some conceptual  continuity  between  human  history  and  biological  evolution; 

* who consider  sociocultural  evolution  to  be governed  by  identifiable  mechanisms functioning  somewhat  like  natural  selection; 

* who  see  these  mechanisms  as involving  adaptation  to  the  environment; 

* who  believe  that  the  mechanisms operate  on  all  societies  regardless  of  time  and  space; and — usually,  but  not always — 

* who  recognize  a  series  of  overlapping  but  largely  sequential  stages  of social/cultural  evolution,  from  egalitarian  foraging  bands  through  hierarchical agricultural empires and pastoral tribes, to modern fossil-fuel-based nation-states "

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j45z2s3)


=Discussion=

==[[Is Seasonality an Objection To Anthropological Evolutionary Theories]] ?==

Ian Morris (in response to the [[Dawn of Everything]]):

"Evolutionary  models typically  tell  how  egalitarian  foraging  groups  turned  into ranked  farming  societies  and  then  into  stratified  states.  However,  GW  note, anthropologists have regularly found societies that have moved back and forth on this spectrum, sometimes rapidly. Nineteenth-century Native American groups on the Great Plains are a famous case. The Crow, Cheyenne, and others spent much of the year in tiny, aggressively egalitarian foraging bands, with no chiefs at all. But for several weeks each autumn, they flocked together to slaughter the great herds of  migrating  bison.  They  appointed  chiefs  and  provided  them  with  what  the anthropologist Robert Lowie called “a police force,” which “issued orders and restrained the disobedient. In most of the tribes,” Lowie continued, “they not only confiscated game clandestinely procured, but whipped the offender, destroyed his property, and, in case of resistance, killed him” (GW 109, citing Lowie 1948: 18).GW call such chiefs “play kings,” their power largely a matter of “performance,” and suggest that “their reality was, in effect, sporadic. They appeared and then dissolved  away”  (GW  117,  429).  


Recognizing  this,  they  say,  undermines evolutionism because 

''- "the  nineteenth-century  Cheyenne  or  Lakota  would  have  been  seen [by  evolutionists] as  evolving  from  the “band” to  the “state” level roughly every November, and then devolving back again come spring. Obviously, this is  silly. No  one would seriously suggest such a thing. Still, it’s worth pointing out because it exposes the much deeper silliness  of  the  initial  assumption:  that  societies  must  necessarily progress through a series of evolutionary stages to begin with." (GW 110–11)'' 

Yet evolutionists have had no real problem incorporating these back-and-forth societies  into  their  typologies.  Allen  Johnson  and  Timothy  Earle  (1987:  31-38, drawing on Steward 1938) even used the Great Basin Shoshone of a century ago as a case study in their widely read book The Evolution  of Human Societies. Like the Cheyenne, the Shoshone spent most of the year in unranked, family-sized groups, but some of them periodically granted “rabbit bosses” and “antelope shamans” far-reaching powers to coordinate large-scale hunting and trapping. Most of the time, the Great Basin’s aridity made family-level organization the most effective way to hunt and gather, but when opportunities arose for rabbit drives, the Shoshone put people  in  charge and  did  what  it took  to  get the job  done.  The  Shoshone  did  not thereby become subjects of a stratified state. Bosses and shamans had no coercive powers beyond people’s willingness to follow their lead, whether that meant clearing brush and stringing out hundreds of feet of nets to accomplish a common goal or punishing free riders whose unruliness threatened the shared effort. The minute  the  jackrabbits  or  bison  stopped  running,  Shoshone  and  Cheyenne,  who now  had  no  need  for  multi-family  organizations  (and  no  food  supply  abundant enough to support them), scattered across the landscape in tiny groups — until the next hunting season.

GW  are  right  that  prehistorians  have  neglected  seasonality,  but  wrong  that seasonality is inconsistent with evolutionism."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j45z2s3)

=More information=

"The  literature  is  enormous;  I  lean  particularly  on  Boyd  and  Richerson  2005  and Mesoudi 2011, plus Trigger’s [1998] account of the field’s intellectual history:

* Boyd,   Robert  and   Peter   Richerson. 2005. Not   by   Genes   Alone:   How   Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

* Mesoudi, Alex.2011. Cultural Evolution: How Darwinian Theory Can Explain Human Culture & Synthesize the Social Sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

* Trigger, Bruce.1998. Sociocultural Evolution. Oxford: Blackwell

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]