
=Discussion=

Pierre Levy:

"The main factor in the evolution of
ideas lies in the material structure
of reproduction of symbols.

Throughout history, symbols (with
the ideas they conveyed) have been
successively perpetuated by writing,
simplified by the alphabet and paper,
multiplied by printing and electrical
media. Today, symbols are digitized
and calculated, that is, a series of
software robots – algorithms –
record them, count them, translate
them and extract patterns. Symbolic
objects (texts, static or animated
images, voices, music, programs,
etc.) are not only recorded,
reproduced and transmitted
automatically, but also generated and
transformed industrially. In short,
cultural evolution has led us to the
point where ecosystems of ideas
manifest themselves as data driven
by algorithms in a ubiquitous virtual
space. And it is in this space that
social bonds are formed, maintained
and dissolved. Before criticizing or
deploring, we must first acknowledge
the facts. Young people’s friendships
can no longer be made without
social media; couples meet online,
for example, on apps like Tinder (see
Figure 1); families stay connected
through Facebook or other apps like
WhatsApp; workspaces have shifted
to electronic ones with Zoom
and Teams, especially since the
COVID-19 pandemic; diplomacy
is increasingly conducted on X
(formerly Twitter), etc. There is no
going back. On the other hand, we
are not moving less physically: as
evidenced by the monstrous traffic
jams in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.
In the same vein, the trend of the
last ten years – an era of exponential
growth in internet connections –
also shows an increase in the number
of air passengers, which continues
to be a secular trend, despite having
suffered a significant decline during
the COVID-19 pandemic.

I felt very lonely when, as a young
student, I arrived in Paris from the
south of France to continue my
university studies. It was 1975 and
there was no Internet. Should elderly
people who live alone and are not
visited by their children blame the
Internet? The problem of loneliness
and the disintegration of social ties
is very real. But it is a long-standing
trend, due to urbanization, changes
in the family, and many other factors."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)


=More information=

* Book by Pierre Levy: [[Collective Intelligence]]


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]