=1929=

'''* Article: Involvement of a Capitalist Crisis in the 1900-30 Inequality Trend Reversal. Michael A. Alexander. CliodynamicsVolume 8, Issue 1, 2017.''' [https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio8133347 doi]

URL = https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42p5m46m

"This paper proposes a supplemental secular cycle formulation for a modern capitalist society that employs financial, economic, and political metrics in place of population and sociopolitical violence. It makes use of Thomas Piketty’s (2014) hypothesis that excess investment return relative to economic growth causes inequality. In a capitalist society, the investing class can be considered as a proxy for elites. Inequality as measured by the ratio of financial to wage gains over time agrees with other economic measures. Rising inequality led to a reduction in capital productivity (output per person per unit of capital). This created instability in financial markets that generated the 1929 stock market crash. Application of a simplified version of the demographic structural theory to inequality trends shows political stress peaking in 1929. The depression that began with the stock market crash in that year resulted in a devastating political defeat for the ruling party in 1932 which brought in the political coalition that engineered the inequality trend reversal. This series of events can be considered as a modern version of the state collapse and reconstitution that was typically a key feature of premodern secular cycles."


==Discussion==

Michael A. Alexander:

"The  transition  between  one agrarian secular  cycle  to  the  next  was typically associated  with  state  collapse  or  transformation, often through  civil  war  or revolution. Nothing like this happened during the early twentieth century secular cycle  transition,  however.  How  did  American  elites  in  the  middle  third  of  the twentieth century come to accept a significant reduction in their income share, as falling  inequality  requires,  without  a  civil  war  or  revolution?  Turchin  proposes that  a  coalition  of  elites  “implemented  a  series  of  formal  reforms,  supplemented by  a  number  of  informal  measures”  that  reversed  the  pre-existing  trends  in inequality/well-being  (Turchin  2016:171).  The  principal  one  of  these  was the restriction  of  immigration  in  the  early  twenties.  This policy was  undertaken primarily  as  a  response  to  sharply  rising  sociopolitical  instability  in  the  second decade  of  the  twentieth  century  (Turchin  2012),  that  if  left  unaddressed,  might have  led  to  the  war  or  revolution  associated  with  previous  inequality  trend reversals. By acting  to  forestall  the  loss  of  wealth  and  status  a  revolution  would bring, elites ended up with it anyway."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42p5m46m)


=More information=

* [[Inequality Cycles]]

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]