'''* Article: Peering Ahead: An Examination of Peer-to-Peer Signal-Sharing Communities that Create Their Own Affordable Internet Access. By Gwen Shaffer, University of California, Irvine. Canadian Journal of Communication Vol 36 (2011) 69-90'''

=ABSTRACT= 

"This study expands upon existing research by shedding light on the challenges
and opportunities facing participants in peer-to-peer wireless signal-sharing initiatives. The
study relies on resource mobilization theory to gain a deeper understanding of why members
of community mesh networks in the United States join the movement and how they sustain
it. The researcher conducted semi-structured interviews with the founders of 12 unique U.S.
networks. The projects examined illustrate the desire for alternatives to traditional ISPs, as
well as deep commitments to digital inclusion and local ownership. Informants reported feeling
personally invested in the future of their projects because they contribute technical support
and other forms of labour."


=Excerpt=


==[[Community Mesh Networking Movement]]==

By Gwen Shaffer:

"Community broadband networks are just one element of a larger media reform
movement focused on ensuring media outlets serve the public interest, as well as foster
independent and diverse sources of information (Free Press, 2010; Media Access Project,
2010; Reclaim the Media, 2010). The relatively weak position of Wi-Fi signal-sharing activists
in the United States is working both for and against the movement’s best interests.
While Internet activists are deploying peer-to-peer networks in numerous cities, these
efforts remain mostly underground and have yet to draw in a critical mass of participants—
certainly not enough to attract the ire of the incumbent ISPs. Should the
telecommunications industry feel compelled to squash signal-sharing initiatives in the
future, it will likely attempt to do so through a combination of legal and political strategies.
As Thomas (2006) points out in his assessment of media reform efforts, any analysis
of social movements must account for the fact that “the language and styles of
corporate organizational management practices are now an essential part of the organizational
culture of movement actors” (p. 23). For instance, several of the most visible
ad hoc network leaders do not merely adopt characteristics typical of corporate culture,
they are corporate. Additionally, social movement organizations deal with the dichotomy
between fighting to achieve long-term goals—in the case of the Wi-Fi signalsharing
movement, expanding broadband access by creating mesh networks—and
obtaining the necessary management skills and resources to survive day to day.

The activists behind community mesh networks possess access to the media and
relationships with policymakers. People initiating and joining non-profit signal-sharing
networks, the core of this grass-roots movement, typically boast technology and IT
knowledge. In fact, they are in a position to mobilize only because they have acquired
these resources. Those who join signal-sharing communities are linked through common
interests, including the desire for ubiquitous connectivity and digital inclusion
and to force change in the telecommunications industry. Finally, many broadband subscribers
who choose to share their wireless signals do so for ideological reasons, with
the intention of making a political statement. Still, the question arises: Why do people
join social movements when they can benefit from the work of others willing to bear
the costs of achieving a common good? What are the incentives to contribute rather
than “free-ride” (Olson, 1965)? This question must be posed because the costs of defending
an interest are obvious; time, money, and even safety are often sacrificed for
the common good. Successful new social movements result in collective benefits, and
participants often get involved in hopes of obtaining some personal resource (McCarthy & Zald, 1987). Actors perceive mobilizing as a pathway for aggregating resources.
If everyone chips in, resources will flow into the movement, making it that much more
efficient. While most peer-to-peer networks were founded to provide Internet access
to disenfranchised members of a community, the benefits to elite participants in the
movement should not be ignored, either."

From the conclusion, regarding Digital inclusion:

"A commitment to expanding digital inclusion is a primary incentive to develop mesh
communities, based on data collected during interviews with network founders and
administrators. Quinn, the informant from the Sun Belt region, reported that he and
fellow group members believe “the digital divide is a real problem and it is widening
every day.” Other informants spoke in detail about daily tasks—from banking transactions
to obtaining government services and filling out job applications—that require
online access. Jack, who administered a community network in a college town in a
Prairie state, said the project began with the idea that it could play a “social justice”
role. “We think the network can perform and reinforce a lot of the good functions of
a neighbourhood organization, in that it makes people aware they are not on some island
of information,” he said. Jack noted that his grass-roots initiative enabled school
children to get online from home for the first time, demonstrating that wireless community
networks can help close the digital divide. Victor, who developed a mesh network
in his Southern city, asserted that if the government paid for just a few gateways
to the Internet and then distributed mesh routers, the digital divide could be nearly
eliminated. Friends who shared a passion for IT founded a mesh network in a Southwestern
city, reported Jordan. “At first, we had no higher purpose,” he stressed, noting
that early deployments were in privately owned apartment complexes. However, network
founders ultimately decided to undertake projects only in affordable and lowincome
housing developments. “We didn’t want to be involved in just hooking up
landlords for their own benefit,” Jordan reported. Quinn, the founder of the signalsharing
community in the Sun Belt, said he is confident that by contributing free bandwidth,
participants in his network are creating an alternate “path” for disenfranchised
residents who may have computers but lack connectivity.

However, other informants reported scepticism that peer-to-peer networking can
help municipal governments meet digital inclusion goals. “It makes us feel good to
say we’re bridging the digital divide, but I’m not sure that’s really the case,” asserted
Howard, the informant who deployed a mesh network in a college town in the Great
Lakes region. Jordan, who administers the ad hoc network in the Southwest, characterized
ad hoc networks as a symptom of the problem—lack of Internet access—rather
than the solution. Signal-sharing maximizes the efficiency of bandwidth that is available,
“but it’s only filling a gap” that municipal and federal governments need to address,
Jordan said. Alexis, the informant closely involved in the Ubiquitous Net project,
stressed that while free access to the Web is a key element to closing the digital divide,
it is “just one” necessary piece for getting low-income people online. “It’s about social
justice, which is more complex than giving someone a router,” Alexis said. As a result,
her organization is working to expand the wireless community network to include access
to computers and content that is “personally relevant” to new Internet users.

The comments from these informants embody the spirit of resource mobilization
theory, which purports that social movement actors capitalize on personal resources
and knowledge to achieve their goals (Kendall, 2008). Rather than merely complaining
about a problem, such as a lack of affordable Internet access, a core group of activists
brings together other disaffected community members to create an organizational
structure. This group then collectively draws upon its resources—perhaps ties to the
political establishment, professional skills, media contacts, or financial capacities—to
alter the situation (Kendall, 2008). The grass-roots network leaders interviewed for
this study all recognized the digital divide as a problem in their communities and, at
the same time, determined the government was unlikely to address it. In reaction, they
developed and implemented action plans to provide broadband access on their own.
The mere fact that, in a peer-to-peer network, discourse takes place over communityowned
infrastructure eliminates the mediating role typically played by corporations.
As a result, these social actors may create cultural and political meanings on their own
terms. By helping close the digital divide, these actors are creating wider structural
change in both broadband infrastructure and the public sphere.

Like the goal of closing the digital divide, a majority of informants mentioned a
desire to strengthen community. Jacob, whose non-profit runs a mesh network in the
rural Southeast, envisions Internet access as a “community-building tool” for a region
located far from both the “seat of power” in the state capital and the economic centre
of the state. Similarly, Zachary, who helped launch three mesh networks in the Midwest,
stressed that he and his peers are not “technologists.” Rather, they perceive Internet
access as a tool for achieving ambitious economic development goals. Zachary cited
the Internet’s potential to open new commercial markets for local entrepreneurs—potentially
enabling them to “compete with Amazon.com”—and “connect” neighbours
to one another. Howard, the study participant from a Great Lakes college town, cited
ad hoc networks worldwide as an opportunity to help disenfranchised residents feel
less intimidated by the Internet. “The Internet is a very sterile, lonely place, and the
fact that this type of project builds community is pretty remarkable,” Howard noted.

Repeatedly, informants reported a desire to help close the digital divide as a driving
force behind the creation and maintenance of their wireless initiatives. Yet the data
reveal that even dedicated supporters of peer-to-peer networks harbour doubts regarding
the potential for these initiatives to bring Internet access to the masses. These comments
highlight the reality that even “successful” grass-roots initiatives are limited in
their reach. While volunteer-led efforts serve an important purpose—in terms of raising
awareness, building community, teaching skills, and expanding access in small
communities—some informants suggest digital inclusion goals are more likely to be
fulfilled when government officials and incumbent carriers intervene. This is unlikely
to happen, however, without a more progressive political economic model that takes
into account civic engagement and deliberative discourse, as opposed to market considerations
alone. Policy decisions that increase media consolidation and lock out landline
competition are the result of a political economy that favours a concentrated,
corporate-run media structure over local, independent broadcasting and publishing
outlets. Currently, the U.S. Congress and other governing bodies in the Americas tend
to consider how their decisions impact industry, rather than how they can enhance
“the lifeworld” (Habermas, 1987), with its focus on how people interact, how they
make rational decisions, how they contribute to culture, and how they contextualize
life experiences. Until governments develop policies that legitimize and encourage
peer-to-peer signal-sharing, it will be difficult for community Wi-Fi networks to achieve
digital inclusion objectives."


=Author Bio=

Gwen Shaffer is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Computer Science, Bren School of Information
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Irvine, 3019 Donald Bren Hall, Irvine,
CA 92697-3435. Email: g.shaffer@uci.edu.


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Articles]]