

=Directory=

"Exchange and virtual currencies networks refer to activities organised by groups of citizens in 
specific regions or across the whole of Greece, where transactions are taking place without the use 
of money. They are based either on the exchange of products and services or on virtual currencies 
such as the unit of time or coupons issued by the networks’ members. Some of them are online 
networks where the members can notify when they want to give something away for free or when 
they need something. 

Some of the most popular networks are presented below: 

• Time Exchange (http://www.time-exchange.gr/): This is a network for exchanging free services. 

In  2011, thousands of people flooded the squares of 
Greece trying to resist the introduction of new 
austerity measures which would have such devastating effects on people’s lives. A group of 
people who had gathered in Syntagma Square decided to exchange views and knowledge 
in order to operate a time bank, i.e. a network for exchanging free services, using time as 
the unit of transaction. 


• Ovolos (www.ovolos.gr): An alternative social currency that facilitates commercial 
activities between its members. 

The network is organised and operated by its members 
and is open to anyone who wants to participate. 


• TEM (http://www.tem-magnisia.gr/): An alternative 
economic/ social model. 

More than 800 citizens in the 
town of Volos have signed up for a local currency scheme 
called TEM. The network includes teachers, doctors,
babysitters, farmers, hairdressers, etc. who interact with 
each other online. All transactions are recorded in a 
special electronic system, in order for any network
member to be able to offer or search for products and 
services in any given time. Members transfer units into 
and out of each others' accounts online. TEM provides an 
alternative way of showing practical solidarity and a response to the crisis effects. 


• Skoros (http://skoros.espiv.net/): Skoros is a 
solidarity bazaar, which is anti-consumerist and is
open to everyone, regardless of their economic 
situation. 

A give-and-take of things but also a 
meeting point for exchange of knowledge/ 
experience/ practices (for example, I offer a hair-cut 
and you teach me how to knit!). It is neither a 
philanthropic organisation, nor a kind of “alternative 
church”. It is a group of people that question in 
practice the dogma “I consume, therefore I am”.


• Fasouli (http://fasouli.wordpress.com/): This network is for the underpaid or unemployed 
youth of Athens – all those whose welfare 
payments are decreasing while the world 
they live in is becoming increasingly 
expensive. 

The so called 700 euro generation 
that today became the 300 euro generation 
is the name that young Greeks have given 
themselves. Two years ago when young people managed to find a job, they rarely got 
more than 700 euro (with a minimum net wage of 750 euro per month) whereas today 
they roughly get more than 350 euro a month which is the minimum net wage for young 
employees up to 25 years old in accordance to the law implemented as a result of the 
austerity measures adopted. Fasouli serves their needs by giving the opportunity to each 
network member to exchange services and products. The tenders are communicated to 
the network through classified ads. The payment is made in Fasoulas, a virtual currency, 
whose use is restricted to the members of the network. 


• Free-economy (http://network.free-economy.gr/): Online exchange network in which 
dozens of professionals offer and receive services 
by using an alternative currency. 


• Xariseto.gr (http://www.xariseto.gr/): Online 
exchange network which aims to decrease the 
volume of useful objects ending up in landfills 
which are useless to someone after a period of 
time. 

This initiative is an alternative economic 
model, a give-and-take of things which are 
offered free of charge. 


• Dose- pare (http://dwsepare.ning.com/): Online 
exchange network. 

A give-and-take of things which are offered free of charge.

 
• Solidarity and exchange networks in several Greek cities and islands: The main focus of 
these networks is to allow their members to exchange services and products as a means of 
meeting part of their daily needs without the use of money. Such networks are: “Votsalo”, 
“Ilianthos”, “Lets.net.gr”, “Stakraeli”, “Ilios”, “Rodia”, “Iliohoros”, “kyklos-kos”, 
“DiktioElia”, “Sano”, “Kaereti”, “Mesopotamia”, “Perivolakia”, “KOINO”, “EMRO”, 
“Boutsouni” etc."

(source: [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece]] )

=More Information=

* [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece]]

[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]