

=Description=

Richard Hames:

"One of the most profound shifts needed in futures literacy is a reimagining of time itself. Western models teach us to see and experience time as linear, a relentless arc of progress, invariably teleological. But then many indigenous and non-Western traditions view time as cyclical—an underlying pulse with cadences of growth, decay, and renewal. The Māori concept of Whakapapa, for instance, reminds us that the past, the present, and the possible are not separate but interconnected layers of relationship and responsibility.

Studying this I developed 'the expanded now'. To be able to imagine any possible state, I figured we must act consciously in the present, having due regard for the past, but comprehending that what we do now ripples forward in an eternal cycle of consequences. The concept of 'the expanded now' offers a structure for understanding our present reality by integrating insights from the deep past and all possible future states. This encourages us to move beyond our tight present focus - the 'here and now' of each and every moment - recognising that the decisions we make in these moments are influenced by historical contexts, perceived opportunities, probabilities, and path dependence. The 'expanded now' seeks to transcend these limitations by fostering a deeper awareness of our interconnectedness with both our history and our evolution.

At the heart of this concept is the idea that embracing complexity by identifying 'patterns that matter' and that can be visualised is essential for making sense of the unprecedented challenges we face today. By situating today's problems within a broader evolutionary context, the 'expanded now' allows for emergent states to be noticed. The uncertain disruptions and brittle capriciousness of our time present a unique chance for inspiring human evolution, enabling us to evolve towards a more equitable and viable world-system.

This cyclical view of time suspends the obsession with 'solutions' and 'development' that characterizes so many Western foresight techniques, including scenario planning. It demonstrates that the future is not something to be conquered or controlled but a 'state' to be shaped and into which we must blend. This perspective offers us a profound antidote in a world of ecological collapse and social fragmentation: a call to slow down, to listen, to feel, and to align our actions with the rhythms of the earth and the cosmos."

(https://richarddavidhames.substack.com/p/futures-literacy)


[[Category:P2P Futures]]

[[Category:Time]]