
'''* Book: Making Common Cause: Exploring the Potential of Cultural Commoning. Curated and Edited by Kevin Murphy, Damien McGlynn and Denis Stewart. Voluntary Arts, 2018.'''

URL = https://www.voluntaryarts.org/News/makingcommoncause

=Join the Conversation=

*Use the hashtag #makingcommoncause 
*Join the Making Common Cause [https://chat.whatsapp.com/invite/DAvYxwJHgVWGYOEDqj7pVj WhatsApp group] - would be great if we could all connect there too and share additional links/audio/video that could stimulate new ideas and connections
*Host your own conversation on particular aspects from the book - email kevin@vaireland.org for help in setting up
*Connect with the network, [[Coalition for the Cultural Commons]]


=The Context=

David Bryan:

"Our Cultural Commons began with a series of round-table discussions across
these islands. These gatherings provided a space for discussion that could
uncover innovative local collaborative practice and build networks of people and
organisations exploring new approaches. A result of these discussions was that we
developed our collective understanding of the problems facing local places as well
as the potential solutions.

What we were unprepared for was that many of the solutions were based on some
very traditional ways of working. We knew, from our work supporting voluntary
creative groups and networks, that pooling resources was an everyday feature
of how people organised things. And the practice of commoning - a pooling of
resources in shared local participation - turns out to be part of a trend towards a
more sustainable and ethical world, which is being progressed actively across the
full spectrum of human endeavour.

Almost accidentally we found ourselves being part of the global commons
movement and in the midst of this cultural shift. Those of us active in the
world of cultural creativity can learn from others who are applying commoning
approaches in worlds as varied as organic food production, land management,
software development, energy provision, online services, and local civic governance.
This wider world of the commons is a flourishing world, and something of a
renaissance in the making.

This book is a contribution to that renaissance. It is a simple compilation of the
weekly Our Cultural Commons series, curated by Voluntary Arts from November
2017 onwards, and authored by cultural thinkers and doers. Our intention is
to help make visible the cultural commons in action and to encourage related
approaches to sustaining creative cultural activity in local places. There is food for
thought here for cultural policy-makers who may not yet be minded to embrace
the potential of local participation and everyday creativity, and the importance of
enabling citizens to identify concerns and create solutions."

=Contents=

David Bryan:

"The structure of the book is straightforward with a section dedicated to perspectives
on our cultural commons and one to practice-based case stories. These main
sections are framed by an introduction to why cultural commoning matters and
an end piece that looks towards a potential future. '


Throughout the book a range of
themes is explored, including:

• new governance and business models that are more participative and
collaborative and centred around common needs and bonds
• localities as cultural commons (cities and towns, rural regions, neighbourhoods)
• the digital and online cultural commons
• creating sustainable asset based financial supports that encourage common
wealth
• the making of art as a commoning and peer-to-peer practice
• how cultural democracy can be enabled through commoning.

==PREAMBLE==

* Why Cultural Commoning Matters 5

==PERSPECTIVES==

* Cultural Commons and Social Wellbeing 8
* Cultural Commoning and Civic Conversation 11
* Parks as Commons 14
* The People’s Parish - Singing Our Own Song 17
* Cultural Commons - Who Pays and Who Benefits? 20
* Culture Banked - Our Digital Commons? 23
* What Does Cultural Democracy Mean? 26
* Mindfulness and the Contemplative Commons 30

==PRACTICES==

* Howlround - A Case Study in Cultural Commoning 34
* Rights and the Power of Real-Life Gathering 37
* Cardboardia - Forming New Communities 40
* No 11 Arts in Birmingham - An Instance of Cultural Commoning 43
* Garvagh People’s Forest - A Commoning Practice 46
* Hebden Bridge Handmade Parade - Our Big Day 49
* A New Role for the Artist 52
* Creative Citizens Together - Building Hope in Local Communities 55


==PROSPECTS==

* Shifting Culture

=Excerpt=

==Why Cultural Commoning Matters==

Kevin Murphy and Denis Stewart:

Cultural commoning is of its time. In a world where it is becoming clear that the
everyday creative things we do have value for us, for the social fabric and wellbeing
of our communities and for the health of our democracies it offers an alternative
approach to sustaining our creative lives. We live in an era when the consequences
and effects of dominant economic, social and political paradigms are pressing upon
people, damaging democracy and fomenting feelings of frustration, helplessness and
despair. It is now when creating together, wisely and hopefully, matters most.
Across the world, the wider commons movement is growing hopeful alternatives to
the dispiriting status quo. Peer-to-peer networks of organisation and production are
on the increase, multiplying exponentially year by year. Working together, collectives
of diversely experienced volunteers and professionals in various sectors are facing
into challenges creatively and with concern for the common good. In their ‘small acts
of creative transgression’ these citizen commoners are using open source methods,
cooperative learning and collaborative approaches to design and development. New
civic and cultural ecosystems are springing up everywhere providing alternatives to
economic and social organisation and development. Take Platform Cooperativism,
for example; or the Urban Commons plans in Ghent, Barcelona and Bologna, to name but a few; or the more ethical blockchain developments in digital currency such as FairCoin. These movements are well beyond the hopeful aspiration stage.

They are on the ground, happening and here to stay.

The practices, principles and values of the commons and ‘commoning’, are very
relevant and directly applicable to the world of creatively cultural activity. Indeed,
in a time when perceptions of priority regarding use of the public purse are leading
politicians and policy makers to cut back on funding for ‘the arts and culture’, the
ways of thinking and acting that are associated with the commons and commoning
need to be highlighted and heeded. Cultural commoning happens when people
come together through personal choice to initiate and grow creative activity and
practices through participative and collaborative approaches. It acknowledges the
abundance we have around us and offers a pragmatic and complementary approach
to sustaining the means of cultural creation in local places. It sits alongside the public
sector and private enterprise with perhaps the most potential being realised when
interdependencies are recognised and built upon. And, in enacting alternative ways
of working, cultural commoning is exerting influence through contributing to
processes of transformative innovation, the need for which is becoming ever more
evident and urgent.

In the sphere of cultural creativity not least, we have the advantage that the basic
resources and building blocks of cultural creativity - the knowledge, the practices,
the human impulse to express ourselves creatively - are held in common. These
abundant human resources are accessible to everyone. At any given point we can
draw from this rich reservoir to imagine and create anew.

More contested are the means by which we turn these building blocks into new
expressions, unique to us and by which we nurture, share and celebrate our
individual and collective creative acts. The cultural landscape is more fragmented
and complicated here. And there are more enclosures.

One next step, as we look to provoke thinking, inspire doing and help to form
an enabling environment of policy and practice within which culturally creative
commoning in diverse ways and places becomes more of the norm, is to name
it and explore it actively as emerging next practice. The series of articles in the
following pages aims to do just that."

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Northern Ireland]]