
'''* Book: 1) Explorations in Altruistic Love and Behavior, edited by Pitirim Sorokin. 2) Altruistic Love.'''

URL = 

=Summary=

Richard Simpson:

"Sorokin's Harvard Research Center in Altruistic Integration and Creativity produced its first book
in 1950: 

* Explorations in Altruistic Love and Behavior, edited by Sorokin and featuring three
articles by him. 

Many sociologists confronting a
book in which are asked such questions as "Can
Eros be separated from Agape?" may find themselves on unfamiliar ground; perhaps this is
why this book, edited by one of the leading men in
the history of sociology, has received scant attention in our journals. Since it has been unduly
neglected, and since it is the start of a potentially
fruitful chapter of Sorokin's scholarly life, it
will be considered in some detail here.

The lead article by Sorokin is entitled "Love: Its
Aspects, Production, Transformation, and Accumulation." The various forms of love-religious,
ethical, ontological, physical, biological, psychological, and social-are discussed. Sorokin surveys
the forms of love and prescriptions for its furtherance in a number of cultures, Eastern and Western,
ancient and modern. While ranging over all the
major religions in quest of worthy maxims about
love and analyses of it, he finds the ancient
scriptures of India the most valuable source of
knowledge in this area. 

Love can be analyzed into
five components or dimensions: intensity, extensity, duration, purity, and adequacy. Sorokin
expresses regret at the non-scalar nature of these
dimensions and the difficulty of defining their
quantitative relationships. The five dimensions of
love are reminiscent of the Sensate Jeremy Bentham's felicific calculus.

Sorokin speaks of the love for humanity of Jesus,
Gandhi, and other spiritual leaders as "unrequited."
Since all they got for their altruistic actions was
martyrdom, he reasons, the source of their loveenergy must be sought outside the customary
human channels.

The most probable hypothesis ... is that an inflow
of love comes from an intangible, little-studied, possibly super-empirical source called "God," "the Godhead," "the Soul of the Universe," the center of the
highest energy in the universe, the "Ultimate and
Highest Value," the "Heavenly Father," "Truth,"
and so on.

Love-energy is a very real thing. It "is even
more imperishable than any other form of energy,
including radioactivity; not a particle of it is
lost."" This energy can be stored up in institutions
and organizations. Mortification of the flesh
helps to produce love-energy; such practices as the
isolation of the hermit have been found effective.
As a beginning in the empirical description and
analysis of love, Sorokin reports two studies he
has made of affiliative and hostile tendencies in
human beings. The processes of love production in
two groups, one composed of nursery-school
children and the other of Harvard students, are
described.

A number of other writers, mainly psychologists
and biologists, contribute articles dealing with
various aspects of altruism. Ashley Montagu,
the distinguished anthropologist, has a chapter
on the biological basis of altruistic cooperation.

Montagu has since published a short book in
which he points out the overemphasis by Darwin
and his followers on tooth-and-claw competition in
evolution and makes a scientific case for a belief
in cooperation, quoting liberally from the works
of leading modern biologists. Montagu and
Sorokin agree that there is a firm biological basis
for human altruism.

Altruistic Love (1950) is a study of the lives and
characteristics of 3,090 Roman Catholic saints,
415 Russian Orthodox saints, 500 contemporary
Americans honored for neighborly deeds on
Tom Breneman's "Breakfast in Hollywood" radio
program, and 112 individuals commended for
neighborliness by a group of Harvard students.

In an effort to find out what makes a saint or a
good neighbor, Sorokin and his assistants catalogued such things as the age, sex, marital status,
family size, socio-economic background, political
views, and type of altruistic behavior of their
subjects. In this way Sorokin hopes to make the
first steps toward discovering what kinds of people
are likely to become saintly or neighborly, and
eventually to lay the groundwork for producing
more of these types than we have heretofore been
blessed with."

(https://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-36d7-41d4-0000-000064b51e55/simpson_sorokin.pdf)

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]