

'''= energy producing home'''

URL = http://www.fablabhouse.com/en/


=Description=

"Green facts & awards

- produces more energy than it consumes
- the world’s most efficient flexible solar panels, made with both Spanish and American technology
- solar panels adhere to the home’s curved roof so as to maximize the sun’s potential
- raised house design is perched on three “legs” which allow for natural ventilation, while expansive windows flood the home with natural light
- The team has been awarded with the people’s choice award

However the house has also introduced significant technological innovations such as the world’s most efficient flexible solar panels, made with both Spanish and American technology, what is being creating a great interest on companies and people who visited the house and it represents a significant breakthrough in the architectural integration of solar systems. “We wanted to overcome the idea that a solar house is a traditional house with solar panels on top and a lot of technology inside. Our project is a full solar house, a new generation of building that visitors have come to appreciate.” says the co-director of the project.

“The competition has been a great way to push the spirit of innovation in the field of architecture and construction in these times of crisis. We will propose that future editions will add tests where they value passive energy solutions in the design of buildings rather than the high consumption of energy to achieve comfort conditions. A solar house competition in Europe should overcome the American technical understanding, and bring values related to outdoor space and the social use of energy” says Vicente Guallart, Director of the Institute for Advanced Architecture of Catalonia.

Guallart also announces that the IAAC, along with its technology partners, will apply again at the next European contest edition.

So far the house has already attracted the interest of the public and the media. The house has been put up for sale from € 45,000 + VAT and there are already several orders booked. On the web www.fablabhouse.com various house configurations are defined: Cottage (12m2), Shelter (24 m2), Studio (36 m2), House (60 +60 m2) and Villa (96 +96 m2).

The project, which involved architects and experts from 20 countries, is being developed by the Institute for Advanced Architecture of Catalonia (IAAC), The Center for Bits and Atoms from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the worldwide network of Fab Labs. The project was carried out with the collaboration of a large group of companies, led by Endesa, Schneider Electric, Visoren, Roca, Santa & Cole, Vinçon and Nani Marquina."
(http://greenlinked.com/architecture/projects/77-fablab-house-energy-producing-home-barcelona.html)

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]