
'''* Paper: Commons-based Peer-Production of Physical Goods. Is there Room for a Hybrid Innovation Ecology? By Peter Troxler, Square One, Rotterdam, The Netherlands'''

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Troxler-Paper.pdf


=Abstract=

"This paper examines how in commons-based peer-production of physical goods a hybrid, private-collective
innovation ecology is developing. Using the Fab Lab community as the field of
investigation, it collates three studies: a survey of Fab Lab business models, an interview study
asking Fab Lab managers and assistants about the pain and pride of their Fab Lab, and a selection
of cases describing innovation in Fab Lab projects. The paper finds that there is a desire and
intention to establish a hybrid innovation ecology in the Fab Lab community, but that Fab Labs
have not yet established business models that would e.g. replicate the known models from open
source software. However, the studies indicated the possibility of such models. The paper finally
puts the results in perspective to the free fabbing ecology, and the wider context of peer production
of physical goods."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Troxler-Paper.pdf)


=Excerpts=

==Introduction==

By Peter Troxler:

"First there was a digital revolution in communication (from analogue to digital telephony) that eventually
cumulated in mobile communication and convergence of media. Then there was a second digital revolution
in computation (from analogue to digital computers), that eventually made personal computers possible
and lead to a convergence of communication and computing. The next digital revolution, according to
Gershenfeld (2005), is in the field of manufactured physical goods with the emergence of digital personal
fabrication or ‘fabbing’.

In this paper, I’ll investigate how this third digital revolution, the emergence of fabbing and its adoption in
the commons-based peer-production of physical goods influences how we go about innovation, particularly
if and how a hybrid innovation ecology could develop or could be developed.

First, I’ll be looking into the world of fabbing, commons-based peer-production of physical goods. I’ll briefly
describe its roots and its analogy to open source software production. I’ll show how wide-spread fabbing is
today and I’ll propose a conceptual map to describe some of the fabbing communities.

I then go on to ask how open source and innovation are related and how far innovation research today
understands the contribution of open source to innovation in general, and more specifically, in the area of
physical goods, of manufacturing and fabbing.

This leads me to my research questions, design and methods; a way to gain more in-depth understanding
about business models in commons-based peer-production.

I’ll report from three studies I carried out in this context, first a survey of Fab Lab business models, second
an interview study asking Fab Lab managers and assistants about the pain and pride of their Fab Lab, and
third a selection of five case studies describing innovation in Fab Lab projects."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Troxler-Paper.pdf)

==[[Survey of Commons-Based Peer Production of Physical Goods]]==

Click on the section title such above.

Overview graphic: see also Figure 1: An attempt at mapping the Fabbing world, page 4 of the document


==[[Business Models of Fab Labs]]==

Click on the section title such above.

Study results indicate "a distinction between Fab Labs that are focusing on supporting innovation, and those that primarily offer the lab as a production facility.

=More Information=

Contact author via peter@square-1.eu


=References=

A selection only:

100kGarages (2010). 100kGarages. Available online at http://www.100kgarages.com, accessed 30 August
2010.

Anderson, Chris (2010). In the Next Industrial Revolution, Atoms Are the New Bits. Wired, Feb. 2010.
Available online at http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/01/ff_newrevolution/all/1, accessed
4 June 2010.

Balka, Kerstin, Christina Raasch, Cornelius Herstatt (2009). Open Source beyond software: An empirical
investigation of the open design phenomenon. Paper presented at the R&D Management
Conference 2009, Feldafing near Munich, Germany 14-16 October 2009.

Balka, Kerstin, Christina Raasch, Cornelius Herstatt (2010). Open Source Innovation: A study of openness
and community expectations. Paper presented at the DIME Conference, Milano, April 14th-16th,
2010.

Benkler, Yochai (2003). Freedom in the Commons: Towards a Political Economy of Information. Duke Law
Journal, vol. 52, pp. 1245-1276.

Benkler, Yochai (2006). The Wealth of Networks. How Social Production Transforms Markets and
Freedom. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Bessen, James (2006), Open Source Software: Free Provision of Complex Public Goods. In: Bitzer, Jürgen
and Philip J. H. Schöder (eds.) The Economics of Open Source Development. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
pp. 57-81.

Chesbrough, Henry (2006a). Open business models: how to thrive in the new innovation landscape.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.

Dalle, Jean-Michel, and Nicolas Jullien (2002). ‘Libre’ Software: Turning Fads into Institutions? Research
Policy, vol. 32, 1, January 2003, pp. 1-11.

Edwards, Kasper (2001). Epistemic Communities, Situated Learning and Open Source Software
Development. Working paper, available online at http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download
?doi=10.1.1.24.7873&rep=rep1&type=pdf, accessed 10 August 2010.

Fab Charter (2007). The Fab Charter. Available online at http://fab.cba.mit.edu/about/charter/, accessed
1 June 2010.

Gershenfeld, Neil (2005). FAB: The Coming Revolution on Your Desktop. From Personal Computers to
Personal Fabrication. Cambridge: Basic Books.

Graham, Marty (2007). Hackers Space: the Final Frontier. 20. October 2007. Available online at
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2007/10/hackers-space-t/, accessed 30 August 2010.

Grenzfurthner, Johannes, and Frank Apunkt Schneider (2009). Hacking the Spaces. monochrome.at.
Available at http://www.monochrom.at/hacking-the-spaces/, accessed 30 August 2010.

Hackerspaces (2010). HackerspaceWiki. Available online at http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/, accessed
30 August 2010.

Hackerspaces (2010a). List of Hackerspaces. Available online at http://hackerspaces.org/wiki
/List_of_Hacker_Spaces, accessed 30 August 2010.

Hackerspaces (2010b). Synchronous Hackathlon. Available online at http://hackerspaces.org
/wiki/Synchronous_Hackathon, accessed 30 August 2010.

Harhoff, Dietmar, Joachim Henkel and Eric von Hippel (2000). Profiting from Voluntary Information
Spillovers: How Users Benefit from Freely Revealing Their Innovations. MIT Sloan School of
Management Working Paper #4125.

Hemetsberger, Andrea and Christian Reinhardt (2004) . Sharing and Creating Knowledge in Open-Source
Communities. The case of KDE. Paper presented at The Fifth European Conference on
Organizational Knowledge, Learning, and Capabilities, Innsbruck, Austria.

Hess, Karl (1979). Community Technology. New York: Harper & Rowe.

Hippel, Eric von (2005). Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Jewell, Mark (2005). Imagine, Make It Real in Fab Lab. Wired, 6 November 2005, available online at
http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2005/11/69495, accessed 3 March 2010.

Johnson, Justin Pappas (2001). Economics of Open Source Software. Available online at
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/johnsonopensource.pdf, accessed 10 August 2010.

Jones, Rhys, Erik de Bruijn & Adrian Bowyer (2010), : The Law and the Prophets/Profits. Presentation given
at FAB6: The Sixth International Fab Lab Forum and Symposium on Digital Fabrication,
Amsterdam, 15-20 August 2010; available at http://cba.mit.edu/events/10.08.FAB6/RepRap.ppt,
accessed 30 August 2010.

Kelty, Christopher M. (2001), Free Software/Free Science. First Monday, Vol. 6, 12, available online at
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/902/811, accessed
10 August 2010.

Khalak, Asif (2000), Economic Model for Impact of Open Source Software, Available online at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.13.4269&rep=rep1&type=pdf, accessed
10 August 2010.

Kirkby, Eddy (2010). It’s Unique: Innovation Diary. Available online at http://www.fablab.is/w/images
/7/7a/Fab_Lab_Case_Study_Its_Unique.pdf, accessed 13 August 2010.

Lakhani, Karim R., Eric von Hippel (2003). How open source software works: "free" user-to-user assistance.
Research Policy 32, 923-943. Available online at http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download
?doi=10.1.1.110.8172&rep=rep1&type=pdf, accessed 10 August 2010.

Lakhani, Karim R. and Robert G. Wolf (2003). Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation
and effort in Free / Open Source software projects”. MIT Sloan Working Paper No. 4425-03.
Available online at http://ssrn.com/abstract=443040, accessed 10 August 2010.

Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole (2000). The Simple Economics of Open Source, Working Paper 7600,
National Bureau of Economic research, Cambridge, MA. Available online at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc /download?doi=10.1.1.145.3577&rep=rep1&type=pdf,
accessed 10 August 2010.

Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole (2002). Some simple economics of Open Source. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 50, 197-234.

Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole (2002a). The Scope of Open Source licensing. MIT Working Paper. Available
online at http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/lernertirole2.pdf, accessed 10 August 2010.

Mikhak, Bakhtiar, Christopher Lyon, Tim Gorton, Neil Gershenfeld, Caroline McEnnis, Jason Taylor (2002).
Fab Lab: An Alternative Model of ICT for Development. development by design (dyd02).
Bangalore: ThinkCycle. Available online at http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download
?doi=10.1.1.72.315&rep=rep1&type=pdf, accessed 10 August 2010.

Pfeiffer, Diane (2009). Digital Tools, Distributed Making & Design. Thesis submitted to the faculty of the
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in partial fulfilment of the requirements for
Master of Science in Architecture. Blacksburg, VA: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.

Pomerantz, Gregory M. (2000). Business Models for Open Source Hardware Design. Available online at
http://pages.nyu.edu/~gmp216/papers/bmfosh-1.0.html, accessed 30. August 2010.
Porter, Michael E. (1998). Clusters and the new economics of competition. Harvard Business Review, vol.
76, 6, pp. 77-90.

Sauer, Robert M. (2007). Why Develop Open Source Software? The Role of Non-pecuniary Benefits,
Monetary Rewards and Open Source Licence Type. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 23, 4,
pp. 605-619

Schaub, Alex (2009). Fab Prosthetics. 22 June 2009. Available online at http://amsterdam.fablab.nl/node
/2094, accessed 10 August 2010.

Schaub, Alex, Miguel Jimenez Gimenez and Oscar Gerritsen (2010). Open Source 3D Scanning System.
26 January 2010. Available at http://fablab.waag.org/node/2609, accessed 10 August 2010.

Shirky, Clay (2007). Re: [decentralization] Generalizing Peer Production into the Physical World. Forum
post, 5 Nov, 2007 at http://finance.groups.yahoo.com/group/decentralization/message/6967,
accessed: 30 August 2010.

TechShop (2010). TechShop is the SF Bay Area's Only Open-Access Public Workshop. Available online
http://techshop.ws/, accessed 30 August 2010.

Torrone, Philip and Limor Fried (2010). Million Dollar Baby. Businesses Designing and Selling Open Source
Hardware, Making Millions. Talk at the O'Reilly foo camp east, 1 May 2010. Available online at
http://blog.makezine.com/archive/2010/05/million_dollar_baby_-_businesses_de.html, accessed
30 August 2010.

Troxler, Peter (2009). Open Content in the Creative Industries: A Source for Service Innovation? In: Wolf,
Patricia, Sami Kazi, Peter Troxler and Ralf Jonischkeit, (eds.). Supporting Service Innovation
Through Knowledge Management. Bristol: KnowledgeBoard, Zurich: Swiss Knowledge
Management Forum. pp. 187-206. Available online at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1597357,
accessed 10 August 2010.

van Tubergen, Joris, and Elmine Wijnia (2010). Joris van Tubergen talks on open innovation and FabLab.
Available online at http://vimeo.com/9677277, accessed 6 June 2010.

Von Hippel, Eric A. and Von Krogh, Georg (2003). Open Source Software and the 'Private-Collective'
Innovation Model: Issues for Organization Science. Organization Science, Vol. 14, No. 2, March–
April 2003, pp. 209-223. Available online at http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/hippelkrogh.pdf,
accessed: 30 August 2010.



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Business]]