My main competence lies in software engineering. I am an open source enthusiast, seeing collective intelligence as an emerging pattern infusing a collaborative paradigm. Technology, used consciously, enhanced with free accessible information and participative processes, is THE tool to really eradicate poverty and to construct a just society of equals.

I am passionate about a P2P society, open and free information, open everything, collaboration and co-creation, but also about healthy food, organic agriculture/permaculture/agroforestry/CSA etc. (as a supporter, not practician, so far...).

I also believe that one of the most pressing issues today is the unsustainable economy, so I have a strong interest in alternative money systems (despite having only superficial skills in economic issues). Currently I work with [http://www.socialtrade.org/ STRO (Social Trade Organization)] on the [http://www.cyclos.org cyclos] software for complementary currencies.

Much of current interests and work has led to associations with [http://cotw.cc Coalition of the Willing], [http://espians.com the espians], [http://ohanda.org Open Hardware and Design Alliance], [http://dreamfish.com Dreamfish].

I have a degree in IT and telecommunications and a MSc in Holistic Science from Schumacher College / University of Plymouth, UK. My MSc thesis , "Distributed networked biobased economies", can be downloaded [http://files.uniteddiversity.com/Money_and_Economics/Distributed-Networked-Biobased-Economies.pdf here]. I am also a passionate musician and dancer. I have published my own albums under Creative Commons license at Jamendo: [http://www.jamendo.com/en/artist/holoniverse holoniverse].

Last but not least, I love nature and time spent to enjoy it, especially with hiking. I speak German, English, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and French.