
=Description=

* FabLabs’ commons-based components and files: Arduino, RepRap, Raspberry Pi, Jerry
Do-It-Together in Africa

Isabelle Liotard:

"A FabLab workshop is made up of a set of pooled digital machines available to the public in
the aim of offering professional material to amateurs (Eychenne, 2012). For example, the
workshop will have CAD and CAM software, laser cutting machines (for parts in wood,
chipboard, leather, cardboard, etc.), digital milling machines (for sculpting complex objects in
thick materials), digital rippers (more powerful than milling machines), 3D printers (for
making complex parts from plastic and bioplastic, moulds and models), vinyl cutting
machines (for cutting paper, card, vinyl, textiles, copper film for circuit boards) and
sometimes even more specific equipment (plasma cutter, electronics workshops, machines to
prototype circuit boards, and 3D scanners; Diwo-Allain, 2015). Some spaces are better
equipped than others. Some of these machines mean that MIT Charter certification can be
obtained. ICI Montreuil is one of the largest spaces in the Paris region (1800 m2) and, for
example, is equipped with a great many highly-specialised machines for many different
trades. What’s more, since FabLabs are part of a network, other types of commons-based
projects can be implemented. Saclay’s Digiscope mainly receives students working on
research projects, and functions as a network with other spaces such as Stanford’s FabLab, for
example. Our interviews underscore the cooperation between these FabLabs, especially for
educational projects and training. For example, EdFab offers training sessions in digital
manufacturing jointly with the ICI Montreuil’s FabManagers who are already well ahead in
this field. Rennes’ LabFab responded to a call for tender from the Paris Region and the Paris
City Council jointly with ICI Montreuil to develop a five-month vocational training course
with MOOC."
(https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B6dbzKVh_GtpRnFreEhVajg4bWM/view)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Technology]]