

URL = https://waag.org/en/project/facebook-liberation-army

=Description=

"The Facebook Liberation Army demands a free Facebook. And the unit is fighting for a digital meeting place that doesn't focus merely on boosting advertising revenue.

There is an increasing criticism of Facebook and how it handles the privacy of its users. A growing number are awakening to the disadvantages of the social platform, but they are also well aware of its benefits. They are happy with their use, but angry about the abuse of that use.

The social network, Facebook, has taken us for fools. We sat idly by while timelines and other requirements were imposed on our profiles. We blithely accepted unwanted ads, the selling of our data, and our privacy being violated. Facebook's commercial 'powers that be' have shown their true colours.

We love our social network—we love Facebook, our digital homeland. But we do not like those who occupy and own our social network. We do not like our rulers. We want autonomy. Is that not a normal requirement for a social platform?

We want to have access to our own data. We don't want to be bothered with advertisements. We don't want others making money off of us. And we want unhindered social contact with each other. That's what Facebook should stand for. Our network is a land currently occupied by oppressive tyrants. And we will not stand for it. We will liberate Facebook."


=More Information=

* statement at https://waag.org/sites/waag/files/public/media/publicaties/statement-facebook-liberation-army.pdf


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Netarchical Capitalism]]