'''* Report: Factory @ Home: The Emerging Economy of Personal Fabrication. One of a Series of Occasional Papers in Science and Technology Policy. By [[Hod Lipson]] and [[Melba Kurman]].'''

URL = http://www.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf (Archived version (Jan 2011): https://web.archive.org/web/20110813004032/http://www.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

Extensive excerpts via our entry on [[Personal Manufacturing]]


=EXECUTIVE SUMMARY=

      
This report outlines the emergence of personal manufacturing technologies, describes
their potential economic and social benefits, and recommends programs the
government should consider to realize this potential.
      
Personal manufacturing machines, sometimes called “fabbers,” are the pint-sized,
low-cost descendants of factory-scale, mass manufacturing machines. Personal-scale
manufacturing machines use the same fabrication methods as their larger, industrial
ancestors, but are smaller, cheaper, and easier to use. Home-scale machines, such as
3D printers, laser cutters, and programmable sewing machines, combined with the
right electronic design blueprint, enable people to manufacture functioning products
at home, on demand, at the press of a button. In just a few hours, these mini-factory
machines can produce a simple object like a toothbrush, or make complex machine
components, artisan-style jewelry or household goods. Within a few years, personal
manufacturing machines may be sophisticated enough to enable regular people to
manufacture complicated objects such as integrated electronic devices.
      
A number of converging forces are bringing industrial-scale design and
manufacturing tools to a tipping point where they will become cheap, reliable, easy,
and versatile enough for personal use. The rapid adoption of personal manufacturing
technologies is accelerated by low cost machinery, active online user communities,
easier-to-use computer aided design (CAD) software, a growing number of online
electronic design blueprints, and more easily available raw materials."
(http://bit.ly/eqxlcZ)


=Excerpts=


Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"For a few thousand dollars, anyone can buy their own personal-scale manufacturing machine, download electronic blueprints to their home computer, and manufacture unique and complicated objects at home. Personal manufacturing machines, or “fabbers,” are the pint-sized, low-cost descendants of mass manufacturing machines used in factories. Different types of small-scale manufacturing machines such as 3D printers, laser cutters, and programmable sewing machines, combined with an electronic design blueprint, enable people to create a wide range of objects. People that have no special skills or training can “rip, mix and burn” physical objects such as custom machine parts, unique household goods, jewelry, toys, and maybe someday electronic devices.

    
Personal manufacturing is where personal computing  was in the 1970s, before the advent of home-scale computers and consumer software. Recent rapid technological advances in personal manufacturing technology, combined with shrinking costs of machines, increasingly available design software and raw manufacturing materials,plus most peoples’ tendency to conduct more daily activities online, are tipping personal fabrication from the realm of hobbyists and pioneers to the mainstream. As consumers, businesses, and schools gain access to the same powerful design software and manufacturing tools traditionally available only to large companies and factories,we will witness a cascade of innovation in product design, educational tools, the arts,medical devices, and business models.


...

    
Personal manufacturing technologies will profoundly impact how we design, make, transport, and consume physical products. As manufacturing technologies follow the path from factory to home use, like personal computers, “personalized” manufacturing tools will enable consumers, schools and businesses to work and play in new ways. Emerging manufacturing technologies will usher in an industrial “evolution” that combines the best of mass and artisan production models, and has
the potential to partially reverse the trend to outsourcing. Personal manufacturing technologies will unleash “long tail” global markets for custom goods, whose sales volumes of will be profitable enough to enable specialists, niche manufacturing, and design companies to make a good living. Underserved communities will be able to design and manufacture their own medical devices, toys, machine parts and other tools locally, using local materials. At school, personal-scale manufacturing tools will empower a new generation of innovators, and spark student interest in science,technology,engineering and math (STEM) education."
(http://timbuktuchronicles.blogspot.com/2011/01/emerging-economy-of-home-manufacturing.html)
      

==Conclusion==

"Personal-scale manufacturing machines use the same fabrication methods as their
larger, industrial ancestors, but are smaller, cheaper, and easier to use. Home-scale
machines, such as 3D printers, laser cutters, and programmable sewing machines,
combined with the right electronic design blueprint, enable people to manufacture
functioning products at home, on demand, at the press of a button. These
technologies make manufacturing accessible to everyone; for the first time, designing
and making custom objects is cheap, easy, and fun. Recent rapid technological
advances in design software and personal manufacturing machines, combined with
shrinking costs of machines and materials, increasingly active and helpful online user
communities, plus most peoples’ tendency to conduct more and more daily activities
online, will tip personal fabrication from the realm of hobbyists and pioneers to the
mainstream.

Personal manufacturing technologies will profoundly impact how we design, make,
transport, and consume physical products. As manufacturing technologies follow the
path from factory to home use, like personal computers, “personalized”
manufacturing tools will enable consumers, schools and businesses to work and play
in new ways. Emerging manufacturing technologies will usher in an industrial
“evolution” that combines the best of mass and artisan production models, and has
the potential to partially reverse the trend to outsourcing. Personal manufacturing
technologies will unleash “long tail” global markets for custom goods, whose sales
volumes of will be profitable enough to enable specialists, niche manufacturing, and
design companies to make a good living. Underserved communities will be able to
design and manufacture their own medical devices, toys, machine parts and other
tools locally, using local materials. At school, personal-scale manufacturing tools will
empower a new generation of innovators, and spark student interest in science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) education.

Like computing, transportation and communication, shrinking manufacturing tools
represent a strategic infrastructure technology that has the potential to catalyze
innovation in many other fields and industries. These technologies remove the
barriers of investment in heavy machinery and specialized operator skill, so
consumers, for the first time since the era of artisan craft production, will lead the
design and manufacturing process. We have the opportunity to create a new retail
ecosystem and manufacturing economy in the U.S. so we can continue to lead the rest
of the world in product innovation and manufacturing. New business models will
become possible, such as small-scale, regional manufacturing hubs, mom and pop
shops that create niche products for a global market, custom and on-demand
manufacturing, and toolkit-based industrial product design and development.
Despite their great promise, successful adoption of personal manufacturing
technologies is not assured. A number of barriers stand in the way that discourage
widespread home, school and business use such as safety concerns, part
standardization and version control challenges, intellectual property issues and
creating appropriate regulatory controls. Thoughtful and visionary government
investment is needed to ensure we establish the U.S. as the world leader in personal
fabrication technologies. Appropriate government policies will nourish the potential
of these technologies to promote STEM education, create new industries and
innovation-based domestic jobs, provide a new design space to foster invention, and
spark the formation of new businesses."

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Articles]]