'''= Shifting from ‘what they owe us’ to ‘what we owe each other’.'''


=Source=

More excerpts and background at:

'''* Article: The [[Left and Reciprocity]]. By Stuart White. From: Labour's Future. Soundings Journal & Open Left. Lawrence Wishart, 2010'''

URL = http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/ebooks/Labour%27s%20Future%20(Final).pdf





=Discussion=

Stuart White:


"To expand the conversation in this way, we need to put the whole
issue of work and contribution in a framework which does take in
the wider economic system, developing an account of what I have
elsewhere called fair reciprocity. This sounds rather abstract, but
here are some guiding principles:


==No poverty in work==

If work is a condition of a decent income, then a decent income
ought to be the guaranteed outcome of a decent minimum of work.
Moreover, poverty is a matter of limited time as well as limited
income: someone has not really escaped poverty if she has to work,
say, sixty hours a week for a minimally decent income.8 As a society
we need to decide how much paid work we can reasonably expect of
different types of household (e.g., two- and one-parent families)
and then make sure that any household providing this has an
adequate income.


==Quality of work==

While every citizen has an obligation to contribute productively, no
citizen is obliged to convert their life into drudgery. Thus, those who
are willing to make a decent productive contribution should have
adequate opportunities for fulfilment in work.


==Tackling undeserved high incomes and wealth==
Ethical socialists like Tawney understood that the welfare system is
by no means the only way individuals can get ‘something for
nothing’, violating reciprocity. They can also get something for
nothing by being paid in excess of their genuine contribution to
production or by living off returns to unearned wealth. To apply the
norm of reciprocity consistently therefore requires that society
scrutinise rewards at the top and take action to share unearned
appreciations in wealth. (Consider, for example, the way in which
many households have benefited from a huge rise in land values in
recent years, getting richer with no extra effort while others have
been excluded from the housing market as a result of this very same
process.)


==Acknowledging all forms of contribution==

In much of this discussion, we have used words like ‘work’ and
‘contribution’ interchangeably. But this is potentially misleading.
Contribution shouldn’t be equated with employment. Carers, for
example, also make a very valuable contribution, even when their
care work is not in the formal economy, and popular attitudes seem
to acknowledge this. Any public account of our duties to contribute
must take account of the full range of ways in which people make
productive contributions to their society, e.g. as carers and parents
as well as employees.

The risk with the new interest in reciprocity is that it becomes
little more than a new way of articulating the New Labour agenda
of ‘rights and responsibilities’, an agenda which has clear limitations
in terms of social justice. If the left is to move beyond this agenda, to
a genuinely egalitarian politics, the notion of reciprocity needs to be
deepened and enriched in something like this way."
(http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/ebooks/Labour%27s%20Future%20(Final).pdf)


=More Information=

* Stuart White, The Civic Minimum: On the Rights and Obligations of Economic
Citizenship, Oxford University Press 2003.


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Politics]]