'''= "support business models that contribute to a TRULY fair distribution of the wealth amongst all parties in the value chain".'''

URL = https://fairchain.org/

=Description=

"We believe in disrupting conventional value chains, to turn all types of businesses in social enterprises. Built inclusive business models that leave more value at origin. By creating shared value and paying for true cost tsocial enterprises can truly shift the balance in value chains.

The FairChain Foundation has the mission to stimulate and support business models that contribute to a TRULY fair distribution of the wealth amongst all parties in the value chain. The objective is for sustainable trade to replace the need for development aid."


=Principles=

FairChain Principles. 


The three cornerstones of the FairChain Foundation are:

1. Trade over Aid

2. Creating shared value

3. Compete on Quality not Poverty.



* Fairtrade 2.0

We believe the world has forgotten how to share!  We’ve created a ‘shared value chain’ to remind them. FairChain is Fairtrade for the 21st century. The difference is that we use contemporary technology and inclusive business models to finish what Fairtrade started.


* Transparency: Blockchain

Blockchain promotes honesty and radical transparency, and connects producers and consumers like nothing before. Put lightly, blockchain has the potential to turn the global coffee industry on its head and bank the unbankable Check out our project HERE.

 
* Beyond Certification

Non of the current certifying organization put living wage and true cost in the core of their Theory of Change. FairChain aims at connecting consumers directly with producers, cutting out middlemen and Big Traders. More value for them, better products for us."

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sustainable_Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]