
'''= " organizational design and business model that legally and fundamentally incorporates the principles of multi-stakeholder governance, stewardship and regenerative economics".'''


=Description=

EvoluteSix:

"The FairShares Commons (FSC) is a groundbreaking organizational design and business model that legally and fundamentally incorporates the principles of multi-stakeholder governance, stewardship and regenerative economics; protecting and enabling the rights and agency of a company to be a Commons. The fairShares Commons or Agentic Incorporation Model (AIM) has been pioneered and developed by Evolutesix's Founder and CEO, Graham Boyd. 

It is a model of business that deconstructs traditional corporate structures and patterns by ensuring that power, decision-making, and wealth are distributed equitably among all material stakeholders. Depending on the specific context and driver (purpose) of the company, this may include investors, workers, consumers, the communities and environments that the business impacts, and always future generations.

At its core, the FSC enables and protects shared stewardship in organizations, conceived not as machines to be extracted from, but living systems to be stewarded towards their potential. Assets and resources are still commodities to be traded, but the company itself is a commons - resources that exist for the collective benefit of present and future generations. 

In this way, this model is a next step in the long history of emancipating individuals and communities, and has been implemented for businesses all over the world for the past decade.

In approaching business as a commons, it restores the natural complexity of economic affairs, a key element of this design choice becomes the embedded developmental dialogue practices, supporting the self-determination and internal capacities of its participants.

By incorporating all forms of capital—financial, natural, human, social, and intellectual - it enables businesses to operate regeneratively and circularly, aligning profit with purpose in ways that benefit society, the environment, and the economy as a whole.

Importantly, the FSC / AIM can be operated effectively in currently existing legal frameworks around the world – needing no new policy developments."

(https://www.evolutesix.com/blog/what-is-the-fairshares-commons)


=Characteristics=

EvoluteSix:

"Key Features:

1. Multi-Stakeholder Governance: Different stakeholder groups (e.g., investors, workers, customers, nature, future generations) each hold shares in the company, which gives them either financial rights or voting rights, or both, always information rights,  and a voice in strategic decisions.

2. Stewardship: Ownership is replaced by stewardship and is shared among stakeholders, preventing monopolization of power by any single group. This enables fair wealth distribution and more considerate decision-making.The FSC includes legal protections to prevent extractive practices, enabling businesses to be stewarded for their individual success in an ecosystem working towards the common good, not sold off or exploited for personal financial gain. 

3. Regenerative Economics: The FSC is grounded in the principles of regenerative economics, recognizing the interdependence of natural, social, human, and financial capitals. Rather than extracting or depleting these capitals, the FSC is designed to regenerate and rebalance them over time, embedding long-term antifragility and short-term adaptability into the organizational model.

4. Self Determination and Agency: FSC's / AIMs build on the tradition of Teal companies, creating "work systems" that favor self-deterministic and agency-based approaches to work. Embedded developmental dialogue practices create a scaffolding so members of the organization are developing their adaptive capacity in increasing levels of inner and relational complexity, whilst having the requisite support system to do so safely."

(https://www.evolutesix.com/blog/what-is-the-fairshares-commons)


=Discussion=

==Why is it Important?==

EvoluteSix:

"The FairShares Commons (FSC), as an agentic incorporation model (AIM), offers a fundamentally different design pattern for organizing businesses—one that is inherently aligned with both human and planetary well-being. Unlike conventional models that prioritize short-term profit maximization, often at the expense of long-term resilience and shared prosperity, the FSC is built to address the root causes of economic, social, and ecological breakdown.

What sets the FSC apart is its ability to enable the creation and governance of ecosystems - interconnected enterprises and stakeholders that collaboratively meet diverse human needs while regenerating the capitals they depend on: natural, social, human, and financial. It does this by structurally embedding shared governance, equitable value flows, and multi-capital accounting into its legal DNA. As a result, the FSC becomes a powerful vehicle for building regenerative economies, where meeting needs and regenerating resources are not trade-offs, but mutually reinforcing dynamics. This makes it uniquely suited for all builders of a better world, founders, and investors seeking scalable models that deliver systemic value, long-term antifragility, and adaptive   and agentic organisations in an increasingly volatile world.

This model is particularly well-suited for companies committed to creating a net-positive impact on society and the environment, making it a critical building block for a truly regenerative economy."

(https://www.evolutesix.com/blog/what-is-the-fairshares-commons)


[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]