
= license proposed by Vincent Lorphelin

=Definition=

==In French==

COMPRENDRE #FAIRLYSHARE EN 10 LIGNES

Tapez "Tour Eiffel" sur Google. Le premier contenu que vous trouvez vient de Wikipedia, et il est noyé au milieu de liens sponsorisés. Google monétise donc des biens communs à son profit. C'est légal, mais pas durable.

Si Wikipedia était sous licence #FairlyShare, Google devrait partager équitablement ce profit avec chaque contributeur de l'article sur la Tour Eiffel.

Ce principe a été établi il y a 50 ans par le Traité de Rome de 1961. Depuis, les radios doivent rémunérer les auteurs-compositeurs, dont elles diffusent la musique, au travers d'organismes de collecte. #FairlyShare est une forme modernisée de ce principe, qui étend le statut des auteurs aux contributeurs, celui des radios aux exploitants des communs, et qui remplace la clé forfaitaire de répartition par des algorithmes d'analyse des traces des contributions.

Texte issu du site http://fairlyshare.strikingly.com/



==Translation in Englich==

UNDERSTAND #FAIRLYSHARE IN 10 LINES

Type "Eiffel Tower" in Google. The first contents which you find come from Wikipedia, and it is flooded in the middle of sponsored links. Google thus monetizes commons in its profit. It's legal, but not sustainable.

If Wikipedia was under license FairlyShare, Google should share fairly this profit with every contributor of the article on the Eiffel Tower.

This principle was established 50 years ago by the Treaty of Rome of 1961. Since then, radios have to pay the composer-songwriters, whose music they broadcast, through bodies of collection. #FairlyShare is a modernized shape of this principle, which spreads the status of the authors to the contributors, that of radios to the developers of outbuildings, and which replaces the fixed key of distribution by algorithms of analysis of the tracks of the contributions.


French text from the site http://fairlyshare.strikingly.com/


=Discussion=

==In French==

Assesment by Lionel Maurel:

"J'avoue qu'au premier abord, cette licence me paraissait poser plusieurs questions. Je trouve qu'elle ressemble plus à une implémentation des idées de Jaron Lasnier sur la monétisation des contributions individuelles qu'à l'idée d'une "réciprocité pour les Communs". Je l'interroge sur les mécanismes concrets de traçage et d'évaluation de la valeur des contributions en vue de rémunération. Enfin, j'ai des doutes sur sa validité concernant les "nano-contributions", car des actions comme les "like", les évaluations ou même la plupart des tweets ne donnent pas naissance à des objets protégeables par la propriété intellectuelle. Dès lors, je vois mal comment les englober dans le champ d'application de la licence.

Moyennant ces réserves, je reconnais que la FairlyShare Licence a l'immense mérite d'exister et de faire des propositions concrètes, là où nous en sommes trop longtemps restés au stade des discours théoriques."


==Translation in English==

"I admit that at first sight, this license appeared to me to ask several questions. I find that it looks like more an implementation of the ideas of Jaron Lasnier on the monetization of the individual contributions than at the idea of a "reciprocity for Commons". I question it about the concrete mechanisms of drawing and evaluation of the value of the contributions with the aim of remuneration. Finally, I have doubts on its validity concerning the "nano-contributions", because actions as "like", evaluations or even most of the tweets do not give birth to protectable objects by the intellectual property.  From then on, I don't see how including them in the scope of the license.

For these reserves, I recognize that FairlyShare Licence has the immense merit to exist and to make concrete proposals, where we too long stayed there at the stage of the theoretical speeches.

[[Category:Licensing]]

[[Category:French]]