
= practiced by the OpenBuilds open source hardware parts store (see: [[Open Parts Store]]

URL = http://openbuildspartstore.com/fairshare-program/


=Description=

"The Fair Share Program is a method of giving back to the Open Source Community in a simple, uncomplicated fashion. The idea is to voluntarily give 5% of the profits back to the community as a whole.  Fair Share is based on the honor system that gives the choice of how to give back to the community.  Find a worthy Open Source organization or just help move a project along through a financial contribution.  The choice is yours.

When you see the Fair Share Program Logo on websites and literature, you will know that they are a contributor to the success of the Open Source Community through voluntary financial contributions to the Open Source Projects of their choice."
(http://openbuildspartstore.com/fairshare-program/)


=Discussion=

==What makes the Fair Share program fair?==

"We believe that everything is a remix of something else or at the very least utilizes parts that are a mix or change from other ideas which predate the ‘original’ design in some form or another.

Over time core Open Source ideas being remixed and re-authored will become diluted enough to be called closed sourced.

We believe that addition to  individualism credit from ideas whose origin is based on others. Simply give back to the community that the base core ideas always come from.

This is where the Fair Share Giving back Program shines, by giving back to the open Source community we help to establish a future of an ever growing and stronger base system for newer and greater ideas to come. The donation back to the community is a personal commitment not a requirement. This is designed so that you give from the heart.

Over all we find this to be the fair and unselfish path to truly helping Open Source not only to succeed but to thrive!"
(http://openbuildspartstore.com/fairshare-program/)

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]