
'''= "an initiative connecting cities, organisations, civil society and other entities to help developing a fair model for Europe’s digital future".'''

URL = https://fairdigitaleurope.eu/


=Description=

"FairDigitalEurope is an initiative connecting cities, organisations, civil society and other entities to help developing a fair model for Europe’s digital future.
 
The European Commission is preparing a proposal for a Digital Services Act by the end of 2020. This act will be the new basis for activities of platforms, cloud services or mixed digital services within the European Union and its single market. Many of such activities were formerly regulated in the E-Commerce Directive (2000/31/EC), which came into effect at the beginning of this millenium.

FairDigitalEurope is a platform to exchange knowledge, ideas and practices between interested parties and partners in preparation for the Digital Services Act. A joined action is more effective to put forward interests and positions to those actively participating in the legislative procedure.

The platform is available to:

* Find info and answers to some questions about taxes, labour, housing, high market concentration, access to data related to the Digital Services Act.
* Access a Municipal Digital Services Act Toolbox, which contains a first approach of possible solutions.
* Connect with FairDigitalEurope to exchange knowledge, express your ideas and views, find document of interest... "

[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]