
'''= "a collaborative mobile app that helps travelers to find and share local and authentic places while having a positive social and economic impact on the visited place".'''

URL = '''https://www.fairtrip.org/'''

=Description=

FairTrip is a collaborative mobile app that helps travelers to find and share local and authentic places while having a positive social and economic impact on the visited place. 

We are a French startup registered as a social economy company. This means our primary goal is not about making money, but about making a difference. 

FairTrip is free. No account creation is needed to use the app.

We have only one goal: put FairTrip in the hands of all travelers wanting to find authentic places all around the world and have the biggest and widest impact to make tourism fair and sustainable. 

Know more about our guidelines.


=History=

​It all started in 2016 during a round-the-world trip when Brian, co-founder of FairTrip, realized how difficult it was to find information about local and authentic places. At the same time, he was struck to find out how tourism in developing countries was only benefiting a few while the local population didn’t appear to get any improvements in its quality of life.

​That’s how the idea of FairTrip was born: to create a global community through the power of new technologies to help travelers find local and authentic places that would allow them to live special and unforgettable travel experiences while at the same time having a positive impact on the visited place by directly benefiting the local community.

Over the long term, FairTrip’s objective is to create a dynamic for a true and deep change in the way we travel so that the tourism industry can truly become a lever of inclusive and sustainable economic growth as well as a vector of world poverty reduction.

We also think that by bringing cultures together, tourism can promote mutual understanding and help to consolidate peace in the world.

We believe in a fair and sustainable tourism. 

[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Travel]]