
'''= " provides communities with the tools required to feed themselves and build a strong livelihood".'''

URL = http://www.farmfromabox.com/

=Description=

"Farm from a Box provides communities with the tools required to feed themselves and build a strong livelihood. Built from a modified shipping container, each unit contains a complete ecosystem of technologies required to enhance agricultural productivity; from renewable power and irrigation, to Information and Communications Technology."
(http://www.farmfromabox.com/#!about/csac)

=Discussion=

"The need to provide a sustainable food supply both domestically and globally is significant and riddled with challenges, ranging from dwindling natural resources, to a lack of infrastructure that can support reliable crop growth.
 
In response to this, we developed a comprehensive solution that acts as the “Swiss-Army knife” of sustainable farming; a single, deliverable unit that contains all of the core components needed for a 2-acre farm.
 
Powered by renewable energy, Farm from a Box ™ is ideal for any application that requires a comprehensive system that enables sustained local food production, without need for an existing grid. 
 
This kit can easily be used to provide local, organic food for 
a school or community group. It can help jumpstart food production and stabilize a community after a disaster. 
It can act as an alternative to standard food aid, providing
the means for struggling communities to grow their own
food source without dependence on outside relief. 
 
It is not charity, it is empowerment and independence, strengthening communities from the ground up with sustainable solutions. "
(http://www.farmfromabox.com/#!about/csac)


[[Category:Agrifood]]