
'''= all-in-one urban farm and grocery store'''

URL =http://www.resilientcommunities.com/a-revolution-at-the-grocery-store/


=Description=

John Robb:

'If we can create an interactive food experience, people will begin to cultivate a relationship with their food that extends far beyond the traditional grocery store.  At least, that is what Ben Greene and his company, The Farmery, are attempting to prove.

Originally developed as part of his Master’s thesis project at NC State, Ben has been able to include his artistic and design talents into this exciting new project.

The Farmery is designed to be an innovative grocery store where produce is grown and sold under one roof.  The modular design of the structure is created from shipping containers.  These are cheap and easily accessible building materials making nationwide construction a very real possibility."
(http://www.resilientcommunities.com/a-revolution-at-the-grocery-store/)


=Discussion=

==How It Solves Some of the Inefficiencies of Traditional Agricultural==

John Robb:

"A 2011 study reported that as much as 30% of all fresh produce is lost between the farm and the retailer.  This means that retail stores must charge higher prices to recoup these significant losses.

The current transportation model also affects the flavor of many foods.  Once a fruit or vegetable has been harvested, the decomposition process begins immediately.  Refrigeration and freezing techniques help to slow down the process but it still degrades the quality of our food en route to the store.

The Farmery allows customers to pick their own fresh produce.  This means that all decomposition occurs after the customer has purchased the product.  Customers can enjoy the taste of fresh produce while learning about the cultivation process."
(http://www.resilientcommunities.com/a-revolution-at-the-grocery-store/)



[[Category:Agrifood]]