

=Description=

"On December 4th, farmers, community gardeners, food activists and Occupiers will come together for dialogue about what's going on with our food system. Everything, from agricultural policy to environmental impact is open for discussion. 

"My take on why we are staging the Farmers' March is multifold," said organizer Vevlyn Wright.

1.  To bring together those along the food chain to talk about how we, the people can take control of our food system from corporation;

2. To share ideas about changes in system;

3. To commiserate and also share strife and successes;

4. To inform individuals inside and outside of our respective circles about the problem in the food system, so that they can be empowered and equipped to fight to put it back into community control."

At 2 pm on Sunday, all who care about the future of our food supply are invited to gather at LA Plaza Cultural where 9th Street intersects with Avenue C. At 4pm, there will be a march toward Wall Street, culminating in a circle of solidarity and seed swap at Zuccotti Park.

"The Farmer's March is a celebration of community power to regain control over the most basic element to human well-being: food," said Seth Wulsin and Paula Winograd,  who are two of several organizers. "The food system has been taken over by multinational corporations to the detriment of communities, ecosystems, local economies, and soil all over the world. We march for urban/rural solidarity, to share the solutions that are already happening, and to strengthen our regional food networks based on the basic principle of food justice: that access to fresh, healthy, affordable food is a human right." 

Seismologik Media and One Pack Productions (the creative minds behind the video short above) will be on hand to film the Farmers' March and interview participants. December 4th will be the official start to filming of their feature-length documentary about Occupy Wall Street."
(http://shareable.net/blog/feeding-the-99-how-co-ops-fuel-occupy-wall-st)


[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

"This will be a beautiful, and symbolic action, said Winnie Wong of Seismologik Media. "On Sunday, we'll be out with our team filming, and we're so excited to make new friends, and to capture and share their inspiring stories with you."