
'''= "farmOS is a web-based application for farm management and planning".'''

URL = http://farmos.org/


=Description=

"It is built on Drupal, which makes it modular, extensible, and secure.

Both Drupal and farmOS are licensed under the GNU General Public License, which means they are open source.

You can host it yourself on your own web server, or you can use Farmier, a farmOS hosting service.

farmOS is under active development, but is still relatively new. The focus right now is laying a strong groundwork, so that others can more easily join in and contribute."

=Status=

Don Watkins, December 2015:

"Fourteen modules are currently being developed, including Farm Access, Farm Admin, Farm Asset, Farm Crop, and more.

“The focus right now is laying a strong groundwork so that others can more easily join in and contribute,” Stenta said. “The world of agriculture wasn’t even on my radar until 2008. I started college in computer science, but switched to art and photography—partly because web development wasn’t in the curriculum. After college I found my way to the Olympic Peninsula in Washington state. There I worked as a farm apprentice. Then I came back to the east coast. In 2010, I helped my friend start a small CSA in Connecticut, and the philosophy of food and cultivation sank in deeply over those years. It shaped my direction profoundly.”

Then, he had the inspiration for farmOS. It came from some software he developed for the CSA. To take it to the next level he started generalizing his work, which led to the creation of the modules that are the core of farmOS today. Stenta is also working on a general ledger module for Drupal, which is a double-entry accounting system similar to popular proprietary products.

The community surrounding the project is important too, and farmOS is looking for beta testers and other contributors to the project.

“FarmOS is developed by a handful of contributors, and more are getting involved steadily,” Stenta said. “Community is everything, and it’s important to foster good communication and planning in any open source project. We publish monthly roadmaps and invite people to help. All the planning and task management is done in the Drupal issue queues and on GitHub, so it’s transparent and accessible. The monthly development meetings are a new experiment we’re trying to invite more people into the conversation. The project is still very young, but the interest has been huge and it’s starting to take on a life of its own.”
(http://blog.farmhack.org/2015/12/13/farmos-a-drupal-based-farm-management-solution/)


[[Category:Agrifood]]