

=Description=

Thomas Rippel on FSO's:

"Kulturland Genossenschaft, BioBoden Genossenschaft, and Terre de Liens
are European FSO cooperatives founded in the past ten years. Their purpose
is to end the problems created by commercial land grabbing by purchasing
farmland and leasing it to organic farms at low fees. As of late
2017, 100 million Euros has been raised to purchase over 6,000 hectares
of land. In early 2018, the Kulturland Genossenschaft conducted a
pilot crowd-investing campaign that raised over one million Euros for one
farm. 

This cooperative model is however not without limitations. First, the investment
is unattractive. Cooperatives charge farmers low lease prices
to reduce their financial burden and thus are unable to pay dividends to
investors. Due to the fact that share prices for the cooperatives are fixed,
shareholders do not profit from any increase in land values owned by the 
cooperative. Additionally, investments in these cooperatives are highly illiquid.
Periods of notice for the liquidation of shares can be up to three
years in some cases.

Despite these limitations, a remarkable amount of capital has been raised
for such a purely idealistic investment. However, it is becoming apparent
that the model will most likely remain an investment niche and be unable
to significantly tackle the challenges resulting from global land-grabbing.
The democratic governance structure of FSOs creates the second problem.
A qualified majority of shareholders could decide to sell the land
and monetize unrealized profits of the cooperative. This constellation
could lead to a dangerous misalignment between the financial interests
of shareholders and the core mission of the cooperatives to protect land
from financial speculation."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]