
'''= Facebook Resistance project'''

URL = http://fbresistance.com/


=Description=

"FB Resistance is a research initiative and hands-on workshop series to rethink and change the frame that Facebook is setting for us.

Facebook is defining our identity and social interactions in digital space. The code is the law (A quote by Lawrence Lessig). What would you do if you could change it?"


=Discussion=

FB Resistance - Augmented Freedom

"What kind of hacks are there to enhance the Facebook user experience and fulfill needs that Facebook does not support? How to define the freedom that FB Resistance explores and cultivates, which is obscured by Facebook at the same time?

To examine this, this article shed light on several concepts and hacks, adopted by FB Resistance. Firstly, three antagonist concepts are described that provoke against wearing Facebook’s obligatory rose-tinted glasses. Secondly, the possibilities for user interface modification are exemplified. Finally, the essential freedoms of open source software are juxtaposed to the freedoms, exercised by Facebook Resistance."

An excerpt from: Stumpel, Marc. "Facebook Resistance: Augmented Freedom." Unlike Us Reader: Social Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives. Eds. Geert Lovink and Miriam Rasch. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2013. 274-287. [http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publication/unlike-us-reader-social-media-monopolies-and-their-alternatives/]


=More Information=

*  Article: The Politics of Social Media. Facebook_Control and Resistance by Marc Stumpel (PDF) [http://marcstumpel.files.wordpress.com/2010/09/stumpel_ma_thesis_the-politics-of-social-media_facebook_control-and-resistance.pdf]

FB Resistance is a project lead by: Tobias Leingruber twitter.com/tbx (Founder); Marc Stumpel twitter.com/zuurstof (Researcher) and Saskia Aldinger saskia-aldinger.com (Designer of previous website)

Join our FB Resistance Facebook Group and participate!

Follow/Ping @fbresistance on Twitter 

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Movements]]