'''= Feasta, set up in Ireland (but not exclusive to it) by Richard Douthwaite and John Jopling, aims to identify the characteristics (economic, cultural and environmental) of a truly sustainable society, articulate how the necessary transition can be effected and promote the implementation of the measures required for this purpose'''

URL = http://www.feasta.org/


=Description=

"The organisation was launched in Dublin in October 1998 to explore the
economic, cultural and environmental characteristics of a truly
sustainable society - and to disseminate the results of this
exploration to the widest relevant audience.

The position Feasta has adopted is that many of the world's problems
are caused not by bad people but by dysfunctional systems and it sees
its purpose as designing better systems.

While most of Feasta's members live in Ireland, people from other
countries have joined because they have found that its form of "hard
sustainability" is not being discussed in any depth in their own
circles. This has turned the organisation into an international
network with an Irish office and efforts are currently being made to
reflect this more in the way in which Feasta is structured and in its
activities. We are trying to change Feasta from being a place-based
body to one which is of equal value to its members wherever they
happen to live in the world.

Our thinking is normally carried out through working groups which form
to explore a topic. Often a project, such as organising a conference,
brings a group together. Some groups start, run for a year or so and
then go dormant when their goal has been achieved. Others are active
for longer although they will go through phases, as their members'
interests and circumstances change. In our earlier years, these groups
tended to meet in person, usually once a month, but increasingly the
discussions are carried out by e-mail, with groups developing their
own e-lists.

The word feasta (pronounced fasta) is taken from an old Irish poem
that laments the decimation of the forests. It means 'in the future'
and Feasta sees itself as a collective thinking process about that
future."

=More Information=

* (a) General - Internet video of Feasta lecture about "Reclaiming the
Commons" by Emer O'Siochru, at http://vimeo.com/5667418

Note also that discussions about commons are to be found at various
places on Feasta Forums at, at http://www.feasta.org/forum/index.php


* (b) On "cap and share" as an approach to managing the atmospheric commons, at http://www.feasta.org/documents/energy/Cap-and-Share-May08-summary.htm

also www.capandshare.org (this is the website of a campaigning
organisation for 'cap and share' that is an offshoot of Feasta's work)


* (c) Global Climate Trust initiative - governance arrangements for
global atmosphere/climate commons, at http://www.globalclimatetrust.com/principles.htm


* (d) Land Value Tax and the value of the land commons

- http://www.feasta.org/documents/landhousing/coritax.html

- http://vimeo.com/6099122


*(e) The monetary system as a commons (This includes a link to a piece
that Richard Douthwaite wrote and the full discussion that followed
it.)

http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/will-big-business-privatise-the-monetary-commons/2010/02/25


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Ireland]]