
=Examples=

* [[Mastodon]]
* [[Diaspora]] 
* [[Freedom Box]]


=Discussion=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"Projects like Mastodon, Diaspora and Freedom Box represent
various generations of federated publishing. As the first prominent project in this space,
Freedom Box sought to introduce better default settings for user privacy and control on
the web by baking key user protections directly into hardware that all households need
to purchase in order to go online–the router. In theory, this strategy offered great
promise for widespread adoption by tapping into an existing consumer market for
hardware. In practice however, the lackluster adoption of Freedom Box demonstrates
how low levels of demand are for privacy preserving technologies that require any
additional cost or effort to adopt. This makes it challenging to compete against services
that offer free, seamless hosting of data generated on their platform.

In addition, projects like Diaspora illustrate the challenge of open source projects
and federation as vehicles for developing better alternatives to large, private social
media sites. The coordination costs of federated protocols make it challenging for
services to remain competitive in a rapidly changing market of communication
applications. As this market becomes increasingly consolidated, the tendency to move
away from federation becomes stronger for large companies because consumers don’t
seem to value interoperability with other service providers over other features. Thus, the
Freedom Box model struggles to adequately address all three of our barriers to impact:
user adoption, developer opt-in and business viability. These examples highlight the
importance of developing foundational technologies that reduce friction and lower switch
over costs, while minimizing the need for users to adopt new behaviors or take on
additional costs.

The comparative success of Mastodon shows that even highly publicized
decentralized social networks, which take usability seriously, will likely have challenges
in scaling to the size of commercial social networks. Mastodon’s growth has been in no
small part due to controversial subcommunities being evicted from centralized platforms
and relocating to decentralized alternatives. It is possible that Mastodon could grow
significantly in the short term, but face long term barriers to growth if its key users are
associated with highly controversial content."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Standards]]