Article: Feedback loops of attention in peer production, Fang Wu, Dennis, M. Wilkinson and Bernardo A. Huberman, 2009/05/12, 

URL = http://uk.arXiv.org/abs/0905.1740 [www.hpl.hp.com/research/scl/papers/feedbacks/feedbacks.pdf pdf]


=Abstract:= 

"A significant percentage of online content is now published and
consumed via the mechanism of crowdsourcing. While any user can contribute
to these forums, a disproportionately large percentage of the content is
submitted by very active and devoted users, whose con- tinuing
participation is key to the sites' success. As we show, people's
propensity to keep participating increases the more they contribute,
suggesting motivating factors which increase over time. This paper
demonstrates that submitters who stop receiving attention tend to stop
contributing, while prolific contributors attract an ever increasing
number of followers and their attention in a feedback loop. We demonstrate
that this mechanism leads to the observed power law in the number of
contributions per user and support our assertions by an analysis of
hundreds of millions of contributions to top content sharing websites
Digg.com and Youtube.com."


=Excerpts=

Compiled by Dante Monson:

page 1 : Getting attention paid to one’s contributions is a form of
value; people are willing to forsake financial gain for it. 

...

This paper addresses how attention and followers affect
contributions to peer production websites, and in particular
how they motivate prolific contributors to remain active for a
long time.



page 3 : The evidence presented above suggests a strong correla-
tion between popularity (attention received) and productivity
(tendency to contribute). It is thus natural to ask whether
one could develop a model to predict a user’s productivity
from her popularity.


page 6 - from conclusion : Taken together, our findings suggest
that the feedback loop of attention is an important ingredient
in a successful of a peer production effort because of its role
in motivating devoted contributors to persist.




[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Governance]]