= "For much of the twentieth century, the fettering thesis dominated Left thinking about technology." [https://cominsitu.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/belly-of-the-revolution-final.pdf]


=Discussion=

Jasper Bernes:

"Many on the left still subscribe to a view of technology that G.A. Cohen,
in his reconstruction of Marx’s thought, called “the fettering thesis.”

From this perspective, the technological forces that capitalism employs
in its quest for productivity-driven profit are the foundation upon 
which an emancipated humanity will erect its new dwelling. Humane
cultivation of these forces is, however, “fettered” by capitalist social
relations. Capitalism is pregnant with what could be, a deployment
in the conditional tense of given productive forces. In a resonant
moment of triumphal phrasing at the end of the first volume of Capital,
Marx describes capitalism as tending toward a moment of crisis, its
property relations an “integument… burst asunder” by the maturation
of increasingly centralized and concentrated productive forces. The
consequences, for Marx, are clear: “The knell of capitalist property
sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.”
 

At a critical point in the development of capitalism, the fragmented, unplanned allocation of
wealth that characterizes production for profit in competitive markets
no longer conforms with the complex, industrialized labor process of
modern workplaces: only socialist planning and the supervision of the
direct producers themselves can make effective use of the technology
whose adolescence the bourgeoisie oversaw. Today, many will advance
these arguments only with significant caveats, avoiding some of its
more embarrassing iterations. Few would argue, for instance, that the
deskilled, socialized labor of the factory system contains the germ of
a new world in the making. They will not hesitate, however, to pour
new wine into old bottles and say much the same thing about 3-D
printers and self-driving cars.

The fettering thesis appears throughout Marx’s mature writings,
especially in those rare, speculative moments when he considers
the transition to communism. It sits uneasily, however, with a view
developed most pointedly in his writing on large-scale machinery,
in which the factory system actualizes capital’s control over labor,
confiscating “every atom of freedom, both in bodily and in intellectual
activity.”

(https://cominsitu.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/belly-of-the-revolution-final.pdf)

[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]