
'''* Article. Marlena Corcoran, “‘Worst Case Scenarios’: The Fiction of the Internet,” Leonardo 30, no. 5 (January 1, 1997): 343-348.'''

=Discussion=

Nicolas Mendoza:

"Artist Marlena Corcoran’s essay The Fiction of the Internet  links cold war era narratives of the apocalypse with the development of the technologies and structures that we know as the Internet. “The creation of the Internet was not only a technological but also an imaginative feat. The conceptual structure of the Internet is an imaginative response to the threat of an annihilating catastrophe” The point here is not to merely romanticize the net as ‘imaginative’, but to note that without a very specific and powerful set of shared fantasies of a science-fictional nature (the paranoiac mindset shared by the generals, scientists, and politicians that teamed to invent the Net) none of the technical feats would have even been attempted. And, more importantly, to realise that the design philosophy of the Internet condensed those into the protocols that govern it. “The drama of the Net is best understood in the context of this flowering of one of the most highly articulated fantasies of an event that galvanized a nation -and never took place” The question, then, is what is this particular ‘drama of the Net’, about? Can we start to think about this drama in order to grasp the ontology of the Net before it exploded, in a similar way as physics research the Big Bang to understand the universe?

The figure of the thermonuclear-apocalypse survivor drove the design philosophy of the Net. If Western culture is the result of an epistemic evolution that articulated power around a sequence of discourses that gradually moved from the figures of the leper, to the monster, to the masturbator, etc , we can only note that the figure of the survivor is one that abruptly came to the centre, courtesy of Cold War nightmares. But the survivor was alien to the historical sequence of the dynamics of power, making his sudden protagonism highly subversive. If the Internet is a manifestation of the problematic of the survivor, then its nature is not related to the forces that transformed sovereign societies into disciplinary societies, ultimately evolving into societies of control. 

The apocalyptic survivor is, by definition, in charge. In charge of what exactly, however, is an enigma. His specific tasks are unimaginable. All that is known is that he is somewhere deep, that he has time, and that he has a computer. The survivor must be thought of as an historic individual, a living legend... the sole witness and the narrator for his own future generations not only because the apocalypse implies the extinction of the audience, but also because the story that will be told really starts after the bomb. From the point of view of a survivor civilisation the bomb is not the end, but the beginning. Since he has to be imagined as the breeder of a second mankind, the apocalyptic survivor competes in historic potential with Noah himself, hence Strangelove's underground ark of lust. He must undertake foundation of the utopian society that we never ceased to fail to construct. At the same time, he is a coward that refused to share the fate of his brothers and went underground. With a generation of so burdened apocalyptic survivors in mind, the Internet was thus designed around the ideas of robustness, flexibility, and survivability: to guarantee survivor agency and empowerment to the maximum possible degree."
(February 2012)



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]