
= concept from the Seneca tradition, on the original [[Abundance]]


=Description=

From http://www.marcinequenzer.com/horn_of_plenty.htm:

"In our Seneca Tradition, the Field of Plenty is seen as a spiral that has its smallest revolution out in space and its' largest revolution near the Earth. ... When the cornucopia was brought to the Pilgrims, the Iroquois People sought to assist these Boat People in destroying their fear of scarcity. The Native understanding is that there is always enough for everyone when abundance is shared and when gratitude is given back to the Original Source. The trick was to explain the concept of the Field of Plenty with few mutually understood words or signs. The misunderstanding that sprang from this lack of common language robbed those who came to Turtle Island of a beautiful teaching." 

Again from the [[Pre-Scarcity]] Haudenosaunee:

"The Field of Plenty houses all thought forms that supply abundant creativity to the Children of Earth These new ideas are available to every Two legged and can be made manifest through acknowledging the ideas, then acting on them. When there is a need, it is sent by the Field of Plenty, in idea form, to the consciousness of all life-forms. These ideas begin to manifest as they enter the physical realm and are acted upon by humans. Every need in our world can be met when we act upon any good idea that comes into our minds. Every talent and every role in physical life plays a part that assists the whole in manifesting abundant life. The Field of Plenty always has a way putting the needed item into the hands of the person who needs it. The keys to manifesting what is needed are gratitude and trust, balanced with action. There is no need for scarcity in the Fifth World. Abundance for all the Children of Earth is manifesting Thought always precedes form. If ideas of sharing and equality precede that reality in the hearts of Two-leggeds, the manifestation of physical needs being met will follow." 
(http://www.marcinequenzer.com/creation.htm#The%20Field%20of%20Plenty)


=More Information=

#"To Become a Human Being: The Message of Tadodaho Chief Leon Shenandoah"
at http://www.amazon.com/Become-Human-Being-Tadodaho-Shenandoah/dp/1571743413
#Above citations originally chosen by Paul D.Fernhout at
http://www.pdfernhout.net/the-true-cost-of-Princeton.html


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Neotraditional]]