The latest special issue 9 of Ephemera is dedicated to the crisis of the university under extreme neoliberalism, offers a critique of ethical business school curricula and calls for the mutual study of ‘critical finance studies’. It’s a very rich collection of essays and strongly recommended.

URL =http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4editorial.pdf 


=Contents=

The issue has to must-read, detailed reviews of important books:

1.	Marazzi, C. (2010) The [[Violence of Financial Capitalism]]
, trans. K. Lebedeva. New York: Semiotext(e). Intervention Series 2

2.	The Edu-factory Collective (eds) (2009) [[Toward a Global Autonomous University]]. Cognitive Labor, The Production of Knowledge, and Exodus from the Education Factory. New York: Autonomedia, 2009


Amongst the other articles:

•	The human capital strategyMorgan Adamson
http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4adamson.pdf 

•	The eve of critical finance studies. Dick Forslund and Thomas Bay

http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4forslundbay.pdf


•	Extreme neo-liberalism: an introduction. Stefano Harney
http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4harney.pdf 

•	Charting the Terrain of Struggle in the
Global University. Elizabeth Johnson and Eli Meyerhoff
http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4johnsonmeyerhoff.pdf 

* A crisis of finance: financialisation as a
crisis of accumulation of new capitalism. Francesca Bria
http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4bria.pdf


=Excerpts=

Excerpts from Francesca Bria:

Many elite business schools are now attempting to trade upon any notion other than the
vocational hand-maiden to capitalism motif traditionally insisted upon by the Ford and
Carnegie Foundations (Wallace, 2010). Harvard Business School seems to be taking the
lead in this regard within this recently emergent genre where, for example, a variety of
MBA students now promise to be ethical (Wayne, 2009), a variety of business
professors blog on how to put the business school back on the right footing (e.g.
Podolny, in HBR, 2009) and a variety of journal articles debate and propose the
principles of a new progressive managerialist ethos (Khurana and Nohria, 2008).
Harvard Business Press has recently published a special collection of debates in and
around the business school, as if to draw a line under the fact that all is again well
(Harvard Business Review, 2009). The responses on the fringes of the academy, which
has equally produced a number of special journal issues or extensive discussion sections
(e.g. Cairns and Roberts, 2009; Haynes, 2009; Currie et al. 2010), has had a similar
flavour.

The progressive model of the re-imagined business school that largely guide these
responses is still that of the professional school (cf. Khurana, 2007) whilst even the
most conservative responses to rethinking business school teaching have proceeded
from the narratives of “bad individual behaviour”, thereby masking any discussion of
the systemic flaws in the neoliberal ideological programme (Gamble, 2009). Ethics here
becomes a key word in the salvaging the model of the business school. Business Ethics,
whatever the signifier may denote at any particular time, has in recent years had a place
within the confines of business school curriculum. It now offers up a pragmatic and
“safe” response to the crisis from the viewpoint of neoliberal ideology. Offering up
“more ethics” as a cure for recent events does not challenge the fundamental concept of
the business school as a training ground for agents of the accumulation process, and
perversely suggests that the business school can correct the most devastating aspects of
the crisis by simply fine-tuning the ingredients of its curriculum.
Two characteristics of these debates impose themselves on the observer. On the one
hand, they hardly exceed the terms and bounds of earlier debates regarding the utility
and ethics of business school education, most prominently expressed in Mintzberg’s
(2004) critique of MBAs and Ghoshal’s (2005) attack on ethical nihilism. In an earlier
special issue of ephemera (Beverungen et al., 2008), we suggested that a more radical
reposing of the terms of this debate, and a more boundless critique of the business
school is necessary – and was necessary even before the financial crisis. On the other
hand, what is practically entirely lacking in these debates is any discussion of perhaps
the most urgent condition of these debates: the financialisation of universities. There is
certainly much talk of ethics, of social responsibility, of history and politics, and of
critique. But while there are a few critiques of finance capital and financialisation, there
is next to no analysis of how these very factors, these very objects of study, impact on
study itself. It is as if the finances of the university remain the great unspoken, the
fundamental condition that remains hidden.

The business school hence continues to embrace a capitalist mode of production, and all
the while its revisionist advocates underline how it is now a school of ethics, a school of
humanities, a school of learning – a school of anything other than a school of business!
We must make the wager here that this persistence to affirm something, anything, says
something about business school advocates, namely, that because of their very financial
modality, they are not able to articulate anything for themselves other than their will
towards yet more finance. !i"ek (2009) suggests that this lack of a will to articulate an
alternative is an endemic feature of the left today. Following Lacan (2005), we might
describe this lack of assertion as the very sinthome of the business school, the curious
knotting together of its place within the bonds of authority and production, its
fragmented self-images and its libidinal circuits. This sinthome is “what’s in them more
than them”, and the inability of business schools to speak convincingly to the crisis
might very well point to what constitutes them in the current political and institutional
context: their very own finances."


'''Finances of the University'''

"Once we shift the focus of analysis in the direction of the university and
financialisation, we move beyond the content of university teaching, its curricula and
pedagogies, and look at the form which university education takes today. In so doing,
we proceed to ask how this very form is itself shaped by finance. And so we come to
question why there is hardly a university left without a private equity club, a hedge fund
society, or a trading room. While some insist on the learning experience and ethical
aspects of trading, others note the ways in which these activities imbue a particular
conservatism and opportunism, which deny the call for a critical engagement with
finance (Jacobs, 2009). The most extreme form this teaching of finance takes is perhaps
the belief that finance could function without production – a belief Marx was amused by
long ago.

It is utter nonsense to suggest that all capital could be transformed into money capital without the
presence of people to buy and valorize the means of production, i.e. the form in which the entire
capital exists, apart from the relatively small part existing in money. Concealed in this idea,
moreover, is the still greater nonsense that capital could yield interest on the basis of the capitalist
mode of production without functioning as productive capital, i.e. without creating surplus-value,
of which interest is simply one part; that the capitalist mode of production could proceed on its
course without capitalist production. (Marx, 2006b: 501)

Apart from finance as a subject of study, on the side of the students, there is student
debt, which is rocketing so much so that in the US there is now talk of student debt as
the next big bubble (Samuels, 2010b). In the UK in recent years, student credit has
gradually replaced a system of grants and scholarships to the point where average debt
is now £20,000 per student (Forkert, 2009: 2). At the same time, fees look likely to rise
across the board, and considerably so for the top institutions. It would perhaps not be an
exaggeration to suggest that students spend more time on personal finance – applying
for grants and students loans; waiting for the same to come through; asking their parents
for financial support; arranging overdrafts with bankers; finding another part-time job to
alleviate their debt – than on actual study. All the while, students are asked to consider
their very education as an investment in their future, as an enhancement to their
employability (emphasised by the Burgess Report in the UK), their future saleability to
capital. This finance has its own pedagogy (Williams, 2009).

And on the side of the university, we are long accustomed – long before the recent cuts
and threats of cuts in response to the crisis – to vice-chancellors’ talk of efficiency
savings, of the need to invest in future growth, the pressure to develop knowledge
exchange as a further revenue source, etc. Finance has advanced so far into the logic of
the university that in August 2009 Mark Yudof, president of the University of
California, found it more sensible to lend $200 million to the state of California than to
invest it in education – despite the severe cuts in the education budget, cuts in provision
and hikes in student fees – noting wryly that “when the university lends money to the
state, it turns a profit, but when it spends money on salaries for teachers, the money is
lost” (Samuels, 2010a). This is only the last consequential step in the transformation of
the University of Excellence (Readings, 1996) into the University of Finance, where it
is the entrepreneurship of students and faculty, and their financial gravitas that seems to
count most. It is from here that our contributors proceed."
(http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4bria.pdf)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Research]]