
'''* Report: Economics and the Common(s): From Seed Form to Core Paradigm. A report on an international conference  on the future of the commons. By David Bollier.''' 

URL = http://www.boell.de/sites/default/files/ecc_report_final.pdf

Organized by the Heinrich Böll Foundation, Commons Strategies Group, Charles Léopold Mayer Foundation and Remix the Commons. Berlin, Germany, May 22-24, 2013


==Excerpt==

===Introduction===

[[David Bollier]]:

"One of the most significant impediments to positive social change is the entrenched power 
of market-fundamentalism as an economic and political paradigm. The prevailing dogma is that 
only a scheme of individual self-interest, expansive individual property rights, market exchange and 
globalized free trade can advance human well-being. This view has increasingly been called into 
question as the predatory dynamics of the market economy became clear and as its threats to the 
biosphere have become more acute. 
 
 
In May 2013, more than 200 activists, academics, and project leaders from more than 30 
countries converged on the headquarters of the Heinrich Böll Foundation in Berlin, Germany, to 
participate in a conference, “Economics and the Commons: From Seed Form to Core Paradigm.” 
The event sought to open up some new vistas in politics, economics and culture by exploring the 
commons as an alternative worldview and provisioning system. The commons is drawing growing 
interest because its workings – in managing natural resources, urban spaces, civic life, the Internet, 
and many other realms – demonstrate that commons can provide stable, equitable and ecologically 
benign alternatives to conventional markets. The conference was hosted by the Heinrich Böll 
Foundation in cooperation with the Commons Strategies Group, The Charles Léopold Mayer 
Foundation and Remix the Commons.
 
 
Because so many rich and complicated ideas emerged over the course of the conference, we 
have decided to prepare a report that distills the more exciting, significant ones. While no account 
of a conference can be fully comprehensive, we believe that this report can serve as a useful guide to 
people interested in the commons as a robust, growing movement. The report provides a general 
summary of the keynote presentations and outcomes of five conference streams as well as accounts 
from many self-organized side-events held before and during the conference. This report also 
points the reader to many valuable resources generated by the conference, most notably the ECC 
communications platform – which was at commonsandeconomics.org but is no longer there – and a wiki that profiles dozens of 
economically minded commoners whose work focuses on the themes of the ECC. 
 
The working method of this report is to summarize the general content of each keynote 
presentation and conference stream, with verbatim excerpts of the more interesting aspects of the 
proceedings."

==More Information==
* [[ECC2013]]
* [[Final Report on the Knowledge Stream of the Economics and the Commons Conference]]


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Articles]]