= an [[Adaptive Cycle]] analysis

=Discussion=

Nafeez Ahmed:

"James Arbib and Tony Seba ... categorise the production system of a civilisation into 
five “foundational sectors”: how we power ourselves (energy), extract and make things 
(materials), eat (food), get around (transport) and create and share knowledge 
(information). All these sectors involve harnessing energy to supply a society’s core material 
needs (Arbib and Seba, 2020). 

A civilisation’s “organising system” (OS) determines how these material capabilities are 
deployed: the knowledge and cultural organisational forms by which those tools are 
designed, owned, distributed, deployed, regulated and governed. Encompassing models 
of thought, belief systems, social systems, political systems, economic systems and 
governance structures which impact ways of thinking, seeing and making decisions, the OS 
determines whether a civilisation successfully manages the production system, shaping the 
final design or “phase” of the civilisation. Societies which failed to adapt organisationally to 
the new material capabilities of their production system and emerging environmental 
conditions faced collapse, while those that succeeded broke through to new vistas of 
possibility (Arbib and Seba, 2020). ... A civilisation’s trajectory through the adaptive cycle can be measured 
using empirical data on the phase transition dynamics across its foundational systems.

...

As foundational technologies scale, they grow exponentially as part of the first growth stage 
of the adaptive cycle of a society or civilisation. As they saturate the market, they 
increasingly define the material structure and capabilities of a civilisation. Ultimately, a 
civilisation’s organising system decisions determine the extent to which it can manage, 
regulate and distribute the benefits. 
The system reaches a peak during the second stage of conservation, at which point it 
reaches a period of homeostasis balancing out positive and negative feedback loops within 
the system. This equilibrium becomes unbalanced in the context of disruptive forces such 
as obstructed energy flows, geopolitical perturbations (Ahmed, 2017) or new technologies 
of production which can potentially outcompete prevailing industries. 
As the system moves out of equilibrium and enters the third release stage, incumbent 
industries decline along with the political, economic, cultural, ideological and ethical 
structures that evolved to manage them. The deepening obsolescence of civilisation’s 
production-OS nexus clears the way for a new production-OS nexus to emerge in the fourth 
stage of reorganisation. 
This final stage either leads the civilisation to degenerate, leading to its collapse or paves 
the way for a new adaptive cycle. If successful, the new cycle will consist of a completely 
new system phase, with distinctive rules and properties encompassing both radically new 
technologies and radically different organising structures"

(https://www.academia.edu/126295640/_Planetary_phase_shift_as_a_new_systems_framework_to_navigate_the_evolutionary_transformation_of_human_civilisation?)


==The [[Adaptive Cycle]] analysis==

Nafeez Ahmed:


"The  data below highlights how human civilisation is now experiencing critical phase transitions 
across its foundational material systems creating a need to both engineer these systems 
optimally while adapting our cultural systems accordingly. Thus, the ultimate direction of 
these processes remains highly uncertain; their systemic interconnections and interactions 
will also drive irreducible uncertainties; and as their direction of travel will remain hotly 
contested among different social and interest groups, their outcomes remain ambiguous. 


===Stage 1: growth/exploitation===

The initial growth stage of the global adaptive cycle that defines industrial civilisation began 
around the 15th century. British geographers Simon Lewis and Mark Maslin put the exact 
date as 1610, coinciding with an “unusual drop in atmospheric CO2 
captured in Antarctic  ice cores”, resulting from “vegetation regrowth on abandoned farmlands following the 
deaths of 50 million indigenous Americans (mostly from smallpox brought by Europeans)”. 
This was due to the colonial annexation of the Americas by Europe – an “essential precursor 
to the Industrial Revolution” (Lewis and Maslin, 2015). 

Two centuries later, America’s textiles industry combined with the trans-Atlantic slave-trade 
played crucial roles in the vast accumulation of capital in England which facilitated the 
industrial revolution (Ahmed, 2009). This culminated in a dramatic shift to carbon-intensive 
energy and transport systems relying on exploitation of coal and steel manufacturing 
(Herschthal and Brooke, 2024). 

This process was enabled by a transformation in Europe’s cultural and information systems. 
Previously, pre-industrial Europe was constrained by an information monopoly associated 
with church and state, linked with feudalist and pre-capitalist social property relations 
(Teschke, 2003). Manuscripts made from animal skin controlled by elite groups were the 
primary mode of written communication. But this monopoly was rapidly disrupted by the 
invention of the printed book in the 1,400s, which was an order of magnitude cheaper and 
more efficient. Manuscripts became obsolete within decades. Book printing undermined 
control of information and drove the emergence of a new educated class operating outside 
the religious establishment (Buringh and Zanden, 2009). 

This information phase transition paved the way for the mass distribution of new ideas. 
Crucial interactions between European empires and colonised subjects facilitated the 
transmission of ideals of freedom and liberty from colonial peripheries into imperial centres 
(Gopal, 2019). Islamic civilisation, in particular, was a key conduit for transmission of 
scientific ideas and methods into Europe (Saliba, 2011). This paved the way for key cultural 
paradigm shifts: the reformation, the separation of church and state and the scientific 
revolution and enlightenment. All this galvanised the emergence of a new understanding of 
reality, and new visions for social organisation around democracy and free market 
capitalism. An information disruption impacting Europe’s OS was thus instrumental in 
catalysing the industrial revolution into the emergence of industrial civilisation (Arbib and 
Seba, 2020). 


===Stage 2: conservation===

From 1945 to the 1970s, global industrial civilisation appeared to move into the second 
conservation stage of the adaptive cycle. This period is widely considered the “golden age” 
of capitalism, which perhaps can be designated as the emerging “peak” of the global 
system before its transition to neoliberal capitalism. 

During this conservation stage, the system became increasingly stable, its structures 
adapted to a set of prevailing external conditions. In the period 1980–2000, circumstantial 
evidence of this can be found in dominant perceptions (Van den Berg, 2004) that extant 
systems had reached a peak of progress believed to become self-perpetuating through the 
inexorable dominance of key organising structures, namely, liberal democracy and 
capitalism (Fukuyama, 2012). 

Prevailing technological and cultural structures became more defined and articulated, 
including centralised control of fossil fuel resources (energy), global mobility networks 
powered by the internal combustion engine and rail premised on these energy sources 
(transport), industrialised agriculture and livestock farming (food), centralised control of mass 
media amidst the computer age (information) and complex economies of scale introduced by 
industrial manufacturing and distribution (materials) across national borders (Ahmed, 2010). 
The organisational systems in question comprised neoliberal capitalism (economy), homo 
economicus (ideology of human nature), consumerist materialism (culture), scientific 
materialism (worldview), liberal democracy (politics), the United Nations system (international 
politics) and NATO (international military) – among others (Ahmed, 2011). 


===Stage 3: release===
 
From 2000–2020, the global system underwent an escalating convergence of planetary- 
scale crises, including intensifying economic and financial crises, environmental crises, 
energy crises and food crises: a series of escalating polycrises. These multiple, 
simultaneous phase transitions signalled a shift into the third release stage of the adaptive 
cycle. The convergence of these planetary-scale crises was distinct from previous waves of 
crisis which were either regional in nature or concentrated in a particular sector (e.g. 
geopolitics or oil). 

Figure 5 identifies the five stages of a collapse feedback loop triggered by Earth System 
Disruption (ESD). This leads to various shocks and crises within the human system. If not 
perceived through a whole systems lens, groups within the system can end up focusing on 
“symptoms” of crisis rather than the system itself, driving social, political and cultural 
polarisation that increases risks violence and leading to Human System Destabilisation
(HSD). HSD undermines the capacity of the whole system to respond to the root systemic 
drivers of crisis, which leads to an amplified ESD crisis and, potentially, deepening HSD. 
Without systems-oriented interventions, this leads to an ESD-HSD feedback loop amplifying 
the risk of systemic collapse. 

The release phase involves an accelerating breakdown of prevailing systems. Their stubborn 
brittleness prevents them from adapting effectively to rapidly changing environmental 
conditions. Figure 6 maps out how human activities are at risk of breaching fundamental 
planetary boundaries, which are an attempt to quantify the stability of key ecosystems that 
regulate the earth system in a manner that allows human civilisation to survive and thrive. 
Mounting scientific evidence, particularly the planetary boundaries framework, demonstrates 
that human activities are at risk of breaching these boundaries across critical ecosystems. 

Figure 7 provides an overview of the incredible complexity of numerous interconnected 
ecosystems at risk of tipping over into dangerous self-reinforcing feedback within just one 
“planetary boundary” issue, namely, climate change. This research suggests that the risk of 
triggering irreversible feedback loops leading to an uninhabitable “hothouse earth” scenario 
is already high (Rockstro¨m et al., 2009; Steffen et al., 2018, 2015). 


'''* Energy and transport.''' 

Climate disruptions are driven by industrial civilisation’s 
dependence on fossil fuels. Yet prevailing fossil fuel industries are simultaneously 
experiencing a rapid decline. Most major analysts project that by 2050, global oil 

Yet environmental disruption is intimately interrelated with the decline of key technologies 
across the production system of industrial civilisation. Below, this is examined by focusing 
on phase transitions in four foundational sectors – energy, transport, food and information.

production will be significantly diminished due to geological supply challenges and 
fundamental demand shifts (Mayor et al., 2020). 

Figure 8 demonstrates the peak and decline of the global energy return on investment 
(EROI) of fossil fuels during the 20th century, and its projected continued decline. The EROI 
of oil, gas and coal – which measures the quantity of energy inputs required to extract 
corresponding energy outputs – peaked around the 1960s before declining rapidly (almost 
by half) over the past few decades. This process involves increasing production costs being 
used to generate declining energy returns (Brockway et al., 2019; Court and Fizaine, 2017). 

Figure 9 demonstrates the exponential increase in the quantity of energy consumed by the 
global oil industry during the 20th century, and its projected continued increase. By 2030, 
the global oil industry will consume about 25% of the energy it produces just to keep 
producing more energy. By 2050, this will rise to about 50%: an economically and 
energetically impossible situation (Delannoy et al., 2021). Larger profits from high energy 
prices have buoyed the industry, temporarily masking the crisis (Rhodes, 2017). This has 
escalated the costs of conventional transport relying on fossil fuels, which has inflationary 
effects across the economy and key industries. 

Long-term decline in the EROI of global fossil fuels is directly connected to a long-term 
decline in the rate of global economic growth since the 1970s, combated through excessive 
financialisation and debt-expansion (Hall, 2017; Murphy, 2014). Especially, visible in the 
USA, Europe and Japan, this decline marked the end of the postwar economic boom (Hall 
et al., 2014; Hall and Klitgaard, 2018). Periodic recessionary crises such as the 2008 global 
financial crash are part of this structural process, becoming longer and larger (Rye and 
Jackson, 2020). Declining global EROI is thus a fundamental causal factor in worsening 
trends of recession, stagnation, stagflation and increasing inequality (Jackson and Jackson, 
2021). Figure 10 represents how the duration and size of economic recessions have 
increased over the last century, consistent with the “critical slowing down” of the economy, 
which is one of the main signs that a dynamical system is moving out of equilibrium and 
close to a tipping point that could lead to it a point it is unable to recover, and therefore, is 
forced to adopt a new state. This could suggest the onset of an unprecedented global 
economic collapse in which the scope for recovery is diminished or negligible. 


'''* Food.''' 

The global food system is reaching critical thresholds due to feedback loops between 
environmental, energy and economic crises, directly related to industrial forms of agriculture, 
livestock farming and fishing (Monbiot, 2022). Soil degradation is surpassing the rate of 
renewal and endangering continued food production growth (Gomiero, 2016). The collapse 
of biodiversity driven by industrial expansion is manifesting in record deaths of pollinator 
species (Lever et al., 2014). These are compounded by growing impacts of droughts, 
heatwaves, floods and other extreme weather events and disasters, heightening risks of 
simultaneous crop failures across major food baskets (Kornhuber et al., 2023). Rising energy 
prices are increasing the costs of inputs into industrial food production and distribution 
(Marshall and Brockway, 2020). Modelling funded by the British Foreign Office suggests the 
global industrial food system is at risk of collapse within decades (Ahmed, 2015). 


'''* Information.''' 

As these crises escalate, our individual and institutional sense-making capacity 
is increasingly destabilised. Across civilisation’s OS, major political, economic, cultural, 
ideological and ethical systems are moving out of equilibrium. The volume of information in 
the global system has never been higher – but so too are “post-truth” levels of confusion 
and polarisation due to poor quality information, echo chambers and bias amplification 
(Barber a, 2020; Milczarek, 2023; Flew, 2020). In politics, once dominant liberal norms and 
values are widely contested. Political polarisation is at record levels across most 
democracies (Casal B ertoa and Rama, 2021). Culture wars dominate public discourse, and 
record numbers of global citizens question the efficacy of representative democracy 
(Haggard and Kaufman, 2021). 

Closed loop filter bubbles on major social platforms increasingly undermine the capacity for 
self-criticism and error-correction, the flow of accurate information and thereby the overall 
capacity for societal sense-making (Arora et al., 2022). As conventional group identities of 
belonging and inclusion are eroded and contested, they are replaced with narrower forms 
of identity politics premised on extreme ideologies. One hallmark of this process is the 
mainstreaming of far-right nationalist populism (Flew, 2020). 


'''* Prognosis.''' 

Recognising disparate megatrends as interconnected crises reveals that their 
mutual escalation is symptomatic of a deeper process: the movement of the global system 
into the third release stage of the life-cycle of industrial civilisation. The system moves out of 
equilibrium as dominant technologies of production alongside prevailing social 
organisational systems enter an accelerating decline. The same process surfaces radical 
new spaces for systemic and structural innovation visible in many of the same sectors. 
These trends of innovation and creativity reinforce the conclusion that the release stage is 
paving the way for a shift into the fourth reorganisation stage of a planetary-scale adaptive 
cycle. This process, however, has opened up increasing volatility, uncertainty, complexity 
and ambiguity as incumbent structures weaken – undermining the stability of the prevailing 
liberal-materialist paradigm – and paving the way for post-liberal and post-materialist 
cultural and technological order whose precise contours are yet to be determined.


===Stage 4: metamorphosis of civilisation===

Amidst the incredibly complex interlocking front loops and back loops of interconnected 
and competing systems, the planetary phase shift framework allows researchers and 
practitioners to focus on critical leverage points in the system. Compelling evidence that 
industrial civilisation is moving into the final reorganisation stage of its adaptive cycle can be 
gleaned from empirical data across foundational sectors of material production, 
demonstrating simultaneous interconnected phase transitions in energy, transport, food 
and information. Emerging advancements in material capabilities, however, are creating a 
widening gap with the industrial-era OS, which is unable to adapt and fracturing as a result. 

Across the production system, as the capabilities and performance of key technologies 
improve exponentially, they undergo exponential decline in costs of production. This 
accelerates through a self-reinforcing feedback loop driving an increasing rate of 
market adoption rapidly displacing incumbent technologies (Bond and Butler Sloss, 
2022; Seba, 2016). 


'''* Energy and transport.''' 

As prevailing fossil fuel industries decline due to internal 
technological, economic and geological challenges, they are displaced by new disruptive 
renewable energy technologies, namely, solar photovoltaics, wind turbines and battery 
storage. These are experiencing exponential cost declines and exponentially increasing 
adoption rates (Butler-Sloss et al., 2023). Projecting these cost-curve and adoption rates 
forward shows that solar, wind and batteries are on track to disrupt, dominate and transform 
the global energy system, starting with the electricity sector, within the next two to four 
decades (Way et al., 2022). Figure 11 demonstrates the exponential declines in costs for 
key renewable energy technologies, namely, solar photovoltaics, wind turbines and battery 
storage, over a decade. Figure 12 demonstrates the exponential adoption of key renewable 
energy technologies throughout the first two decades of the 20th century. 

Figure 13 projects the global adoption of renewable and solar technologies out to 2060 
based on economic competitiveness and shows that solar will dominate global electricity 
production by 2050 due to economic factors alone. The precise speed and impact of this 
transformation depends on societal choices: governments, businesses and civil society can 
delay or accelerate the transition. Economic factors alone will drive solar power to approach 
global dominance between 2050 and 2060, but this outcome can be obstructed if lack of 
investment persists in poorer countries (Nijsse et al., 2023). Excessive delays due to 
regulatory barriers could have dangerous environmental consequences (Arbib et al., 2021).

Without such barriers, solar power, renewables and electric vehicles (EV) could reach 
global dominance as early as the 2030s (Mercure et al., 2021). 
New energy technologies will bring fundamental systemic changes to the operation of the 
energy system. Figure 14 illustrates the counterintuitive relationship between the 
deployment of solar and wind generating capacity and battery storage, whereby 
supersizing generation capacity allows the quantity of batteries required for grid parity to be 
reduced dramatically. 

If designed poorly, the new energy system might produce less energy at higher cost, and 
with destructive environmental impacts amidst destabilising materials bottlenecks. But if 
optimised, the cheapest possible energy system will involve supersizing solar and wind 
generating capacity by at least three times existing demand (Desing et al., 2019; Perez, 
2014), while reducing battery storage by up to 90% (Perez and Perez, 2023) – dramatically 
reducing materials intensity (Perez et al., 2016). 

This planetary renewable energy system will potentially enable citizens everywhere to 
produce clean energy “superabundance” at near-zero marginal costs for most times of the
year (Dorr and Seba, 2020). This huge energy surplus – as much as ten times what we 
produce today – could power a global “circular economy” system in which materials are 
rigorously recycled, (Desing et al., 2019) with the system overall requiring 300 times less 
materials by weight than the fossil fuel system (Bond, 2021). Potential instabilities and 
demand gaps (Clack et al., 2017) can be closed through cross-sector energy 
interconnections (Bogdanov et al., 2021); cross-border grid interconnections (Wu et al., 
2021); and using surplus electricity to generate clean fuels (Pfennig et al., 2023). 

The energy phase transition is unfolding in tandem with the electrification of transportation. 
Figure 15 demonstrates that adoption rate in EV has increased exponentially on a global 
scale over the preceding decade. EVs are experiencing exponential production cost 
declines, capability improvements and adoption rates on track to achieve market 
dominance within the next 10–15 years (Arbib and Seba, 2017) and almost certainly by 
around 2050 (Carlier, 2022), depending on societal choices. 

Again, if shoehorned into prevailing transport models, EVs could drive unsustainable levels 
of energy and materials demand with dangerous environmental and economic 
consequences. Yet, if deployed to maximise distribution of its benefits, they could have the 
opposite effect: cost and performance improvements in autonomous driving technology 
(Olson, 2019) could enable a new model called transport-as-a-service, leading private car 
ownership to collapse by about 90% – replaced by fleets of privately or publicly-owned 
autonomous taxis and buses up to ten times cheaper than transport today – as early as the 
2030s. (Arbib and Seba, 2017) Figure 16 projects forward the learning rate for autonomous 
vehicles, suggesting maturation of the technology at current rates of improvement by the 
mid-2030s. More conservative projections suggest mass adoption of safe and reliable self- 
driving vehicles between 2040 and 2045 (Litman, 2023). 


'''* Food.''' 

Solar power and electrification of transport could have major benefits for conventional 
farming (Hailstone, 2023). But the most disruptive food technologies are precision 
fermentation (PF), which uses the same process used to brew beer to produce 
vegetable and animal proteins and cellular agriculture (CA) which combines with PF to 
programme animal proteins. Widely used to produce key food ingredients, PFCA’s costs 
have dropped exponentially over the past two decades and are set to drop further. Without
barriers, this could drive exponential adoption out to the 2030s (Tubb and Seba, 2019). 

Figure 17 charts this exponential decline in costs of PF and CA over the preceding decade, 
and projects forward how these cost declines will continue and drive an exponential growth 
in adoption. 

The main barrier to implementation is expensive fossil fuel dependence. If established 
without a sufficiently robust renewable energy transition, PFCA would compound 
environmental destruction and boost carbon emissions. However, if powered by
renewables PFCA is at least an order of magnitude more energy and environmentally 
efficient, using less water, land and fertiliser – enabling the production of nutritious proteins 
anywhere at an order of magnitude cheaper than today (Leger et al., 2021). Food scientists 
acknowledge that PF is “projected to completely disrupt traditional animal-based 
agriculture” (Nielsen et al., 2024). This could potentially free up as much as 2.7 billion 
hectares land no longer needed for animal farming for rewilding, reforestation, regenerative 
agriculture and natural carbon sequestration (Arbib et al., 2021). 


'''* Information.''' 

The information sector has already experienced a series of phase transitions 
through the 20th century, including the smartphone, internet, video streaming and social 
media. The next major phase transition is from artificial intelligence (AI), most visibly through 
large language models experiencing exponential cost declines, performance improvements 
and adoption rates. AI is projected to accelerate performance in the information 
components of foundational technologies in energy, transport and food (Ahmed, 2023). Yet 
it is also creating new opportunities for disinformation, warfare and exploitation that could 
reinforce power and wealth disparities. 

Figure 18 illustrates how generative AI is likely to scale exponentially across all significant 
sectors of civilisation’s production system out to 2045 due to current rates of improvement in 
costs and performance. Exponential improvements in autonomous robotics are also on 
track to disrupt manual labour. This is likely to pass a tipping point following the maturation 
of 3D sensing and mobility in autonomous driving, which will be applicable to other sectors 
(Dorr, 2022). The disruption of manual labour would, in principle, eliminate the most 
fundamental limiting factor in economic growth – labour productivity – potentially unleashing 
a new era of post-scarcity economic productivity. Yet, if this innovation evolves within the 
incumbent economic paradigm of neoliberal capitalism, such potential abundance could be 
constrained and monopolised by a highly centralised elite; it might also be aborted before it 
is able to fully emerge in the context of mass uncontrolled unemployment and the 
unpredictable social and political consequences."

(https://www.academia.edu/126295640/_Planetary_phase_shift_as_a_new_systems_framework_to_navigate_the_evolutionary_transformation_of_human_civilisation?)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]