* Article: Five Approaches to Technological Metamodernism. By Stephen Reid.

URL = ([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lIoPO8XqrUDckmW1-MQZbTSbFsholmVg6Wb25QBYBfU/edit?tab=t.0])


=Graphic=

The article starts with a comparative table comparing five different schools of thought:

* [[D/Acc]] (Vitalik Buterin)
* [[Cosmo-Localism]] (Michel Bauwens)
* Alignment at Large (Welf von Hören)
* [[Axiological Design]] (The [[Consilience Project]])
* Awakened Design (Aki Järvinen)


=Excerpts=

Stephen Reid:

==Key Overlaps and Synergies==

Critique of Existing Systems: All five approaches critique aspects of the current technological landscape and/or the broader socio-economic systems in which technology is developed.

Emphasis on Values: All five, in different ways, emphasize the importance of values (ethical, spiritual, social) in shaping technology.

Decentralization/Distribution: d/acc, Cosmo-localism, and Alignment at Large share a strong emphasis on decentralization and the distribution of power.

Holistic Perspective: All five approaches advocate for a more holistic perspective that considers the broader impacts of technology (social, psychological, environmental).

Reconciling Opposites: Several approaches (Cosmo-localism, Awakened Design) explicitly seek to reconcile seemingly opposing forces (local/global, technology/spirituality). This is a core metamodern trait.

Open Source: d/acc and Cosmo-Localism specifically mention a leaning toward and utilization of open-source.


==Key Distinctions==

Scope: Alignment at Large has the broadest scope, addressing the entire system of technological capitalism. The others focus on more specific aspects of technology design and development.

Primary Focus:

#d/acc: Defensive technology and decentralization.
#Cosmo-localism: Local resilience and global knowledge sharing.
#Alignment at Large: Systemic alignment of technological capitalism.
#Axiological Design: Explicit consideration of values in design.
Awakened Design: Integrating spiritual perspectives into design.#

Role of Acceleration: d/acc advocates for selective acceleration (of defensive technologies), while Cosmo-localism is more implicitly cautious about acceleration. Alignment at Large critiques the uncritical acceleration inherent in technological capitalism. Axiological and Awakened Design don't focus on acceleration as a primary concept.

Relationship to Capitalism: The approaches range from implicitly critical (d/acc, Awakened Design) to explicitly critical (Alignment at Large, Cosmo-localism) of aspects of capitalism.


In summary, these five approaches can be seen as complementary facets of a potential "Technological Metamodernism." They share a common concern with the direction of technological development and a desire to shape technology in a way that is more aligned with human values, well-being, and long-term flourishing. They offer different, but potentially synergistic, perspectives and tools for achieving this goal. They oscillate between critique and proposition, embrace complexity, and seek to transcend limiting dualisms. They represent a move beyond both the naive optimism of early techno-modernism and the cynical pessimism of some postmodern critiques.
 

==An Integrated Vision==

Imagine a world breathing with life, vibrant and resilient. Cities are not concrete jungles, but verdant ecosystems, interwoven with nature. Buildings rise like sculpted trees, their surfaces alive with vertical gardens and solar panels seamlessly integrated into their design. Food is grown locally, in rooftop farms and community plots, nourishing bodies with a richness and diversity long forgotten. Energy flows from renewable sources, decentralized and democratically controlled, empowering communities to be self-sufficient.
But this is not a retreat to the past. This is a future where technology, guided by deep wisdom and a profound respect for life, amplifies human potential and fosters interconnectedness. The digital realm is not a separate, distracting space, but an extension of our natural world, a tool for connection, learning, and collaboration. Open, secure, and decentralized networks form the backbone of communication, ensuring privacy and freedom from manipulation.

Imagine walking down a street, your personalized AI assistant, not a disembodied voice, but a subtle presence integrated into your awareness, whispering suggestions based on real-time data – the healthiest restaurant option, a hidden park nearby, a potential collaborator with shared interests. It connects you, not to a curated feed of fleeting distractions, but to a rich tapestry of human experience.

Education is no longer about rote memorization, but about cultivating curiosity, critical thinking, and a deep understanding of the interconnectedness of all things. Children learn through immersive experiences, guided by mentors and aided by technology that enhances, rather than replaces, human interaction. Elders are revered, not for their age alone, but for the wisdom they embody, their stories woven into the fabric of community life.

Healthcare focuses not just on treating disease, but on fostering holistic well-being. Advanced diagnostics, powered by open-source AI and decentralized data sharing, detect potential problems long before they manifest. Personalized treatments, tailored to individual needs and drawing on both ancient wisdom and cutting-edge science, support the body's natural healing processes. Pandemics are a distant memory, thanks to robust, decentralized bio-defense systems and a global commitment to preventative measures.
The relentless pursuit of economic growth at all costs has been replaced by a deeper understanding of prosperity. We measure progress not by GDP, but by the well-being of people and the planet. Businesses are not driven solely by profit, but by a commitment to serving the common good. Resources are shared equitably, and a global network of collaborative platforms ensures that everyone has access to the tools and knowledge they need to thrive.

Conflicts still arise, but they are addressed not through brute force, but through dialogue, empathy, and a commitment to finding solutions that benefit all parties. The digital realm, once a breeding ground for division and misinformation, now fosters understanding and connection. Advanced cryptographic tools protect our privacy and security, while sophisticated algorithms help us navigate the complexities of information, filtering out noise and highlighting diverse perspectives.

Humanity has not retreated from the stars, but our exploration is guided by a sense of humility and respect for the vastness and mystery of the universe. We seek not to conquer or exploit, but to learn, to connect, and to contribute to the unfolding story of life.
This is not a utopia, free from challenges or imperfections. It is a world in progress, a world constantly evolving, adapting, and learning. It is a world where technology serves as a powerful tool for enhancing life, not replacing it. It is a world where the wisdom of ancient traditions and the innovation of modern science are woven together, creating a tapestry of thriving that is both resilient and beautiful. It is a world where human potential is unleashed, not for the sake of endless growth, but for the sake of a deeper, richer, and more meaningful existence for all beings, a world in harmony with itself and the cosmos. It is a world built not on extraction and domination, but on regeneration, collaboration, and a profound sense of interconnectedness – a world truly worth striving for."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lIoPO8XqrUDckmW1-MQZbTSbFsholmVg6Wb25QBYBfU/edit?tab=t.0])

[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]