

=The Five Design Principles=

Christian Iaione and Sheila Foster:

The idea of the “Co-City” is based on five basic design principles, or dimensions, extracted from our practice in the field and the cases that we identified as sharing similar approaches, values and methodologies. While some of these design principles resonate with Ostrom’s principles, they are each adapted to the context of the urban commons and the realities of constructing common resources in the city.  


We have distilled five key design principles for the urban commons:

* Principle 1: Collective governance refers to the presence of a multi-stakeholder governance scheme whereby the community emerges as an actor and partners up with at least three different urban actors

* Principle 2: Enabling State expresses the role of the State in facilitating the creation of urban commons and supporting collective action arrangements for the management and sustainability of the urban commons.

* Principle 3: Social and Economic Pooling refers to the presence of different forms of resource pooling and cooperation between five possible actors in the urban environment

* Principle 4: Experimentalism is the presence of an adaptive and iterative approach to designing the legal processes and institutions that govern urban commons.

* Principle 5: Tech Justice highlights access to technology, the presence of digital infrastructure, and open data protocols as an enabling driver of collaboration and the creation of urban commons."

(https://www.thenatureofcities.com/2017/08/20/ostrom-city-design-principles-urban-commons/)


=Discussion=

Sheila Foster and Christian Iaione:

"These design principles articulate the types of conditions and factors necessary to instantiate the city as a collaborative space in which various forms of urban commons not only emerge but are sustainable. The concept of the co-city imagines the city as an infrastructure on which participants can share resources, engage in collective decision-making and co-production of shared urban resources, supported by open data and guided by principles of distributive justice. A co-city is based on polycentric governance of a variety of urban resources such as environmental, cultural, knowledge and digital goods that are co-managed through contractual or institutionalized public-private-community partnerships. Polycentric urban governance involves resource pooling and cooperation between five possible actors—social innovators, public authorities, businesses, civil society organizations, and knowledge institutions. These collaborative arrangements give birth to local peer-to-peer production of experimental, physical, digital and institutional platforms with three main aims: fostering social innovation in urban welfare provision, spurring collaborative economies as a driver of local economic development, and promoting inclusive urban regeneration of blighted areas. Public authorities play an important enabling role in creating and sustaining the co-city. The ultimate goal of a co-city is the creation of a more just and democratic city, also in light of the Lefebvrian approach of the right to the city."
(https://www.thenatureofcities.com/2017/08/20/ostrom-city-design-principles-urban-commons/)


==Extended Rationale for the Five Principles==

Sheila Foster and Christian Iaione:

"Based on these differences, we began to think anew about design principles
for the urban commons, taking into account what Ostrom learned about
successful governance of natural resources commons. While many of her
principles have clear applicability to constructed urban commons — such as
recognition by higher authorities (principle 7), the importance of nestedness
for complex resources (principles 8), the existence of collective governance
arrangements (principle 3), and resource adaptation to local conditions
(principle 2) — others are of limited utility or need to be adapted to the
urban context.

For instance, communities should drive, manage, and own the process of
governing shared urban resources, but we have seen time and time again
that they can rarely avoid dealing with the state and the market. While this
can be true of natural commons, and rural communities, we think both the
state and the market are even more omnipresent in cities, making it difficult
to side step them over the long run. As such, we observe that many types
of urban commons tend to benefit from cooperation with other than internal
community members and resource users. Rather, they need to collaborate
and manage resources with other commons-minded actors, such as those
constituting knowledge institutions and civil society organizations.
Communities should drive, manage, and own the process of governing shared
urban resources, but we have seen time and time again that they can rarely
avoid dealing with the state and the market.

We have observed that in contexts where the State is the strongest, and
markets are not as strong, local and provincial government actors can
lend assistance to, and form a solid alliance with, communities to advance
collective governance of urban resources. In this sense, the State generally
acts as an enabler of cooperation and pooling of resources with other actors.
On the other hand, where the State is weak or weaker, either because of
corruption or lack of resources, the market seems to be the only answer
to enable the pooling of resources (i.e. human, economic, cognitive, etc.) 
needed for collective action and collaborative management of urban
resources. The market could subsidize the commons if proper legal structures
and participatory processes are put in place and there is sufficient social
and political capital among resource users to negotiate with market actors.
In both cases, the concept of “pooling” seems to capture the true essence of
commons-based projects and policies in the urban environment. For these
reasons, we have identified in our work two core principles underlying many
kinds of urban commons as an enabling state and pooling economies.

We also observed for instance that technology in cities plays a key role
in enabling collaboration and sustainability, as well as pooling users of
urban assets, shared infrastructure, and open data management. Further,
urban commons-based governance solutions are cutting-edge prototypes
and therefore often require careful research and implementation. In other
words, they are experimental: new approaches and new methodologies
are constantly being developed and require prototyping, monitoring and
evaluation.

These basic empirical observations are now the cornerstone of a much
larger and scientifically driven research project that we established and call
the “Co-Cities Project.” The idea of the “Co-City” is based on five basic
design principles, or dimensions, extracted from our practice in the field
and the cases that we identified as sharing similar approaches, values
and methodologies. While some of these design principles resonate with
Ostrom’s principles, they are each adapted to the context of the urban
commons and the realities of constructing common resources in the city.


We have distilled five key design principles for the urban commons:

• Principle 1: Collective Governance (or co-governance) refers to the presence
of a multistakeholder governance scheme whereby the community emerges
as an actor and partners (through sharing, collaboration, cooperation, and
coordination) with four other possible categories of urban actors in a loosely
coupled system;

• Principle 2: Enabling State expresses the role of the State (usually local
public authorities) in facilitating the creation of urban commons and
supporting collective governance arrangements for the management and
sustainability of the urban commons;

• Principle 3: Social and Economic Pooling refers to the presence of
autonomous institutions (e.g., civic, financial, social, economic, etc.) that
are open, participatory, and managed or owned by local communities
operating within non-mainstream economic systems (e.g. cooperative, social
and solidarity, circular, cultural, or collaborative economies, etc.) that pool 
resources and stakeholders often resulting in the creation of new opportunities
(e.g. jobs, skills, education, etc.) and services (e.g. housing, care, utilities,
etc.) in underserved areas of the city or for vulnerable inhabitants;

• Principle 4: Experimentalism is the presence of an adaptive, place-based
and iterative approach to design legal and policy innovations that enable the
urban commons;

• Principle 5: Tech Justice highlights access, participation, co-management
and/or co-ownership of technological and digital urban infrastructure and
data as an enabling driver of cooperation and co-creation of urban commons.
These design principles articulate the types of conditions and factors
that we observe are present and that instantiate the city as a cooperative
space in which various forms of urban commons not only emerge but are
sustainable. These conditions shape and define what we call a “co-city.”

The concept of the co-city imagines the city as an infrastructure on which
participants can share resources, engage in collective decision-making and
co-production of shared urban resources and services, supported by open
data and technology, guided by principles of distributive justice. A co-city
is based on polycentric governance of a variety of urban resources such as
environmental, cultural, knowledge and digital goods that are co-managed
through contractual or institutionalized public-community or public-private
community partnerships.

Polycentric urban governance involves resource pooling and cooperation
between five possible categories of actors — social innovators or the
unorganized public, public authorities, businesses, civil society organizations,
and knowledge institutions —the so-called “quintuple helix governance”
approach. These co-governance arrangements have three main aims:
fostering social innovation in urban welfare provision, spurring collaborative
economies as a driver of local economic development, and promoting
inclusive urban regeneration of blighted areas. Public authorities play an
important enabling role in creating and sustaining the co-city.

The ultimate goal of a co-city, we believe, is the creation of a more just and
democratic city, consistent with the Lefebvrian approach of the right to the
city."
(http://networkcultures.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/OUR_COMMONS_lulu.pdf)

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]