'''Flashmob = A group of people converging in a single place doing something for a few minutes/moments and then disbursing quickly in many directions'''

URL = http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flickr


==Definition==

'''1.''' From the Wikipedia:

"A flash mob is a group of people who assemble suddenly in a public place, do something unusual or notable, and then disperse. They are usually organized with the help of the Internet or other digital communications networks. The term has also been applied to distributed mobs, who use similar means to co-ordinate sudden large scale simultaneous actions in multiple locations. An example of such an action is the widespread use of mobile phones in the November 2005 French Riots to co-ordinate widespread social disruption."
<ref>Wikipedia article http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_mob</ref>


'''2.'''

“A flash mob is a group of people who assemble suddenly in a public place, do something unusual or notable, and then disperse. They are usually organized with the help of the Internet or other digital communications networks.‿

'''Anatomy of a Flash Mob:'''

"1. A listing of interested parties

2. Interested parties having lists of interested parties (repeat as necessary)

3. An invite specifying: Where to go, When to go, What to do once you get there"
<ref>http://www.seedwiki.com/wiki/participatory_media_and_collective_action/case_5.cfm?wpid=207718</ref>


==Origin==

"I had conceived it specifically as a New York thing. People in New York are always looking for the next big thing. They come here because they want to take part in the arts community, they want to be with other people who are doing creative stuff, and they will come out to see a reading or a concert on the basis of word-of-mouth. Partly they want to find out what everybody else is so excited about, but partly they just want to be a part of the scene. You have this in other places too, but I feel like there's something in New York that makes it kind of a city-wide pastime. Part of what I liked about this idea was that it would be very frank about the pure scenesterism of it. What is it that would make people come to the flash mob? Well, it would be the fact that if it went off as planned, lots of other people would be coming. The desire to not be left out was part of what would grow it. I didn't have all of these grandiose notions about it at the time; I mostly just thought it was funny. But I thought of it as a stunt that would satirize scenester-y gatherings."
<ref>http://www.stayfreemagazine.org/archives/24/flash-mobs-history.html</ref>

==More Information==

@[[Hashmobs]]
#[http://mashable.com/2010/06/20/flash-mob-videos/ 15 Flash Mob Videos]

==References==
<references/>

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Culture]]