See [[Flickr]] for general information.

=Discussion=


==Closedness to participants involvement in infrastructure governance==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"In the first year of Flickr’s platform design and development, the Flickr provider relied heavily on fairly
intense interaction with the original participant base (M. Alpern, Presentation at Wikimania and informal
interview, August 28, 2009). In this first stage, the Flickr provider collaborated and enabled participants to
construct, manage and have control over their interaction at the platform, and in the infrastructure
governance in terms of platform design (Garrett, 2005). By 2006 however, the platform design became fairly
stable and participant involvement was restricted. With the stabilization of the platform design, the
participants’ active involvement in platform design and self-governance
altered with participants as individual
“consumers” of a service as part of an increasingly commercial relationship in which participants’
experiences are centered on their own photos and not intervening in designing the overall platform. In other
words, Flickr’s infrastructure governance evolved from an early stage of participative platform design and
interaction in self-governance
to commercialization in which participants do not intervene in the overall
platform, but only use it (Cox, 2008).


In terms of the structural points of relationships, the relationship between Flickr and the
community of participants is based on closedness to participants’ involvement, the corporation providing a
service that the participants use. The community does not contribute on infrastructure provision matters, nor
is there any overlapping or collaboration with Flickr.20 In Flickr's words: “Flickr works on getting things up and
serving you”.


Two main points of contact and communication can be discerned between Yahoo! as provider and
the participants: the Flickr team as broker and the community manager as contact point .

When Yahoo! bought Flickr, it “absorbed” both the platform and the team in charge of it. Flickr's team
maintains the platform, but importantly, it acts as a channel between the contrasting interests of Yahoo!’s
profit goal and the community’s social and communicative aim in using Flickr. In addition, among Flickr’s
team there are activists who developed Indymedia, protest.net and other activist platforms (E. Rabble,
Interview, August 28, 2009). In this regard, placing such creative and activist profiles between the corporation
and the community is a way of linking social processes and activists’ creativity with a profit enterprise. The
Flickr team acts as a broker between the corporation’s interests and the community’s interests, which
highlights two main tensions between the Flickr team and Yahoo!. On the one hand, the Flickr team defend
and advocate for the community’s interest and empowerment before Yahoo!’s commercial interests (E.
Rabble, Interview, 28 August 2009). On the other hand, the Flickr team wants to keep its own identity and
independence as a working group apart from Yahoo!.

Within the Flickr team there is the figure of the community manager who acts as the contact point
between the team and the community. Community managers are in charge of community control and
implement the policies set up by Yahoo! to regulate community interaction. The generation of a particular
culture within the platform results from active intervention from community managers. This contrasts with the
image of the Flickr community as “self organizing” which ignores the importance and the scope of these
interventions by the community manager. Community managers also intervene to block participants or
remove content which is not deemed appropriate by Yahoo! The community managers try to get to know the community through
”participative observation”. The communication with the community takes place though blogs, forums and via
email.

Community managers are also in charge of collecting community feedback for the design and
maintenance of the platform. In fact, users play an important role in the innovation of the platform (von
Hippel, 2005). For example, before introducing a change in the platform, the community manager works
internally to review participants’ feedback and solicit new feedback from the community through blogs or
forums. After the change is made, the community manager encourages participants to actively participate in
the discussion regarding the appropriateness of the change. In the words of a Yahoo! community manager:
“By giving people ownership of something and allowing them to influence their product, they are more likely
to stick with the product and have a positive impact” (Yahoo! community manager intervention at Online
community report unconference). On some occasions, participants criticize changes incorporated by the
provider. The community manager also deals with the reactions of participants. Additionally, Yahoo! lent
importance to the emotional dimension and emotional linkage of the community within the platform (M.
Alpern, Presentation at Wikimania and interview, 28 August 2009). Thus, another task of the community
manager is "managing the mob" or “convoying sentiments”. For example, addressing calm
mad/sad/frustrated feelings within the community when things are changing at the platform.

An additional part of community management (especially of commercial communities) is the creation
of “false” users created by employees who participate in the community and act as regular participants
without revealing the fact that hey are Yahoo! employees.

In sum, Flickr’s infrastructure governance is characterized by the structural closedness to
participant’s involvement. Furthermore, the linkage between Yahoo! and the community is mediated by
Flickr's team and bridged by the figure of the community manager. Community managers control the
community and preserve the order defined by Yahoo!; plus, they are charged with ensuring the participants
satisfaction with the platform design and policy and discouraging them from leaving."

==The Blackbox Approach==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"The Flickr platform is based on proprietary software and is copyright licensed. The blackbox
conditions of Flickr restrict the possibility of replicating its activities somewhere else. As the software is
proprietary, users do not know exactly what the program is doing with their data. They can not technically or
legally modify the program nor create a copy of it to develop in another direction. Additionally, Yahoo! does
not favor data portability and flow outside of the Flickr platform. This means that even though the participants
are the owners of the data they upload at the platform, it is not facilitate for users to remove their data from
Flickr and/or move their data from Flickr to somewhere else. Furthermore, in moving the data somewhere
else, the participants would lose the network effect and the collaborative metadata
that joins all of the
photos together. Finally, data ownership of Flickr is individually based. This makes creating an independent
and autonomous archive complicated, as all of the participants would have to agree on using a free license
or moving their data somewhere else."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/FusterMorell-Paper.pdf)


==Power embedded in Flickr infrastructure governance==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"Flickr is based on a "classic" distribution of functions. The participants develop the works or content
at the platform. In other words, participants upload the large majority of photos on the Flickr archive, while
Yahoo! as the Flickr provider takes care of everything else. This includes amongst other things, the technical
base and maintenance, sustainability and legal issues.


The commercial providers depend on the community to develop the content of the platform.

Volunteers also contribute depending on their own views and motivations. The lack of control over these
important factors (the availability of volunteers to create content on the platform) indicates a weaknesses in
these types of corporations. Furthermore, it makes the corporation vulnerable to their own corporate
reputation. Corporations that do not rely on their own image to attract participants do not have to worry about
their reputation. But if the community is a product of the corporation, then the corporation is in a lot of ways at
the mercy of its participants, which makes it vulnerable. Thus, a body of people, large enough and vocal
enough, could cause problems for the corporation.

One consequence is that the community is more empowered with regard to the corporation,
because the corporation depends on the community. Another consequence is that these create stimuli for
ethical practices by the corporations. Corporations therefore make extra effort to maintain their reputation
and image and to “gain” the trust of their communities and the general public. However, ethical debates on
the role and behavior of commercial providers do not always conform to this there
is also the practice of
creating “fake” images of the commercial providers in order to gain a reputation. I will refer to these practices
with the concept of “wikiwashing”.


Wikiwashing refers to a practice present in new media corporations which is based on building and
promoting a corporate image based on a conscientious distortion of the real practices of the corporation,
and/or the adoption of pro-democratic
and community discourses (particularly associating its image with
Wikipedia’s reputation) with the only purpose of gaining a good reputation with the community and the
general public. Wikiwashing
is based on a similar mechanism to the greenwashing of petrol corporations.

For example, the platform presents among its values the quality of online sociability, and certain types of
purpose (i.e., commercial ones) are systematically misrepresented (Werry, 1999).

A platform which appears to have an active and fair relationship with the community is more valuable
and attractive to participants and is more likely to be considered by the community during decision making. In
this regard, corporations also fake the image of the platform with several mechanisms. For example, when
staff act as community members to give the impression of a live community. Or when a community manager
uses feedback to legitimize decisions, such as “Tell(ing) people looking at new products, asking for
suggestions (look or don't look at it), then when relaunching saying "This is what you wanted"" (C. Watson
Community manager intervention at Online community report unconference).


Pertaining to the distribution of ownership, ownership follows the same distribution as function.
Yahoo! owns the technological infrastructure and the trade mark; while the community owns the content.
However, content ownership is individually based not collectively based. Each user individually owns the
content she or he has produced. Flickr allows participants to choose which license they wish to use
(copyright, “all rights reserved” or a set of several Creative Commons licenses). The participants who choose
creative commons licenses (depending on the conditions of each license) allowing free access to others.
Importantly, there are no collectively owned goods such as the entire archive, and so no collective licenses
are held.


However, the distribution of authority does not reflect to the distribution of functions and ownership.
Yahoo! has authority and ownership of the infrastructure, but Yahoo! also has authority over how the
community functions. That is, the community is not self-governed
and the rules and policies that govern the
interaction are established by Yahoo!. Consequently Yahoo! has to establish tight controls over participants
to maintain respect for the rules.


Flickr defines the platform use and community interaction policies. For example, even moderation of
communications between participants is in the hands of Flickr. Flickr is also in charge of “administrating the
participants”, if a participant is behaving inappropriately, Flickr can block his or her account and the
participant will lose his or her photos (E. Rabble, Interview, 28 August 2009). However, Yahoo! does
consider the participant’s opinion to some degree when defining terms of use and policies. Yahoo! aims to
increase participation, so defines the terms of use in order to satisfy and attract more participants (M. Alpern,
Presentation at Wikimania and Interview, 28 August 2009). This is also the case for other commercial
platforms, such as Wikianswers, where the policies are defined by the corporation, yet, according to a
Wikianswers’ employee: “Wikianswers have to be receptive to requests. They drive the community forward,
we do not have to, but we listen to them” (Y. Goldstein, Interview, August 26, 2009).


However, the influence of participants on policy is based not on the fact that it is up to them to define
the terms of policies, but based on the possibility of accepting or “rejecting” them. For example, Facebook
wanted to change their copyright policy, but due to a revolt from the community was forced to reverse the
change (M. Matsuzaki, Interview, October 2009).


There are several reasons to explain the compliance of Yahoo! to govern the community and
establish the rules of the interaction. Firstly, Yahoo! has a profitable goal in terms of providing the platform.
The platform design and the rules of interaction are driven by the Yahoo!’s profit goal. The profit driven
architecture of participation could be connected to the question that Yahoo! does not promote community
self-governance.


In order to fulfill its profit strategy Yahoo! needs some type of interaction and activity with
the platform (the one which results in benefits increase). In this regard, Yahoo! cannot leave the community
to decide what to do. Instead Yahoo! designs its framework for participation according to its profit strategy.

A second reason that explains why Yahoo! wants to keep control over the community is related to
legal responsibility over the content. In general, the providers are not legally responsible for the works
created by the participants at the platforms. However, the regulation on the level of responsibility over the
content is an ambiguous area. For example, in the case of YouTube, in order to determine appropriate
content, Google (as the provider of YouTube) used to rely on its participants to flag content as inappropriate
or violating copyright law until a corporate employee determined whether the flagged material violated the
platform's terms of service or copyright law. However, in July 2008 the Culture and Media Committee of the
House of Commons of the United Kingdom stated that it was "unimpressed" with YouTube's system for
policing its videos, and argued that "Proactive review of content should be standard practice for platforms
hosting user generated content."24 Due to this type of legal controversy, corporations are moving more and
more in the direction of policing the platform. In this regard, to avoid lawsuits, it is in the corporation’s interest
to ensure control and intervention over a content which does not respect copyright law. In March 2007 Yahoo!
introduced mandatory filtering of all photos at Flickr and a process of central review of photos by Flickr's
team to set levels of appropriateness. However, this is a complex situation because the violation of terms of
services and copyright law is relatively frequent in these platforms. To insure that the content completely
respects copyright law and the terms of service would create a massive amount of work for the staff and
would be very costly for the corporations.

This contrast to the Wikipedia case in which the major involvement of the community in the issue of
governance, results in a larger amount of voluntary resources at the community level for making sure that the
content added is appropriate according to the community rules and respects the copyright laws. In other
words, the Wikimedia Foundation does not control participants as Yahoo! does, because participants control
themselves making sure the content does not create trouble in the Wikimedia Foundation.


The corporate system of validation of content opens up debates about censorship and several
scandals have happened over the deletion of photos at Flickr by Yahoo!. Yahoo! is responsible for informing
public authorities of content of an illicit nature. For example, Flickr provides information on participants
uploading violent or pedophile photos (E. Rabble, Interview, August 28, 2009). This opened a debate on the
creation of networked surveillance resulting from a collaboration of Web 2.0 corporate and Public authorities
(Calenda & Lyon, 2007)."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/FusterMorell-Paper.pdf)


===Conclusion===

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"In conclusion, at Flickr there is a traditional distribution of functions between the provider (who takes
care of technical maintenance and legal and financial issues) and the participants (who produce the content).
However, Yahoo! has major authority in terms of judging participants’ behavior and also defining the policies
and terms of use of the platform in the first place. Participants are “free” to accept or reject the conditions
imposed by Flickr, but they do not have the authority to change the policies and rules that govern user
interaction within Flickr.


In conclusion, the number and strengths of the sources of power within the infrastructure governance
in Flickr benefits Yahoo! in front of the community of participants in contrast to the other cases. Yahoo!
depends on the community to create the content. Yahoo! has to provide terms of use for its service which
attracts participants. Yahoo! also has to give priority to the community of interest in order to insure its
reputation and attract participants. However, the community does not control and govern its own interaction.

Instead, Yahoo! has control over participants’ behavior at the platform and can control participants behavior.
Additionally, the blackbox conditions of Yahoo! mean that the platform cannot be reproduced and that
participants depend upon Yahoo! for access and reuse of their works. The individualized mode of
participation reduces the chances that users will press their interests and demands onto Yahoo!."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/FusterMorell-Paper.pdf)


==How does the Flickr infrastructure governance shape the community?==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"A very large community of participants are involved in Flickr, with more than 50 million registered
accounts. The interaction between participants is limited to individual actions and the collaborative
generation of metadata
which creates the system. As a result of this interaction, a digital common is not
generated as a collectively owned resource freely available for third parties. There are several mechanisms
which link the infrastructure governance in Flickr with this community.


In contrast to open providers, the closed infrastructure governance of Flickr limits Yahoo!'s ability to
activate volunteers to provide the infrastructure and content control of Flickr. However, Yahoo!’s for profit
character insures Yahoo! the financial resources to make up for the lack of voluntary resources and to make
up for the lesser knowledge on the community in closed providers. Yahoo! has the monetary resources to
keep the infrastructure updated and running as well as the monetary resources to contract the best technical
expertise and creativity. Additionally, Internet standards and regulations seem to favor multinational
communication corporations. corporations support each other in order to maintain their dominant positions.

In sum, the professional function of Flickr’s services could explain the large size of its community.

A small part of society boycott the use of the corporate type of infrastructure because of its forprofit
character and/or its capacity to control of participants’ data. However, this does not constitute a strong trade
off for Yahoo!: despite the boycott, Yahoo! remains very visible and dominates the market.


Importantly, Flickr is based on the architecture of participation which is designed to create flow more
than to articulate content. The profit goal of the corporations is highlighted with the emphasis on flow and
new activity (i.e., highlighting the last photos upload more than the organization of the photos). In other
words, the profit goal is present in the design of the architecture of participation and content, which translates
into a commodification of participants’ behavior towards the profit goals (Danlberg, 2005a, 2005b). In order to
increase profits, Yahoo! aims to maximize the number of people using its services, rather than design the
interaction in order to increase an integration of the content. Yahoo! aims to increase flow of information and
people connected to the site more so than to produce an integrated and high quality information resource.

Corporations aim to make a profit and in this regard they have an instrumental approach to the
community of participants. The main sources of revenue are advertisements and paid services, which shape
the platforms they provide. The demands of advertisers and the requirements to increase paid subscriptions
limit the type of content, number of participants, demographics of participants and the overall design of the
platform as well as increasing growth and flow."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/FusterMorell-Paper.pdf)







=More Information=

* Mayo Fuster Morell's research website: http://www.onlincreation.info

Article on policing 'the spirit of Flickr' at the famous photo-sharing site.

URL = http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2008/09/29/onthejob.DTL

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]