FLO Farm was a project in 2009 to turn a piece of land in Eastern Pennsylvania into a free/libre/open-source farm.  That land didn't work out.  FLOFarm may live on.  Below are resources collected during that intial project.

===Pennsylvania Farms===

[http://redearthfarm.org/ Red Earth Farm] "Red Earth Farm is a family-owned and operated farm dedicated to bringing the freshest chemical-free produce to your table."  1025 Red Dale Road Orwigsburg, PA 17961:: 570.943.3460

[http://www.paenergyfest.com/ PA Renewable Energy Festival] "Our goal is to inform and educate ourselves and the public on renewable energy production, energy efficiency, and sustainable living through meetings, workshops, educational materials, and energy fairs."

[http://www.journeysendfarm.org/ Journey's End Farm] "Journey's End Farm is a PA certified organic farm located in northeastern Pennsylvania just outside the village of Sterling. Driving time is approximately 2-3 hours from both New York City Philadelphia and approximately 4.5 hours from Washington, D.C."

===Goals/Visions===

*Arts and Crafts Center
*Open Source Fabrication Laboratory
**Content
**Documentation
*Perma/Vermiculture and Plant Nursery
*Land for LARPing
*Experimental Architecture
*Yoga, Wellness and Healing Space
*Residency program for people working on mid-long term projects
*Local food kitchen and CSA
*Farmland
*Classes
*Media Studio

===Possible Collaborators===
[http://opensourceecology.org/ Open Source Ecology]

[http://www.windowfarms.com/ Window Farms]

Revenerds Jackson of the [http://www.brooklynrescuemission.org Brooklyn Rescue Mission]

===Similar Spaces===

http://dachaproject.com/about-the-dacha/

[http://planetsave.com/2008/10/01/radical-simplicity-living-car-free-petroleum-free-and-electricity-free-at-the-possibility-alliance/ "Radical Simplicity: Living Car-Free and Off The Grid at the Possibility Alliance"]

[http://www.trumanindex.com/2.10113/family-survives-as-minimalists-1.1458427 "Family Survives as Minimalists"] about the Possibility Alliance.

===Building Resources===

[http://static.childrenofmay.org/dome.jpg Andy's Dome]

[http://openarchitecturenetwork.org/ Open Architecture Network] has hundreds of open sourced building designs and we can [http://openarchitecturenetwork.org/how_to.html add our own].  Check out this 25 min [http://www.bilconference.com/videos/open-source-architecture-cameron-sinclair/ presentation by the founder].

http://www.simondale.net/house/gallery.htm

http://arkfab.org/?p=216

===Currency===

Land valuation metrics
*Average/Square

Calculate current and potential production value/acre/year.  Create acre currency redeemable for one year of land production.  Cultivate the land to make the currency more valuable.

===Artifacts===

http://www.anuvar.org/flofarm/game.html