FLO / Open Source Working Group Minutes 10/6/11 1700
Posted on October 7, 2011 by Drew

Meeting Time: 10/6 1700-1900
Next Meeting Time: 10/7 1630

General Announcements
*Devin
**Happy we’re happy having our first GA – style meeting.
**Occupy Wall Street Journal is aware of the permabank.cc
*Drew
**New multi-user wordpress will be unvealed tonight to Drew and 2 others.
*Nick
**He’s pitching permabank.cc to everyone

Team Reports
*None

Agenda
*Discussion: LDAP integration
**Proposal: Project to setup and evaluate LDAP and publish recommendations. [Passed]
*Discussion: The role of FLOearth
*Proposal: Directory of platforms requests and offers
**Passed:
*Discussion: “Replacing Money” and alternative currency exchange
*Discussion: Collaborative documents and platforms
*Proposal: Directory of software platforms and technologies being used, developed and/or designed by NYCGA affiliated working groups. [Passed]
*Discussion: Communication with information related to decisionmaking between
*Proposal: Documentation Formatting
*Proposal: PermaBank.cc project team

Notes
*Proposal: Directory of platforms requests and offers [PASSED]
**Existing NYCGA.cc website
***Groups
***General Information
***Fliers, etc
***User accounts that need to be maintained and users must be informed
**v2. NYCGA.cc website
***Wordpress multisite with buddypress plug-in
**PermaBank.cc
***Profiles of individuals, clothing size, shoe size, etc
***Post Wants and Offers
***Cross referencing with Working Groups
**Potential Grou.ps
***Out of the box social network
**FLOearth
***Joomla based reference
**BetterMeans
***Tech team uses and loves it

*Discussion: LDAP integration
**LDAP is an implementation for user role management so all the groups could moderate their membership.
**Back end for a directory.
**Lay it down before you get big.
**[Want] LDAP Expert
**Proposal: Project to setup and evaluate LDAP and publish recommendations. [Passed]
*Project Tasks
**Implement LDAP – Nick and Chris

[Passed]
*Directory of software platforms, domains and hardware resources being used, developed and/or designed by NYCGA affiliated working groups. [Passed]
**Description of Purpose
**Functionality
**Scalability
**Security
**Liscensing
**Compatibility
**Support
**Open to adding more

*Role of FLOearth
**Recommendation: Evaluate FLOearth.org
**Proposal: Demo of FLOearth.org at next meeting
**Proposal: Evaluation of similar and useful initiatives

*PermaBank.cc
**PermaBank uses collection of Drupal modules from CommunityForge who is responsive to our needs.
**Working with Sage to create user interface
**Coordinating with Colin from outreach for skill documentation/volunteer intake
**[Want] outreach to other alternative currency groups and protocols
**People have wishlists and focus on waste elimination information

Next Agenda Items
*Facebook and Diaspora
*FLOEarth Demonastration

[[Category: OccupyWallStreet]]