
'''= "Building the UK’s biggest network of flood sensors".'''

URL = https://flood.network


=Description=

[[DiDIY]]:

"An initiative that started in Oxford and is now UK wide, where citizens
install flood sensors to monitor the water level and send the data to a
central server where the data is visualised on a map.

The low-cost ultrasound flood monitor is battery-powered and transmits
its data through wirelessly over the LoRaWAN long range radio
technology. They use The Things Network for providing this radio
transmission, another case in this study.

Flood Network visualises the waterways and the monitored levels on a
map, showing where levels are high and flooding is likely. Data is shared
with flood modellers and forecasters to improve resilience and response."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=Characteristics=

[[DiDIY]]:

==Community==

"One is encouraged to become a «Flood Watcher» and connect a flood
monitor to the network or become a sponsor to help someone else (alone
or in group form) to deploy one. There are community meetups and
hacking events. 

Data is visualised at https://map.flood.network.


==Licensing==

Members contributing sensors and data stay owners of their things and
data and choose whether they make the data public. The Flood.network
allows flood modelers and forecasters always to have access to the data.

The data license is not defined. The map is aggregating data from the
Flood Network with the Environment Agency, under the Open
Government License v2.0."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=Business Model=

[[DiDIY]]:

"Revenue models 

• Sponsoring is received from Bethnal Green Ventures, Nominet and
Geovation.
• Network planning and design.
• Consultancy.
• Workshops.


Modes of production:

The deployment of sensors and sharing of data is commons-based peer
production."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


==Governance model==

• Legal entity owning Flood Network: Flood Network Ltd, directed
by Ben Ward.

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


[[Category:Open Science]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Open Data]]