
=Discussion=

==Is There a Lowering of Cognitive Capacity Due to AI or Digital Technology ?==

Q by Fabiano Incerti and Douglas Borges Candido :

- "Some authors talk about the
reversal of the “Flynn effect”,
suggesting that future generations
will have a lower cognitive level
than their parents. How do you
see this issue in the context
of emerging technologies? Do
you think that the intensive
use of digital technologies can
contribute to this trend or do they
offer new ways to expand our
cognitive capacities?


Pierre Levy:

"The decline in cognitive (and
moral) levels has been deplored
for centuries by each generation,
while the “Flynn effect” shows
precisely the opposite. It is normal
to see a stabilization of Intelligence
Quotient (IQ) values: the hope of
a constant increase is never very
realistic and it would be normal to
reach a limit or a plateau, as in any
other historical or even biological
phenomenon. But let us admit that
today’s young people have lower
IQ scores than the immediately
preceding generations. We must
first ask ourselves what these
tests measure: primarily academic
intelligence. They do not take into
account emotional intelligence,
relational intelligence, aesthetic
sensitivity, physical or technical
skills, or even practical common
sense. So we are not measuring
something limited here. On the other
hand, if we focus on the adaptation
to school functioning that IQ tests
measure, why blame technology
first? Perhaps families are resigned
to the task of education (particularly
because families are falling apart), or
schools and universities are failing,
becoming increasingly lax (because
students have become customers to
be satisfied at any price). When I was
a student, an “A” in exams was
not yet a right… Today, it has almost
become a pure and simple substitute
for human intellectual activity.
Finally, and this needs to be repeated
constantly, “the use of digital
technologies” does not make much
sense. There are uses that are mindnumbing, which slide down the slope
of intellectual laziness, and uses that
open the mind but require personal
responsibility, an effort of autonomy
and – yes – work. It is the role of
educators to encourage positive uses."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)


[[Intelligence]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]