
'''* Article: Folksonomy-based Collabulary Learning. By Leandro Balby Marinho, Krisztian Buza and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab (ISMLL)'''

URL = http://www.ismll.uni-hildesheim.de/pub/pdfs/Marinho_BuZa_SchmidtThieme_ISWC08.pdf

=Abstract=

"The growing popularity of social tagging systems promises to alleviate
the knowledge bottleneck that slows down the full materialization of the Semantic
Web since these systems allow ordinary users to create and share knowledge
in a simple, cheap, and scalable representation, usually known as folksonomy.

However, for the sake of knowledge workflow, one needs to find a compromise
between the uncontrolled nature of folksonomies and the controlled and
more systematic vocabulary of domain experts. In this paper we propose to address
this concern by devising a method that automatically enriches a folksonomy
with domain expert knowledge and by introducing a novel algorithm based
on frequent itemset mining techniques to efficiently learn an ontology over the
enriched folksonomy. In order to quantitatively assess our method, we propose a
new benchmark for task-based ontology evaluation where the quality of the ontologies
is measured based on how helpful they are for the task of personalized
information finding. We conduct experiments on real data and empirically show
the effectiveness of our approach."


=More Information=

Collabulary

"A collaborative vocabulary for tagging Web content. Like the folksonomies used on social bookmarking sites like del.icio.us. collabularies are generated by a community. But unlike folksonomies, they’re automatically vetted for consistency, extracting the wisdom of the crowds from the cacophony."
(http://forging-the-future.net/vocabwiki/index.php?title=Collabulary)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]