

=Description=

John Robb:

"What is foodscaping?

It's when you replace your yard with a garden or aquaculture system that can produce high quality food for your family.

How much room does it take?  Not as much as you think.  Here's an example from a foodscaping company called Ecolicious in Australia.  They converted a small, barren, and traditional backyard into a productive aquaculture system that will enable the home's owners to vegetables hydroponically and raise fish in a small decorative pond.

With the landscaping touches thrown in, it's actually makes the backyard a refuge of tranquility."
(http://www.ResilientCommunities.com)

See also the Norwich Abundance Project, at http://transitionnorwich.blogspot.co.uk/2012/03/where-are-all-fruit-and-nut-trees.html


=Example=

John Robb:

"To demonstrate how simple and beneficial this could be, here's an example of foodscaping a public commons of St. James -- a village located in Suffolk, UK.

They planted 100 fruit trees - apple, pear, quince, plum, cherry, damson, medlar - in a section of the public commons a couple of years ago.   Here's the map (click through to enlarge):

So, how does the town benefit from the trees?

Lots of ways.   The good fruit can be harvested and given away to residents that would benefit from it.  The bruised fruit can be made into chutney and sauces for resale, to support the maintenance of the orchard."
(http://www.ResilientCommunities.com)


=More Information=

# [[Solarscaping]]
# [[Waterscaping]]


[[Category:Agrifood]]