

=The Policy Note=

'''* Analytical Note: Food policy councils. TOWARDS DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE OF FOOD SYSTEMS ?  Veronica Bonomelli et Manuel Egg. FIAN Belgium, 2017'''

URL = http://www.fian.be/Food-policy-councils?lang=fr


"In the face of globalisation and the vertical integration of links in the food chain by the giants of the agro-food industry, new initiatives abound for relocating and transforming the governance of our food systems. At the heart of this movement, we find Food Policy Councils. These include multi-actor bodies and platforms whose objectives are to identify and offer innovative and interdisciplinary solutions with a view towards improving food systems at the local or territorial level, ensuring that they will be more environmentally sustainable and socially just. This note aims to explain the context that gave rise to these initiatives as well as their principal characteristics in order to highlight their potential and the challenges that they must confront to become a truly participatory instrument for the promotion of the right to food and nutrition."


=The Concept=

==Description==

Fian:

"The Food Policy Council represents a model of collaborative
governance that emerged during the 1980s in North
America, and that has since expanded to different parts
of the world.

It seeks to democratise food system governance, favouring
the participation of different actors within the food
system (public sector, producer representatives, private
sector, social activists) and developing a holistic vision for
meeting challenges at the local or territorial level.

For decades, environmental, social and economic problems
tied to food have been understood in a fragmented
manner and managed by a multitude of institutions and
public services at the local, regional and national level.

This generally leads to a proliferation of sectoral policies,
without a real connection between them, which prevents
them from having a strategic and coordinated approach
for solving food system problems and fulfilling the right
to food and nutrition. This fragmentation is particularly
significant in Belgium in light of the proliferation of levels
of power (federal, regional, community, provincial, local).

In light of this constant fragmentation, the Food Policy
Council allows for the development of a more holistic and
interdisciplinary approach by bringing different and complementary
expertise to the table. In doing so, it makes collaborative
governance a reality, manifested by the active
participation of different actors in the political process.

Food Policy Councils operate in two complementary fields.

On the one hand, they allow for a relocalisation of food
systems locally-based on territories and the inclusion of
the food-sovereignty paradigm found in local development
policies. On the other hand, they promotes the development
of ‘human rights cities’: city or local government
coupled with civil-society engagement fosters the protection
and promotion of human rights, including those in the
realm of the right to food."
(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf)

==Characteristics==

Fian [(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf]:

"The Food Policy Council is characterised by its wide diversity.

It takes several forms and has several different objectives
depending on the context where it arises and the
intentions of the creators.


===Level of governance===

They can be instituted at different levels of government,
whether at the local or community level or higher territorial
levels (large cities, regions). In Belgium, we see the
emergence of these Councils at the urban level (Brussels,
Gand, Bruges, Liège), particularly in the context of their
commitment to the Milan Urban Food Policy Pact (see
the text box). Food Policy Councils instituted at the national
level also exist (see the text box about the Brazilian
National Council for Food and Nutritional Security). One
interesting solution would be to have councils at different
levels of government, on the condition that the roles
ought to be well defined and that meaningful interaction
between them and public authorities ought to be possible.

===Composition===

Food Policy Councils can be made up of representatives
and participants from different food system sectors:
production, consumption, processing, distribution and
recycling. The participation quotas must be adapted accounting
for power relations between the different actors
connected to the food system, such as the advocates in the
fight against hunger and food justice, educators, non-profit
organisations, concerned citizens, civil servants, farmers,
groceries, workers’ representatives, employer organisations,
food processors and food product distributors.


===Statutes and financing===

Food Policy Councils can configure themselves under different
judicial statutes and have a relatively close connection
to public authorities: some are real government agencies;
others have been created according to government
initiatives but function with complete independence, while
others still are created autonomously by civil society. As
for their financing, many have no financing at all and survive
thanks to the energy of volunteers, while others are
financed by public funds or by individual donations.


===Principal functions===

Despite the Food Policy Councils’ wide variety of experiences,
it is possible to identify four principal functions. 

* (1) They serve as forums for discussing questions concerning
food, creating spaces for dialogue where different actors
connected to food participate. 

* (2) They encourage coordination
between different sectors connected to food, production,
and recycling. 

(3) They issue recommendations in
order to influence public policy and undertake follow-up
work and monitoring of the implementation of public policies.

(4) Besides furnishing strategic advice, they are often
behind concrete initiatives that respond to local needs."

(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf)




==Examples==

===The [[Milan Urban Food Policy Pact]]===

Fian:

"Signed in October 2015, the Milan Pact is an initiative
driven by representatives of local communities
around the world for fighting for more equitable, resilient
and sustainable territorial food systems. As of
September 2017, it counts 148 cities as signatories,
including Brussels, Bruges, Gand and, most recently,
Liège. The Milan Pact reaffirms the roles and responsibilities
of local communities in the realisation of food
and nutritional rights and focuses on the areas of governance,
social and economic equality, sustainable diets
and nutrition, production, supply and distribution,
and food loss and waste. The Milan Pact particularly
encourages direct participation between civil society
and small producers in decision making across Food
Policy Councils."
(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf)


===The [[National Council for Food and Nutritional Security - Brazil]]===

Fian: 

On CONSEA: "In 2003, Brazil undertook a strategy of ‘Zero Hunger’
(fome zero). This strategy, supported by organic law,
aimed to guarantee and protect the right to food
and nutrition and to create formal spaces for social
participation by means of food and nutritional security
councils (CONSEA). The national CONSEA was installed
within the Presidency of the Republic in order
to show the political priority given to the fight against
hunger and to promote an intersectoral dialogue between
different government departments, reflecting
the diversity of social sectors. The CONSEA is composed
of a majority of two tiers representing civil society
and one tier representing various government
sectors. Some decentralised CONSEA have also been
instituted with the Federated states and at the municipal
level. The CONSEA have been decisive in the
adoption and implementation of programs against
hunger such as the Food Acquisition Program for
family farmers, the National School Meal Program or
the Family Allowance program (Bolsa familia), permitting
a transfer of wealth to the poorest families."
(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf)


===[[Gent en Garde]] and the Good Food Strategy===

Fian:

"In 2013, the city of Gent launched the Gent en Garde
policy and more recently, in 2016, the Brussels-Capital
region implemented the Good Food Strategy. Both
initiatives define areas of intervention and concrete
action, which include the promotion of local products,
the reduction of food waste, the raising of citizen
awareness and involvement, and the creation of
sustainable alliances between territorial actors who
work in the food trade12. The two initiatives plan to set
up Food Policy Councils. It is a unique opportunity to
implement a participatory strategy for the realisation
of food rights in Belgium."
(http://www.fian.be/IMG/pdf/conseils_politique_alimentaire_uk_web.pdf)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]