= Documentary series on organic local food initiatives, 

=Description=

"Natalie Savona (BBC Three's Freaky Eaters) presents this original new food series which highlights the best projects, produce and farming techniques local food groups have to offer. Across six episodes Natalie visits leading food projects shaking up the system, eats some delicious food along the way, and helps us understand how and where we can eat more real, sustainable produce."


= Episode 1 =
In this first episode, Natalie Savona travels to Brighton to visit hiSbe 'how it Should be', an ethical supermarket which is on a mission to reinvent the way we think about and buy food. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bKF65MukWA&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=1

= Episode 2 =

In Episode 2, Natalie joins the 300 strong army of volunteers who are feeding a hot meal to five thousand people in the centre of Brighton, using food that would otherwise have gone to waste. Along the way, she meets Food Rebels, Adam Buckingham of the Real Junk Food Project Brighton, Lindsay Boswell, CEO of Fareshare and Tristram Stuart, the founder of the Feeding the 5000. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cfNgpkNuj94&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=2

= Episode 3 =
In the third Episode of Food Rebels, Natalie visits Todmorden, West Yorkshire where Food Rebels are growing fruits and vegetables without permission, providing food for anyone who wants to pick it. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4rVOpdxJKs&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=3

= Episode 4 =
In Episode 4, Natalie visits the kitchens at Local Food Links in Dorset to help make a thousand school dinners, as they bring healthy local food to more people.

Local Food Links was established in 1999 by the West Dorset Food and Land Trust, a registered charity and local community organisation, to run Farmer's Markets and other food initiatives. Local Food Links now focuses mainly on our school meals service. Their kitchens provide freshly prepared meals daily to over 30 schools and nurseries. 

For more info about Local Food Links https://library.uniteddiversity.coop/Food/Local_Food_Links_first_10_years.pdf

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIBJkT55H8Y&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=4

= Episode 5 =
This week, Natalie with Food Rebels travels to Dartington Hall, Devon, to meet its farming tenants and uncover their radical approaches to sustainable food production. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gzIrMRuCkV0&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=5

= Episode 6 =
In this episode Natalie travels to OrganicLea, a veg growing project in London bringing people together around the growing, consumption and distribution of local food. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYYc5cNI6ic&list=PLLSOqtXvamHCQADSAxttAtWyt-cCPxSGF&index=6

= See also =
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt5840154/episodes

[[Category:UK]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]