
'''= food-related research framework of European Union'''

=Description=

"Food 2030

At the 2015 Milan World Expo Commissioner for Research and Innovation, Carlos Moedas, announced his intention to launch a Food Research Area by World Food Day 2016, presenting a single thematic Research and Innovation narrative built on a number of key Food and Nutrition Security priorities:
NUTRITION for sustainable and healthy diets: Ensuring that nutritious food and water is available, accessible and affordable for all. It involves reducing hunger and malnutrition, ensuring high levels of food safety and traceability, reducing the incidence of non-communicable diet-related diseases, and helping all citizens and consumers adopt sustainable and healthy diets for good health and wellbeing.

CLIMATE smart and environmentally sustainable food systems: Building climate smart food systems adaptive to climate change, conserving natural resources and contributing to climate change mitigation. It seeks to support healthy, productive and biodiverse ecosystems. Ensuring diversity in food systems (including production, processing, distribution and logistics) including in terms of cultural and environmental diversity. Natural resources (water, soil, land and sea) are used sustainably within the planetary boundaries and available to future generations.

CIRCULARITY and resource efficiency of food systems: Implementing resource-efficient circular economy principles across the whole food system while reducing its environmental footprint. Circularity is applied for sustainable and resource-efficient food systems and food losses and waste are minimized throughout.

INNOVATION and empowerment of communities: Boosting innovation and investment, while empowering communities. A broad innovation ecosystem leading to new business models and value-added products, goods and services, meeting the needs, values and expectations of society in a responsible and ethical way. More and better jobs across the EU, fostering thriving urban, rural and coastal economies and communities. Through closer partnerships with industry and food producers, markets that function in a responsible manner thereby fostering fair trade and pricing, inclusiveness and sustainability. Scientific evidence and knowledge from a wide diversity of actors underpinning the development and implementation of FNS relevant policies, at all geographical scales (Local to Global).

FOOD 2030 builds of this intention and is a timely EU research and innovation policy response to the recent international policy developments including the SDGs and COP21 commitments."
(https://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/index.cfm?pg=policy&lib=food2030)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Europe]]