'''=  a bunch of hackers from all over the world who share the love of experimenting with food and beverages, promoting these concepts on some of the world major hacker events'''

URL = https://foodhackingbase.org/


== Description ==

"We are the Food Hacking Base (fhb), a bunch of hackers from all over the world who share the love of experimenting with food and beverages. After more than two years of promoting these concepts on some of the world major hacker events, we recently started our website and we are ready to become permanently active. We are building tools and trying out new techniques or those based on the ancient wisdom of traditional societies. Merging this ancient knowledge with today's scientific understanding and technology are some of our areas of interest."

== Discussion ==

Nadia El Imam:

"From the experience of building and running the unMonastery and our annual LOTE events, we have collectively learned how important food is for health and well-being of communities and individuals. Not just eating good, healthy food but the activities of preparing it and how we go about eating it.  So collaborating with a community of hackers and food and drink enthusiasts who run activities at hacker events like ccc camps and OHM was a no-brainer. So we joined the Food Hacking Base assembly: @Thomas_Goorden and I led a weMixology/Agape workshop with help from @SamMuirhead. Also a tea corner was set up by Thomas @msanti and @Dorotea.

Over the years the Food Hacking Base community has managed to collect equipment to be able to set up a fully functional kitchen for a large number of people with stoves, ovens, sinks and lots of work surfaces plus all the smaller stuff like knives, cutting boards and even more advanced equipment. The kitchen is used both 1) to run experimental or pedagogical food related activities like cheese making, or Korean Fermented food and beverage production workshops...2) to cook healthy, delicious food by event participants for conference/camp/event participants. This is also very helpful for people who wish to have a bit more control of what they eat (and how much it costs) than is allowed by e.g. commercial catering services."

(https://edgeryders.eu/en/edgeryders-at-31c3/sharing-the-highlights-what-did-you-learn-at-31c3)

[[Category:Agrifood]]