
Source: Vivero Pol JL. Food is a public good. [The Food System]. World Nutrition April 2015, 6, 4, 306-309

URL = https://www.academia.edu/11733398/Food_is_a_public_good


=Text=

==Food is a public good==
 

José Luis Vivero Pol writes:

Food is treated as a private good. Current top-level proposals for ‘sustainable development’ in the foreseeable future assume that the current global industrialised
food system that treats food as a commodity is inevitable and beneficial (1). This is all a big mistake, similar to that which assumes that modified transnational business as usual can check climate disruption. Food must be re-conceived as a public good, or a commons –  using the non-economic term that has deep cultural and historical roots – 
in the transition toward a more sustainable food system that is fair to food producers and consumers. When treated as a public good, food will be better produced and distributed by governance
systems implemented at local level that integrate market rules, public regulations, and collective actions. This change will have enormous ethical, legal, economic, and nutritional implications.


==Food is not a commodity==

Food is a limited yet renewable resource that comes in both wild and cultivated forms, essential for human existence. Over time, it has evolved from a local resource held in common, into what is now a private, transnationalised commodity. This has involved developments made to fit mechanised processes, and all along this increasingly processed food has become deprived of all its non-economic attributes. Its value is no longer based on the many dimensions that bring security and health, including the fact that food is a:

* Basic human need and should be available to all

* Fundamental human right that should be guaranteed to every citizen

* Pillar of culture for producers and consumers alike

* Natural, renewable resource that can be controlled by humans

* Marketable product subject to fair trade and sustainable production

* Global public good that should be enjoyed by all Even so, not all is yet lost. 


The industrial food system has yet to enclose, or to convert into private property, several dimensions of food that are still considered as global commons, including:

* Traditional knowledge of agriculture accumulated over thousands of years

* Modern agricultural knowledge accumulated within national institutions

* Cuisine, recipes, and national and local gastronomy

* Uncultivated edible plants and animals such as wild fish and fruits

* Genetic resources for food and agriculture

* Public health considerations –  safety, nutrition and health


==The industrial food system is broken==

 
The industrial food system has enclosed food, through the privatisation of seeds and land, legislation, excessive pricing, and patents. The system now feeds a growing share of people living on the planet, controlling all food exports and most agricultural inputs, and has created a market of mass consumption where people become mere consumers.
 
The system’s goal is to exploit under-priced food resources while maximising the
profit of food corporations, instead of ensuring food’s most important non-economic qualities, such as nutrition. This is a reason why the global food system has failed and is now broken.

‘No money, no food’ means that hunger still prevails in a world of abundance. The industrial food system is increasingly failing to fulfil its basic goals of producing food in a sustainable manner, feeding people adequately, and avoiding hunger. The irony is that half of those who grow 70 per cent of the world’s food are now vulnerable to hungry. Analyses of the connection between the global food system and hunger rarely question the privatisation of food (3). As a result most people still think that food access is the main problem of global hunger. But reality proves otherwise. Unregulated markets cannot provide enough food for everyone, even if low-income groups had the means to procure it. An industrial food system that views food as a commodity to be distributed according to market rules  will never achieve food security for all (2). Moreover, the commodification of food crowds out non-market values worth caring about (3). These include the conviviality of cooking or eating together, the preservation of food culture and gastronomic tradition which is part of the definition of distinct civilisations, and the traditional moral economy of food production and distribution, materialised in the ancient and now proscribed practices of gleaning and famine thefts. A real solution will require experimentation at all levels, personal, local, national, and international, and diverse approaches to governance, market-led, state-led, and collective action-led.

==Food as a public good==
 
A great transition to perceiving food as a public good (or commons) is essential.  There will of course be practical consequences. Food will need to be dealt with outside of trade agreements made for pure private goods, and, as a result, a system of governance for the production, distribution, and access to food at a global level needs to be created. This system could well involve binding legal frameworks to fight hunger and guarantee everyone the right to food (4), universal basic food entitlements or food security floors guaranteed by the state, minimum salaries matched to food prices, bans on the financial speculation of food, and limits on alternative uses of food, such as biofuels. Locally adapted technologies will benefit from crowd-sourcing and creative-commons licensing systems to improve sustainability and fairness of food systems. Millions of innovative people are more likely to find appropriate and resilient solutions than a few thousand scientists in corporate and other laboratories. Patents in the agricultural sector deter full-scale food security innovations. Conversely, freedom to copy promotes creativity and innovation, as with open-source software. Collective civic actions and alternative food networks will bring about the transition toward sustainable and fair food systems. They involve civic engagement, community, conviviality, and the celebration of local food. Food can be produced, consumed, and distributed by governance schemes such as those proposed by Nobel economics prizewinner Elinor Ostrom (5).  These are collective actions initially implemented at the local level. In these schemes the main goal of partner states (6) is to maximise the well-being of their citizens and to provide a framework enabling people to enjoy their right to food. Political and financial incentives targeting those civic actions for food are deemed essential during
the transition. In them socially-embedded enterprises (co-operatives and social entrepreneurs) prosper under state regulations and incentives. In different parts of the world, many initiatives already show how such combinations yield good results for food producers, consumers, the environment, and society in general (7). Such initiatives are models to be developed nationally and internationally. Local governments, entrepreneurs, and self-organised communities will develop in co-existence, giving the state a leading role in the transition period to guarantee adequate and nourishing food for all."
(https://www.academia.edu/11733398/Food_is_a_public_good)


=References=

1 United Nations. The Future we Want. Outcome document adopted at the Rio+20 Conference. A/Conf. 216/L.1, 12 June 2012. https://rio20.un.org /sites/rio20 .un.org/files/a-conf.216l-1_english.pdf.pdf). 

2 Rocha C. Food insecurity as market failure: a contribution from economics. Journal of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition 2007, 1, 4, 5-22. (http://www.ryerson.ca/content/dam/foodsecurity/projects/paperspres/FoodInsecurityMarketFailure.pdf). 

3 Sandel MJ. What isn’t for sale?The Atlantic, Feb. 2012. http://www.the atlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/04/what-isnt-for-sale/308902/. 

4 Vivero Pol JL. The commons-based international food treaty: A legal architecture to sustain a fair and sustainable food transition. In Collart-Dutilleul F., Breger T, editors.
Penser une démocratie alimentaire Volume II. Nantes :Lascaux European Research Programme, 2014. https://www.academia.edu/5899060 /The commons-based_international_Food_Treaty_a_legal_architecture_to_ sustain_the_transition.
 
5 Ostrom E. A Polycentric Approach for Coping with Climate Change. Policy Research  working paper WPS 5095. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009. http://econ.  worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK=469372&piPK=64165421&menuPK=64166322&entityID=000158349_20091026142624. 

6 Kostakis V, Bauwens M. Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative eEonomy 
. London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2014. 7 Sustainable Economies Law Center .The Shareable Food Movement Meets the Law.
Shareable, 1 July 2011. http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-shareable-food-movement-meets-the-law.


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]