
'''= works to ensure the food, water and fish we consume is safe, accessible and sustainably produced'''


URL = http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/


=Description=

"Food & Water Watch works to ensure the food, water and fish we consume is safe, accessible and sustainably produced. So we can all enjoy and trust in what we eat and drink, we help people take charge of where their food comes from, keep clean, affordable, public tap water flowing freely to our homes, protect the environmental quality of oceans, force government to do its job protecting citizens, and educate about the importance of keeping shared resources under public control.
Our Work

Food & Water Watch is a non-profit organization that advocates for common sense policies that will result in healthy, safe food and access to safe and affordable drinking water. Everyone is dependent on shared resources like clean water, safe food and healthy oceans. It’s essential that these shared resources be regulated in the public interest rather than for private gain.

Our staff, located in 10 offices in the United States, works with a range of constituencies to inform and hold policymakers accountable. Our international staff in the European Union and Latin America work with coalition partners to track the global impact of the actions of U.S. corporations on public policy overseas.

Food: We work to promote the practices and policies that will result in sustainable and secure food systems that provide healthy food for consumers and an economically viable living for family farmers and rural communities.

Water: We advocate for public control of water resources and services, strong conservation measures, and support tough regulation of toxic emissions into water. The policies we promote will result in safe and affordable drinking water for everyone, rather than reliance on bottled water.

Fish: We promote policies that maintain the environmental quality of the ocean and its resources. As an important source of food, it is important not to misuse it by creating massive factory fish farms, operating dangerous oil platforms or creating policies that lead to the privatization of ocean resources."
(http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/about/about-us/)



=Publications=

From Food and Water Watch, United States 

Some of our publications that relate to protecting the global commons:

http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/dried-up-sold-out/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/money-down-the-drain/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/priceless/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/bottled/industry-sales-bad-news-for-bottled-water/
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/Casino.pdf
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/CatchandTrade-IssueBrief.pdf

=More Information=

#[[Maude Barlow]]


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Movements]]