=Description=
Bruno Poljokan, Lenissa Lenza et al:

"The CFE is organized in theme axes and management fronts.Theme axes are:

1) Circulation: circulation of artists and cultural agents of different expression contemplated in CFE, seeking the strengthening, expansion and dissemination of the network. Some of the themes that guide the Axis are the Artist Agency, tours, and itinerant routes.

2) Sustainability: research, implementation, management and generation of data on the mechanisms for sustainability of CFE, in its global perspective. Some of the themes guiding the Axis are complementary currencies, the CFE Fund - Collective Fund,Bylaws and Charter of Principles, Solidarity Economy, Creative Economy, Knowledge Economy.

3) Communication: brings together the chain of independent cultural production,connecting through collaborative works nationwide with a specific primary objective: to generate new agents of free media. The intention is to promote the formation of opinion by agents of independent culture and maintain a stimulated debate. Some of the theme axis are Social Networking, Media and Content Production.

4) Distribution: product development and production/distribution centers, to build a supportive network of national cultural products. Some of the guiding theme Axis a redistribution logistics, distribution points, marketing and logistics of products.Managing Fronts develop actions in favor of the alternative national cultural scene. These fronts are adapted to the local reality by the organizations and develop the structuring of projects and groups, involving the arrangement of local cultural production. The fronts should address the needs of the setting and its supply chain, designing projects and integrating staff from all collaborators. They give tone to political action, economic,educational, social and environmental, musical, audiovisual, communication, environment and other cross-cutting areas of the entity. 


The fronts manage the production and the strategic actions of the network as well as assume the lead role in organizing all activities on CFE.

1) CFE Communication: group that works all the communication inside CFE and support other organizations by developing local networks of independent media. CFE Communication manage CFE’s Social Network, Radio, TV, Writing, Press, Design and institutional projects’ media, and also incorporate in each organzation the same methodology of work for the development of local actions, connected to the cultural scene.

2) CFE Events: group in charge of producing network events such as CFE Festival, Grito Rock Festival, Regional Meetings, Congress, Debate, Show Nights, MovieWeek and so on. This front stimulates the production activities in the CFE organizations to ensure the circulation, production, generation, distribution and marketing platforms. At each CFE organization there is at least one major event that meets the demand of this managing front in support of the local cultural scene. These actions are the main platforms for launching new products and projects in the cultural market.

3) CFE Cinema Club: group in charge of the audio-visual actions inside CFE Organizations, leveraging the alternative cultural audio-visual scene. The Cinema Club encourages audio-visual nucleus of each CFE Organization and works collaboratively in the actions of the segment. The Cinema Club appears in 2009 during the Second CFE Congress.

4) CFE Theater: group dedicated to the performing arts scene. CFE Theater, as well as the Cinema Club, promote the expansion of CFE to other expressions, agglutinating agents from all CFE Organizations and encouraging the creation of performing arts groups in them. CFE Theater emerges in 2010, being the latest front on CFE.

5) CFE Music: group that brings together music agents such as bands, musicians and supporters in general focused on the development of the national music scene. CFEMusic extends to all CFE Organizations in order to mobilize key individuals toexpand the local music networks.

6) CFE Environmental: group dedicated to actions related to environmental awareness. CFE environmental appeared in 2010 during CFE Regional meeting, that happened during the CFE Festival 2010 held in São Paulo, as a result of a bigger need of more actions for the environmental area. The ideia of the front is to work projects that aimto reduce, reuse and recycle materials having a major focus in sustainability. The front develops integrated actions of the network and enhances the creation of similar centers at each CFE Organization.
 
7) CFE Institutional: responsible for designing and developing management strategies along CFE Organizations, increasing the link between their own managing fronts and external partners. The front should work to maintain the balance of group dynamics from the needs that each group demands in relation to its strategic partners. It also works the relationship with the Points of Culture of the Federal Government in the pursuit of expanding its network and exchange technologies.

8) CFE Card: responsible for the actions of sustainability within the network, this front manages and organizes actions such as mapping, diagnostics, research, work and commercial plans, projects, Fund, complementary currencies and flow between the various fronts related to decisions about projects and activities. The front is divided in different nuclei: Survey and Mapping, Projects, Business, Fund, and APL (Local Productive Arrangements - extension of the actions in CFE Organizations).

9) CFE Distro: front responsible for the distribution of CFE’s products through: the CFE store (on and offline), CFE stands (on events), Compacto. Rec (virtual distribution project) and any other distribution process. CFE Distro fosters the development of distribution points in all CFE Organizations.

10) CFE Tecnoart (TECA): responsible for audio, sound, stage, AMPs, luthiery, testing,recording, lighting, digital technology, computing and any other related demands within the network. TECA also encourages the structuring of related nuclei at each CFE Organization. The front is split between: Content Sharing, Live (stage, sound and light), Studios (recording test) and open platforms.

11) CFE Agency: responsible for the circulation of artists, creation of tour routes,catalog, announcements, scheduling shows, business proposals, marketing and any demand concerning the organization of artistic career on the network. The front also enhances the creation of agency in each CFE Organization.

12) CFE Offices: front dedicated to fostering and structuring permanent offices aimed at working CFE’s market and political action. Currently, Sao Paulo Office’s main focus is interacting with the cultural market in order to expand the alternatives for the sustainability of the network. The Brasilia Office has public policy as the main tool to be exploited. This front seeks to consolidate all integrated actions and CFE Organization guided by the expansion of cultural market and public policy.


All fronts elect coordinators have a better organization and dedication to the responsibilities of the CFE Groups. All members of the network must work on at least one front. Each front has its own email group administered by a representative of the Regional Reference Organization and the respective coordinators. The coordinators are in charge of reporting the front’s activities to the whole network, every two weeks."[http://www.scribd.com/doc/59754560/The-Brazilian-System-for-the-Solidarity-Culture-Fora-Do-Eixo-Card]

=  Sources and references  =
* '''Paper: Fora do Eixo Card: The [[Brazilian System for the Solidarity Culture]]. By Bruno Poljokan, Lenissa Lenza et al.''' [http://www.scribd.com/doc/59754560/The-Brazilian-System-for-the-Solidarity-Culture-Fora-Do-Eixo-Card]


[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Brazil]]

[[Category:Culture]]