
'''= the value accounting and exchange system used by the [[Fora do Eixo]] [[Solidarity Economy]] cultural network in Brazil'''

=Description=

Source: '''* Paper: Fora do Eixo Card: The [[Brazilian System for the Solidarity Culture]]. By Bruno Poljokan, Lenissa Lenza et al.''' [http://www.scribd.com/doc/59754560/The-Brazilian-System-for-the-Solidarity-Culture-Fora-Do-Eixo-Card]

Bruno Poljokan, Lenissa Lenza et al:


"The establishment of the Cubo Card credit system tried to innovate on the internal relationships, providing a collective fund that equates the survival of the members of the Collective. The revenue generated is transformed into Cubo Card credit, which has an exchange rate of: 1 Cubo Card = Real. When you get a sponsorship, this investment could bein products or services, for example a restaurant can invest in a particular event, having in exchange an advertisement or other benefits, and instead of paying 500 Reais in cash / currency it pays in consumer credit, the Collective Cubo manages this credits and, instead of paying a salary to the employees involved, distributes credits for consumption and that goes for any commercial activity. Bars, restaurants, hairdressers, clothing stores, rental of DVD's,record stores, books, exchanges that do not involve the exchange of currency (Real). The system's advantages are many, because it facilitates transactions between customers and partners. The Municipal Secretary of Culture entered the system and to provide a cash benefit for a particular project, in return receives the value given in Cubo Card. The Secretary may use this credit for hiring shows from Espaço Cubo. This generates an economic activity, including interfaces with other cities, such as São Carlos(SP) and Uberlândia (MG), which have similar complementary currencies. The Cubo Card also develops direct exchanges, service per service or product per product,according to the needs of the groups involved, developing a Service Database. This transaction creates a new value for each product, depending on the needs of the group. 

The system is also guided through hours worked, in which the valuation (in R$) of a service is based on how long it is done, characterizing in a bank of hours.With the experience of the Espaço Cubo in Cuiabá (MT), which organizes an exchange system, creating the complementary currency Cubo Card, the other collective in the network began implementing their own currencies, systematizing their exchange and thus matching the category of the Solidarity Economy. Today, there is already a physical circulation of the Cubo Card (Collective Espaço Cubo), Goma Card (Collective Goma), Marcianos Card (Collective Massa), Palafita Card (Collective Palafita) and the pilots of Lumoeda (Collective Lumo) and Patativa (redeco - CE). With the growth of the network both in number of agents, and volume of activities produced collaboratively, there is the need to create a system that organizes the production and trade in services, products, knowledge and technologies in a more organized way. Is then formed,within the network structure, the Solidarity “Fora do Eixo” Bank, coordinated by the sustainability axis of the network, the Fora do Eixo Card. This system organizes and accounts the workforce, products, goods and services invested by each Fora do Eixo Collective. It also acts as a catalyst for the development of the collectives in their territories, in order to amplify the sustainability of their economic activities and establish favorable conditions for the practice of solidarity, trust and cooperation, based on the cultural changes encouraged by these initiatives. In general, financial solidarity initiatives, of collaborative and associative nature, based on the principles of solidarity economy, can stimulate the creation and strengthening this network of production, consumption and trade, thus fostering the endogenous development of Fora do Eixo Circuit."
(http://www.scribd.com/doc/59754560/The-Brazilian-System-for-the-Solidarity-Culture-Fora-Do-Eixo-Card)


=More Information=

See: The [[Brazilian System for the Solidarity Culture]]

[[Fora do Eixo]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Brazil]]