'''* Article: Forms and Modes of The Free Software Society. Magnus Lawrie. 6th June 2011'''

URL = http://ditch.org.uk/download/forms_and_modes_free_software_society.pdf



=Excerpts=


==On Emerging [[Free Culture Media]]==


==[[Reboot FM]]==

Magnus Lawrie:

"Such collaborative, democratic forms are a critical aspect of the envisaged
peer-to-peer future. RebootFM is an established cultural radio station op-
erating in Berlin, Germany. Since June 2010, 85 participating artists have
released over 500 self-produced radio programmes. The station claims nearly
3000 followers on Facebook and Twitter and its programmes are also sourced
as content for a number of commercial radio stations. RebootFM’s website
states,

”The non-commercial frequency 88.4 MHz, gives different radio groups in
Berlin the possibility to produce independent, non-commercial radio, longer
and more continuously than was previously the case...new formats and meth-
ods will be developed around connecting the variety of the city’s creative
production to a wider and more international listener group” (RebootFM
2011)."
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/forms_and_modes_free_software_society.pdf)


==[[LaTele - Catalonia, Spain]]==

Magnus Lawrie:

"In Catalonia, LaTele is a third-sector organisation of ’L’Assemblea per la
Communicaci Social’ (ACS). ACS was established in 2003 with ”...the aim
of creating television of social movements and to criticize and transform the
dominant model of communication”. LaTele, self-described as ”the free television and television community of social movements of Barcelona” (LaTele
2011), broadcasts online and - since April 2011 - on TDT channel 37, to
Barcelona and nearby. The emergence of this citizen television and campaign
to ’occupy the waves’ is ”...creating channels of horizontal communication,
collectively owned and managed by the organisations, groups and individuals
involved in social criticism and transformation” (LaTele 2011), from which
’programming intiatives’ emerge. 


From its position in the third-sector, ACS
seeks changes in legislation relating to non-profit media:

”The current system of broadcasting only leaves space for public media
controlled by political parties, media and private business controlled by a few
business groups. We want to debate this model and participate in defining a
new framework that leaves space for collective forms of communication and
community, where citizenship is not just passive audience or consumer...”
(LaTele 2011)"
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/forms_and_modes_free_software_society.pdf)


Status, June 2011:

"To the degree that RebootFM and LaTele are institutions emerging from
within the existing society, they can be identified as germ forms. Significantly,
neither of these organizations eschew state financial support, though in the
event only Reboot receives money (whilst ACS and LaTele are wholly self-supporting). In the current climate both are precarious positions to maintain.
In the case of rebootFM, threats are in the form of proposed cuts to the job
placements which enable many of the stations programmers to participate
- a radio programme was devised to discuss this very issue. In the case of
LaTele, a 30 second video titled ’we are not afraid of your pistol’ (LaTele
2011), unflinching shows the programme makers’ own situation. This video,
of 27th May 2011, is taken on Barcelona’s Placa Catalunya: The camera
pans sideways to frame a policeman of the notoriously brutal ’Mossos’; He
faces the camera and wears full riot gear; The camera zooms to the man’s
waistbelt, where a gun sits ready in his unclipped holster."
(http://ditch.org.uk/download/forms_and_modes_free_software_society.pdf)



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]