An overview of the situation of free and open source in [[Taiwan]].


ASIA PACIFIC REPORT: TAIPEI [Based on a presentation by Ping Yeh]


National Taiwan University's adjunct assistant professor Ping
Yeh -- who is also a co-founder of the Taipei Open Source
Software User Group -- recently put together (for the Asia
Open Source Software Symposium) a fascinating presentation on
what's happening on the FOSS front at Taiwan, the island in
East Asia with a population of 23 million.

Taiwan is located off the coast of mainland China, south of
Japan and north of the Philippines. Also known as Formosa
(Portuguese sailors called it Ilha Formosa, which means
"beautiful island"). The island comprises of steep mountains
covered by tropical and subtropical vegetation.

Taiwan has had a "traditional" and "closed source" trend
since the 1980s. But the government's five-year programme
2002-07 has a theme of "establishing the Free Software
industry". It has been investing over 100 million NT a year,
and the emphasis is on training ("nothing can be done without
highly-skilled people") , standards and compatibility ("make
sure things work together"), and legal issues ("reduction or
removal of Free Software-unfriendly regulations and laws").

Interestingly, this programme has some clear goals. These
include, building a friendly environment for Free Software
development, having an internationally-active Free Software
development community, high-value Free Software products, and
encouraging a large-scale Free Software industrial chain.

One interesting goal the Taiwanese are talking about is
having OpenOffice.org as the format for all government
documents. "It requires mature localisation and massive
training through all levels of government
organisations," says Ping Yeh in the presentation.

There are some useful government-funded programmes too: a
Linux Compatibility Test & Certification Center; an Open
Source Software Application Consulting Center; the
recursively-named OSSF Supports Software Freedom; standard
operations procedure for open source softwares; Free Software
Research & Development; and embedded Linux R&D.

Linux Compatibility Test & Certification Center, or the
LCTCC, aims to test the compatibility between hardware and
various flavors/versions of GNU/Linux distributions. A useful
idea in a country that is into the deep end of excellence in
the hardware world. It is run by the Taiwan Linux Consortium,
and in 2004 had 279 database entries, six promotion events,
and contacts with the Free Standards Group for setting up the
LSB/OpenI18N certification. See
http://linux.tca.org.tw/linux-test/

SOP for OSS is a Standard operating procedures for open
source softwares. It is run by the Chinese Open Systems
Association. By late 2005 it had completed SOP documents for
installing and configuring Fedora core 2, webmin, apache,
sendmail, mysql, samba, phpnuke, tomcat, openwebmail,
firewall and OpenOffice.org. Each SOP has a detailed report
(in PDF) and an associated flash live demo.

OSSACC (Open Source Software Application Consulting Center)
is an attempt by Taiwan's Ministry of Education's push to
diversity in IT education in elementary schools. It is funded
by the MOE, and executed by Software Liberty Association of
Taiwan. It's mission? To train elementary school teachers to
use free softwares and provide support to them. It has
offered more than 1500 trainees courses on Linux, OpenOffice,
PHP, zope, etc. Besides, it has made and distributed the EZGo
CD, a collection of free softwares on Windows and training
materials. http://www.ossacc.org/

OSSF stands for "OSSF Supports Software Freedom", and is led
by the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica.
(The Academia Sinica, headquartered in the Nangang district
of Taipei, is the national academy for Taiwan.It is deemed a
primary research centre for the nation. It supports research
activities in a wide variety of disciplines, ranging from
mathematical and physical sciences, to life sciences, and to
humanities and social sciences.) This project focuses on
infrastructure building for free software development. It
offers a foundry, similar to sourceforge.net, for local FOSS
developers to interact in local languages.

There's also technical, operational and legal assistance.
Legal analysis of OSS licenses is provided to assist
developers to choose the most suitable license.
http://www.openfoundry.org/

OpenFoundry.org is the repository of OSSF. It has some 321
projects, 1753 registered users as of Sept 3, 2005. Some
well-known projects emerging out of this Taiwanese experiment
include OpenWebMail, OpenVanilla, Kwiki, Pugs See
http://openfoundry.org/

License Wizard of OSSF helps maintainers and authors of Free
Software projects to choose a license they like best. You
need to answer a few questions such as, and then you're
prompted to the suitable license. This process is available
only in Traditional Chinese so far.

Meanwhile, the F.S. R&D programme is funded by Taiwan's
National Science Council, and encourages two kinds of Free
Software R&D -- that needed by industry, and that which can
be used as software components. It is conducted by
universities and research institutes via a "call for
proposal" mechanism. Some 133 proposals approved for 2003 and
2004 combined.

Embedded Linux R&D Programme is a strategy to combine
GNU/Linux technology with Taiwan's local strength in IT
hardware. Its target market is embedded products, it
emphasises on GNU/Linux wide-scale security systems, and its
major participants are the Taiwan Linux Consortium and its
member companies, the Industrial Technology Research
Institute and Institute for Information Industry.

Apart from all this, there's spontanous initiatives and
volunteer-driven projects -- from the research, educational,
industrial sectors and the GNU/Linux community. "This is not
an exhaustive report," says Ping Yeh modestly.

Taiwan Linux Consortium has been promoting GNU/Linux since
2000. Linux Expo is held every summer together with Computex,
the second largest computer exhibition in the world.

Taiwan Linux Forum is active too. There's the Golden Penguin
Award (annual since 2003) -- a distinguished contribution
award that goes out to the best application of the year, nd
the best innovation of the year. This was scheduled to be
extended to greater China recently.

Not to say that the educational sector is lagging behind in
initiatives. School Free Software (SFS) has been run since
2003. It's a Web-based school administration portal,
PHP+MySQL (LAMP).  It's modular, with more than 100 modules.
Developers are teachers in elementary schools.  More then 500
schools in three counties are using it.
http://sfs.wpes.tcc.edu.tw/

Dr. Geo, on the other hand, is an interactive software for
teaching geometry. It's now part of the global Freeduc
project, which takes Free Software to school. There's also
the Freeductw project, aimed at promoting Freeduc softwares
in Taiwanese primary schools.

In the research sector, informs Ping Yeh, there are many
projects, some funded by the NSC and some spontaneously
growing. These include the DRBL (Diskless Remote Boot in
Linux) which has one boot server, multiple diskless clients,
and is seen as being particularly well suited for computer
classrooms. More than 200 installed sites (6000 PCs) are in
schools, hospitals, NPOs, government orgs, small & medium
sized businesses.

There's a Sourceforge mirror run out of the NCHC Tainan,
which has been online since March 2005.

On the community front, other initiatives have come up.
There's the Software Liberty Association of Taiwan. It's a
not-for-profit organization dedicated to the promotion of
Free Software. Donations are tax-deductible. This network
holds an international FOSS conference annually since 2001.
It offers community awards every other year, and interleaves
with a technology competition which is also held in
alternative years. It runs OSSACC for the Ministry of
Education. http://www.slat.org/

User group activities include: Taiwan linux user group
(forum), Tainan linux user group (talks), Tainan county
network center, Taiwan Debian user group (wiki, irc), PCManX,
OV-IME, and others Fedora Taiwan (forum), Fedora LiveCD, OS X
chat (irc, blog), OpenVanilla, Taipei open source software
user group (talks, mailing list), Mozilla Taiwan (forum),
Localisation Sayya.org (bbs), and other volunteering
individuals work on Gentoo, Ubuntu, *BSD, etc.

Some names you ought to be linking to Taiwan, when you hear
of them in the future: Pugs, implementation of Perl 6 in
Haskell, led by Autrijus Tang.  http://www.pugscode.org/

svk: decentralized version control system that works with all
major code repository systems, led by C.L.Kao.
http://svk.elixus.org/

PCMan: cross-platform BBS client with graphical user
interface, led by "pcman"

OpenVanilla: cross-platform input method framework, led by
Dane Liu. http://www.openvanilla.org/

OV-IME: input method editor for OpenVanilla on Windows, led
by Kanru Chen

SDL-im: enabling input method in SDL (Simple Directmedia

Layer, a game development library), led by L.Y.C.

Some names that helped in collating the content of this
presentation, and could be helpful contacts to finding out
more: Ping Yeh (National Taiwan University & Tossug
+886.913.165.100 ping@pingyeh.net) and Tinli Lin (OSSF), K.C.
Chen (OSSACC), Mike Lin (TLC), Tzu-Chiang Liu (OSSF), Fred
Cheng (NICI), Hong-Sheu Wu (COSA), James Chen (ITRI), Steven
Hsiau (NCHC), T. H. Chang (NSC), Ying-Kuang Chen (SFS),
Chao-Kwei Hung (Freeduc), Jing-Chun "jserv" Huang (Debian
Taiwan), Chuan-Te Ho (RDEC).

Links to Taiwanese organisations:

Chinese Open System Association: http://www.cosa.org.tw/
Taiwan Linux Consortium: http://taiwan-linux.tca.org.tw/
Software Liberty Association of Taiwan: http://www.slat.org/

Links to Taiwanese projects:

Chinese Linux Extension: http://cle.linux.org.tw/
OSSF Supports Software Freedom: http://openfoundry.org/

Links to Taiwanese communities:

Taiwan Linux User Group: http://www.linux.org.tw/
Tainan Linux User Group: http://tnlug.linux.org.tw/
Tainan County Network Center: http://freesf.tnc.edu.tw/
Taipei Open Source Software User Group: http://tossug.org/
Debian: http://debian.org.tw/
Fedora Taiwan: http://www.fect.com.tw/
Mozilla Taiwan: http://moztw.org/
OS X Chat: http://osxchat.blogspot.com/
Dream Software List: http://wiki.debian.org.tw/index.php/WishList2005
Sayya BBS: telnet://bbs.sayya.org/

Acronyms of government agencies:

NSC: National Science Council
MOE: Ministry of Education
IDB: Industry Development Bureau of the Ministry of Economy Affairs
NICI: National Information and Communications Initiative
RDEC: Research, Development and Evaluation Commission

http://www.openmalaysiablog.com/2006/07/odf_alliance_ne.html
http://www.openmalaysiablog.com/2006/07/ps3_pikoms_conf.html
http://kushaldas.blogspot.com/2006/07/one-year.html
http://ipvsadm.blogspot.com/2006/07/idcs-asiapacific-managed-services.html
http://www.openmalaysiablog.com/2006/07/moving.html
http://www.openmalaysiablog.com/2006/07/digital_rights_.html
http://www.openmalaysiablog.com/2006/07/software_patent_1.html
http://kartikm.blogspot.com/2006/07/tuxpaint.html

[[Category:Asia]]

[[Category:Taiwan]]

[[Category:Free Software]]