'''FOSS: Licensing Author: Shun-ling Chen © UNDP-APDIP, Elsevier, 2006, 29 pages ISBN-13: 978-81-312-0422-1'''

= Description= 

COMING UP SOON: IOSN and UNDP-APDIP releases new publication
on Free/Open Source Software and Licensing
http://www.iosn.net/licensing/foss-licensing-primer/

As the FOSS Movement has been growing rapidly in recent
years, more and more stakeholders are brought in to
participate in different roles. Some of them are end-users,
developers, business entities, or government agencies that
provide funding for FOSS projects. This e-primer is designed
to provide these stakeholders with some basic knowledge about
copyright, software copyright and FOSS licenses. Legal issues
may vary in different situations and this e-primer may not be
able to provide answers to all situations. But, hopefully, it
will serve as a bridge between lawyers and non-lawyers in
this joint venture of FOSS development.

This e-primer examines different proprietary and
FOSS licenses that use copyright law to regulate
the use of software, and discusses how the FOSS
movement uses licenses as a way to create a
different model of software development. It
provides scenarios to highlight possible copyright
issues regarding the use of FOSS by end-users,
developers and vendors, and addresses common
questions and misconceptions regarding copyright
and licensing issues. The e-primer also includes
two cases regarding government-sponsored FOSS
projects.


=More Information=

This e-primer is part of the Free/Open Source Software
e-Primer Series. For other publications in this series,
please visit http://www.iosn.net/publications/foss-primers


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Licensing]]