=Directory=

Compiled by [[Donnie Maclurcan]]:


This is a list of key organisations, companies, entities and movements seeking to create more equitable access to FOSS. I have alphabetised it to make things a little easier. When this list is adequate we can perhaps add our personal links to others within these groups. Feel free to edit/add to the general list and later we can work on a useful taxonomy.

* [[Apache Software Foundation]] - Supports the development of a number of open-source software projects, including the apache webserver. Includes license information, latest news, and project sites.

* Australian Service for Knowledge of Open Source Software - A national focal point in Australia for advice, management, governance, storage and dissemination of FOSS for research and higher education. 

* [[Bar Camp]] - an international network of user generated conferences/unconference - open, participatory workshop-events, whose content is provided by participants.

* [[FLOSS WORLD]] - A project aiming to strengthen Europe's leadership in research into FLOSS and open standards, building a global constituency with partners from Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, India, Malaysia and South Africa.

* [[FOSS Bazaar]] - An open community of technology and industry leaders who are collaborating to accelerate adoption of free and open source software in enterprise.

* [[FOSS Learning Centre]] - An international non-profit organization serving as an information and training hub for conferences, webcasts, online videos, and workshops providing information about free open source software. 

* [[FOSSACT]] - A users group focussed on promoting and supporting the use of free and open source software in business and government in the Australian Capital Territory and surrounding regions.

* [[Free Software Foundation]] - Non-profit organization dedicated to eliminating restrictions on copying, redistributing, understanding, and modifying computer programs.

* [[Free Software Foundation Europe]] - European branch of the FSF. Includes news and events listings, press information, and a document archive.

* Free/Open source research community - A community in which information will be freely exchanged, so that we may further the understanding of open source and its implications outside the realm of software development.

* [[GNU Project]] - A project to develop a complete free Unix-like operating system.

* [[GOSLING]] - an informal learning and knowledge-sharing community who actively assist the engagement of free/libre open source methods and software solutions in Canadian Federal and other government operations. 

* [[International Centre for FOSS]] (ICFOSS) - An organization set up by the Government of Kerala, India, to leverage the early lead of Kerala State in FOSS (2001 onwards)

* [[International Open Source Network]] - a Centre of Excellence for FOSS in the Asia-Pacific region.

* [[Jabber Software Foundation]] - Not-for-profit organization that oversees the general development of XMPP and maintains the Jabber Enhancement Proposals.

* [http://www.linux.org.au/foss_in_australia Linux Australia] - the peak body for Linux User Groups (LUGs) around Australia

* [[Linux Foundation]] - A non-profit consortium dedicated to fostering the growth of Linux, and promoting standardization and technical collaboration. Provides details of activities and working groups, a collaboration forum, and developer services.

* LUGs - Linux Users groups existing in Australian cities.

* [[Mozilla Foundation]] - A non-profit organization that promotes openness, innovation and participation on the Internet.

* [[One Laptop Per Child]] - A non-profit association dedicated to creating educational opportunities for the world's poorest children by providing each child with a rugged, low-cost, low-power, connected laptop with content and software designed for collaborative, joyful, self-empowered learning.

* [[Open Invention Network]] - An intellectual property company that was formed to promote Linux. It acquires patents and makes them available royalty-free to any company, institution or individual that agrees not to assert its patents against the Linux System.

* [[Open Knowledge Foundation]] - A not-for-profit organization promoting open knowledge: that's any kind of information

* [[Open Solutions Alliance]] - A nonprofit, vendor-neutral consortium dedicated to driving the adoption of comprehensive open source business solutions.

* [[Open Source Academy]] - UK government portal which aims to encourage the use of Open Source Software by local authorities. Offers opportunities for knowledge sharing and practical advice.

* [[Open Source Advisory Service]] - Promotes awareness and understanding of the legal, social, technical and economic issues that arise when educational institutions engage with free and open source software. News, publications, events, and FAQ.

* [[Open Source Automation Development Lab]] (OSADL) - Aims to promote and support the development of Open Source software for the automation industry.

* [[Open Source Developers Club]] - A federation of PHP, Python and Perl user groups.

* [[Open Source for America]] - A cross-section of technology industry leaders, associations, non-governmental organizations, communities, and academic/research institutions, promoting better utilization of free and open source software in the US Government. 


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Open]]