
'''Fouad Riaz Bajwa = Pakistani free software advocate'''

Photo link: http://wikis.bellanet.org/asia-commons/images/c/c1/Fouad_pic.jpg

=Bio=


Co-Founder and General Secretary of FOSSFP: Free and Open Source Software Foundation of Pakistan (http://www.fossfp.org), and is well known for his involvement amongst the leaders of the global Free and Open Source Software movement as a prominent FOSS advocate and writer on ICT related issues. Fouad is also a member of the BytesForAll network and contributes to the South Asian Regional FOSS Localization Consortium. An active member of Civil Society, Fouad works towards promoting the widespread use of ICTs for human development enabled by FOSS in the social sector. 

With over 10 years of ICT and “Strategic Technology Management‿ related career experience, Fouad has worked with local and international organizations including sectors like media, academia, public sector banking & finance institutions, private IT startups and social enterprise technology ventures. Fouad provides advisory and consultation expertise in areas of strategic use of emerging technologies including knowledge management, Web 2.0, content management, Multimedia and learning management systems. 

Fouad also leads the regional FOSS-Academy that is one of the largest FOSS capacity development and awareness campaigns at national level in Pakistan widely supported by the Government as well as UNCTAD as an effort to combat software piracy providing resources and capacity in FOSS as an alternative encouraging ICT innovation, production and consumption. To-date the FOSS-Academy has trained and certified over 5000 FOSS users from over 506 organizations nationwide. 
Fouad is a frequent speaker and presenter at local and international conferences and consultations on ICT and FOSS policy related issues. Fouad has recently launched the Tv4Humanity.org, an IPTV initiative for promoting social justice and sustainable development globally. 


=Contact=

URL: http://www.fossfp.org

E-mail: bajwa@fossfp.org, fouadbajwa@yahoo.com

Ph: +92 42 5030039

Cell: +92 333 4661290

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Pakistan]]