
'''* Book chapter: Bottom-up Economics. Foundations of a Theory of Distributed and Open Value Creation. Redlich, Tobias (et al.).''' From the book: The Decentralized and Networked Future of Value Creation. [[3D Printing and its Implications for Society, Industry, and Sustainable Development]]. Ed. by Ferdinand, Jan-Peter, Petschow, Ulrich, Dickel, Sascha. Springer, 2016

URL = https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319316840

=Description=

Cindy Kohtala:

"In the Introduction to the book (written by the editors), page 13: “With these broadly drawn conceptual trajectories, a closer look at specific options for implementing these new modes of value creation reveals two typical approaches representing either business-centric top-down organization or network-based bottom-up processes. Business-oriented approaches to enhance flexibility in production do involve modifications to traditional production and consumption patterns, but the control of value creation ultimately remains in the hands of organizations, which increasingly adapt digitalized production processes to meet specific customer demands. In contrast, bottom-up approaches contrive to offer a fundamental alternative to the current producer-consumer model by placing responsibility, not only for production but also the creative momentum of the product design, in the hands of potential users or user groups; as such, these actors can be viewed as early adopters of a "radically decentralized system of production (Bauwens et al. 2012: 47 pp).”

Cindy Kohtala writes: I see it as from the industry point of view - how to acknowledge all that open-p2p action in the world and allow for it in business activities, incorporate it in mutual value creation and strategize it. Interesting diagram on page 41"



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]