'''* Booklet: [[Foundations of Archdisciplinarity]]. Archdisciplinary Research Center.'''

URL = https://static1.squarespace.com/static/63bed6ba94028f5771ecf233/t/64061bc3b6ae33647928210f/1678121924785/Foundations+of+Archdisciplinarity.pdf

"Archdisciplinarity is here introduced as the academic inquiry that treats big picture, transdisciplinary, theory of everything, unification metatheories as units of analysis for comparison and contrast. Foundations of Archdisciplinarity is a free booklet that provides an in-depth look at the evolution of human knowledge – where we came from, where we are at, and where we’re going."


== Abstract ==

"[[Archdisciplinarity]] is here introduced as the academic inquiry that treats big picture, transdisciplinary, theory of everything, unification metatheories as units of analysis for comparison and contrast. In this booklet, we first describe the purpose and motivation for formalizing the notions of archdisciplinarity. Next, we examine historical to contemporary contexts of the evolution of human understanding through scopes of academic inquiry – disciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, transdisciplinarity, with archdisciplinarity as the next-higher order scope of academic inquiry. This is followed by an articulation of scopes of propositional frameworks that explain phenomena – theory, metatheory, and unification metatheory, with archtheory as the next-higher order theory that follows. '''Archtheories are described as syntheses across unification metatheories along their common themes called arches'''. We give several examples of arches that are intrinsic to and persist across the meta of most comprehensive and integrated models in the world. The booklet continues with an account of sociocultural sensibilities – premodernity, modernity, postmodernity, and metamodernity, with archmodernity proposed to follow. After grounding our topic in the literature, we then lay out the foundations for archdisciplinarity by describing a) criteria for what constitutes unification metatheories, b) the means for how to classify unification metatheories, and c) a path forward for coordinating study and practice at this scope of inquiry. Three archdisciplinary methodologies are presented for dierent purposes, with one describing community collaboration, another describing application of archdisciplinarity to upgrade existing scopes of theory, and one describing the procedure for how an arch was originally derived, which prompted the conception of archdisciplinarity. After that, we will describe the mission of the Archdisciplinary Research Center (ARC), and what we anticipate going forward. We bring this booklet to a close with some discussion of the topic, and some concluding remarks."

== More Information ==

* [[Archdisciplinary Research Center]]

[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Research]]