

URL = http://www.fes.org.in [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundation_for_Ecological_Security wikipedia]


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Purposefully managed commons play an important role in reducing 
vulnerability and act as reserves on which people can fall back for 
subsistence and income generation during times of hardships. Efforts 
for  improving  productivity  and  health  of  the  commons  do  help  in 
stabilizing  and  improving  the  agriculture  based  livelihoods  and  an 
effective  and  encompassing  strategy  would  be  to  supplement  this 
effort with an array of livelihood choices geared towards helping the 
marginalized and women to have better control over their lives. 


We  promote  the  conservation  and  sustainable  management  of 
natural  resources,  forests  and  water  in  particular,  through  local  self-
governance institutions. The crux of our efforts lie in locating forests 
and other natural resources within the prevailing economic, social and 
ecological demands at the level of villages and village conglomerates, 
and amalgamating principles of conservation and local self governance 
to safeguard the natural surroundings and improve the living conditions 
of the poor. In essence, we see the role of our organisation in centre-
staging an ecological agenda in an economically dominated world view, 
reorienting progress with a conservation and social justice perspective 
and presenting local visions and voices at local and global levels. 
 



FES presently works with 1402 village institutions in 26 districts across six 
states, and assists the village communities in protecting the  96,933 hectares 
of  revenue  wastelands,  degraded  forest  lands  and  Panchayat  grazing  lands 
(Charagah lands). Outside the Government FES is probably the only organization 
that works on Commons at this scale. 

Areas of interest are: 

• 	Establishing  institutional  design  principles  and  mechanisms  that 
provide space for the poor. Developing linkages between village level institutions 
and the umbrella institution of Panchayats, and integration of natural resource management plans by Panchayats. 

• 	Improving rural livelihoods particularly of the poor and marginalized 
so as to meet the subsistence requirements and increase household incomes 
from agriculture, forests and other allied livelihoods. 

• 	Reviving the criticality of forests and other common lands and locating 
inter-linkages  with  the  associated  production  systems,  thereby  highlighting 
the value of forests and water for the sustenance of farming and safeguarding subsistence livelihoods. 

• 	Strengthening platforms for discussion at a village and inter-village 
level by inviting government functionaries, academia and larger civil society"


'''2.'''

"Spread across diverse ecological and social geographies, FES works towards conservation of nature and natural resources through collective action of local communities. The crux of FES’ efforts lie in locating forests and other natural resources within the prevailing economic, social and ecological dynamics in rural landscapes. Globally, FES hopes to see an increasing influence on two fundamental issues in governing shared natural resources – a ‘socio-ecological systems’ approach and a ‘Commons paradigm’, which together could have far-reaching impact on world views on ‘development’.

In India, FES has played a pioneering role in furthering the concept of Commons as an effective instrument of local governance, as economic assets for the poor and for the viability of adjoining farmlands. It has also highlighted that by strengthening the institutional dimension, the collective action spins off from effectively managing natural resources to other spheres of village life such as education, health and access to economic opportunities.

The three fundamental dimensions or cornerstones of FES are:

* Ecological Restoration: Conserving nature, restoring and managing natural resources, such as land and local biodiversity, hydrological and nutrient cycles;

* Commons and Community Institutions: Strengthening institutions and enhancing the capacity to self-govern, promoting inclusionary processes and collective decision-making;

* Rural Livelihoods: Securing livelihoods that are dependent on natural resources, and assisting communities to determine and adopt consumption levels within the ecological capacity of the area.


FES presently works with 8,845 village institutions in 31 districts across eight states, and assists the village communities in protecting more than 2.6 million acres of common lands including revenue wastelands, degraded forest lands and Panchayat grazing lands (Charagah lands). We support Panchayats and their subcommittees, Village Forest Committees, Gramya Jungle Committees, Water Users Associations and Watershed Committees in order to improve the governance of natural resources. Regardless of the form of the institution, we strive for universal membership and an equal access of women and poor in decision making."

[[Category:India]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Commons]]