=Contents=

Less well edited primary versions of my articles are collected here:

My 'Fourth Civilization' Substack newsletter is at https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/archive


* 1: '''[[Towards a Fourth Generation Civilization]]'''. Why this substack by Michel Bauwens, founder of the P2P Foundation.

* 2: '''[[Towards Mutual Coordination Economics]].''' Why we should pay attention to mutual coordination as a concept for the next civilization.

* 3: '''[[On the Importance of Seed Forms for the Next Civilization]]''': An overview of fifteen years of research by the P2P Foundation.

* 4: '''[[Why We Need Real-Time Public Ledger Organizations]]''': RTPLO's might be the 'commons-based' institutions that we need to change the value regime.

* 5: '''[[Why We Need 'Crypto for Real']]''': A proposal to link up the open ecosystems for crypto coordination, with the real-life mutualization of provisioning.

* 6: '''The [[Fate of Tribes in a Cosmo-Local World]]''': A more personal travelogue that starts in a Lebanese mountain community and ends up in a network nation.

* 7: '''The [[Transhumanist Technological Quest Is a Religious Quest]]''': Recovering our technological unconscious.

* 8: '''[[Understanding the Emergence of Neo-Venetian Crypto-Networks]]''': Why the prefigurative self-provisioning of mutual coordination infrastructures by the crypto-nomadic networks has a macro-historical importance.

* 9: '''[[Three Scenarios for a Turbo-Charged Crypto-Future]]'''.

* 10: '''[[Shifting from a Commodity-Based Value Regime to a Contributory Value Regime]]'''.

* 11: '''The [[Age of Trans-Local Self-Organized CoordiNations]]'''

* 12: '''[[Why Ordo-Communalism is Necessary]]''': on the [[Ordo-Communal State]].

* 13: '''[[Getting Ready for the Five Thousand Year Shift in Value Regime]]''':  An overview of signposts towards the civilizational shift in the direction of <contribution-based>, <thermodynamically informed> <mutual coordination> economics.

* 14: '''[[From the Commons for Capital to Capital for the Commons]]''': How an important book, [[Assets in Common]], introduces the shift towards a Stewardship Economy.

* 15: '''[[How Peer Production and Web3 Governance Mechanisms May Prefigure a Isonomic World Order]]''': Is what we are waiting for perhaps not Democracy, but [[Isonomia]] ?

* 16: '''[[What Kind of Money Do We Need for the Next Value Revolution]] ?''': Beyond fiat money and crypto, how do we measure and reward systemic contributions, i.e. contribution to common infrastructural and care value ?

* 17. '''[[Who Can Change the World Today]] ?''' Is there a new agent of historical change ? Could it be the commoners ? But if so: allied to who ?

* 18. '''[[What Would a Commons-Centric Society or Civilization Look Like]] ?''' (Ethical Economy + Partner State + Commons): Adding the commons institutions to the mix: Transforming societies from a national bi-institutional format (market+state) to a cosmo-local tri-institutional format (market-state + commons).

* 19: '''[[Why Human Contributive Labor Remains the Creative Principle of Human Society]]''':  The salvific and ex-tropic implications of the medieval Christian vision of human work as spiritual activity. (with excerpts from the study: “[[From Modes of Production to the Resurrection of the Body]]".

* 20: '''The [[Construction of the Post-Civilizational Civium Has Begun]]''': Why the confederation of more than a dozen translocal popup villages in Chiang Mai is a historical pivot

* 21: '''A [[Global History of Societal Regulation]]''': Why commons-based institutions now need to regulate the market and state, ‘cosmo-locally’.

* 22: '''The [[Cosmo-Local Plan for Our Next Civilization]]'''. Towards a convergence of the local bioregional resilient production efforts with the global coordination and 'Capital for the Commons' capacities of Web3.

* 23: '''The [[Three Civilizational Priorities of the Next Societal Transition]]''':  Can We Truly Change Our Civilizational Model? What we can learn from [[Peter Pogany]]'s '[[Rethinking the World]]'.

* 24: '''[[AI and the Advent of the Age of the Brahmin Workers]]'''. The pivot towards P2P AI has just begun.

* 25: '''[[Looking at the Evolution of our World Through the Lens of Coordination Systems]]'''

* 26: '''[[What Kind of Spiritual Revival Can We Expect at the End of This Civilizational Cycle]]''' ?

* 27: '''[[Is Trump the Unwitting Historical Agent of Cosmolocal Accelerationism]]''' ?

* 28: '''[[Should We Expect a Spiritual Revolution]]?'''

* 29. '''The [[State of the Commons in 2025]]'''

* 30: '''Suggestions for a [[Commons-Based Strategy of Social Change]]'''

* 31: '''[[Who Can Change the World Today]]'''


==To be updated==

* The Geopolitics of Cosmo-Localism (I): Understanding the upcoming conflict and potential synergy of East, West, and Digital. Part I: the post-Civilizational thesis. [https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/p/the-geopolitics-of-cosmo-localism]

* The Geopolitics of Cosmo-Localism (II): How the cosmo-local phygital commons change the world order The new trinitary world order is East - West - Digital, NOT the ‘West vs the Rest’ [https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/p/the-geopolitics-of-cosmo-localism-f80]

* My relationship with Satoshi Nakomoto: a historical review. An overview and discussion of the communication and relation between the Bitcoin founder, Satoshi Nakamoto, and the P2P Foundation, Michel Bauwens. [https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/p/my-relationship-with-satoshi-nakomoto]

* We need Commons-Based Instruments of Expansion!! Dispatches from (Zu)Kas, the civilization-building Web3 Oasis in Southern Turkey. [https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/p/we-need-commons-based-instruments]

=Thematic Clustering=

==Characteristics of the Transition==

Intro:

* [[Getting Ready for the Five Thousand Year Shift in Value Regime]]

* The [[State of the Commons in 2025]]

* [[Shifting from a Commodity-Based Value Regime to a Contributory Value Regime]]

* [[Global History of Societal Regulation]]

*[[Cosmo-Local Plan for Our Next Civilization]]

* The [[Three Civilizational Priorities of the Next Societal Transition]]

* Suggestions for a [[Commons-Based Strategy of Social Change]]

* [[How Peer Production and Web3 Governance Mechanisms May Prefigure a Isonomic World Order]]

* [[What Kind of Money Do We Need for the Next Value Revolution]]

* The [[Construction of the Post-Civilizational Civium Has Begun]]


===Process===

* [[On the Importance of Seed Forms for the Next Civilization]]

* [[Understanding the Emergence of Neo-Venetian Crypto-Networks]]

* [[Why We Need Real-Time Public Ledger Organizations]]

* [[Three Scenarios for a Turbo-Charged Crypto-Future]]: The [[Age of Trans-Local Self-Organized CoordiNations]]

* [[What Would a Commons-Centric Society or Civilization Look Like]] ? (Ethical Economy + Partner State + Commons): Adding the commons institutions to the mix: Transforming societies from a national bi-institutional format (market+state) to a cosmo-local tri-institutional format (market-state + commons).


===Characteristics===


* [[Towards Mutual Coordination Economics]]. Why we should pay attention to mutual coordination as a concept for the next civilization.

* [[Looking at the Evolution of our World Through the Lens of Coordination Systems]]

* [[Why We Need 'Crypto for Real']]

=Discussion=

* [[Why Human Contributive Labor Remains the Creative Principle of Human Society]]


==Controversies==

* The [[Transhumanist Technological Quest Is a Religious Quest]]

* [[AI and the Advent of the Age of the Brahmin Workers]]. The pivot towards P2P AI has just begun.

* [[ What Kind of Spiritual Revival Can We Expect at the End of This Civilizational Cycle]] / [[ Should We Expect a Spiritual Revolution?]]

* [[Is Trump the Unwitting Historical Agent of Cosmolocal Accelerationism ?]]

[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]