=Description=

Hannah Pilgrim:

"After 

* the mechanization of production (1. Industrial Revolution), 

* mass production due to
division of labor as well as the assembly line
(2. Industrial Revolution) and 

* the automatization of production (3. Industrial Revolution), the
Fourth Industrial Revolution – also known as the
[[Internet of Things]] or [[Industry 4.0]] – is defined by
digitalization. While digitalization is a term used
to describe changes in various fields (e. g. smart
homes, smart city, smart grids, smart cars, etc.),
Industry 4.0 refers to the digitalization of manufacturing processes, meaning that all steps of the
production process will be connected."

(https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf)


=Discussion=

==Overview of the Technologies Involved: [[Raw Materials Needed for the Fourth Industrial Revolution]]==

Hannah Pilgrim:

What technologies are needed to
connect the “things”, and what metals
are processed?


Industry 4.0 or the Industry of Things do not
describe one type of technology but refer to a 
combination of dif ferent knowledge-based information systems and technologies. Central to
Industry 4.0 are Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), as
they combine the physical production process
with the virtual world. Materials, devices and
other components in the production chain are
connected to the internet via small computers
which are equipped with sensors and actors.

A 2016 study by the German Mineral Resources
Agency (DERA) examines the probable demand
for raw materials caused by different future technologies.
 
According to the DERA study, in 2035,
the examined 42 future technologies will require
the quadruple of the present lithium production,
a threefold increase in heavy rare earths and one
and a half times increase in light rare earths and
tantalum. It is furthermore estimated that, due
to the increased use of electronics, the global demand for copper will grow between 231 and 341
percent until 2050.

In the following, we will introduce a few of the
technologies examined by the DERA study that
are essential for digitalized production processes:


* Sensors are a key technology. In the production
process, sensors can measure the position or
temperature of machines, product components,
etc. In the past years, the use of sensors sharply
increased. Although it is difficult to make scientifically valid statements about the future
demand of sensors, it is clear that metals are
used for the production of sensors, such as tin,
tungsten, tantalum and platinum.


* Radio Frequency IDentification-Tags (RFID-Tags)
are another type of sensors. RFID-Tags enable the
localization of objects through radio waves. They
are used in the supply chain management. Calculations indicate that, in 2035, up to 85 trillion
RFID-Tags could be sold per year. Compared with
6.3 billion in 2014, this is a huge increase. Metals
needed for the production of RFID-Tags are silver,
copper and aluminum.

* The digitalization of production also depends on
flat screens and touch screens. They consist of
indium tin oxide, which in turn mainly consists
of indium oxide. According to the DERA study, in
2035, up to 34 percent of the worldwide indium
production may be used solely for the production of displays.
Industrial robots are machines capable of working autonomously in the production process.

They consist of a manipulator (robotic arm),
control instrument and the effector (gripper
or tool). Robots are increasingly equipped with
different sensors. Research of the International
Federation of Robotics shows that global sales
in industrial robots has increased in the past
years. According to the International Federation
of Robotics, in 2020, more than three million robots will probably work in industrial production.

The metal-, plastic- and electronic industry in
particular rely on automated production. Robots  – which are also equipped with a number
of sensors – primarily consist of steel, copper, tin
and silicon.

* High-performance microchips are mainly used
for mobile phones and WLAN chips. However,
they are now being integrated in more and more
devices. Within the context of Industry 4.0, the
extended use of wireless communications in spacious production facilities will certainly increase
the quantity of chips needed. Compared with
‘traditional’ chips, high-performance microchips
are smaller, more ef ficient and can also be used
at high temperatures. They consist primarily of
gallium."

(https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf)


==[[Raw Materials Usage for Electric Mobility and Renewable Energies]]==

Hannah Pilgrim:

"Besides the technologies used for the digitalization of the production process, it is necessary to
look at new technologies for electricity generation and mobility.
The widespread individual use of automobiles
has devastating consequences for the environment. With its lithium-ion batteries, recharged
with renewable energy, Electric Mobility seems
to offer a solution: CO2-emissions and the consumption of fossil fuels may be reduced whilst
the current mobility model can be maintained.
However, compared to “old” engine technologies,
electric motor technology needs the fourfold of
copper and also larger quantities of other metals like cobalt, lithium and heavy and light rare
earths. Additionally, a large part of lithium-ion
batteries consists of graphite. Thus, with the production of electric cars, the material consumption by the automobile industry will certainly
not decrease. In fact, the opposite is the case.
The replacement of diesel and gasoline engines
with electric cars leads to a deadlock. Instead, research and implementation of mobility concepts
based on public transport, biking and shared vehicles must be supported.

To reach the 2.0 degrees, possibly even the 1.5
degrees goal as stated in the Paris Agreement,
we have to phase out the exploitation and use
of new fossil resources, which are mainly responsible for CO2 emissions. Generating power
via renewable energy certainly is a welcome
development. But specific devices such as permanent magnets for wind turbine generators or
lithium-ion batteries for the storage of electricity in photovoltaic plants will in turn create specific raw material demands (aluminum, copper,
indium, gallium, tellurium, heavy rare earths,
lithium, graphite or nickel). Hence, the following
still holds true: The most environmental friendly
kilowatt hour is always the one which is not consumed at all." 


(https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf)


==The False promises of the Fourth Industrial Revolution==

Hannah Pilgrim:

===Dematerialization===

According to research of the Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI), a network of more than
40 leading companies from the information and
communication sector, digitalized manufacturing can kill two birds with one stone: Firstly, it
“creates significant economic benefits”, secondly, they
assume a minimization of “environmental impact,
natural resource use, and energy consumption”.

The strong belief in progress and improvement
through technology must be examined critically.
Despite promises of dematerialization, the global
raw materials demand has increased constantly,
and the needed raw materials and energy for the
“future technologies” (e. g. RFID-Tags, chips, displays
etc.) have not yet been taken into account.


===Resource efficiency===

In addition to promises of “dematerialization”, the
increased efficiency in the use of raw materials
and energy, but also the workforce is of ten emphasized in debates on the digitalization of production processes. For the businesses, ef ficiency
primarily means cost savings. The mining supplier company MIRS (Mining and Heavy Industry
Robotics) illustrates this in the following quote:
“While mobile internet, internet of things, automation of knowledge and cloud technology are expected
to dramatically increase mining assets productivity,
advanced robotics are expected to replace human labor for low level tasks.”19
In this case, efficiency is at the expense of the
few existing jobs in the extractive industry sector. With the loss of local job opportunities and
the negative environmental and social impacts of
mining, countries in the Global South continue to
be the raw material supplier, rather than having
any chance for value-adding activities.

The companies interviewed by PWC for a study
on “Digital Factories” expect efficiency gains of
12 percentage in the next five years due to digitalized production. However, the scientifically
proven rebound effect also applies for production. Savings in resource and energy intensity
make products cheaper, and hence are eaten up
by increased production and consumption.

Furthermore, it is not clear to what extent the
needed energy and materials to produce sensors, displays and other smart devices as well
as the power consumption for the rapidly rising
data amount are factored in efficiency calculations. Digitalization will contribute to rising data
amounts. This in turn requires more energy and
undermines the political goal to reduce our energy consumption towards a global sustainable
level.


===Data security===

The all-encompassing digitalization also raises
questions about data security. Data protectionists are apprehensive of increasing connectivity between things, persons, and processes. The
metaphor of ´glass human beings´ is becoming
increasingly real. With the help of chips, sensors,
and RFID-Tags, even more personal data can be
transmitted.

With regard to extractive industries, questions
of data security and hacker attacks are of ten
connected to matters of safety in the workplace,
environmental risks and human rights violations. The consequences of potentially hacked
mines and smelters are tremendous: Hazardous
substances could pollute the environment, work
safety would no longer be guaranteed. So far, no
reliable studies exist on this matter."

=Directory=

Hannah Pilgrim:

Alliances, networks and platforms:
An international look at digitalization
policies

The digitalization of production is a global trend.
Hence, several global initiatives, alliances and
platforms dedicated to the research and support
of Industry 4.0 policies have come into existence.

==Global==


===The Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC)===

is an open membership organization founded in Massachusetts in 2014 by international companies
like Cisco, General Electrics or Intel. It comprises
more than 250 member worldwide, mainly global players from the electronic and communications industries. Furthermore, universities from
Asia, Europe and North America joined the IIC
to “accelerate the growth of the Industrial Internet
by identifying, assembling and promoting best practices”. The IIC cooperates closely with the German
Plattform Industrie 4.0 (see 3c. EU).

Industry of Things World (IoTW) and related
event formats like IoTW USA or IoTW Asia want
to bring together the “Industrial Internet of Things
scene”. They portray themselves as an “international knowledge exchange platform”, with the aim
of supporting each other and thereby increase
their benefits from the global digital transformation. In September 2017, an event from IoTW
took place in Berlin, Germany. More than 1,000
executives from business and technology companies as well as experts from science were invited.
China (Made in China 2025) and Japan (Industrial
Value Chain Initiative and Robot Revolution Initiative) are likewise preparing their industries for
the digitalization.


==OECD and G20==

At the level of OECD, the “Committee on Digital Economy Policy” deals with topics like the digitalization
of the economy and society, mobile communication and cyber security. The OECD is a key partner
of the G20. Before and during the last summit
in Hamburg, several meetings and conferences
about the “Key Issues for Digital Transformation in the
G20” were held. The “G20 Digital Economy Ministerial Declaration” presents the outcome of the
digital ministers’ meeting. They agreed on a joint
digitalization policy with a focus on “harnessing the
potential of inclusive growth and employment”, “digitizing production for growth” and “strengthening trust in
the digital world”. The increase in metals demand
has not been addressed at the level of the OECD
nor at recent meetings of the G20.


==EU==

At the level of the EU, the Commission/DG Connect deals primarily with digital issues. In April
2016, the Commission announced to support the
digitalization of the European industry through
national initiatives and increased investments.

Günther H. Oettinger, the former European Commissioner for Digital Economy and Society, emphasized the logic of economic competition. In
order for the European industry to maintain its
leading position in the global economy, digitalization processes must be supported.
„Europe has a very competitive industrial base and is
a global leader in important sectors. But Europe will
only be able to maintain its leading role if the digitization of its industry is successful and reached fast. Our
proposals aim to ensure that this happens. It requires
a joint ef fort across Europe to attract the investments we need for growth in the digital economy.“
The European Commission is operating according to a logic of growth and progress that allows
hardly any space for discussions about socio-ecological challenges caused by digitalization."

(https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf)


=Source=

'''* Report: The Dark Side of Digitalization: [[Will Industry 4.0 Create New Raw Materials Demands]]?. By Hannah Pilgrim. PowerShift, 2017.'''

URL = https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf

based on „Ressourcenfluch 4.0 – Die sozialen und ökologischen
Auswirkungen von Industrie 4.0 auf den Rohstof fsektor“ (PowerShift 2017)


=More information=

'''* Article: Repudiating the Fourth Industrial Revolution Discourse: A New Episteme of Technological Progress. By Alexander Trauth-Goik. World Futures , The Journal of New Paradigm Research, Volume 77, 2021 - Issue 1'''

URL = https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02604027.2020.1788357

"The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4th IR) is a techno-infused discourse around which high-level discussions of the future have come to revolve. The vision depicted by the 4th IR is one of exponential technological change and convergence, a scene in which disruptive discoveries and their implementation occur simultaneously across the physical, digital and biological spheres. This article examines the development of the 4th IR and assesses the neoliberal logic behind it."

 

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Technology]]