'''= "the Maximum Em-Power Principle".'''

URL = http://www.ordinality.org/


=Description=

'''1. the Maximum Em-Power Principle'''

"In 2002 Corrado Giannantoni succeeded in giving a very general mathematical formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle (H. T. Odum, early 1990s), generally considered as being the Fourth Thermodynamic Principle. This was made possible by means of the introduction of a new concept of “derivative” (termed as “Incipient” derivative) and, consequently, a new Differential Calculus (the Incipient Differential Calculus or IDC).

As an immediate consequence, from 2002 on he has progressively intensified his activity of diffusion of new Mathematical Methods (Intensive and Incipient Fractional Calculus) for the solution to non-linear differential equations and their direct applications in several fields (from Quantum Mechanics to Celestial Mechanics, from Thermodynamics to Electromagnetism, etc.). In addition, he has progressively shown the significant advantages of IDC when dealing with multi-phase Policy Models based on any number of Thermodynamic, Economic, Environmental and Juridical Indicators.

In January 2010 (Sixth Emergy Conference, Gainesville, USA) he proposed a generalized version of the Maximum Em-Power Principle. In fact, on the basis of the new concept of “incipient” derivative, both Emergy and Transformity can be replaced by the concept of Ordinality.

The principle can be thus renamed as the Maximum Ordinality Principle. Its corresponding enunciation then becomes: “Every System tends to Maximize its own Ordinality, including that of the surrounding habitat”."

(http://www.ordinality.org/)


'''2. The Maximum Ordinality Principle:'''

"The Maximum Ordinality Principle is the re-proposition of the Maximum Em-Power Principle (Odum, 1994), once deprived of any “residual” reference to traditional concepts of Classical Thermodynamics (such as Energy, Exergy and so on). Such a reformulation might thus appear, at a first glance, as being a sort of “dissonance” with respect to the previous formulations of the Maximum Em-Power Principle, both in steady state and dynamic conditions. Vice versa, in this way the real novelty of the Maximum Em-Power Principle emerges in a much clearer way, by contributing to give a more “harmonious” picture of the surrounding world. This is because classical quantities (such as Energy, Exergy and so on) simply represent a mere cardinal reflex of Generative Processes persistently evolving toward the Maximum Ordinality. Such a re-formulation, on the other hand, is already implicit in the same Rules of Emergy Algebra, which represent one of the most important contributions to modern Science over the last four centuries. This is because they introduce a renewed concept of Quality which is able to transform any scientific aspect”, including the same Principles of Classical Thermodynamics.

A preliminary analogy between the two Principles can be recognized from their pertaining verbal enunciations. In fact the Maximum Em-Power Principle (Odum H. T., 1994a, b, c), given in one of the equivalent forms, states that:

“Every System reaches its maximum possible organization when maximizing the flow of Emergy involved in the process, including that of its surrounding habitat.”

The introduction of the concept of “Incipient Derivative” enabled us to reformulate the Maximum

Em-Power Principle in a more general form, by replacing the concepts of Emergy and Transformity with the concept of Ordinality. The principle can thus be renamed as the Maximum Ordinality Principle, because its the corresponding verbal enunciation then becomes:

“Every System tends to Maximize its own Ordinality, including that of the surrounding habitat.”

(http://www.ordinality.org/the-maximum-ordinality-principle/)

=Excerpt=

Howard Odum:

"The systems concepts were developed during the Second
World War including meteorology. In the post-war university there
was much discussion of systems information and energy and a very
remarkable book published earlier, Physical Biology, by Alfred
Lotka -- Hutchinson put me onto it. 

'''The principles of thermodynamics include three laws, and Lotka proposed a fourth
one.''' 

I realized as a graduate student then, that this was the
explanation of nearly everything. It was called the maximum power
principle. The self-organizing processes that you have in the forest
or in a chemical solution or in the stars or in human affairs, the
systems that prevail are those that, as first priority, pull in the most
available energy resources, and as second priority, use them
efficiently to make all the processes perform at the maximum. And
people say, well why? Why should that be? Well, it is natural
selection, but not just on an organismal level. I mean, in addition to
selecting organisms, natural selection chooses system design,
including all the components of a system, whether it be people
interacting or birds and trees interacting. There are all kinds of
connections that could be made, and the ones that reinforce are
selected. For example, when the bees pollinate the flowers, that
reinforces both the bees and the flowers. It is a closed loop
reinforcement, and therefore that design takes over. I do not
understand why so much of science, and particularly ecological
people, have trouble with understanding the maximum power
principle. And we have changed it and refined it, and we now call it
the maximum empower principle.


'''* B: Does man not have an advantage, an unfair advantage, in this system that you just described?'''

O: Humans are suffered on this earth as long as they feed back and
reinforce their environment. That is the message that is gradually
getting out. So what do the humans do for the environment, for the
whole world, that was not there before? Well, they are information
processors, both as individuals and also in their social mechanisms
that their culture developed, so that they collectively can have this
fantastic information development. That is why people are
reinforcing the earth. Of course, information civilization has a
temporary pulse from using fossil fuels, but on a longer scale, the
pulse is part of a repeating pattern.

There are a bunch of corollaries that we have learned about all
systems that are part of the energy hierarchy concept. Systems
store energies and then use them in a pulse, and that gives more
performance. An earthquake gets more done than if the plates of
the earth moved gradually all the time. They would not get as much
done as by building up a strain and then releasing it with a sudden
surge. We find pulsing in the molecules, the cells of organisms, in
ladies with pregnancies, and human sleep; pulsing is the normal
pattern to plan for. The world is using the sustainable steady state
model where growth builds up and levels off. And that came out of
ecology earlier, and that is Cowles' model. It is not correct.
Systems build up and have a consumption pulse, and then they reset
and do it again. I think most ecologists now are coming to realize
that. Other colleagues contributed to that consensus such as C.S
Holling."

([https://www.facebook.com/groups/p2p.open/posts/6475943925783065/?])


=More information=

audio links:

* https://original-ufdc.uflib.ufl.edu/AA00020189/00001

* Part 2 here: https://original-ufdc.uflib.ufl.edu/AA00020190/00001

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Ecology]]