=Description=

Wim Grommen:

"The first (and second revolution) transformed an agricultural society into an industrial society
where mechanization (finally) relieved man of physical labor. The craft industry could not
compete with the factories that put products of the same or even better quality on the market at a
lower price. The result was that many small businesses went bankrupt and the former workers
went to work in the factories. The effects of industrialization were seen in the process of rapid
urbanization of formerly relatively small villages and towns where the new plants came. These
turned into dirty and unhealthy industrial cities. Still people from the country were forced to go
and work there. Because of this a new social class emerged: the workers, or the industrial
proletariat. They lived in overcrowded slums in poor housing with little sanitation. The average
life expectancy was low, and infant mortality high. The elite accepted the filth of the factories as
the inevitable price for their success. The chimneys were symbols of economic power, but also
of social inequality. You see this social inequality appear after each revolution. The gap between
the bottom and the top of society becomes very large. Eventually there are inevitable responses
that decrease this gap. It could be argued that the Industrial revolutions have created the
conditions for a society with little or no poverty.

The third revolution transformed an industrial society into a service society. Where
mechanization man relieved of physical labor, the computer relieved him of mental labor. This
revolution made lower positions in industry more and more obsolete and caused the emergence
of entirely new roles in the service sector."
(http://basisinkomen.nl/wp-content/uploads/The-present-crisis-a-pattern-paper.pdf)


=Characteristics=

Wim Grommen:

"In general transitions can be seen to go through the S curve and we can distinguish four phases:

 a pre-development phase of a dynamic balance in which the present status does not
visibly change

 a take-off phase in which the process of change starts because of changes in the system

 an acceleration phase in which visible structural changes take place through an
accumulation of socio-cultural, economical, ecological and institutional changes
influencing each other; in this phase we see collective learning processes, diffusion and
processes of embedding

 a stabilization phase in which the speed of sociological change slows down and a new
dynamic balance is achieved through learning."

(http://basisinkomen.nl/wp-content/uploads/The-present-crisis-a-pattern-paper.pdf)

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Change Theory]]