
'''* Article: Fractal Organisation Theory. By JANNA RAYE. journal of organisational transformation & social change, Vol. 11 No. 1, April, 2014, 50–68'''

URL = http://fractalorgs.com/fractalorgtheory.pdf

"Fractal organisation theory recognises an emergent human operating system that mimics nature in its capacity for creativity, adaptation,
vitality, and innovation."


=Description=

"Top-down hierarchies are typically characterised by command-and-control
systems of authority that often create harmful stress and internal competition
for advancement within organisations. The pervading perception is of ‘limited
room at the top’, where positions of authority become scarce resources.

Members withhold or hoard information by focusing competition energy
internally rather than externally, creating silos of information and causing
negative stress that is reflected in absenteeism and higher healthcare costs.
Voluntary turnover drains talent as creative individuals tire of the politics and
seek harmonious work environments. ‘Change management’ is an issue, as
members’ natural compulsion to provide feedback and insights is quashed by
management dictates. The triangular shapes of top-down hierarchies are nonrandom
and limited, according to Benoit Mandelbrot, which may explain why
many top-down organisations typically grow through acquisitions rather than
by expanding from within. The fractal geometry of living systems in nature is
both random and scalable, ensuring pattern integrity during evolutionary
adaptations. Fractal organisation theory recognises an emergent human
operating system that mimics nature in its capacity for creativity, adaptation,
vitality, and innovation. The qualities of a fractal organisation include shared
purpose and values that create pattern integrity; universal participation in ideas
and solutions for continuous improvement; decision making at functional
levels; leadership devoted to universal leadership; and competition energy
directed outwards instead of inwards. Relationship development enables the
effective flow of information between individuals and among teams. At all levels
of a fractal organisation, members share information iteratively and make
decisions collectively in response to constantly changing conditions.



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Network Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]