'''* Article: Jostein Hauge & Jason Hickel (05 Jun 2025): A progressive framework for green industrial policy, New Political Economy, [https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2025.2506655 doi]'''

URL = https://tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13563467.2025.2506655


=Abstract=

"In the age of ecological breakdown, there is a growing need for ‘green’ industrial policy. However, existing frameworks for green industrial policy fail to address unsustainable growth in energy and resource use in high-income economies. In this sense, they are not adequate to achieve core ecological objectives. This paper fills a gap in the literature by offering a progressive framework for green industrial policy that combines traditional green industrial policy perspectives with insights from ecological economics and literature on post-growth and degrowth. 

The framework has three key pillars: 

(1) scale down ecologically harmful industries and sectors to directly reduce energy and resource use; 

(2) organise production more around public benefit, with greater democratic control and guidance over investment and production; and 

(3) work towards global ecological justice and enable greater ‘ecological policy space’ for the global South to pursue industrial development. 

The paper argues that this progressive approach to green industrial policy is necessary due to the scale and urgency of the ecological crisis. The framework shows how productive capacity can be liberated and redirected towards more socially and environmentally beneficial ends, while also democratising control over the economy."


=Excerpts=

From the Conclusion, by Jostein Hauge and Jason Hickel:

"This paper has proposed a progressive framework for green industrial policy that addresses the
shortcomings of existing approaches in the face of urgent ecological challenges. By combining
insights from traditional green industrial policy perspectives with literature on ecological economics,
post growth and degrowth, we have outlined a three-pillar approach that aims to achieve core ecological objectives while enabling just economic transformations.

The first pillar calls for scaling down ecologically harmful industries and sectors to directly reduce
energy and resource use, using credit policy and other mechanisms. This approach recognises that
the continuous growth in energy and resource use is unsustainable and that certain industries need
to be strategically downsized. This not only reduces ecological harm but also liberates productive
capacity that can be redirected towards more environmentally and socially beneficial ends.
The second pillar advocates for reorganising the economy to produce for public rather than
private benefit, with greater public control and guidance over investment and production. This
involves scaling up public investment in ecologically necessary production, aligning policies with
democratically determined green transition goals, and increasing public provision of essential
goods and services. It also calls for greater financial coordination between various policy levers of
the state and a more active role for banks in credit guidance towards environmental objectives.
The third pillar emphasises the need for global ecological justice and greater ‘ecological policy
space’ for the global South to pursue industrial development. Recognising that high-income
countries are primarily responsible for ecological breakdown, this approach calls for differentiated
climate responsibilities. It argues for ensuring lower-income countries have more leverage in formulating their industrial policies while advocating for compensation or reparations from the global
North for climate-related damages and appropriation of ecological commons.

This progressive framework represents a departure from traditional green industrial policy
approaches. It acknowledges that the scale and urgency of the ecological crisis requires more
than just market-based solutions or incremental changes. Instead, it proposes a fundamental restructuring of economic priorities and approaches to industrial policy, with a focus on reducing overall
resource use in high-income economies while enabling sustainable development in the global
South.

The kind of progressive transformation we call for requires changes to the status quo, shifting
away from an economic system that relies primarily on growth-oriented solutions. Luckily, these
changes are in high demand. In the research community, a survey of nearly 800 climate policy
researchers around the world found that 73 per cent support positions that call for moving
towards a world that is not growth-focused (i.e. post-growth) (King et al. 2023). Among the
public, a consumer research study found that 70 per cent of people in 20 high-income and
middle-income countries support the statement that ‘overconsumption is putting our planet and
society at risk’ (Sustainable Brands 2014). Even in the United States, where support for consumerism
and growth is supposedly strong, 70 per cent of people believe that ‘environmental protection is
more important than economic growth’ (Yale Climate Opinion Maps 2018). On the climate justice
front, strong majorities in the global North support compensation to the global South for climaterelated damages (Fabre et al. 2023).

Clearly, the systemic change we call for is not out of step with the public or with scientists. Of
course, even strong public support for a policy framework does not mean it will be implemented.
Indeed, it is reasonable to expect very strong resistance from elite factions who benefit so prodigiously from the existing arrangement. The path forward will require not only protest and demonstration – the dominant mode of popular political engagement over the past decades – but the
establishment of mass-based political parties that can represent the interests of the working-classes,
achieve power, and implement industrial policy measures that can resolve the social and ecological
crises of the twenty-first century. Meaningful, systemic socio-economic change has often been
unpopular with policy elites, including the British suffragette movement, the civil rights movement
in the United States, and the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa (Malm 2020). Nelson Mandela,
recognising that the anti-apartheid movement was calling for change that was deemed unrealistic
by policy elites at the time, pointed out that ‘It always seems impossible until it’s done’.
Although the framework we outline above calls for systematic transformation, the policy pathways are not simply thought experiments. They build on real-existing implementation, both at
present and historically, including carbon taxes, credit guidance, anti-trust legislation, consumer protection laws, and public ownership structures. But we do indeed question the status quo of the capitalist economic system more fundamentally than existing frameworks for green industrial policy.
It is time for green industrial policy frameworks to consider the views of climate scientists and the
public more seriously. While we should continue to take lessons from existing frameworks for green
industrial policy, we must advance this field in a more progressive direction. Our aim with this paper
is to move the needle in that direction."


=Discussion=

==The green journey of industrial policy==

J. HAUGE AND J. HICKEL:

"Governments are also now recognising that industrial policy may be useful or necessary to achieve
certain ecological objectives, and that industrial production itself must be attentive to ecological
impacts. Thus, the emergence of ‘green industrial policy’. This approach started gaining traction in the
2010s, kickstarted by calls for green growth – very simply, the idea that economic growth can and
should be more ecologically sustainable (Jacobs 2013, Pollin 2015, Hickel and Kallis 2020). Hauge
(2023) highlights that three economic and political observations specific to the contemporary world
economy underpin the rationale for green industrial policy: (i) change to the status quo of the global
economic system is needed, involving a stronger focus on ecological sustainability; (ii) the manufacturing
sector must play a role in the green transition, both through offering new, green technological solutions
and through making existing energy systems and production methods greener; (iii) state action, involvement, incentives, and investment are crucial to achieve a green transition, especially because private
markets – which organise production around what is most profitable rather than what is most necessary
– do not have a good track record of dealing with problems related to ecological breakdown.

In the age of ecological breakdown, the world economy needs more and stronger green industrial
policy. However, there are questions about whether industrial policy, as currently formulated, can be
truly green. A growing body of literature in industrial ecology and ecological economics, developed
under the umbrella of post-growth and degrowth, argues that continued aggregate growth in highincome countries is likely to be incompatible with ecological sustainability (Weiss and Cattaneo 2017,
Haberl et al. 2020, Vogel and Hickel 2023). According to this literature, high-income countries should
pursue planned reduction in energy and resource use in order to enable rapid decarbonisation and
alleviate other ecosystem pressures (Hickel 2021). Some of this can be achieved through efficiency
improvements, but it also requires scaling down less-necessary forms of production to reduce
energy and resource use directly, and so that productive capacities can be redirected toward
more socially necessary objectives.

To the extent that one of the objectives of industrial policy is to increase aggregate production,
this is at odds with the critique of growth that has been developed within industrial ecology and
ecological economics. Indeed, there are clear contradictions between this aim of industrial policy,
as traditionally formulated, and ecological sustainability. This paper discusses these contradictions
and offers a new, progressive framework for green industrial policy. This framework fills a gap in
the existing literature by building on insights from literatures on both green industrial policy and
degrowth. The paper first explores the journey of industrial policy toward ecological considerations,
outlining the rationales and pillars of both industrial policy and green industrial policy. Then, the
paper explores the contradictions of green industrial policy from a degrowth perspective. Building
upon these critical analyses, the paper offers a progressive framework for green industrial policy,
rooted in three policy areas: reduce damaging and unnecessary forms of production, organise production more around public benefit, and pursue global ecological justice.


Industrial policy can generally be defined as state intervention to move the economy towards a
desired structure in the medium/long term. At a more granular level, industrial policy refers to strategic government intervention at the firm or industry level to develop the economy, often with the
aim growing innovative, productive, and high-value activities (Chang 1994, Pack and Saggi 2006,
Rodrik 2008, Hauge 2023, Juhász et al. 2023). Industrial policy can be designed in a range of
different ways, so, in practice, the toolbox of industrial policy is extensive. Trade policy is an
obvious example, such as import tariffs and export subsidies to protect and assist domestic producers. But industrial policy can also involve less obvious instruments, such as price regulation,
exchange rate policy, labour training policy, long-term financing by development banks, the establishment of state-owned enterprises, and infrastructure investment, to name a few.

The appropriate degree of state intervention has always been central to discussions on industrial
policy. This makes the role of industrial policy a contentious issue, as it relates to state-versus-market
debates. Irrespective of one’s opinions on this, industrial policy has been used by governments for
hundreds of years and has been an invaluable tool for economic growth and development strategies. Alexander Hamilton, one of the founders of the United States, was a fierce a supporter of
industrial policy, and laid the basis for a century of steep tariff barriers on imports of manufactured
goods into the United States, which helped enable US industrialisation (Chang 2002). In the second
half of the twentieth century, industrial policy was at the centre of the rapid economic development
of the so-called ‘Asian Tigers’ (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan) (Wade 1990, Amsden
1992, Chang 1994, Woo-Cumings 1999).

Even governments that have been ideologically opposed to state intervention have used industrial policy. Ronald Reagan protected the US steel and automotive industries from import competition, and Margaret Thatcher designed financial incentives to increase investment rates in the UK
automotive industry (Juhász et al. 2023). That said, the period of neoliberalism spearheaded by
Thatcher and Reagan in the 1980s saw a decline in the use of industrial policy globally, and particularly in the global South. This was largely because industrial policy was effectively outlawed by international organisations – such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Trade
Organization (WTO) and the World Bank – through the enforcement of free trade agreements and
structural adjustment programmes (Wade 2003, Chang 2007, Gallagher and Kozul Wright 2022).
Since the 2010s, however, industrial policy has come back with force (Stiglitz et al. 2013, Cherif
and Hasanov 2019, Aiginger and Rodrik 2020, Juhász et al. 2023). This is due to a number of
reasons (for a detailed discussion, see Evenett et al. (2024)). First, in the wake of the global
financial crisis in 2007/08, governments have become more wary of leaving key national objectives
to the market, and have generally increased levels of regulation and intervention. Second, we have
witnessed increasing geopolitical competition, especially between the United States and China, the
two largest economies in the world. Both countries are more actively ramping up investment in manufacturing and innovation as part of broader strategies to strengthen their international competitiveness and international economic power. Third, the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine rattled global supply chains, reminding countries of the dangers of being too dependent
on imports of critical goods and intermediate inputs. The response by governments around the
world was to use industrial policy to strengthen domestic production.

The return of industrial policy is also due to growing environmental concerns. Governments are
recognising that the world economy needs to become cleaner and greener, involving change to the
status quo. So far the private sector has not made the necessary investments in renewable energy,
public transit, building insulation, etc, because these are not considered sufficiently profitable (Christophers 2024). In light of this, governments are recognising that state intervention is necessary to
achieve a green transition. Of course, the motivation to develop green industries is not coming
purely from the perspective of respecting planetary boundaries, but also from a desire and need
to be internationally competitive in technological clusters that are shaping our future (Lebdioui
2024). Countries are racing to become global leaders in industries associated with renewable
energy, such as batteries, electric vehicles, photovoltaics, and wind turbines, to name a few.
China, for example, has become the world’s leading manufacturer of electric vehicles and photovoltaics through years of strategic industrial policy (IEA 2024).

Unsurprisingly, the idea of ‘green industrial policy’ has become more central to discussions on
ecological sustainability and national economic development/planning policy (Hallegatte et al.
2013, Rodrik 2014, Schmitz et al. 2015, Altenburg and Assman 2017). The idea of green industrial
policy has grown alongside and builds upon the idea of ‘green growth’. Green growth as an
agenda was pushed by various international organisations in the 2010s, and has by now become
mainstream. The idea is to achieve growing GDP alongside a reduction of ecological impacts to sustainable levels, e.g. by absolutely decoupling GDP from greenhouse gas emissions and resource use
(Jacobs 2013, Pollin 2015, Dale et al. 2016, Hickel and Kallis 2020, Green 2023).
In terms of how green industrial policy has been defined and discussed in existing literature, it can
be understood as state intervention that supports the green growth agenda. One lens through
which one can understand green industrial policy is through the idea of Green New Deals (although
a few of these – such as the Green New Deal for Europe – are critical of the idea of green growth).
These are sweeping public policy packages with the intention of tackling climate change and global
warming, while at the same time creating jobs and reducing economic inequality (e.g. Pettifor 2019,
Rifkin 2019, Chomsky and Pollin 2020, Ajl 2021). Green New Deals have a strong association with progressive politics, especially in the United States, building upon Franklin D. Roosevelt’s famous New
Deal in the 1930s. In both Europe and the United States, the concept of Green New Deals started
gaining momentum in the 2010s. It reached mainstream political discussion in 2019, when the
Democrats Alexandria Ocazio-Cortez and Ed Markey attempted to get legislation passed for a
Green New Deal in the United States Senate.

In line with both green growth and Green New Deals, green industrial policy focuses heavily on
reducing greenhouse gas emissions through investment in new energy systems, energy infrastructure, and energy efficiency. The literature on green industrial policy is rich with extensive country
case studies on public investment strategies in renewable energy, but also provides insight into
the details of green government intervention, including carbon taxes, feed-in tariffs, research and
development (R&D) support, subsidised credit, and public procurement (e.g. Hallegatte et al.
2013, Altenburg and Assman 2017, Pollin 2020).

There is clearly a need for more green industrial policy. However, one may question the ability of
industrial policy to be truly green, at least in terms of how it has been considered so far. At their core,
existing frameworks of green industrial policy support the idea of increased aggregate economic
growth. But mounting evidence suggests that, in high-income countries, degrowth approaches
may be necessary for ecological sustainability."

(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13563467.2025.2506655)


==The contradictions of green industrial policy from a [[Degrowth]] perspective==

J. HAUGE AND J. HICKEL:

"The idea of ecological limits to economic growth began receiving serious attention by economists as
early as the 1970s (e.g. Georgescu-Roegen 1971, Meadows et al. 1972, Daly 1973). Over the past
decade, research in industrial ecology and ecological economics has demonstrated that the
global ecological crisis is being driven overwhelmingly by excess production and consumption in
high-income countries. In high-income countries, material resource use exceeds sustainable guardrails by on average a factor of four (Hickel et al. 2022), and they are responsible for around 90 per cent
of global carbon emissions in excess of the safe planetary boundary (Hickel, 2020b; Fanning and
Hickel 2023). By contrast, low-income countries have low levels of resource and energy use, well
within sustainable levels, and in fact need to increase resource and energy use in order to
achieve human development objectives.

Advocates of green growth claim that by harnessing technological change and efficiency
improvements, high-income countries can continue increasing total output while reducing resource
use to sustainable levels and get emissions to zero by 2050. But researchers in industrial ecology and
ecological economics have raised major empirical questions about the feasibility of achieving these
objectives.

Let us first look at resource use. Several major reviews have found that despite strong efficiency
improvements, high-income countries are not achieving sustained absolute decoupling of GDP from
resource use – let alone the rates of decoupling necessary to achieve sustainable levels – and extant
models indicate it is unlikely to occur in a growth-oriented scenario even under optimistic assumptions (Haberl et al. 2020, Hickel and Kallis 2020, Vadén et al. 2020, Vadén et al. 2021). This is because,
in a growth-oriented economy, gains (savings) from efficiency are leveraged to expand total production, making absolute reductions in resource use very difficult to achieve.

Emissions are a somewhat different story but have parallels to the developments in resource use.
Many high-income countries have achieved absolute decoupling of GDP from emissions, even in
consumption-based terms (although the total number of countries achieving absolute decoupling
remains relatively low; Hubacek et al. 2021). However, no high-income countries are on track to
meet their Paris climate obligations. At existing rates of mitigation, they will take on average more
than 200 years to decarbonise and will burn their fair-share of the remaining carbon budget 27 times
over (Vogel and Hickel 2023). Much faster mitigation is needed. For high-income countries, this is
challenging because they have high levels of energy use, meaning a massive effort is required to
build out enough renewable energy infrastructure. Climate scientists and industrial ecologists indicate that the only way for high-income countries to achieve sufficiently rapid decarbonisation is to
reduce total energy use. Some of this can be achieved with efficiency improvements, but again –
given economy-wide rebound effects (Berner et al. 2022) – this is not enough by itself.

To resolve these problems, recent research indicates that high-income countries need to abandon
aggregate growth as an objective (Kallis et al. 2025), and take a more industry-specific approach to
economic development. This implies focusing on increasing and improving socially and ecologically
necessary activities, while scaling down or ‘degrowing’ harmful and less-necessary forms of production to reduce energy use and resource use directly (Hickel et al. 2021). This may include reducing
production of, for example, SUVs, cruise ships, fast fashion, industrial meat, mansions, private jets,
commercial aviation, advertising, weapons, etc. In the climate policy literature and IPCC reports,
this is referred to as ‘demand-side’ or ‘sufficiency’-oriented mitigation (Creuzig et al. 2022, IPCC
2022). Any unemployment that may be created by industry-specific reductions is intended to be
mitigated by implementing a public job guarantee, which provides a mechanism for reallocating
labour away from damaging and unnecessary sectors toward other forms of production (for
example, to produce renewable energy, public transit, public housing, etc.) (Olk et al. 2023). With
this approach, high-income countries can accelerate progress on decarbonisation and other ecological objectives while improving social outcomes at the same time.

It is important to underscore that the need to reduce aggregate production applies only to highincome countries – not to developing countries (although developing countries too can benefit from
the general approach of reducing harmful and unnecessary output in order to increase socially beneficial and economically strategic production). Furthermore, it is important to note that degrowth
scholarship embraces technological innovation (Hickel 2023). All published post-growth and
degrowth scenarios start with rapid technological change and efficiency improvements, accelerated
through public investment, and then add sufficiency and equity measures (Victor and Rosenbluth
2009, D’Allesandro et al. 2020). For example, scenarios for transport-sector decarbonisation
require EVs (technology, efficiency) but also a rapid and large-scale reduction in car use and a
shift toward public transit (sufficiency and equity) (Winkler et al. 2023). A recent study in Nature
Energy finds that this approach – efficiency plus sufficiency – can enable the United Kingdom to
reduce energy use by more than 50 per cent, without compromising citizens’ quality of life, and
thus bring Paris-compliant mitigation within reach (Barret et al. 2022).

This scholarship clearly contrasts with traditional industrial policy, even in its ‘green’ formulation.
Degrowth questions the pursuit of aggregate growth and wants instead to distinguish between
socially beneficial and damaging or unnecessary production. Furthermore, in contrast to most of
the literature on green industrial policy, degrowth offers an assessment of the ecological crisis
that extends beyond just emissions, to include resource use and other ecological pressures
(Hickel 2020a, Fanning et al. 2022, Parrique 2024). With this approach, additional contradictions of
the traditional green industrial policy literature emerge. For example, if high-income countries maintain high and growing production, the decarbonisation strategy will have to require high and
growing levels of material extraction in order to build out the necessary renewable energy infrastructure and devices, thus exacerbating ecological pressures associated with resource use. Gregoir and
van Acker (2022) find that Europe will have to ramp up its demand for metals – in particular cobalt
and lithium – by an extraordinary amount in order to meet its clean energy goals by 2050. With
lithium, it is estimated that the world would need a 2,700 per cent increase in extraction compared
to 2020 levels (Hickel 2020a). This would have to involve more deep seabed mining, which would
have a devastating impact on deep sea ecosystems and biodiversity (WWF 2021). These problems
can be mitigated by reducing aggregate energy use.

Traditional frameworks of green industrial policy include elements that are clearly important and
needed to meet the challenge of ecological breakdown. But it is clearly also necessary to develop a
more progressive framework for green industrial policy – one that considers not only emissions but
also material resource use, and which offers a robust alternative to the conventional approach of
ever-increasing production and consumption. The remainder of this paper outlines such a
framework."

(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13563467.2025.2506655)


==Towards [[Ecology-Friendly Credit Guidance Frameworks]]==

J. HAUGE AND J. HICKEL:

"Control over finance and money translates into control over our collective labour and resources. In
today’s economic system, capital – by which we mean the major financial firms, the commercial
banks, the largest corporations, and the wealthiest 1 per cent – has overwhelming control over
financial assets and therefore determines production. For capital, the purpose of production is
not to achieve social and ecological progress, it is to maximise and accumulate profit. This is why
many societies chronically overproduce many damaging and unnecessary things, like fossil fuels and
superyachts (which are highly profitable to capital), and at the same time chronically underproduce
socially useful things, like renewable energy, public transport, affordable housing, and universal
healthcare services (which are less profitable or not profitable at all). In this sense, it is not surprising that the private sector has a poor track record of investing in environmentally beneficial activities (Christophers 2022, 2024).

Credit guidance frameworks can help overcome this problem. In the previous section we
described how credit policy can reduce lending to and investment in damaging sectors that must
be scaled down. A similar approach can also be used to actively steer private finance toward
more socially and ecologically beneficial activities, thus ensuring sufficient investment in necessary
but less-profitable production in line with democratically ratified objectives. Credit guidance was
used extensively in the post-war period (Monnet 2018). It helped many European states build up
industrial capacity and accelerate innovation in key sectors. In the contemporary world economy,
China represents a strong example of credit guidance in action (Sperber 2024). In China, major
financial institutions and banks are controlled by the state, which allows the government to strategically allocate capital in line with long-term objectives. Green industrial policy has been a core
aspect of state-led credit guidance in China and has achieved remarkable success: China is now
the global leader in the manufacturing of many renewable energy devices, such as photovoltaics,
EVs, lithium-ion batteries, and wind turbines. Credit guidance also holds other potential economic
benefits, such as offsetting inflationary pressures and potentially preventing debt bubbles.
Public finance mechanisms can also be leveraged to increase investment in socially and ecologically necessary production, and are particularly important in cases where the necessary production is
not profitable at all. Any government that has sufficient monetary sovereignty can issue the national
currency to invest directly in implementing a public job guarantee, improving public services, insulating buildings, innovating more efficient technologies, and establishing a national renewable
energy system, without being limited by the question of profitability (Kelton 2020). Increasing
public finance in this manner may risk driving inflation if the new production stretches the productive capacity of the economy. But this risk can be avoided by implementing measures to
reduce other, less-necessary forms of production (and by using taxation to reduce the purchasing
power of the rich), which reduces excess demand and prevents inflationary pressures (Olk et al.
2023). The degrowth-oriented measures described above therefore liberate real resources that
can be redirected toward increasing production for the public good.

We have mentioned the public job guarantee and universal public services above. The idea of a
job guarantee is to prevent unemployment that may arise from reducing output in certain sectors,
and enables labour to train and participate in socially meaningful production and the ambitious
public works that are necessary for the transition (Kaboub 2008, Sylla 2023). The job guarantee programme can also be used to establish living wages and good labour conditions, therefore compelling private firms to meet similar standards or risk losing staff. This is a crucial stabilising mechanism
in striving towards universal employment, good livelihoods, and sufficient production of necessary
goods and services regardless of fluctuations in aggregate output. The idea of universal public services – by which we mean not only education and healthcare but also affordable housing, childcare,
and sufficient quantities of water and clean energy for household consumption – is to ensure that
necessary goods and services are always being produced and available to all, again irrespective of
changes in aggregate output.

Currently, many states take a passive approach to green industrial policy, limiting their intervention to fixing ‘market failures’, for example through carbon taxes, emission trading schemes, and subsidies for renewables, as outlined above (Gabor and Braun 2025). Although these can be useful,
governments must take a more active approach to investment if we are to achieve rapid reductions
in emissions and bring resource use to sustainable levels. In this kind of system, the direction of
investment is determined by the state, the public, and the people, rather than by capital. In practice,
this means more public provision of essential goods and services, public finance and credit policy in
line with democratically ratified objectives, and greater democratisation of private sector production
in the form of worker/community ownership of firms.

We also need greater financial coordination between various policy levers of the state, be it monetary policy, fiscal policy, credit plicy, or financial repression policy (Gabor and Braun 2025). For
many state bodies, this would transform business-as-usual, but nothing less is necessary given the
scale and urgency of the challenges we face. Central banks in particular need to change the way
they operate, from simply focusing on ‘market-fixing’ and short-term price stability, towards
taking a more active role in credit guidance (Kedward et al. 2024).
Reorganising the economy to produce for public benefit would also enable our societies to shift
toward more community-centred living, in turn helping us to more rapidly decarbonise and reduce
material footprints (Hickel 2020a; Kallis et al. 2020, Schmelzer et al. 2022). Many cities and countries
have started implementing policies for that purpose. For example, many European cities have
started incentivizing more use of public transport and less use of private vehicles. Oslo has made
large parts of its city centre inaccessible for cars, London has introduced ultra-low emission zones,
and Milan has vastly expanded its bicycle network. Research has demonstrated that sufficiently
rapid decarbonisation does not only require more electric vehicles, but also requires a large-scale
reduction in car use (Winkler et al. 2023).

More broadly, public provisioning is crucial in the age of ecological breakdown. In the 1950s and
1960s, assets such as land and housing were in fact often in the hands of the public, but since the
wave of neoliberalism starting in the 1970s, land and housing were sold off in abundance to the
private sector (Harvey 2007). These should be restored to public ownership, so they can be provisioned to people under more accessible conditions. The housing market has become especially problematic. Housing has become so financialised that most people now see houses as investment
assets to generate returns rather than places for people to live in. The deregulation of the
housing market has paved the way for rent hikes, growing deficits of social housing, and a
growing number of dilapidated houses being put up for rent. In England, there has been a net
loss of 20,000–35,000 social homes nearly every year since 1981. In 2023, there were 1.4 million
fewer households in social housing compared to 1980 (Shelter 2024).

(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13563467.2025.2506655)


=More information=

* [[Global Ecological Justice]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Articles]]