

=Text=

Frances Hutchinson:

"The 54 page Report (accessed via http://www.bollier.org/blog/democratic-money-and-capital-commons )
provides a timely introduction to strategies capable of transforming neoliberal finance for benefit
of the common good. This very timely document depicts the hold of the “dominant systems of
finance, banking and money” over the resources of the commoners and the natural world. One
cannot but agree with the view that our “money and banking system is now based on rent extraction
that uses privatisation, the division of labour, and the enclosure of commons resources to create a
surplus” which goes into private pockets. Hence “the only hope for commoners committed to
promoting the common good lies in dismantling the existing rentier system and reintegrating the
realms of nature and social value into a reconceptualized whole in which capital serves the
collective aims of society”. This involves “using finance to enable people to engage in commoning
… [which] ... requires a wholly different set of institutions, legal regimes and social practices for
managing (and mutualizing) money, credit and risk.” A very demanding schedule, and one based on
the necessity to generate “immense popular pressure” for political change. 

The Report makes reference to Iceland, where informed political opinion gave rise to dramatic
change in finance and banking, change which followed study of popular movements of the past. I
draw attention to two further examples of the awakening of the popular will in defence of the
commons. The first is highlighted by Bill Krehm (COMER) writing on the theme of The Political
Economy of Social Credit and Guild Socialism on http://www.gaianeconomics.org/social_credit.htm. 

Krehm goes to the heart of the matter. The Douglas-Orage/William Morris socialists observe that
“production does not create money: 

“Douglas-Orage review the nature of money from the ground up with a thoroughness that has few if any
equals. “Douglas stressed that production does not create money. It is possible to imagine a producer in a
system of single-stage production [i.e., without the purchase of intermediate goods and hence not incurring
costs that have need of money]. Having access to land (which has not been bought) and a discarded spade,
and having saved seed potato and horse manure (discarded A), it is possible for a producer to plant, tend
and harvest a potato crop at no financial cost. The crop can be put in a discarded sack and sold to a
neighbour for £5. Has the producer created £5? Or any money at all? That is the sort of maddeningly basic
question Douglas was given to asking.

“Nevertheless, at the point of exchange no value is created. However sophisticated the system, production of
all commodities follows the same pattern as the potato example. All production requires inputs from the
natural world which the economy cannot create. All production requires human inputs. First, an inherited
body of knowledge, as in the ability to save seed, cope with pests and drought and so on. Second, a
‘producer’ who may be employed or self-employed, but who comes to the task physically developed from
infancy to maturity and still requires social care. Neither form of ‘human input’ is produced through
exchange on the market. Wealth creation can take place outside the exchange economy.”


Hence it follows that the case is made for: 

“the concept of a social dividend representing the contribution of society over generations in creating the
institutions, the inventions, the scientific and technical discoveries that made the productive potential of our
world possible. It would include, too, the unrewarded labour of slaves, the contribution of martyrs and
prophets that made possible the social and legal framework for modern society and its productivity. That
could be allotted to all citizens and it would fill the gap and free society from servitude to financial capital.
Instead of patenting scientific discoveries, even genes, for speculative investors to collect a rent on them, the
social dividend would contribute to gear down the drive to maximization of the financial sector. It would
encourage alternative life styles that would cultivate other goals than the consumption of highly promoted
items of little or negative usefulness.” 

Krehm brings the role of the commoner or informed citizen into focus by linking the 'social
dividend', aka a basic or citizen's income with the potential to encourage alternative life styles that
would cultivate other goals than the consumption of highly promoted items of little or
negative usefulness,” 

A less well-known (on a world scale) popular initiative of the late 20th century is the
publication in Denmark of Revolt from the Centre (1978) by three Danes of national repute, a
physicist, a philosopher and an engineer. They critiqued mainstream political thought and
introduced new thinking on ecological balance, with decentralization of government via
small scale production, good work and profit sharing. In the process of writing this
remarkably coherent and readable document they came up with the idea of a 'citizen's
wage'. 


Under the heading “Overall Picture of the Humane, Ecologically Sustainable
Society” they predicted: 

“People living some way into the 21st century have evolved a number of different family patterns and
different forms of production. Individuals have extensive personal freedom to organize their own lives,
provided that the basic rules of society are observed. Practical means of safeguarding this personal freedom
include the payment of a citizen's wage to every member of the population. The citizen's wage covers basic
living costs, so that no one is compelled to take paid work. Anyone wanting a higher material standard of living is ensured the right to a certain amount of paid work.” (Emphasis added) 


A revolutionary thought. According to Niels Meyer, sole surviving author of this very
accessible prediction of politics, economics and culture in the 21st century, the notion of a
'citizen's wage' was dreamed up out of the blue. If the Deep Dive initiative is to generate
popular pressure for monetary reform it will need to be combined with a political
philosophy of work and citizenship capable of bringing an end to waged/salaried slavery
in all its forms. The obstacles to monetary reform are political, not financial. 

The call for a rethink of the whole notion of economic-growth-as-we-know-it comes today
is emerging in the form of works like Simon Reid-Henry's The Political Origins of Inequality:
Why a More Equal World is Better for Us All (2016). The time has come to reject both
cornucopian capitalism and cornucopian socialism. Revolt from the politically aware
centre is long overdue."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]