
=Principles=

From Will Ruddick, applying it to [[Commitment Pooling]]:

“Principles of Franciscan Economics

'''* Sacredness of Creation'''

In Franciscan thought, nature is not a resource but a relative (Brother Sun, Sister Water). Commitment Pooling honors this by allowing communities to issue, pool and redeem commitments (for past and future actions) tied to ecological care, such as reforestation, soil regeneration, or water protection. These commitments recognize nature as a co-participant in the economy, not something to be exploited.


'''* Poverty as Spiritual Freedom'''

Franciscan Economics views voluntary poverty as liberation from materialism. Commitment Pooling fulfills this by enabling people to exchange value without dependence on money, using promises and mutual obligations instead. It reduces dependence on unstable, extractive and morally bankrupt national currencies and helps communities organize around sufficiency, not accumulation.


'''* Fraternal Love and Mutual Care'''

Saint Francis taught that all people are brothers and sisters, and economic relationships should reflect love and solidarity. Commitment Pooling activates this through trust-based systems where value flows from mutual recognition. People contribute what they can (time, labor, care) and are acknowledged not for how much they have, but how they show up for others.


'''* Trust as a Divine Posture'''

In the Franciscan worldview, credit (from creditere, to trust) is sacred. Commitment Pooling enacts this by issuing credit (access to commons) through social agreements. The community decides who to trust and how much, re-centering trust as the basis of economic life.


'''* Stewardship Over Ownership'''

Franciscan thought emphasizes that we are not owners, but caretakers (stewards). Commitment Pooling supports this through shared governance structures. Land, tools, water systems, and labor commitments are coordinated through communal pools, ensuring that stewardship (rather than control) guides use.


'''* The Common Good Over Individual Gain'''

Franciscan Economics insists that economic systems should serve all, especially the poor. Commitment Pooling is built to circulate value within a community. It’s non-extractive, meaning no one profits from someone else's need. Value returns to the commons and is reused to meet ongoing collective needs.


'''* Ethical Use of Resources'''

Franciscan principles prohibit waste and hoarding. Similarly, pools have transparent rules for redemption and use, preventing abuse or excessive withdrawal. These ethical guidelines help communities manage what they have with intention and balance.


'''* Solidarity with the Poor and Marginalized'''

Franciscan morality includes a “preferential option for the poor.” In practice, Commitment Pooling allows people who lack money to participate fully by contributing labor, skills, or care. The system recognizes these contributions as valuable and redeemable, reshaping the definition of wealth to be inclusive.


'''* Work as Sacred Service'''

For Saint Francis, labor is not just a means of survival - it is a form of prayer, service, and meaning. In this spirit, Commitment Pooling honors work as mutual service, where every contribution (whether planting trees, caring for children, sharing knowledge, or restoring a waterway) is recognized as meaningful and valuable. By issuing and fulfilling commitments, community members weave a fabric of reciprocity, where labor is not bought or sold but offered and received as a sacred exchange.


'''* Peace Through Right Relationship'''

Franciscan Economics teaches that peace comes through restored relationships—among people and with the Earth. Commitment Pools are designed to rebalance value through feedback loops and dialogue. When a promise is broken or a pool becomes imbalanced, communities can adjust, restoring trust (not through punishment) but through dialogue, forgiveness, and re-commitment.”

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/meeting-franciscan-economics)


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]