
=Bio=

Francesca Musiani is a researcher at the Institute for Communication Sciences, French National Centre for Scientific Research (ISCC-CNRS) and an associate researcher at the Centre for the Sociology of Innovation of MINES ParisTech-PSL. 

She is currently a member of the Commission « Rights and Liberties in the Digital Age » established by the French National Assembly in June 2014, outreach officer for the Global Internet Governance Academic Network (GigaNet), and co-chair of the Emerging Scholars Network of the International Association for Media and Communication Research (ESN-IAMCR). She is a member of the editorial board for the (online, « green open access ») journals Tecnoscienza, RESET and Journal of Peer Production, and an author for the Internet Policy Review, online journal of the Berlin-based Humboldt Institut für Internet und Gesellschaft. Francesca was the 2012-13 Yahoo! Fellow in Residence at Georgetown University and an affiliate of the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University.

Francesca’s research work focuses on Internet governance, in an interdisciplinary perspective blending, first and foremost, information and communication sciences with Science and Technology Studies (STS). Since 2008, this research has explored the distributed and decentralized approach to the technical architecture of Internet-based services, so as to understand the co-shaping of these architectures and of several different dynamics: the articulation between actors and contents, the allocation of responsibilities, the capacity to exert control, the organization of markets. This work has spanned a doctoral thesis (2008-12, MINES ParisTech, Prix Informatique et Libertés 2013 awarded by the French Privacy and Data Protection Commission), a research project funded by the French National Agency for Research, ANR (ADAM-Architectures distribuées et applications multimédias, 2010-14) and the Yahoo! Fellowship (2012-13). 

Francesca’s work has also explored, or is currently investigating, peer production and the sharing economy (European FP7 project P2Pvalue, 2013-), digital heritage (ANR project WEB90, 2014-), authorship and writing practices in the digital age, the processes of « industrialization » of Internet users’ contributions, net neutrality, ICT-related socio-technical controversies and online dispute resolution systems.

Francesca is part of the teaching team for the Description of controversies course at MINES ParisTech and has taught ICT and society-related courses at the Université catholique d’Angers and Georgetown University.

Francesca’s personal website is here and her email address is francesca (dot) musiani (at) cnrs (dot) fr.


=In French=

"Francesca Musiani est chargée de recherche à l’Institut des sciences de la communication du CNRS (ISCC) et chercheuse associée au Centre de sociologie de l’innovation de MINES ParisTech-PSL. 

Elle est actuellement membre de la Commission « droit et libertés à l’âge du numérique » établie par l’Assemblée nationale en juin 2014, responsable des relations extérieures pour le Global Internet Governance Academic Network (GigaNet) et responsable du réseau jeunes chercheurs de l’Association internationale des études et recherches sur l’information et la communication (ESN-AIERI/IAMCR). Membre du comité de rédaction pour les revues (en ligne, « green open access ») Tecnoscienza, RESET et Journal of Peer Production, Francesca est auteure pour l’Internet Policy Review, revue en ligne de l’Humboldt Institut für Internet und Gesellschaft de Berlin. Francesca a été le Yahoo! Fellow in Residence à l’université de Georgetown et chercheuse associée au Berkman Center for Internet and Society de l’université de Harvard en 2012-13.

Les travaux de recherche de Francesca portent sur la gouvernance de l’Internet, dans une perspective interdisciplinaire qui puise notamment dans les sciences de l’information et de la communication et les Science and technology studies (STS). Depuis 2008, ces recherches explorent l’approche distribuée et décentralisée de l’architecture technique des services Internet, dans le but de comprendre ce que ces architectures dessinent du point de vue de l’articulation des acteurs et des contenus, de la répartition de responsabilités, de l’organisation du marché et de la capacité à exercer du contrôle. Ces travaux ont jusqu’ici fait l’objet d’une thèse de doctorat (2008-12, MINES ParisTech, Prix Informatique et Libertés 2013 de la CNIL), d’un projet de recherche ANR (ADAM-Architectures distribuées et applications multimédias, 2010-14) et de la bourse Yahoo! (2012-13). 

Les travaux de Francesca ont porté ou portent également sur la production entre pairs et l’économie du partage (projet européen P2Pvalue, 2013-en cours), le patrimoine numérique (projet ANR WEB90, 2014-en cours), les pratiques d’écriture et le statut d’auteur à l’ère du numérique, l’ « industrialisation » des contributions des internautes, la neutralité du net, les controverses socio-techniques dans le domaine des TIC et les dispositifs de résolution des conflits en ligne. 

Francesca participe à l’enseignement de Description de controverses à MINES ParisTech et a enseigné la sociologie du numérique à l’Université catholique d’Angers et l’université de Georgetown.

Les pages personnelles de Francesca se trouvent ici et son contact est francesca (dot) musiani (at) cnrs (dot) fr."



=More Information=

* Listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers]]

* Contact via

#Email: francesca.musiani(at)mines-paristech.fr
#Site: www.csi.mines-paristech.fr/Perso/Musiani


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Rights]]