

=Bio=

"Social worker and coordinator of cultural and popular education initiatives dedicated to sciences and technology issues since 80s. I am working with [http://gazibo.fr Gazibo], a cooperative company created in 2008.  [http://gazibo.fr Gazibo] that provides services of project management (logistic, fundraising, coordination, publication, ...etc)  based on the uses of digital tools for cooperation.

Since 2011, I am the coordinator of [http://remixthecommons.org Remix the commons], a collaborative and evolutive multimedia project. It aims to document and illustrate the key ideas and practices of commonning by remixing multimedia materiels.

As activist, I am member of [http://vecam.org VECAM], a French non for profit organisation, dealing with the impact of ICT (information and communication technologies) on society. I have been working for [http://vecam.org VECAM] from 2000 until 2006. I have been involved in some international initiatives and projects for the appropriation of information and communication technology, such as "Fragments du monde", "I-jumelages". Since then I am still involved in the activities of the association as a volunteer and sometime providing services by the way of my company [http://gazibo.fr Gazibo]. I am also member of [http://aitec.reseau-ipam.org/ AITEC] a French non for profit organisation dealing with citizenship expertise and strongly involved in Social Forum and Sciences and Democracy Forum. In 2009, I was involved in the process of writing the [http://bienscommuns.org Manifesto "reclaim the commons"] and the coordinator for the first World Forum Science and Democracy, and now member of the International Initiative Comittee of the World Forum Science and Democracy."


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Science]]