= Meta =
== Internal announcement ==
Dear P2P Research List Members,

I want to invite you to check the first version of http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project

Please
* like us http://www.facebook.com/apps/application.php?id=325994169879
* follow us http://feeds.feedburner.com/FreeTaxProject 
* join us https://www.pivotaltracker.com/signup/new?join_project_id=73008
* edit the wiki http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project

If you are native English speaker and want to help the project, please correct the text.

I want to
* speak about the Project with you all, on this list,
* embed your suggestions on the list into the wiki (if you won't do it yourselves:),
* later on, invite other organizations to the discussion, and
* officially initiate the Project by the parallel announcement on the blogs of the initiating organizations.

My main questions to you are:

1. Do you like the Vision of the Project, i.e., its
* Values http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Core_Ideology:_Values 
* Purpose http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Core_Ideology:_Purpose
* Big Goal http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Envisioned_Future:_Big_Hairy_Audacious_Goal 

2. Are the subprojects http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Subprojects necessary and together sufficient modules for the Project? 

3. On what conditions should the P2PFoundation (as a distinct entity) join the Project publicly (on the blog) as its initiator http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Members

4. Later on, who could help us with his/her connections to some representatives of this set of organizations http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project#Value_IV:_Commonality

Thank you:

Peter

== Please ==
* Work in progress: please feel free to edit
* Please help to correct the grammar in this wiki page: thank you:)

== Join ==

Join [https://www.pivotaltracker.com/signup/new?join_project_id=73008 here] with your project ideas, initiations or pledges,

and/or publish a status update, link, quote or blog post [http://theunitedpersons.org here] (and please do not forget to tag them with 'Tax')!

== Follow and like us ==
=== Wiki ===
http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project

=== Feed ===
[http://feeds.feedburner.com/FreeTaxProject This is the feed] which aggregates all known Free Tax Project feeds:
* the [https://www.pivotaltracker.com/projects/73008/activities/e17804e35a8aec1e984aa53efaf0ee3b Project activity feed @Pivotaltracker.com],
* the [http://theunitedpersons.org/blog/tag/tax/feed Tax feed @TheUnitedPersons.org]
[[#Join| Suggest an additional feed]] to include in the [http://feeds.feedburner.com/FreeTaxProject aggregated feed]!

=== Facebook ===

If your own [http://mattmckeon.com/facebook-privacy/ privacy settings]:) allow, please [http://www.facebook.com/apps/application.php?id=325994169879 like us @Facebook]!

[When we officially launch the project, we will change the http://theunitedpersons.org/project/free-tax-project link in the description field to http://p2pfoundation.net/Free_Tax_Project .]

== Logo ==

We need a Project logo which expresses our Core Ideology: [https://www.pivotaltracker.com/signup/new?join_project_id=73008 could you help us]?

== Definitions ==

* [http://tutor2u.net/economics/content/topics/monopoly/contestable_markets.htm Contestable] market
* (Perfectly) [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_competition Competitive] market
* [http://www.palgrave.com/business/beynon-daviesbis/students/chapter7/summary.html Intangible] goods or intangibles, e.g. bits or information
* [http://theunitedpersons.org/blog/partition-is-necessary-and-sufficient-for-equivalence Partition]
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference#Axioms_of_preference_order Preference order]
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project Project]

= Membership =

== Members ==
[[#Join|Join]]!
* [initiators]
* 

== Potential Members ==
* [http://theunitedpersons.org/ The United Persons] [co-initiator?]
* [http://p2pfoundation.net P2P Foundation] [co-initiator?]
* [http://mazsa.com Peter Mazsa]
*

= Core Ideology: Values =
<blockquote>A small set of timeless guiding principles, core values require no external justification; they have intrinsic value and importance to those inside the organization. [...]</blockquote>
<blockquote>People involved in articulating the core values need to answer several questions:</blockquote>
<blockquote>* What core values do you personally bring to your work? (These should be so fundamental that you would hold them regardless of whether or not they were rewarded.)</blockquote>
<blockquote>* What would you tell your children are the core values that you hold at work and that you hope they will hold when they become working adults?</blockquote>
<blockquote>* If you awoke tomorrow morning with enough money to retire for the rest of your life, would you continue to live those core values?</blockquote>
<blockquote>* Can you envision them being as valid for you 100 years from now as they are today?</blockquote>
<blockquote>* Would you want to hold those core values, even if at some point one or more of them became a competitive disadvantage?</blockquote>
<blockquote>* If you were to start a new organization tomorrow in a different line of work, what core values would you build into the new organization regardless of its industry?</blockquote>
<blockquote>The last three questions are particularly important because they make the crucial distinction between enduring core values that should not change and practices and strategies that should be changing all the time." [[http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/78318835 Collins-Porras,1996]]</blockquote>

Values are in [[#Definitions|preference order]] (i.e., first come, first served:).

== Value I: Responsibility ==
We should make sure of ourselves that the free tax concept and project work seamlessly.

We should not force them: if we are not able to prove

1. their practical feasibility and

2. their theoretical
* consistence and
* coherence and
* rightness (morality) and

3. whether it worth [http://ahrcanum.files.wordpress.com/2009/04/newworld.jpg the risk to modify the world order]:) based on them, judged by their [http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism consequences],

then we should give up our efforts to disseminate them.

Of course we should improve the free tax concept and project and the modified world order in order to work together seamlessly, as long as they do not prove to be intrinsically flawed.

Of course we should not abandon our project if it is not flawed but it hurts vested interests (of states).

== Value II: Freedom ==
We think that our present world order is based on [[#Definitions|partitions and equivalence]]: partition and equivalence
* of humans (human bodies),
* of states (state territories), (cf. [http://theunitedpersons.org/blog/a-story-of-political-equivalence-in-logical-order this outline]) and
* of tangible goods (i.e., properties).

We think that partitions and equivalence are the robust base for the present world order, and we are [[#Value_I:_Responsibility|responsible]] for the (for an) order.

At the same time, we think that
* [[#Definitions|intangible goods]], because of their [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_good#Information_goods_and_market_failure original inconvenience for partition], are not properties ([http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Property cf.]), while
* we need an ethical basis for a firm conception of sustainable creativity in case of intangibles.

As first approach (before the provable ethical conception of sustainable creativity in case of intangibles), and as a default concept, free tax
* means ''libre'' tax and, at the same time, optionally ''gratis'' tax (cf. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gratis_versus_Libre Wikipedia: Gratis versus Libre], [http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html The Free Software Definition] and [http://www.opensource.org/docs/osd The Open Source Definition]),
** but does not mean that it should be ''gratis'' and should exclude the opportunity to express the responsibility towards the political units their citizens feel allegiance to.
* means free choice of the destination of the tax of intangible goods, depending on political allegiance of producers of these goods (by the option of setting the default tax destinations) and/or of customers of these goods (by the option changing the default destinations),
** but does not mean that you can not pay tax of intangible goods to a territorial state (e.g. if a producer and/or a consumer feel political allegiance primarily to it).
* means free from monopolization (e.g. by the states), i.e. the tax market of [[#Definitions|intangibles]] should be [[#Definitions|contestable]], i.e. free for competition
** and does not mean either that this tax market should be freely monopolizable (e.g. by the states),
** or that some hypothetical (e.g. a super-state) authority should enforce tax [[#Definitions|competition]], i.e that this tax market should be competitive,
* means independent tax (e.g. free from dependence of states),
** but does not mean that taxation of [[#Definitions|intangibles]] should not practice public cooperation e.g. with states in order to maintain free choice.

== Value III: Respect ==
Respect means, first of all, respect for partitions and equivalence, [[#Value_II:_Freedom|cf. above]]:

=== Value III.I: Respect for individuals ===

=== Value III.II: Respect for states ===

=== Value III.III: Respect for properties ===

== Value IV: Commonality ==
The Project is defined as the Greatest Common Divisor among
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer-to-peer p2p] [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Movements movements]
* [http://hackerspaces.org Hackerspaces]
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirate_Party Pirate parties]
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micronation Micronations]
* "State hack" projects (first steps in this direction: [http://www.freestateproject.org/ Free State Project] and [http://immi.is/ Icelandic Modern Media Initiative])
* [http://theunitedpersons.org/ The United Persons]
specifically, the [[#Members|initiating organizations]] as an informed reference group, within
* the core ideology of the Project:
** [[#Core_Ideology:_Purpose|Purpose]] and
** [[#Core_Ideology:_Values|Values]], and
* the scope of the Project, i.e. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tax taxation].

Constraint: the predetermination of the desirable scope of the state is certainly not included in the Greatest Common Divisor. The [[#Concept|contestable]] tax market of [[#Definitions|intangibles]] (i.e., the consequence of the desirable scope of the taxation by the state) should shape the environment for the states and they will proactively/reactively adapt themselves to this environment.

== Value V: [...] ==
[Do we need any other values? This needs to be cleared by the [[#Members|Members]] of the Project.]

= Core Ideology: Purpose =

'''Free Tax Project - ''Choose Your Tax on Bits'''''

[Free Tax Project - ''Free Your Tax from States'' ???]

[Free Tax Project - ''To Caesar the Things that are Caesar's / To Yourselves the Bits that are Yours'' ???]

[E.g. like "[http://www.nokia.com Nokia - ''Connecting People'']"; this needs to be cleared by the [[#Members|Members]] of the Project.]

= Envisioned Future: Big Hairy Audacious Goal =

The Free Tax Project is a [[#Definitions|project]] with a beginning and an end. What is the end = [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria SMART] BHAGoal of the Project?

'''1% of [http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=world+gdp world GDP] collected as free tax.''' [???]

[This needs to be cleared by the [[#Members|Members]] of the Project.]

= Envisioned Future: Vivid descriptions =
Based on [http://theunitedpersons.org/blog/built-to-last Built to Last].

How will the world look like after the BHAG has been reached?

[This needs to be cleared by the [[#Members|Members]] of the Project.]

= Strategy =
The Strategy is
* the way
* of the Members of all time
* from here and now
* deliberately
* to the Envisioned future ([[#Envisioned_Future:_Big_Hairy_Audacious_Goal|BHAG]] and [[#Envisioned_Future:_Vivid_descriptions|Vivid descriptions]])
* based on the Core ideology ([[#Core_Ideology:_Purpose|Purpose]] and [[#Core_Ideology:_Values|Values]]) as
** guiding principles and
** constraints.

Here and now:
<blockquote>The pulls of conflicting loyalties are not new. Country, church, corporation and family have always competed with one another, coexisting easily at times and uneasily at others. The issue, however, is not the conflict between overlapping loyalties in general, but between overlapping political loyalties. [...] The problems with self-determination, the rise of supranational authorities and modern, often electronically based, transnational relations all loosen the ties to geography and again increase the probability of multiple and conflicting ''political'' loyalties. [[http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/22409767 Kobrin,1998]:20]</blockquote>

<blockquote>Currently the word ‘neo-medievalism’ is generally used in two ways. Focusing on how states have lost control over their domestic affairs, one details the rise of non-states actors, transnational networks, and international institutions. However, increasing interdependence and reduction in domestic capacities does not necessarily reduce sovereignty in the absence of new organising principles competing with the state. The European Union (EU) may represent an alternative view of neo-medievalism. [...] While the EU is already more than the sum of its states, states are not disappearing. While sovereignty may be diminished, authority structures are not in open competition, as would be the case if authority were truly overlapping. Because of this strong institutionalisation, the EU is far from the chaos and competition implied by neo-medievalism. Furthermore, neither of these models generates real issues of multiple loyalty. [[http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/22130156 Deets,2006]:19]</blockquote>

Our strategy is based on the [[#Core_Ideology:_Values|Values]], but not independent from the following presumption:
<blockquote>The anticipated growth of new communications technologies, including the Internet and other digital networks, will make it increasingly difficult for states to tax global commerce effectively. Greater harmonization and coordination of national tax policies will likely be required in the coming years in order to address this problem. Given that the history of the state is inseparable from the history of taxation, this ‘‘globalization of taxation’’ could have far-reaching political implications. The modern state itself emerged out of a fiscal crisis of medieval European feudalism, which by the 14th and 15th centuries was increasingly incapable of raising sufficient revenues to support the mounting expenses of warfare. If new developments in the technology of commerce are now undermining the efficiency of the state as an autonomous taxing entity, fiscal pressures may produce a similar shift in de facto political authority away from the state and toward whatever international mechanisms are created to expedite the taxation of these new forms of commerce. [[http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/44447030 Paris,2003]: 153]</blockquote>

== Financing ==
[How???]

= Subprojects =
The subprojects should be defined as the necessary and together sufficient [http://www.acq.osd.mil/osjtf/whatisos.html open system] modules for the project. [Are the Subprojects below  necessary and together sufficient for our Project?]

== Sustainable Creativity ==
An ethical basis for free tax in the form of a firm conception of sustainable creativity in case of [[#Definitions|intangibles]].
=== Reference ===

== Independent Communication and Participation ==
Infrastructure for secure communication and political participation (e.g. in spending our taxes) independent of states (through a process which is not necessarily democratic, but necessarily based on a constitution).

=== Reference ===
* Michael's delicious [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/Participation participation], [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/Collective-Choice-Systems collective choice systems] and [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Governance P2P-Governance] links
* qp's Zotero [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/993280 voting] and [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/804681 nudges] collections
* qp's delicious [http://delicious.com/qpeter/voting voting] and [http://delicious.com/allamreform/infrastruktúra%2Bgovernance governance] links

== Independent Money and Tax ==
The option to exchange bits and pay our tax on bits to the political units to which we owe our political allegiance (i.e., independent of, but not excluding, the states), cf. http://theunitedpersons.org/blog/states-let-them-prey-on-atoms-but-not-on-bits
* default rate > 0
* option out (i.e., e-cash)
The extreme 0% tax rate still does not mean ''gratis'' transaction: the costs of transaction and tax rates are not the same concepts.
=== Reference ===
* [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Money p2pfoundation.net/Category:Money] and [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Taxation p2pfoundation.net/Category:Taxation]
* Michael's delicious [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Money P2P-Money] and [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Taxation P2P Tax] links
* [http://p2pfoundation.net/Smart_Taxes_Network Smart Taxes Network] (Michaels's favorite tax-project)
* qp's Zotero [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/1086687 money] and [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/804699 tax]
* qp's delicious [http://delicious.com/qpeter/money money] and [http://delicious.com/allamreform/adók tax] links
* Collections of [http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/ Roy Davies] on [http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/arian/money.html money] and [http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/arian/emoney.html e-money], and the book of [http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/arian/author.html his father] on the [http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/arian/llyfr.html History of Money from Ancient Times to the Present Day]

== Pacification ==
* Defending the option of producers and consumers of [[#Definitions|intangibles]] to avoid double taxation by states.
** default: no double taxation
** option out (i.e., pay taxes on bits to states as well)
* Ensuring that our tax is free from cartels, cf. [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/124672418 Barnett,2006]:
<blockquote>1. Focus prosecutors on “hard core” cartel activity</blockquote>

<blockquote>2. Treat cartels as serious crimes, and cartel members as criminals</blockquote>

<blockquote>3. Provide amnesty and amnesty plus</blockquote>

<blockquote>4. Vigorously prosecute obstruction of justice</blockquote>

<blockquote>5. Charge cartels in conjunction with other offenses</blockquote>

<blockquote>6. Provide transparency</blockquote>

<blockquote>7. Publicize enforcement efforts</blockquote>
=== Reference ===
* [http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Security p2pfoundation.net/Category:Security]
* [http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Warfare Michael's delicious security / P2P-Warfare links]
* qp's Zotero conditions / warfare [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/568130 / 4th generation warfare] and [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/1003830 / invasion] collections
* [http://delicious.com/allamreform/biztonság%2Bvédelem qp's delicious security+defense links]



== Customary Law ==
Laws revealed by our customs of our communities on the internet.

Customary law does not mean that we should avoid prescriptive laws or constitutions: it just means that we should review and appreciate the experiences we acquired through our cooperation of different kinds on the internet.
=== Reference ===
* [http://www.zotero.org/mazsa/items/collection/1754130 qp's Zotero non-territorial law collection]

== Citizen Experience ==
To offer average users a kind of user experience [http://laughingsquid.com/a-2-5-year-old-uses-an-ipad-for-the-first-time/ as Apple provides], and to advanced users as open as Linux provides and as formal as machine readable ontologies; for all above.
* Usable
** [http://developer.apple.com/ue/ User Experience @apple]
* Open
* Formal
** [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_ontology Wikipedia: Formal ontology]
** [http://www.ifomis.org/bfo/ Basic Formal Ontology]
=== Reference ===
== Public Transparency ==
Deliver push and pull information to the public on
* the strategy and tactics of the tax cartel of the states and our evaluation,
* the project.
=== Reference ===