'''= We are an American student-led organization that aims to bring unfettered network access to as much of humanity as possible.''' 


URL = http://freenetworkfoundation.org


=Description=

"The Free Network Movement owes an incredible debt to the Free Software Movement, and pledges them our ongoing support. It was pioneers such as Richard Stallman, Eben Moglen, and John Perry Barlow who initialized this struggle for our freedom. It is to these pioneers that we turn for inspiration and guidance. If not for early and decisive court victories won by Stallman, Moglen, and the Free Software Foundation, it is doubtful that we would today be in a position to advocate for the liberation of cyberspace.

    
The legacy of the Free Software Movement, however, goes beyond ideology. Open-source networking software will be integral to the development and growth of the Free Network. As such, members of the Free Network Movement are currently contributing code to the Diaspora* project.

    
Diaspora* will be a secure, elegant, and open-source personal web server application. It is being designed to facilitate the creation of a full featured, highly customizable, and privacy aware peer-to-peer social network. Diaspora* is currently in alpha release, and a large community of programmers has taken ownership of building this software for a new type of network. We believe that the wide release of Diaspora* will be a seminal event in the evolution of our nascent global network.

    
Still, Freenet’s commitment to free software goes beyond a single application. We hold that certain types of essential software should be free. The invention and improvement of the digital computer over the last sixty has given humanity the ability to reproduce some of its most valuable tools at zero marginal cost. The ethical and philosophical implications of this changing mode of events are many. The notion that we abstain from distributing useful software to those who could use it, despite the fact that it costs nothing to reproduce, is absurd not only from a theoretical standpoint, but also from the standpoint of real and applied economics."
(http://freenetworkmovement.org/Freenet/Software.html)


=Discussion=


==Three Stage Summary==

Isaac Wilder:

"don't think that the intention has ever been to build from scratch.
The plan is to use existing infrastructure to build a system that
allows for communications that are truly peer-to-peer. This will
happen in stages. Briefly:
 
The first stage is the emergence of cooperatives. This is just people
banding together and assembling the toolkit they need to buy access
from current providers at better, collective rates.
 
The second stage is using the exact same toolkit that enables
cooperative purchasing to engage in true (seven layer) peer-to-peer
networking.
 
The third stage is to use packet tunelling/vpn technology *inside
existing infrastructure* to engage in networking that is
opportunistically peer-to-peer. As more and more people engage each
each other directly when they have the opportunity, the opportunities
to do so will multiply. (Higher free network density means more
routes, means less chance that you've got to use corporately owned
infrastructure).
 
So, once a huge number of people are participating in the network, we
have a few choices, some of which are better (from my perspective)
than others. The worst-case scenario is that we don't have the
activation energy to transform the political economy of our
infrastructure. The medium case is that we have to raise enough money
to build our own backbone in competition with existing corporate
facilities. The best case, what makes the most sense to me, is that
the participants in the network pool their resources and collectively
purchase the existing backbone. I've got little idea how much this
would cost, but I do know that humanity, collectively, must possess
the resources to procure its own constructions."
(Next Net, May 2011)



==The Five Freedoms of a Free Network==

Isaac Wilder:

"We summarize these benefits in what we call the 'five freedoms': access, transmission, storage, authentication, and consignment.

The first freedom is access - In a Free Network, constituents would pay only
the actual cost of owning and operating their share of the network. Buy and
power a FreedomNode, and you become part of the Free Network - contribute
to your local co-op, and make the economies of scale work to your benefit. Compare this to today's environment, where network 'consumers' pay the costs of
access, plus a hefty margin, in order to lease a line that is owned by a corpora-
tion.


The second freedom is transmission - this is the ability to send bits from peer-to-peer without the prospect of interference, interception, or censorship. The
Free Network achieves this aim through the use of cryptographic best practices,
and by eliminating the network chokepoints where packet inspection is likely to occur.

The third freedom is storage - the FreedomBox allows people to run their own
network services, such as social networking, telephony, and web hosting, and
thereby enables them to maintain posession of those bits. Due to the fact that
the FreedomBox is in the posession of its owner, gaining access to its contents
would require a warrant or subpoena. This is not the case in the current network environment, where bits pertaining to our private lives are scattered and
held in various data centers around the world.

The fourth freedom is authentication - people ought to be able to maintain
an identity that is verified as authentic by others. This technology is called a
'Web of Trust,' and is built into the freedom-enabling software stack at a low
level. Just as important, however, as the ability to present a verified identity,
is the ability to present a pseudonym, or to remain anonymous entirely. The
Free Network will make the authentication spectrum easily intelligible to its
constituents, and clearly indicate whether a given session is onymous, pseudonymous, or anonymous.

The fifth and final freedom is consignment - the ability to perform exacting
mechanisms of access control. In large part, this is about making it easy to
see and manipulate individual privacy settings, yet it is also contingent upon
storing one's data locally. When people own their own data, and are able to
decide exactly who can access it, bit consignment becomes a willing, rather than
unwitting action."
(draft, September 2011)

==Five Stages to the Co-owned Open Meshwork==

[[Isaac Wilder]]:

"I share the "belief in
the radical necessity of humanity's co-owning the physical layer. As I
see it, this is the only path to freedom.
 
To that end, I *have* a roadmap. It has five stages, and follows hot
on the tail of this preamble. I see this roadmap playing out over the
span of a decade or more, but it does include actionable steps for the
present day. (On our way to freedom-land, as Mahalia Jackson said).
 
===Stage 1: The Co-op===

Stage one consists of the emergence of network access
cooperatives. Stage one has already begun, so instead of speaking
hypothetically, I will tell you what it looks like on the ground. I'm
not entirely sure of the legality, but I am sure of the justice. Here
in Grinnell, IA, the Free Network Movement has built a mesh network
that we call grinnellMIND. It allows us to share a single internet
connection amongst many physically disparate locations. I live on
Broad Street, Dylan lives on Main Street, Martin lives on Park Street,
and Anna lives on East. We and many others are able to purchase
Internet access cooperatively, thus driving down the amount that each
of us pays. This works especially well because of the asynchronous
nature of network usage - if we each bought our own connections, they
would lay dormant much of the time. We imagine that some day, the
entire town of Grinnell might purchase access cooperatively. That day
has not yet arrived, but we think it is on its way. This struggle for
collective purchasing will have to happen in many towns and cities,
the world over. It will have to happen for city blocks and
subdivisions, in residential towers and intentional communities. This
won't be easy to accomplish, especially when telcos catch wind of
what's going on. Still, the obvious economic advantage to the end user
(reduced cost) makes this an easy sell to the people.
 

===Stage 2: The Digital Village===

The unseen benefit of the aforementioned co-ops is that they wrest
the terminal nodes of the network away from the control of the
telco/ISP hegemony. This provides for the opportunity of network
applications that are truly peer-to-peer. At first, this will only be
able to happen within each isolated cooperative community. Imagine
that Grinnell (or some other town) makes shared use of a few pipes,
whose flow of information is distributed accross the last mile via
mesh. Now imagine that each node of that mesh network is a Diaspora
pod running a codebase that is specifically designed for use in mesh
networks (this is in development, but a ways off). People will still
have to rely on the big pipes for access to the wider internet, but to
pass each other messages and participate in social networking, at
least within the town of Grinnell, we will have achieved a truly
peer-to-peer architecture. Thus arises the digital village. What used
to be just a co-op for purchasing access has suddenly become a
community that is able to share information directly with one another.
It takes only a little more imagination to see that Diaspora is one of
many applications that could run on this architecture. I happen to
believe that the social network is the network's 'killer-app,' and so
I have chosen to use Diaspora as an example.
 
===Stage 3: Towards Unity===

Stages 2 and 3 are seperated here for clarity, but it seems likely
that stage 3 will begin shortly after stage 2, and take place
concomitantly. Stage 3 is quite simple. Using packet tunnelling
(something like Freenet or TOR, to give an idea) in concert with the
existing global network, we can simulate the contiguity of
geographically disparate digital villages. Suddenly, people all over
the world are able to share with one another directly. Specify a
user@a_node@a_network and you've got a unique address for each network
user. Of course, the corporate giants still own the backbone at this
stage, which is why we can only say *towards* unity. No uprising until
Stage 4, please.
 

===Stage 4: A Backbone of our Own===

Stage 4 is when the dream of true co-ownership becomes a reality.
We are already starting in on what needs to be done here, because it's
a pretty tall order, and will take some time. (You gotta do what you
gotta do). In Stage 4, we replace the corporate-owned fiber backbone
with a backbone of our own. We believe that this will be accomplished
via either a constellation of telecommunications satellites or the
construction of HF or Whitespace radios . This won't come cheap, but
as Patrick was saying, the upfront cost is all that we'll ever have to
pay. Satellite dishes or TV-Band towers would replace the pipes that
used to come from the ISP, and their connectivity could be distributed
throughout every digital village. The only cost that anyone would ever
have to pay for network access would be the cost of a mesh node (could
be integrated into a PC, or shareable stand alone). Not everyone will
be able to afford a node, which is why the roadmap doesn't end with
Stage 4.
 

===Stage 5: A Human Right===

Once the Mesh Interface for Network Devices is global, we can
focus our energies towards providing a node to anyone who wants one.
We believe that access to the network is a human right, and this is
our vision for supplying it to all of humanity."


==An appeal for cooperation==

Isaac Wilder:

"A common counter-argument to this proposal is that mesh technologies
don't scale beyond a few thousand nodes. Our rebuttal is that they
won't have to. The federation of digital villages means that no single
mesh would have to grow larger than some optimal number. Furthermore,
there is reason to believe that mesh routing protocols will improve
rapidly in the near future. The wide release of B.A.T.M.A.N. will
provide for a significant improvement in performance of O.L.S.R. Just
because something hasn't been done doesn't mean that it can't. We just
need to focus our mental energies.
 
This roadmap comes from the work of the Free Network Movement. We are
online at <www.freenetworkmovement.org>
 
I am a developer for Diaspora. We are online at <www.joindiaspora.com>
 
I am an ambassador for an organization called A Human Right, which is
currently at work fundraising for the procurement of satellite
bandwidth and equipment. We are online at <www.ahumanright.org> and
<www.buythissatellite.org>
 
 
Let me know if you are interested in collaborating on projects that
further the end of network access as a human right. We are having a
conference call some time next week. There is a doodle poll here if
you want to vote on the time of the call:
<http://www.doodle.com/yxia8m9kzdmcwth6>, and an etherpad to set the
agenda, here: <http://etherpad.openstewardship.net/muni-broadband>
 
 
 
I am happy to take a stab at any and all questions that pop up about
the roadmap, though I worry about my classwork. For now, I'm a college
student studying philosophy and computer science, which puts some
unfortunate constraints on my time. (Not to mention the parties).
So... this is our vision here at the Free Network Movement, and we
think it could become a reality in the not-too-distant future. We
don't yet have the expertise, resources, or manpower to bring all of
this to fruition, but then... perhaps that's where you come in."
(email at NextNet list, April 2011)

=More Information=


* wiki @ http://www.freenetworkmovement.org/commons



[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]