
'''= place for free but also legal music'''


URL = http://freemusicarchive.org/


=Description=

"On the internet, there are a number of places you can go to get free music, but when it comes to free, legal music, there just aren't as many options. That's why it's exciting when something like The Free Music Archive opens its doors. Having just launched into beta, this site, a project of WFMU, one of the most popular freeform radio stations in America, aims to provide a platform for free public access to new music. At the FMA, they've created an online archive where there are currently 5000 free tracks available for download in a variety of genres.

The Free Music Archive's goal is to provide public access to new music in a way that's "designed for the age of the internet." The tracks on the site are pre-cleared for a variety of modern-day uses, including pod-safe audio, samples for remixes, music for audio and video productions, and, of course, tracks that you can just add to your latest playlist.

The platform, inspired by Creative Commons and the notion of open software, is a collaborative effort between WFMU and others, including KEXP, dublab, KBOO, ISSUE Project Room, and CASH Music, all of whom work to curate the music made available on the site. Instead of fearing free downloads (as the music industry typically does), the belief here is that providing free downloads will actually encourage people to purchase music. Although all the tracks on the site are free, there are links that point to full album downloads which are not. Also, FMA users have the option of "tipping" an artist when they find something they like by sending money to the artist's PayPal account."
(http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/free_music_archive_launches_beta_offers_5000_free.php)



[[Category:Music]]