'''= The Free Technology Academy (FTA) is an international institution based in Europe, whose goal is to provide online education, at master level, about Free Software.'''

URL = http://www.ftacademy.org

=Description=


'''1.'''

"A Consortium formed by the Open University of Catalonia (Spain), the
Open University of the Netherlands and University of Agder (Norway) and
led by the [[Free Knowledge Institute]] (FKI), the FTA has received the
support from the EC's Lifelong Learning Programme to set up an
international educational programme on Free Software. The courses are
taught completely online in a virtual campus based on the Campus Project
interoperability framework.

Following the [[Open Educational Resources]] movement, all learning
materials are freely available through the Internet. The use of [[Free Software]] (also referred to as [[Open Source Software]] or [[Libre Software]]) is
rapidly expanding in governmental and private organisations. However,
still only a limited number of ICT professionals, teachers and decision
makers have sufficient knowledge and expertise in these new fields. The
Free Technology Academy aims to address this gap by providing high level
courses that fit into larger Master Programmes at the participating
universities."


'''2.'''

Malcolm Harris:


"The FTA is like no university you've ever seen - even though they offer accredited classes - partly because you can't see it. The project is a collaboration between the Free Knowledge institute and universities in The Netherlands, Spain, and Norway, but has no campus. The courses in the FTA program stretch from the theoretical ("The concepts of Free Software and Open Standards") to the practical ("Software development", "Web applications development"), but all are devoted to the propagation and increased use of free technology."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/technology-thats-free-like-speech-not-like-beer)

=Interview=

Marco Fioretti spoke with Wouter Tebbens, president of the Free Knowledge Institute and FTA director, to know how the FTA works and what are its plans for the next year. (= 2011)


"Stop: '''Wouter, what is the FTA's mission and philosophy?''' 

Wouter: The FTA aims to contribute to a society that permits all users to study, participate and build upon existing knowledge without restrictions. The starting point of our project is shared development and shared exploitation. Anyone willing to contribute to what we have already built and benefiting from that is welcome. All software and educational materials used and produced by the FTA come with the freedom to use, modify, copy and distribute. We view those as minimum rights to foster a strong community around the education of Free Software. Within the courses at the FTA we practice these freedoms and values. 


'''Stop: What is your methodology?''' 

Wouter: The FTA's educational methodology is based on distance learning for which we have set up the FTA online campus. Learners participate in a virtual classroom, one per course, where they discuss in groups and work on assignments. These assignments can be little projects, essays, setting up and testing certain software, etc. Each group works with a tutor who guides the learners when necessary and provides feedback on their assignments. 


'''Stop: Do FTA lessons happen in real time?''' 

Wouter: No. Besides being based completely on online participation and distance learning, our courses are also asynchronous. There are no fixed moments that participants need to be online: people come in every day or two as fits best with their working hours or other personal commitments. As each course takes place over 13 weeks, there are of course certain deadlines for activities and assignments of course."
(http://stop.zona-m.net/education/free-technology-academy-working-offer-more-free-software-online-teaching)

Full interview at http://stop.zona-m.net/education/free-technology-academy-working-offer-more-free-software-online-teaching


=Discussion=

==The FTA as case study of [[Economic Models Around Free Educational Materials]]‎==

Wouter Tebbens et al.:

"The production of OER must be sustainable both in the production and the
economic points of view. The FTA project addresses, among other issues, both
objectives by incorporating an OER development cycle and a set of services
around these OER which generate revenues.


The FTA tackles the development cycle of educational materials by offering
different production models: 

a) the production of a course material by a single
partner of the project (“inhouse”); 

b) collecting feedback to update and improve
future versions of the materials; and 

c) the distributed production by a set of interested parties. 

In any case, the materials considered as “official” within the
project must be supervised and approved by a set of experts belonging to any of
the HE institutions which constitute the FTA consortium or associate partners to
guarantee their scientific and academic correctness.

From the economic point of view, the FTA generates revenues by offering a set
of services around the produced OER. These services are mainly (though not
exclusively) educational, since courses are delivered on-line using the FTA
campus with expert tutor guidance, and diplomas are issued when students
accomplish the learning objectives of each course. These diplomas are
recognised by the official educational programmes offered by the HE institutions
integrated in the FTA network. In addition, the FTA also offers a Print on
Demand service which allows to obtain physical copies of the books at a reduced
price. Obviously, both the production of materials and the services provided
involve a set of costs. The FTA has worked on several scenarios including fixed
and variable costs and how these can be covered by the generated revenues,
which show that the economic sustainability of the process is possible under
some realistic conditions, which include a target number of students and
courses.

Hence, the FTA tries to solve the sustainability problem of OER production and
sets up an example which may be replicated in fields different from Free
Software and Open Standards by interested parties."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf)


Source:

* Paper: Free Technology Academy: [[Towards Sustainable Production of Free Educational Materials]]. Authors: Wouter Tebbens (Free Knowledge Institute), David Megías (Open University of Catalonia), David Jacovkis (Free Knowledge Institute), Lex Bijlsma (Open University Netherlands)

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Tebbens-etal-Paper1.pdf 




[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Courses]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Technology]]