'''Free Music Philosophy = "the idea that creating, copying, and distributing music must be as unrestricted"'''



=Excerpts=

From a FAQ at http://www.ram.org/ramblings/philosophy/fmp.html 

'''What is the Free Music Philosophy (FMP)?'''

It is an anarchistic grass-roots, but high-tech, system of spreading music: the idea that creating, copying, and distributing music must be as unrestricted as breathing air, plucking a blade of grass, or basking in the rays of the sun.


'''What does it mean to use the term "Free Music"?'''

The idea is similar to the notion of Free Software [1], and like with Free Software, the word "free" refers to freedom, not price. Specifically, Free Music means that any individual has the freedom of copying, distributing, and modifying music for personal, noncommercial purposes. Free Music does not mean that musicians cannot charge for records, tapes, CDs, or DATs.

The above definition of Free implies that any tangible object cannot be made free. However, something that can be copied arbitrarily many times, like music, should be set free. When I say music, I mean the expression of ideas (in the form of a musical composition or a sound recording) on some medium, and not the medium itself. Thus you have the freedom to make a copy of a CD I've created, the freedom to download soundfiles of songs I've created from my server on the Internet, the freedom to cover or improve upon a song I've written, but you are not necessarily entitled to free CDs.


'''Why must we Free Music?'''

Music is a creative process. Today, when a musician publishes music, i.e., exposes it to the outside world, only a privileged set of individuals are able to use the music as they please. However, the artist has drawn from the creativity of many other musicians and there is an existential responsibility placed upon them to give this back unconditionally, so creativity is fostered among people."
(http://www.ram.org/ramblings/philosophy/fmp.html)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]