'''= Engineering effort applied to freely publish useful engineering data and designs such that others may freely reuse the information.'''

Examples: A wood stove design others can build, modify and deploy as they please.



=Directory=

# CisLunarFreighter/Open source tools [http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/CisLunarFreighter/Open_source_tools]
# NASA Will Tinker With [[Open-Source Rocket]] for Return to Moon [http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/air_space/4236758.html]
# algOS - [[Oil from Algae Open Source]] [http://www.oilgae.com/algae/oil/biod/research/os/algos.html]


=Tools=

Via [http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Topic:Engineering/Free_or_open_source_design_tools]:

Tools which may be useful to participants in engineering studies, research and development. 

    
* http://opencircuitdesign.com/xcircuit/

Looks extensive, useful and increasingly so. Not terribly easy to install and maintain for a computer neophyte.

    
* http://z88.uni-bayreuth.de/english.html
Finite element analysis package. Freeware with C source code downloadable. Program documentation available in English, German and Greek.

    
* http://www.eetimes.com/news/design/resources/opensourcelinks.html

List of links to open source or free engineering assets.

    
* http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/School_of_Mathematics:Software

List of Free Math tools maintained by the Wikiversity School of Mathematics

    
* http://edu.kde.org/kig/

GUI based geometry editor. Includes some analytical functions, geometric shapes, conic sections and exports to several formats including SVG. Good for sketching and diagrams.

    
* http://edu.kde.org/kmplot/

Math analysis and plotting tool for Linux/KDE desktop environment. Superimposes functions on precise plots and allows export to bmp, png, and svg.

    
* HeeksCAD

3D CAD tool

    
* FreeCAD

Computer-aided engineering platform (CAD, kinematics, analysis)

    
* Electric Editor VLSI CAD system. Available under the GNU Public License.


Latest version at ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/electric .

    
* Alliance CAD tools available under the GNU Public License.





[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]

[[Category:Open]]