'''= movement that aims to apply the logic of [[Free Software]], to the production of medication, by giving access to the source code and production methodology, so that medications can be produced much more cheaply, without Intellectual Property premiums'''



=Principles=

"Here's how a definition of Free Drugs, another possible process of reconfiguration of the public and the private, could be inherited from Free Software:

    
* The freedom to use the drug, for any purpose (freedom 0).

    
* The freedom to study how the drug works, and adapt it to your needs (freedom 1). Access to the drug recipe (blueprint) and acceptance through regulated clinical trials are preconditions for this.

    
* The freedom to redistribute copies of the drug and its recipe (blueprint) so you can help your neighbour (freedom 2).

    
* The freedom to improve the drug, and release your improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3). Access to the drug recipe (blueprint) and acceptance through regulated clinical trials are preconditions for this."
(http://rabelais.socialtools.net/FreeSoftware.ToniPrug.Aug2007.html)


=Description=

Tony Prug:

"Given today's drugs, AIDS could be contained worldwide in relatively
short period of time, but corporations and governments stand in the
way of millions dying being protected. Like people
who decide to share online, they choose to do so, because they can,
because nothing, no one, stands in their way. The production of
drugs could follow the example of Free Software, be created in a
more collaborative way, publishing recipes and allowing it to be
freely produced, by anyone, for any purpose. If this was the case,
controllable and curable diseases like malaria and AIDS, who
together kill tens of millions of people every year, could be put
under the control in most of the world. Yet this doesn't happen.
Why? We can assume it is because their work needs different tools
and material conditions, and that prevents them from working in low
cost environments, which confines them to academic and corporate
world. If later is the case, we could conclude that it is the
domination of capital over all other considerations, primacy of
private over public, that prevents decommodification acts of Free
Software to be repeatable in the sphere of free drugs. However, as
the Swedish Pirate Party demonstrates, in Europe, the vast majority
of drug research money already comes from taxes. Hence, a Free
Software model for generic drugs might not be such a remote
proposal. Instead of pushing through a neo-liberal constitution,
Europe could, and should do the opposite act, create an
institutional Free Drugs scientific movement, based on the Free
Software hackers model, following the logic of [[Copyleft]] , patented for free production and reuse of all
documentation, as a gift of its citizens to the world. One could
argue that after centuries of military domination and exploitation,
something like this is due. When ethics and its laws in the West
allow death on such scale to occur, although the society has the
means to prevent it, we have to ask: what is the difference between
tens of millions dead in two world wars and the dead of malaria and
AIDS today? The former were killed while later are allowed to die.
Ethics complicit in mass death, an annually repeated disaster, not
an one off event like the world wars, is the ethics of the West
today: because our laws allow those deaths to occur."
(http://rabelais.socialtools.net/FreeSoftware.ToniPrug.Aug2007.txt)



[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Movements]]