
'''* Book: Freedom & Security in a Complex World. By Dirk Holemans. Green European Foundation, 2017'''

URL = http://www.oikos.be/item/857-new-hopeful-publication-freedom-security-in-a-complex-world [http://gef.eu/publication/freedom-security/ download pdf]

Essay with some core ideas of the Dutch-language book produced by Oikos

=Description=

"People all over the world are taking their future back into their hands. Together, they are taking initiatives in the fields of renewable energy, local food production, sharing tools, and so forth. This is the most hopeful movement of our time. Where the market and state fail, people are taking action. As free citizens, they are reinventing the collective, with open partnerships where personal development and social engagement go hand in hand. This observation seems to contradict what we experience every day. The system errors of our society model fill the newspapers: climate crisis, unstable banks, refugee flows. Accepted wisdom is that uncertainty is increasing. But both trends are happening, not by coincidence, at the same time. 

Dirk Holemans suggests in this publication that the answer needs to be the transformation into a socioecological society in the 21st century. in this booklet Dirk argues for the realisation of a societal project that strives for equal freedom for all people to flourish in security, within the boundaries of the planet, and proposes concrete steps towards it."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]