
Freeform Fabrication Systems

From the [[Fab@Home Project]].

URL = http://synth1.mae.cornell.edu/wiki/index.php?title=Fab%40Home:Overview


=Description=

Universal manufacturing embodied as todays freeform fabrication
systems has  like universal computers  the potential to transform
human society to a degree that few creations ever have. The ability
to directly fabricate functional custom objects could transform the
way we design, make, deliver and consume products. But not less
importantly, rapid prototyping technology has the potential to
redefine the designer. By eliminating many of the barriers of
resource and skill that currently prevent ordinary inventors from
realizing their own ideas, fabbers can democratize innovation
Ubiquitous automated manufacturing can thus open the door
to a new class of independent designers, a marketplace of printable
blueprints, and a new economy of custom products. Just like the
Internet and MP3s have freed musical talent from control of big
labels, so can widespread RP divorce technological innovation from
the control of big corporations.

Despite the formidable potential of rapid prototyping technology,
its acceptance over the last two decades has remained
disappointingly slow. At present SFF systems remain very
expensive and complex, focused on production of mechanical parts,
and used primarily by corporate engineers, designers, and architects
for prototyping and visualization. These factors are linked in a
vicious cycle which slows the development of the technology: Niche
applications imply a small demand for machines, while small demand
for machines keeps the machines costly and complex, limiting them to
niche applications. Alternatively, if one could provide either a
large market for SFF machines and products or a simple and cheap SFF
machine with which end users could invent products and applications,
then this same feedback coupling could instead drive a rapid
expansion in SFF technology and applications.


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Technology]]