A diverse group of writers has released the first version of the
"Definition of Free Cultural Works." The authors have identified a
minimum set of freedoms which they believe should be granted to all
users of copyrighted materials. 


=Definition=

The definition lists the following core freedoms:

* The freedom to use and perform the work

* The freedom to study the work and apply the information

* The freedom to redistribute copies

* The freedom to distribute derivative works.

Inspired by the Free Software Definition and the ideals of the free
software and open source movements, these conditions are meant to apply
to any conceivable work. In reality, these freedoms must be granted
explicitly by authors, through the use of licenses which confer them. 


On the website of the definition, [http://freedomdefined.org/], a list of
these licenses can be found. Furthermore, authors are encouraged to
identify their works as Free Cultural Works using a set of logos and
buttons.

The definition was initiated by Benjamin Mako Hill, a Debian GNU/Linux
developer, and Erik Mِiller, an author and long-time Wikipedia user.

Mِller and Hill encourage authors to rethink copyright law and use one
of the Free Culture Licenses to help build a genuine free and open
culture.

=More Information=

* http://freedomdefined.org/ - Official homepage of the definition

* http://freedomdefined.org/Licenses - Information about specific
licenses

* http://freedomdefined.org/Logos_and_buttons - Logos and buttons for
identifying free cultural works

== Contact ==

* Erik Miِller - eloquence (at) gmail (dot) com - +49-30-45491008

* Benjamin Mako Hill - mako (at) atdot (dot) cc


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]