'''= taking place on September 15 all around the world'''

URL = http://www.freemoneyday.org/

=Description=


By Donnie Maclurcan:

"Encouraging creative approaches, we challenged the peoples of the world to take to the streets to give away their own money. Signed-up participants committed to give two small coins or banknotes to strangers, asking these strangers to pass one of them on to someone else – as a symbolic gesture, not a donation.

Quirky? Yes. Likely to elicit questions and dialogue? We hoped so. The idea was for this simple exercise to act as an interruption to our trained response to the prospect of ‘free money’. Curiosity was embraced as a conversation starter.

We created a website and invited participants to share what they did through photos, footage, or reflections they wanted to pass along to the wider world. The site included a world map, so people could find their closest event and observe the experiment’s reach.

We scheduled activities to happen on September 15, 2011, purposefully coinciding with the anniversary of the 2008 bankruptcy filing by Lehman Brothers."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/sharing-is-common-cents-the-free-money-day-experience)

=Status=

'Free Money Day 2012 will again take place on September 15 all around the world. This year we’re partnering with debt relief groups to include ‘forgiving’ informal debts amongst friends and formal debts between countries and companies. If you would like more information or are interested in participating, please visit the Free Money Day website or join the conversation through Twitter with the hashtag #freemoneyday, and Facebook."
((http://www.shareable.net/blog/sharing-is-common-cents-the-free-money-day-experience))

[[Category:Money]]