
'''= creating the open global interoperable infrastructure for these millions currencies to be easily issued and put in circulation, in a peer-to-peer way.''' 

=Description=

"The Free Currencies Project consists in creating the open global interoperable infrastructure for these millions currencies to be easily issued and put in circulation, in a peer-to-peer way. It is aimed become the next planetary tool for accounting, transacting and hoarding wealth. It will belong to the commons, it's open source. It will be easy to use via computers and cell phones, making it accessible to the most part of humanity. Like email it will work peer-to-peer via servers, domain names and accounts (MyName^LocalCurrency.usa.ny.albany ; MyName^EthicalMarket.world, etc) provided by community currency service providers (CCSP)."
(http://www.thetransitioner.com/English/Free_Currencies%3a_the_next_global_currency_system)


=Background=

"Money is an information system. It's made to measure and balance flows in the real world. Money needs not to be scarce otherwise it turns the world into artificial scarcity, even when it's abundant. Money should be in right supply to account flows so that every marketplaces in the world -- companies, neighborhoods, towns, regions, global communities, etc -- can grow their wealth (all levels of Maslow pyramid) without constraints.

Money is about to follow the same path the media did these past years. Millions of free currencies will soon circulate on the Net and through our cell phones. They will not be controlled by states or central banks, they will be issued by those millions of marketplaces willing to free themselves from conventional debt-based, interest-based money (85% to 95% circulating today). Everyone will issue and use these free currencies simply because most people and organizations are undermonetized."
(http://www.thetransitioner.com/English/Free_Currencies%3a_the_next_global_currency_system)


[[Category:Money]]