'''= non-profit  organization, built on open source software, defined by four freedoms and designed to empower citizens'''


URL = http://www.freegovernment.org/

Running a candidate for U.S. Congress, maybe several, but not until 2010

=Description=

From the FAQ:

" '''What is FreeGovernment.org?'''

FreeGovernment.org is an online polling and bill drafting site run by the Free Government Party.


'''Wait, this is put together by a political party?'''

Yes, but since we're dedicated to a process and not a platform, we're unlike any of the other political parties out there. Founded on the Four Principles of Free Government, we look to empower citizens through direct, convenient participation that interfaces well with the current system.


'''Does signing up on this site conflict with my other political affiliation?'''

Absolutely not. The Free Government Party is more a "meta-party" than anything else. Our purpose is to empower you as a citizen, and since forming groups is so critical to robust politics, we in fact look to facilitate these political associations.


'''I heard you're going to run a candidate, is this true?'''

Yes. We are currently looking to run candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives.


'''Does the Free Government Party ever intend to run a presidential candidate?'''

No. The Free Government Party will not run candidates for positions that are not intended to represent citizens.


'''If a candidate gets into office, how will their votes in Congress be decided?'''

Each candidate we choose to endorse will sign a contract with us vowing only to vote in Congress as do their constituents on the site, that is, as do the majority of votes from constituents when enough votes have been cast."
(http://www.freegovernment.org/)


[[Category:Politics]]