=Examples=


==Free Map Server==


URL = http://freemap.in/


Project List

'''Mumbai Free Map'''

The Mumbai Free Map is an attempt to create an open-data base mapping initiative in Mumbai, India. It is part of the Free Map System, and contains raster and vector data to an incredibly detailed level. OpenLayers replaced MapBuilder as the primary mapping interface for the project in May of 2006. 	


'''NYC Free Map'''

The NYC Free Map uses data from the NYC GIS department combined with TIGER to create an attractive basemap for New York City. Technical tasks for the creation of this dataset included the creation of new subclasses within TIGER for better classification, and the determination of an attractive cartographic display for the data within the limitations in attribute data available. 	


'''Boston Free Map'''

The Boston Free Map uses data from MassGIS inside of an OpenLayers instance. It is designed to be used by applications in Massachusetts which are dedicated to free/open data, such as the Open Guide to Boston. 	


'''London Free Map'''

The London Free Map project is a collection of tools, renderings, and discussion pieces relating to the OpenStreetMap. Currently, work from this project is being developed to act as a replacement for the renderer on the homepage of OpenStreetMap. 	


'''World Free Map'''

The World Free Map is a queryable version of the CIA Factbook. Clicking on a country will show information about it, from the population to the number of cell phones.



==Freemap (UK - countryside)==

URL = http://nick.dev.openstreetmap.org/openlayers/


"Freemap aims to provide maps of the countryside based on OpenStreetMap data, updated as often as planet.osm comes out. It also allows users to annotate the maps with interesting features such as path blockages, photos, pub reviews and the like."


==GeoServer==

URL = http://docs.codehaus.org/display/GEOS/Home


"GeoServer is an Open Source server that connects your information to the Geospatial Web.

With GeoServer you can publish and edit data using open standards. Your information is made available in a large variety of formats as maps/images or actual geospatial data. GeoServer's transactional capabilities offer robust support for shared editing. GeoServer's focus is ease of use and support for standards, in order to serve as 'glue' for the geospatial web, connecting from legacy databases to many diverse clients."


==Mapbender==

URL = http://www.mapbender.org/index.php/Main_Page

"Mapbender is an [[Open Source Geospatial Foundation]] project and all about maps! Have a look at this map application. You can zoom in, out, pan, click and query, turn layers on and off or add more maps. You can also add new points to the map with the flag button, all Mapbender operators are invited to do so. There are many different possibilities to make use of maps, see some more examples in the Mapbender Gallery. Please observe that this software only shows and manages maps. The maps themselves come from many different Map Services all over the world.

Mapbender is the software and portal site for geodata management of OGC OWS architectures. The software provides web technology for managing spatial data services implemented in PHP, JavaScript and XML. It provides a data model and interfaces for displaying, navigating and querying OGC compliant map services. The Mapbender framework furthermore provides authentication and authorization services, OWS proxy functionality, management interfaces for user, group and service administration in WebGIS projects."


==Open GeoData==

See [[Open GeoData]]

==Open Layers==

URL = http://www.openlayers.org/


"OpenLayers makes it easy to put a dynamic map in any web page. It can display map tiles and markers loaded from any source. MetaCarta developed the initial version of OpenLayers and gave it to the public to further the use of geographic information of all kinds. OpenLayers is completely free, Open Source JavaScript, released under the BSD License."


==Open StreetMap==

URL = http://www.openstreetmap.org/


"OpenStreetMap is a free editable map of the whole world. It is made by people like you.
OpenStreetMap allows you to view, edit and use geographical data in a collaborative way from anywhere on Earth."


==uDig==

URL = http://udig.refractions.net/confluence/display/UDIG/Home


"The User-friendly Desktop Internet GIS (uDig) is both a GeoSpatial application and a platform through which developers can create new, derived applications. uDig is a core element in an internet aware Geographic Information System."



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Maps]]