

=Description=

"Governor Schwarzenegger, Superintendent O'Connell, and the State Board of Education have announced the Free Digital Textbook Initiative, a project to provide a list of standards aligned free digital textbooks for high schools that cover the course content in mathematics and science subject areas.

The California Learning Resource Network (CLRN) is responsible for reviewing these materials to verify that they are aligned to the California content standards. Qualifying mathematics courses include geometry, algebra II, trigonometry, or calculus. The science materials must be aligned to the standards for physics, chemistry, biology/life sciences, or earth sciences, including the investigation and experimentation strand. Digital textbooks should approach or equal a full course of study and must be downloadable.

The CLRN review submission process consists of several steps, all of which are completed online. Before you can begin, access http://clrn.org/publisher and request a publisher account. Once your account is approved, CLRN will send you a complete description of the submission process and advice for completing each step. Phone support from CLRN is available at the number listed below.

Concurrently, download one or more of the CLRN standards correlation documents, from the links listed at the bottom of this page, to view the standards for your textbook. Insert the page or chapter numbers where each standard may be found and upload the document during step two of the process.

For more information, contact Brian Bridges (CLRN Director) or Kelley Day (CLRN Program Manager) at (209) 238-1420."
(http://www.clrn.org/FDTI/index.cfm)


[[Category:Education]]