URL = http://www.vorratsdatenspeicherung.de/content/view/372/55/

=Interview=

"Chris Woolfrey: '''For those who might not know it so well, tell me a little about Freedom Not Fear.'''

'''Leena Simon''': Freedom not Fear is '''an international alliance of people who fight for civil rights in the digital cross-linked world'''. Not every technology is good for the people and we want the good things, like better communication and maybe a more democratic world, without the bad things like surveillance and manipulation of the masses. That’s what we go on the streets for: freedom needs risk and it can not be achieved in a totally secure society. But governments use fear – for example the fear about terrorism – to cut civil rights, and this is something really dangerous for all citizens and for democracy itself. We state, that freedom is more important than security. History taught us, especially in Germany, more than once, that it is never good if information or it’s broadcasting is confined to just one group.

The beauty of the World Wide Web is that it, theoretically, connects everyone with everyone. This could destroy some very basic structures that make society nowadays work. I myself think this is a good thing. But a lot of people are scared and want to confine the new technology to those abilities the old ones have, or use these possibilities to help those in power to become even more powerful. And of course they want to use these possibilities."

(http://blogs.fsfe.org/fellowship-interviews/?p=119)

[[Category:Freedom]]

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Rights]]