
=Introduction=

Proposed by the [[Free Network Foundation]]:

"The free software movement has thrived because they have made it
easy to differentiate between free and unfree code. They have done so
through the definition of free software embodied in the GNU project's
'four freedoms.' It is in this spirit that we aim here to define
exactly what it means to say that a network is free. We hope that the
existence of such a definition will highlight the ways in which our
current network, the Internet, is unfree, and help illuminate the path
to a freer world.

We specify five freedoms. In a word each, they are access,
transmission, storage, authentication, and consignment. Let's go
through them now, understand what they mean, and measure the ways in
which they do or do not exist today."


=Text=
 
URL = http://www.freenetworkmovement.org/commons/index.php?title=Free_network_definition 

(this link does not seem to function right now, 29/4/11, see provisionally at http://www.freenetworkmovement.org/Freenet/FreeNet.html)


==Freedom 0==

'''The freedom to access the network without tariff'''
 
Tariff here means price above cost. In today's world, Internet service
providers charge heavy fees for access to the network. Your right to
peaceably assemble in cyberspace is being restricted - you must not
allow this erosion. The Free Network Foundation aims to combat this
practice by assisting in the formation of network access cooperatives
on the local and regional level. Envision a world where the only cost
that one pays to access the network is that of operating a network node.
 

==Freedom 1==

'''The freedom to transmit bits from peer to peer without the prospect of interference, interception or censorship.'''
 
Today's Internet exhibits an architecture of centralized command and
control. This makes the network far too susceptible to breakdowns,
both accidental and intentional. The truth of this sentiment is
manifest, from the recent outage of Amazon Web Services to the network
shutdown during the Egyptian uprising. Moreover, choke points make it
too easy for bit movers to look inside the packets they are
transporting. So called 'traffic shaping' is already an accepted
practice, even in the United States. The ability of governments and
powerful corporations to look at the messages we send to one another
and determine their fitness for transmission is nothing less than
censorship. Demand your right to free speech - participate in the
cooperative construction of mesh networks as an avenue to the
restoration of that freedom.
 

==Freedom 2==

'''The freedom to determine where one's bits are stored.'''
 
If you are like most, and you most likely are, then the most
comprehensive collection of bits pertaining to you is stored in a
nondescript building in Prineville, Oregon. That is the location of
Facebook's primary data facility, and the site where more than 25
Terabytes of data per day are harvested and stored. Facebook has
become a 50 Billion dollar behemoth by selling this data to the
highest bidder. It has also been known to hand over these logs to
government agents without so much as a subpoena. At this point, you
might say that they don't care, that you've got nothing to hide, and
don't mind industrial-strength marketing. We are here to say this: you
should. You should care where your data is stored, even if you have
nothing to hide. Not to do so does a deep disservice to freedom
fighters, to whistleblowers, to those that put their lives on the line
for humanity. To demand this freedom is to demand your right to
property. Not to do so is to allow the outright theft of what
rightfully belongs to you.
 
 
==Freedom 3==

'''The freedom to maintain anonymity, or to present a unique, trusted identity.'''
 
Of all of the freedoms, this is the one most realized in todays world,
but that does not make it any less essential. The free network must
allow for anonymity, but it must also sometimes function as a trust
network. The cryptographic community has established mechanisms for
building trust networks, where people are who they say they are. The
mechanism established by the GNU Privacy Guard is called keysigning,
and it amounts to the practice of people vouching for one another.
Authentication is important, and the freedom not to authenticate as
much so - the essential thing is the ability to determine between a
known entity and a shadow figure. Only on a trust network is this
possible.
 

==Freedom 4==

'''The freedom to determine the parties to whom one's bits are consigned.'''
 
It is important to understand that the transmission of bits to others
necessarily entails a loss of exclusive ownership. This is the very
nature of digital reproduction. Whichever party receives those bits
will gain the ability to reproduce and transmit them anew. This makes
it all the more important to maintain complete control over who is
granted access to your bits. Your right to privacy is contingent upon
an ability to determine exactly who can see your data."
(http://www.freenetworkmovement.org/commons/index.php?title=Free_network_definition)



[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]