
Adopted by Guifi.net, a autonomous internet infrastructure started in the Catalan region.


=Principles=

Free Web is a philosophy of the development and use of the Social Web or Web 2.0, where the users maintain control of the software, the protocols, the formats, the servers; of one's own network, of the social relations and of the content that is generated through them. A Free Web respects the freedom of the users over the service they use and so allows it to be used, studied, modified and replicated freely. More precisely, the following 5 or 6 freedoms are referred:

* Freedom 0, Freedom of Software: Software that generates the web interface and with which the user interacts, must be free. 

    
* Freedom 1, Freedom of Operating System: The operating system on which the service is based must be free; which is to say the web servers, the database servers and all the programs that make it possible that the service works. 

* Freedom 2, Freedom of Content: Content must be free and remain property of the users. 

* Freedom 3, Freedom of Organization: The service must to be able to be administered by its users in an accessible and democratic way, where the bureaucracy is a communication channel and not a barrier to access of the users' own service. 

* Freedom 4, Freedom in Formats & Protocols: Protocols & formats must be open & real standards & must be able to be used with free software. 

* Freedom 5, Freedom of The Network: The network must be free and powerful, which is to say that it should be able to set up nodes easily, with bandwidth that also guarantees uploading. The alternative to commercial ADSL is to use Citizen Networks and/or to create clusters or distributed resources (e.g. http://www.coralcdn.org ). 

Source: http://en.blogxpopuli.org/wiki/Free_Web


=More Information=

* [http://www.fsf.org/licensing/licenses/agpl-3.0.html Affero General Public License]
* Spanish Free Web Project at http://en.blogxpopuli.org/wiki/Category:Free_Web_Project


[[Category:Standards]]