
URL = http://freenetworkfoundation.org/

=Description=

"We envision a world where communities build, maintain, and own their own share of the global computer network.
Our Mission

The Free Network Foundation is a nonprofit organization that provides operators around the world with essential infrastructure for the realization and support of free networks. We engineer tools and develop educational resources to facilitate the deployment of resilient, responsive, and accessible networks.


'''Who We Are'''

We are an organization committed to the tenets of free information, free culture, and free society.

We hold that advances in information technology provide humanity with the ability to effectively face global challenges.

We contend that our very ability to mobilize, organize, and bring about change depends on our ability to communicate.

We see that our ability to communicate is purchased from a handful of powerful entities.

We know that we cannot depend on these entities to support movement away from a status quo from which they are the beneficiaries.

We believe that access to a free network is a human right, and a necessary tool for environmental and social justice.


'''What We’re Doing'''

We envision communications infrastructure that is owned and operated cooperatively, by the whole of humanity, rather than by corporations and states.

We are using the power of peer-to-peer technologies to create a global network which is resistant to censorship and breakdown.

We promote freedoms, support innovations and advocate technologies that enhance and enable digital self-determination."
(http://freenetworkfoundation.org/?page_id=738)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]