'''Free Hardware Design'''


=Definition=

'''1.'''

Definition by Graham Seaman, advocate of [[Open Hardware]], from an article on the history, present and future of 'free hardware design'. [http://opencollector.org/Whyfree/freedesign.html]


"'''Free Design Practice'''

* Designs are owned by the people who create them. Ownership is protected by copyright law only. The intention is to make designs as widely available as possible.

* There is every incentive to build on older designs, to collaborate with as wide a spread of people as possible, and to make the designs widely known. NGOs in developing countries are not locked out, but encouraged to reuse designs.
    
* Design software is free software, so that anyone who wishes to can participate.
    
* Designs are driven by the wishes of their creators. The end goal can be whatever they wish.
    
* Users of the end product can not only know how it works, but are encouraged to create improvements or modify it for their own purposes."
(http://opencollector.org/Whyfree/freedesign.html)


'''2.'''

Christoph Beaupoil:

"What makes some blueprints in public domain a Free Hardware project?

   
1. A community of developers and users
  
2. Effective medium for information sharing
   
3. Lowest possible effort to convert the design to useful hardware
   
4. Low cost of imperfect builds
   
5. A license granting

         1. Freely available Design
         2. Freedom to modify
         3. Free redistribution"
(http://www.oekonux-conference.org/documentation/texts/)


=History=

Terry Hancock on [[Free Hardware Pioneers]]:

"One of the most exciting proofs-of-principle was the LART project, which developed an ARM-based single-board computer to be used in multimedia applications. LART was developed by a company that had a need for such a system in one of their projects, and did not want to be dependent on a vendor-supplied board to do the job. By opening the source for the LART, they were able to build a community around the LART design. This also allowed for them to collectively bargain for runs of PCBs, which are much cheaper to manufacture in larger quantity.

Another influential site is [[Open Cores]], which develops “Open Intellectual Property (IP) Cores” for the manufacture of LSI microchips. An “IP Core” of a chip is a collection of design elements which can be combined with other elements in the production of customized integrated circuits. It can be regarded as the hardware source-code for a chip. This really makes sense as a pioneer project, since ICs are among the most ephemeralized hardware technologies we have.

Artemis Society International is a project to design a complete technology chain for establishing a permanent Human presence on the moon, based on the tourist economy. They want to create a small habitat on the moon to be sold as a hotel in a kind of “adventure tourism” package. They are making use of both government-funded development for the International Space Station (and previous projects) and equipment designed and manufactured by independent space companies, like SpaceHab, whose extensible module-system figures prominently in the Artemis design."
(http://www.freesoftwaremagazine.com/articles/free_matter_economy?page=0%2C1)
 

=More Information=


'''Free Hardware Design - Past, Present, Future''', at http://opencollector.org/Whyfree/freedesign.html

'''Richard Stallman, on Free Hardware''', at http://www.linuxtoday.com/news_story.php3?ltsn=1999-06-22-005-05-NW-LF

'''Business Models for Open Source hardware design''', at
http://pages.nyu.edu/~gmp216/papers/bmfosh-1.0.html

'''Some examples of free hardware designs in progress''', at http://fhwd.org/

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]