'''Article: Free Manuals for Free Software. Adam Hyde''' 


=Text=


==Introduction==

Adam Hyde:

"Many times I have searched online for information about how to use a
particularly exciting free software and been disappointed about the lack
of information I could find. This situation was particularly frustrating
when it came to leading workshops. I wanted to spread the word on the
wonderful applications available, from real time audio and video
processing applications like PureData or Kino, through to office
applications like Gimp or Inkscape. However I had to create my own
manuals for my workshops as there was nothing else appropriate available
online. Sure, some of these applications had books available which I
could (rather expensively) purchase at the local bookstore, however I
would have to require my students to buy the book too or rewrite
(backward engineer) the material to avoid copyright infringement.

It seemed crazy to me that I had to buy a book to learn how to use a
free software. The problem seemed not just financial but idealogical.
How can a software be free if you have to buy a proprietary book to
learn how to use it?

At first I thought this was just a gap in the free software ecology.
Someone simply needs to write free manuals. As it turns out this is
largely true, however there are a few embedded issues that need to be
dug out before the free documentation sector can identify itself and
flourish. Through observation and experience I have come to the
conclusion that the free software / open source sector has a blind spot
when it comes to documentation which is retarding the development of
this sector. This prejudice begins with a general belief that
documentation is not that important and extends to much more extreme
positions such as the Free Software Foundations inability to extend the
same license freedoms for documentation as they extend to software.

In time this will change as more people realise that free documentation
is not just an important promotional tool for the advancement of free
software, but that free documentation is as socially and economically
empowering, and subscribes to the same ideals, as free software itself.

In this article, I'll describe what I see as problems with existing free
software documentation, licenses, and delivery mechanisms. Then I'll
describe attributes I think free documentation should have, along with
the economic ecology that it needs. Finally, I'll talk about how the
FLOSS Manuals Foundation is attempting to address these issues, and how
you can help.


==Free as in education==

Free software has developed outside and alongside of the more
restrictive licenses and copyrights of the proprietary software
environment. 

(i) Free software can be used by anyone for any purpose:
users can study the source code, adapt it to their needs, and whether or
not they modify it, they can redistribute both the software and its
source code. This co-operative model has meant that free software has
had a high rate of uptake in the cultural sector – artists and activists
have been amongst its active promoters. Its appeal is strong amongst
those who recognise the productive political and social ambiguity of the
word ‘free’. A number of artists also make a living through teaching and
workshops centered on free technologies they use in their practice.
Exhibitions, symposiums and festivals engaging with these ideas have
brought these issues into the public arena, while cultural and digital
theorists have reinforced the need to develop and use both free software
and free hardware. This support has often risen to the point of
hyperbole, and for many years every digital art event seemed to be
‘open’ this or ‘free’ that.

However, despite these efforts, it seems that the uptake of free
software is very slow. Although most of the internet runs on free
software (60% of web servers run Apache and 90% of Domain Name Servers
run BIND), if we look at operating systems the share is somewhere under
2%. 

(ii) Free software, as opposed to free operating systems, does a
little better, with the current estimate for usage of the Firefox
browser across all platforms coming in at something between 20-30%.

(iii) Still, this is very small. The user uptake of Firefox is an
impressive achievement, but why haven’t other fine tools such as the
image editing software Gimp or the audio editing software Audacity taken
similar ‘market’ share? Why, given that we all know how good free
software is, that a wide variety is available, and that it is free as in
gratis as well as libre, (or, Free Libre Open Source Software – FLOSS)
is the uptake so low?

The Free Software Foundation think the answer is quite simple: “The
biggest deficiency in free operating systems is not in the software – it
is the lack of good free manuals.” (iv)

Many years of teaching free tools (mostly for streaming media) have led
me to the same conclusion. It is not that there is no documentation.
Often you can find something on a developer’s site, or in a bookstore,
or perhaps in the comments on a forum, a mailing list, or maybe in a
wiki somewhere. This seems to satisfy most geeks. Many ‘advanced’ users
tell me this is enough. Google is their index, and they know how to use
it to find solutions. The thinking is that when it comes to solving a
problem in software you aren’t the first to encounter it and that
someone somewhere has written down a solution. This is often true. If it
isn’t true then either you solve the problem yourself (by hitting your
head against the wall until it works), or you find the appropriate IRC
channel and quiz the developers. Even better...you're using open source,
right!? READ THE SOURCE CODE!

Well, I don't know about you but maybe, just maybe, I feel that I should
not have to be a programmer to work out how to use a particular piece of
software. Perhaps this threshold is a little too high and might be
deterring users.

Free software should be well documented. You should be easily able to
find out what a particular software does, what it doesn’t do, how it
fits into the software universe, what the interface looks like, how to
install it, how to set the up most basic configuration and how to use
its main functions. These things should be well explained and kept in a
place that is easy to find. The easier it is to access well written
documentation for a given software, the larger the potential user base.

I have often heard that it is simply not the case that there is a lack
of documentation. ‘There is a manual for XX!’ (replace ‘XX’ with your
favorite free software). ‘What do you mean? XX has a great manual!’
Well, I admire the effort put into the documentation of some free
software. Unfortunately however, the documentation is seldom adequate.

There are some very good manuals available at a price for some of the
more well known free softwares. In general there is more published about
server-side softwares than desktop software. These books are usually
published in the traditional publishing model under restrictive
copyright with no easy way to modify or re-use the contents. I don't
subscribe to using closed documentation for these reasons and other
idealogical and practical reasons which I outline later in this
article.



The most common flaws of existing documentation of free softwares
include:

* that assumptions about the user’s knowledge are set too high
       
      
* the documentation has bad navigation
       
      
* it contains unexplained jargon
       
      
* there is no visual component
       
      
* the documentation is proprietary or ‘closed’ material
       
      
* the documentation’s design is unreadable
       
      
* operational steps are missing or unexplained
       
      
* the documentation is out of date
       
      
* the documentation is not easily re-usable
       
      
* the documentation is not easily modifiable
       


These mistakes are very common, and the situation is so bad it amounts
to a crisis in the world of free software. I have made my own efforts to
address this situation but I thought it is about time I wrote about some
of the basic issues in order to encourage others to consider the
importance of free documentation and to encourage you to contribute to
free documentation projects.

First of all I want to say something briefly about why documentation
should be free, and then to look at some parameters for identifying good
documentation.


==Free documentation for free software==

Making documentation ideologically aligned with the software it
documents seems to me to be a natural relationship. Documentation should
be able to flow as freely as the software itself, making unhindered
migrations across media, onto the screens and bookshelves of anyone that
wants it. Documentation should be able to be redistributed, altered,
sold or given away for free by anyone to anyone. If documentation cannot
do this, it is not free.

It is with regret that author notes that the Free Software Foundations
“Free Documentation License” [sic] tethers content to an unwieldy set of
requirements which impede this freedom. 

The Debian Foundation has made
many critiques of the license and they have concluded :

“''It is not possible to borrow text from a GFDL'd manual and incorporate
it in any free software program whatsoever. This is not a mere license
incompatibility. It's not just that the GFDL is incompatible with this
or that free software license: it's that it is fundamentally
incompatible with any free software license whatsoever. So if you write
a new program, and you have no commitments at all about what license you
want to use, saving only that it be a free license, you cannot include
GFDL'd text.''

''The GNU FDL, as it stands today, does not meet the Debian Free Software
Guidelines. There are significant problems with the license, [...] and,
as such, we cannot accept works licensed under the GNU FDL into our
distribution.''”
(http://people.debian.org/~srivasta/Position_Statement.xhtml)

However it is perhaps the rationale of this license – marrying
documentation to manual, manual to book, book to publisher, publisher to
commerce – which has set the Free Software Foundation on a course that
undermines their reputation as staunch defenders of freedom.


In particular :

* the FDL does not allow for easy duplication and modification (an
        absolute necessity in this day and age)
       
      
* it does not allow for the easy inclusion of documentation in
        software itself
       
      
* it appears to be written for hard copy books and does not engage
        issues of digital documentation very well
       
      
* it is difficult to know how to implement
       

These issues emanate from the founding rationale of the license. 

There are two particular assumptions that lead to problematic clauses:

'''1. The FDL seems to assume that technical writing should contain embedded free software political editorial.''' 

I refer to this statement (amongst others):

"''Our manuals also include sections that state our political position
about free software. We mark these as "invariant", so that they cannot
be changed or removed. The GFDL makes provisions for these "invariant
sections''".
(http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html#WhyNotGPLForManuals)

Political editorial is not a prerequisite (nor, in my opinion, desired)
for good technical writing.

        
2. the FDL assumes documentation writing is a book business. 

I refer to :
        
''"the GFDL has clauses that help publishers of free manuals make a profit from selling copies"''
(http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html#WhyNotGPLForManuals)

'Free Licences' should not shy away from commercial use of the substance
it is applied to. That is the principle of freedom - to use the software
or documentation as you wish, as long as you preserve the same freedoms
for others. However the focus should be about preserving freedom not
preservingparticularbusiness models. Can you imagine a similar clause in
the GPL? It would be lamblasted by the FSF for limiting freedom and
immediately dropped. A pity the FSF do not apply the same freedoms to
the materials of free software education. If they did this issue and
others would be cleared up quickly I am sure.


The above are just the main concerns with the rationale of the FDL.
These two issues have both ideological and pragmatic consequences that
make it very difficult to use the FDL if you wish to write free
documentation for free software.

The ideological issues are clear – but these rationale also simply make
the license practically unusable. For example, there are constant
references to book elements such as 'Title Pages', 'Covers' etc. One
particular clause that is hard to maintain is this section which
stipulates that a modified version of a work must:
        
"A.Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
distinct from that of the Document, and from those of previous
versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in the
History section of the Document). You may use the same title as
a previous version if the original publisher of that version
gives permission."

There are so many issues with this statement its hard to know where to
begin. What, for example, is the role of a 'History Section' in
documentation that might be one 'page' long? What about documentation
that is a few sentences long? The main problem with this clause however
is that digital documentation should flow like water from one author to
the other with as much flexibility to add, alter, delete, and remix as
much as possible. Requiring a 'traceback' to the original author so you
can use the same title is cumbersome, stifles re-use of material, and
logistically hard to maintain in this age of free flowing digital
document distribution.

Here is another 'book' issue which limits freedom:

"''If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that
commonly have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more
than 100, and the Document's license notice requires Cover
Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly
and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the
front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers
must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of
these copies. The front cover must present the full title with
all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may
add other material on the covers in addition. Copying with
changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the
title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be
treated as verbatim copying in other respects''."

Why should free documentation writers care how many documents you might
print? In my case I want the material to be used as much as possible. Go
ahead, print as many as you like, however you like, on whatever medium
you like. Free documentation writers don't want to get involved in
complex clauses involving 'Cover Texts', 'Front-Cover Texts' and
arbitrary numerical limits which are going to limit your freedom to use
the documentation as you want. They want the material to be used as much
as possible.

We need the same principles of freedom for documentation as we have for
code and the Free Documentation License (FDL) does not preserve the
above principles of freedom. At the time of writing there is a redraft
of this license and it looks like it will be split into two licenses,
however neither of the redrafts address these fundamental issues. We
need a license that goes further that the FDL and can allow the users to
do with the documentation as they can do with the source code.
Thankfully there is a license that does this - the General Public
License (GPL). This is the license that most free software / open source
projects use to release their source code. Due to the well known history
and legacy of the GPL many believe it to be only applicable to software,
however the license can be applied to any content as the FSF itself
acknowledges :

"''any work of any nature that can be copyrighted can be copylefted with the GNU GPL''."
(http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/nonsoftware-copyleft.html)

Documentation of free software should share the same principles of
freedom as the software itself. It should therefore use the GPL when the
code of the project it documents is also under the GPL. If you are not
convinced of this idealogical argument then ask yourself these two
simple pragmatic questions. Should programmers be able to benefit from
the efforts of free documentation writers by embedding their
documentation into the software itself? Should it be possible to
distribute free documentation with the software it documents? If your
answer is “yes” to either of these then you do not have many choices
when it comes to licenses. License interoperability (compatibility) is
laden with complex problems that few outside of the Software Freedom Law
Center seem to understand. Many, for example – the Debian project, argue
very convincingly that the Free Documentation License may not be
compatible with the GPL. There is, however, one license that enables
documentation to be easily distributed with GPL software – the GPL. The
only reason to bother about another license is if the free software
project you are documenting uses a license other than the GPL. In this
case give the documentation the same license as the code. Do not use the
FDL.


'''Free documentation is better'''

Less ideologically and more practically speaking, free documentation
presents a better kind of documentation than closed documentation. Ease
of modification is a strength that proprietary documentation cannot
match. Free documentation can be updated at the same time as the
software is updated and improved through distributed problem solving (a
la ‘many eyes make bugs shallow'(v), it can be translated into your own
language or re-contextualised to better suit individual or
organisational needs. Free documentation in these terms alone is a
better argument than closed documentation and if done well, can be a
tremendous asset to the uptake of free software.


==Qualities of Free Documentation==

So, now I would like to talk a little about some essential qualities
good free documentation should have :


'''- Free documentation should be easy to access and easy to improve.'''

It makes sense that if the intention is that something can be improved
that it should be able to be easily improved. Many free documentation
projects inherit their technology strategy from free software
development methods. These projects store their content in a CVS
(Concurrent Versioning System) which means that you need to be pretty
technically competent to be able to access the source material and
contribute to it.(vi)

What this system overlooks is the fact that writers are not programmers.
Writers have a different tool set (usually based on word processors),
and do not have a familiarity with the typical programmers tool set. To
expect a free documentation writer to access content via CVS or similar
tools is to make the same mistake as assuming the audience for your
documentation knows more than they do: setting the threshold for
contributions so high means that many people that could contribute won’t
contribute.

There is no need to trap content in CVS. All we are dealing with is text
and images and there are plenty of tools that are easier to use. I
recommend a wiki with WYSIWG (What You See Is What You Get) editing –
these look and work like word processors except they are available
anywhere you can get online via your browser. I personally don’t
recommend using mark-up languages as even wiki mark-up is harder to use
that WYSIWYG editors and is a barrier to contributions.


'''- Free documentation should be well structured'''

Many projects are now setting up unstructured wikis for their developers
and users as a base for writing documentation. At the moment, mediawiki
is often used, although which specific platform gets used tends to
depend on the winds of software fashion. These resources can be
extremely good, however I believe unstructured wiki content, with
contextual navigation systems, is a poor substitute for well-structured
content with a clear top-level index. Unstructured content is a good
secondary documentation strategy and certainly useful for documenting
the nooks and crannies of sometimes archaic interface issues or strange
hardware-specific conflicts, however it doesn’t replace content that is
designed to document the software thoroughly with a clear and structured
flow.


'''- Tell it as it is'''

I have found that documentation written by developers can make the
simple mistake of writing how the software should work and not how it
does work. Writing free documentation should not be done from memory or
done by those who cannot see the problems. Telling the user what is
wrong with the software, what does not work and what could be improved
is absolutely necessary. It is not bad-mouthing a free software to point
out a quirk that should not be a quirk. It is far worse for potential
users of that software if the user reads documentation that is
inaccurate or glosses over these issues.



'''- Make it look good'''

Documentation should be attractive to read. Over the years, free
software developers have discovered that in order to interface with
humans, software must look nice and allow the eye to easily engage with
it. The same is true for documentation. Black text with blue links on a
white background are not enticing. Embrace a layout than enhances
readability but make sure it also looks good.


'''- Quality'''

Now we come to the bugbear. Quality. What is good quality documentation?


Some benchmarks include:

* no spelling mistakes
       
      
* set a style guide and stick to it
       
      
* make sure no steps are glossed over
       
      
* make sure the documentation is accurate
       

However, beyond the purely procedural there is the subjective issue of
quality. There is no solid rule, the best you can do is to get people to
read the content and tell you if it makes sense. If you belong to a
community of contributors then look to peer reviews.


==The need for a free documentation sector==

Before talking a little about what FLOSS Manuals has done addressing the
issues listed so far, I want to talk a little about the need for a free
documentation sector.



Free software has developed a methodology and economy that free
documentation lacks. The traditional method of making money in the
manual business is to write a manual and sell it. To protect your
interests you use a standard ‘closed’ copyright notice. This is the
publishing model. Outside of this circle of proprietary content you do
the best you can voluntarily and put your work online wherever you can.

The free software sector has much better resources. Free software
projects have established working models and a number of content and
management tools including development and distribution sites like
Savannah and SourceForge. The financial model is much clearer too. Most
obviously, if you need to make money working on a free software project
you hone your skills and find a company that will pay you for your
work.

Free documentation is lacking all these components – there is no
standard technical tool set, there are very few ‘communities’ of free
documentation writers and less chances of being able to pay the rent if
authors choose to do this full time. Finding our way to build these
elements is critical to the evolution of a healthy free documentation
sector, and, I would argue, to achieving the widespread adoption of free
software. It is imperative that we find and develop these models and
tools, as the standard model of closed documentation for free software
contains an ideological paradox.

We need to build an ecology around free documentation in much the same
way as the free software sector has done. Free software enables
programmers to work with communities of programmers, with tools that
enable collaboration, and the opportunity to learn from their peers.

There is an economy of reputation at work in these communities which
encourages best practices, and a lucky minority can leverage their
reputation to be paid to work on free software projects.

Free documentation needs these tool sets, communities and economies.
Free documentation needs to identify itself as a sector and build a
consciousness as a community. This in itself can lead to better
documentation and to the potential for an economically sustainable
practice for individuals wishing to make a living writing free manuals.

There are a few shallow myths about documentation that hinder this
sectors development a little. The first is that writing documentation is
boring. Well, it can be boring, but it can be hugely satisfying and it
certainly can be fun. I have indeed actually witnessed people being
happily proud of their docs and equally excited when someone comes along
and improves them. Sound familiar? It sounds a little like the free
software sector. Yes, documentation writers enjoy what they do, they
enjoy doing a good job, they enjoy getting better at it, they enjoy
being recognised for it, and they especially enjoy people benefiting
from their efforts.

There is another myth that needs to be popped. I have noticed a certain
amount of hesitancy in the free software world towards contributing to
free manuals. This seems to stem from programmers holding onto the
belief that writing a book is a cornerstone of the free software
economy. Well, I hate to break the news here, but the publishing world
is going through the same massive challenge to this commodity model as
the other industries that have their medium digitised. Not that book
sales which relied on proprietary content and the sale of information,
ever actually made many authors much money but there is a bigger issue
at play. Many programmers fail to see that the world of publishing has
changed. It is not just software, music and movies that routes itself
around artificial obstacles to distribution - books do too. If
programmers hold on to outmoded models of proprietary information resale
then they will find themselves without a secondary revenue stream The
new model is, as technical writer Janet Swisher says, to “charge for
time, but give away the artifacts”.

The same situation is true for documentation writers in general. It is
entirely possible to be commissioned, for example, to write manuals, or
to be employed by a company to write inhouse support docs that can also
be contributed to the general community under a free license. As with
this example, in many instances the free documentation economy can map
directly onto, and learn from, the economy that has developed around
free software. It could be argued that the software is already there but
the documentation largely isn't so the potential demand is very high.


==FLOSS Manuals and the Pursuit of Funky Docs==

It is easy enough to point out what is wrong with something and harp on
about how it should be. It's another issue to actually do something
about it. In order to address this, I founded a not-for-profit
foundation called FLOSS Manuals. We are a community of free
documentation writers committed to writing excellent documentation about
free software. Anyone can join FLOSS Manuals and anyone can edit the
material we publish. All content is licensed under a free license (the
GPL (GNU General Public Licence)).

When we started (we officially launched in October 2007) there were, and
still are, no good publication platforms for collaborative authoring.
Some may say that there are too many CMS (Content Management Systems)
already and surely, SURELY, there must be a CMS to meet our needs?

Well, no. The closer you get to collaborative publishing systems the
further you stray from the functionality of most Content Management
Systems. So we have hacked our way into the wonderful TWiki and
developed our own set of plug-ins. TWiki has proven to be a very good
platform for online publication. It has all the structured content
features and user administration that makes it a good shell for
authoring collaborative content. What was missing, and what is missing
from other CMSs is good copyright and credit tracking, easy ways to
build indexes, and a nifty way to remix content. We have remedied that
now with our own custom plug-ins (available through the TWiki
repository). (vii)


==Remixing==

So, the word ‘remix’ may have caught your eye and you may have
fleetingly thought ‘remixing manuals?’. It might not seem intuitive at
first glance but there are a lot of very good reasons why manuals are
excellent material for remixing. I don't mean remix in the William S.
Burroughs sense of cut-up – we do cherish linearity in the world of free
documentation. I mean remix as in re-combining multiple chapters from
multiple disparate manuals to form one document. Doing this enables the
user to create manuals specific to their needs whether they be, for
instance, learning by themselves, teaching classes or running inhouse
training programmes.

The FLOSS manuals remix feature (http://www.flossmanuals,net/remix)
enables the remixing of content into indexed PDF and downloadable HTML
with your own look and feel provided by Cascading Style Sheets. Now we
have also added a Remix Application Programming Interface. This means
that you can remix manuals and include them in your website by cutting
and pasting a few lines of HTML. No longer is messy FTP necessary. This
part of FLOSS Manuals is new and in test form, but so far it works very
well. Combining remixing with print-on-demand is an obvious next step.
It can be done now, as print-on-demand services use PDFs as their source
material, but the trick is in getting it to look nice on paper.

A word on remixing – if you want to make documentation that is reusable
then consider the way you write it. It is a good idea to keep it modular
– with no dependencies on other content and with as little
single-context language as possible.

Print on Demand

In addition to the free online manuals FLOSS Manuals material is also
turned into books via a print-on-demand service. The books look very
nice, having been tweaked for print production, and they are available
at cost price (we don’t put any mark-up on books so they cost what the
print-on-demand company charge to produce the book and send to the
buyer). This is pretty exciting and FLOSS Manuals has its own embeddable
Book Store. Anyone wanting to support the promotion and uptake of free
software can embed the FLOSS Manuals book store on their website with
the addition of a few short lines of HTML.

As I talk to people, I find that the physicality of books is the best
way to get across the idea of what the FLOSS Manuals project is doing.
Talking about a website is one thing, but handing over a book sparks
understanding and gets people excited. Books are an excellent
promotional medium for free software itself.


==Quality Control==

Lastly, a word on quality. These manuals aim to be better than any
available documentation. (Sometimes this is not hard, as there is no
available documentation!). When working with an open system maintaining
this level of quality raises some interesting issues. Anyone can
contribute to FLOSS Manuals – it is completely open. You need to
register, but this is not a method for gating contributions, but so we
can abide by the license requirements of the GPL to credit authorship.

Spam is an obvious issue with an open system, as is the possibility of
malicious content. Incorrect or malicious information in Wikipedia might
lead you to quote the wrong King of Scotland or may misinform you about
the origins of potatoes, but incorrect information in documentation
might lead you to wipe-out your operating system. So we have separated
the ‘backend’ – where you can write manuals – from the ‘frontend’ –
where you can read manuals.

Manuals in the ‘Write’ section are in constant development. (viii)
However, the same manual linked from the front page will be in the
‘stable’ form, ready for use. This is managed by some existing TWiki
tools we twisted together to form a simple one-step publishing system.
It works like this – every manual has a Maintainer. A Maintainer is a
person – a volunteer – that keeps an eye on that particular manual.
Edits and updates are added to the Write section by anyone that wishes
to contribute. When the Maintainer thinks the manual is in good shape
and an update is appropriate they push the ‘publish’ button and all the
material is copied to the ‘frontend’ version of the manual. This way the
reader gets stable reliable documentation and writers can continue
working on documents without the reader being confronted by
half-finished content. It’s a simple and effective system.


==How you can help==

Good free documentation is not just a necessary component of good free
software, it is the most important part of bringing the software to the
largest potential user base. Free documentation is simultaneously a
education tool and a marketing device – without it the software will
undertake a gradual growth as users inform each other as to what is
available and pass on experience and knowledge to each other on an
almost one to one basis. This is a powerful mechanism in its own right
but to break beyond this barrier into the world of the average desktop
computer user we need comprehensive and attractive free docs.

If you love free software then join us making free documentation! We
have a growing number of very talented contributors and Maintainers and
good manuals available online, but we need more. Contributing is pretty
easy. If you would like to be a part of helping create good manuals then
register with the project and read our manual on FLOSS Manuals. (ix).

Anyone can contribute: you can spell check documents, tidy up layout,
test or review material, design icons, write, remix or improve material.
Contribute in any way that you can and not only will you be helping to
make the documentation better, you will be assisting in the development
and spread of free culture and free software."

=More Information= 

#Adam Hyde, Founder FLOSS Manuals, http://www.flossmanuals.net; contact via Adam Hyde adam@flossmanuals.net


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]