==Description==

From Patrick Anderson's [[User Owned]] theory perspective:


Free Production is a true [[Mode Of Production]] that recovers the [[Cost]]s of Physical Sources while using [[Free Design]] for all Virtual Sources.

Free Production is not just [[Free Hardware]], because that term is limited to the 'virtual' or 'soft' or [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_(metaphysics) universal] portion of things.

Free Production is therefore about completing and complementing the ideals of [[Free Software]] by addressing the physical, tangible, fungible properties of Space, Time, Mass and Energy required to finally begin real [[Peer Production]] in a "Free as in Freedom" manner.

==Discussion==

===User Freedoms===
A list of Freedoms analogous to the Software Freedoms defined by the [[Free Software Foundation]] at http://GNU.org/philosophy/free-sw.html

"Free Production" is a matter of liberty, not price.  To understand the concept, you should think of "free" as in "free speech," not as in "free beer."

Free Production is a matter of the users' freedom to run, copy, distribute, study, change and improve the product.  More precisely, it refers to four kinds of freedom, for the users of the product:

* The freedom to use the product, for any purpose (freedom 0).
* The freedom to study how the product works, and adapt it to your needs (freedom 1). Access to the Physical Sources and Virtual Sources is a precondition for this.
* The freedom to redistribute other instances of this product so you can help your neighbor (freedom 2).
* The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3). Access to the [[Physical Sources]] and Virtual Sources is a precondition for this.

===Possible Applications===
* Social Networking Website where all users become partial owners of the Physical Sources required for that hosting.
* Agriculture where the collective consumers hold the debt burden and have full control.
* Restaurant where customers become parital owners whenever they pay [[Price Above Cost]].
* Local government where each citizen has divisible (the right to secede) ownership weighted by the amount they chose to pay toward that Public Utility instead of [[Tax]].
* OTHER APPLICATIONS (must work in all cases)

===Comments===
This is a rough idea.  What is wrong, and what is right? -- [[User:Ownut|Ownut]] 14:21, 21 April 2008 (PDT)