

'''= aims to replace targed 'cold calling' with 'warm calling' of friends of political symphatizers'''



=Description=

See at http://iyear.us/4_71_0_2008_06_24_The-Friend-to-Friend-Model.html


=Case Study=

From Pat Dunlavey [www.voter2voter.org], 12/24/2003  (pat@pdcarto.com )

Source: Friend to friend politics and the “inside-out” campaign A tale of three campaigns. By Pat Dunlavey. URL = http://www.pdcarto.com/papers/f2f_politics.pdf  



“In 2003, we used a rudimentary web application I designed and Jonathan Leamon coded, which simply put the friend to friend type of campaign, used in 1999, online. The resident database could be searched, and call lists built. Results of contacts could be recorded, and progress could be viewed by all, in real- time. Captains could monitor the work of the people they were supervising. In cases where a volunteer did not have web access, his captain acted as facilitator - either doing the data entry directly, or setting up that person with someone who could do the online work. We began with about 55 volunteers, however the Supporter ID effort doubles as a recruitment campaign (as it did in both earlier campaigns), and with the ease of adding and effectively utilizing new volunteers, our numbers quickly increased to almost 100. The 2003 numbers speak for themselves. Not only did we activate more volunteers, but they created larger call lists, while returning an identified supporter percentage equal to the 1999 campaign. 

To put this all another way, with the web system facilitating a friend to friend campaign, we were able to recruit and utilize 2% of the vote-eligible population as volunteers, and with that 2%, come very close to saturating the potentially supportive population (late-comers to the volunteer ranks complained that almost every person they could think of was taken), without wasted effort and alienation or mobilization of the opposition. 

I call this a “friend to friend” campaign. Instead of laying siege to the population and wearing it down with uncomfortable and unwanted approaches from strangers ringing doorbells or calling during the dinner hour, you grow the campaign from the inside, through the web of relationships inside the community. 

Comparing friend to friend with demographic targeting. My experience is that cold-calling performs poorly compared to “warm calling” .

Clearly, it is better that a person have the political conversation with someone they know and trust, rather than being approached by a stranger. The return relative to effort is doubled. The volunteers do less work, and easier work; so they are happier. The target population is a lot happier: it is not put under siege from outside their community walls; they do not have to deflect desperate strangers during their dinner hours. By utilizing the existing network of relationships within a community, a friend to friend campaign is a community effort that strengthens the social fabric. It also inspires the population to become a community of activists, rather than a passive “market”. “
(http://www.pdcarto.com/papers/f2f_politics.pdf )



[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]