
= author, activist and freelance academic

=Bio=

"Dr. Friederike Habermann is an economist, historian and political scientist as well as author, activist and freelanced academic. In the aftermath of a book about alternative economy in the German speaking area (´Halbinseln gegen den Strom´) she became aware that younger approaches also correspond to the principles of commonsbased peerproduction. In order to emphasize its potential for the whole economy, she calls it ´[[Ecommony]]´.

She lives in a solidarian and ecological project next to Berlin."


'''LONG VERSION:'''

Dr. Friederike Habermann (born in 1967) is a German economist, historian and political scientist. For 30 years, she is active in social movements, including the global resistance movement. She lives in a solidarian and ecological project next to Berlin.


HER VISION: In the aftermath of a book about alternative economy in the German speaking area (´Halbinseln gegen den Strom´) she became aware that younger approaches also correspond to the principles of [[Commons-Based Peer Production]]. In order to emphasize its potential for the whole economy, she calls it ´Ecommony."

=Publications=

==In English==

* [http://wealthofthecommons.org/essay/we-are-not-born-egoists We Are Not Born as Egoists]

==German-language BOOKS==

* Geschichte wird gemacht. Etappen des globalen Widerstands, in der Reihe ´Bibliothek des Widerstands´, Hamburg (Laika) (Mai) 2013.

* Der unsichtbare Tropenhelm. Wie koloniales Denken noch immer unsere Köpfe beherrscht, Klein Jasedow (Drachenverlag) (April) 2013.

* Halbinseln gegen den Strom. Anders leben und wirtschaften im Alltag, hrsg. v.d. Stiftung Fraueninitiative, Königstein (Ulrike-Helmer-Verlag) 2009.

* Der Homo Oeconomicus und das Andere. Hegemonie, Identität und Emanzipation, Bd. 1 der Reihe ´Feminist and Critical Political Economy´, Baden-Baden (Nomos) 2008.

* Aus der Not eine andere Welt. Gelebter Widerstand in Argentinien, hrsg. v.d. Stiftung Fraueninitiative, Königstein (Ulrike Helmer-Verlag).

* Chiapas und die Internationale der Hoffnung, (mit Ulrich Brand u.a.), Köln (isp) 1997.


==ONLINE ARTICLES==

* „[[Ecommony]]: Strukturelle Gemeinschaftlichkeit statt Negatives Wachstum“, in: Deutschlands Wege in die Zukunft, hrsg. vom Umweltbundesamt, http://www.uba.de/uba-info-medien/4222.html

* “Wir werden nicht als Egoisten geboren”, in: Commons. Für eine neue Politik jenseits von Markt und Staat, hrsg. von Silke Helfrich u. d. Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung, http://www.boell.de/publikationen/publikationen-commons-fuer-eine-neue-politik-jenseits-von-markt-und-staat-14395.html

* Solidarität wär´ eine prima Alternative. Oder: Brot, Schoki und Freiheit für alle, rls-paper, http://www.rosalux.de/publication/37369/solidaritaet-waer-eine-prima-alternative.html



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]