=Excerpt=

Friedrich Hayek:

( from a 1985 talk )

"Our basic problem is that we have three levels of moral beliefs. 

We have, in the first instance, our intuitive moral feelings, which are adapted to the small
person-to-person society, where we act toward people that we know. 

Then we have a society run by moral traditions, which — unlike what modern rationalists
believe — are not intellectual discoveries of men who designed them. They are
an example of a process that I now prefer to describe by the biological term of
group selection. Those groups that quite accidentally developed favourable
habits, such as a tradition of private property and the family, succeed but they
never understood this. So we owe our present extended order of human cooperation very largely to a moral tradition, of which the intellectual does not approve because it had never been intellectually designed. 

It has to compete with a third level of moral beliefs; the morals that intellectuals design in the
hope that they can better satisfy man’s instincts than the traditional rules. 

And we live in a world where the three moral traditions are in constant conflict: the
innate ones, the traditional ones, and the intellectually designed ones…. You can
explain the whole of social conflicts of the last 200 years by the conflict of the
three… "

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)


=Discussion=

==[[Oswald Spengler and Friedrich Hayek on the Clash of the Three Historical Ethical Systems]]==

Alistair Crooks:
 
"Man has evolved directly from such primate groups, and then lived
for generations more in similar, simple, hierarchical groups largely
controlled by the same inherited, genetically derived, protocols of our
primate ancestors. Spengler describes this period of human prehistory in ‘The Decline of the West’:
Life as experienced by primitive and by fellaheen peoples is just the zoological
up and down, a planless happening without goal or cadenced march in time,
wherein occurrences are many, but, in the last analysis, devoid of significance.

But around the time of the invention and introduction of farming,
rising population densities increased the likelihood of contact
between different ‘troops’, and the changing nature of these
interactions forced these groups to develop larger and more complex
social structures. With increasing contacts there was a transition
towards a linear development of successive cultural forms. This linear
‘history’ is referred to by Spengler as the ‘world-as-nature’  view of
history, since it has similar features to linear nature of biological, i.e.
natural, evolution.

''- "The professional historian […] sees it (history) like a sort of tape worm,
industriously adding on to itself one epoch after the other."''


Spengler used derogatory terms to describe this ‘world-as-nature’
view of history because to his mind the old subdivisions into
historical categories of Ancient, Medieval and Modern dealt
inappropriately with the evolution of his ‘wave-cycles’ of the later
complex societies. Significantly, the linearity of ‘world-as-nature’
implied that the future is unknowable, whereas his interpretation of
the repeated cycles of ‘world-as-history’ rendered the future as
knowable. But that does not concern us here. How ever much
Spengler liked to reject this linear, ‘world-as-nature’ model of
history, it is clear that we can follow a linear development in prehistoric societies.
If one looks at the political structure of the Australian Aborigines
we find that the focal unit of power is what is referred to as the
‘clan’. The clan is a small hierarchical family group, numbering from 
1 up to 30, or even 50 individuals maximum, headed by an all
powerful patriarch. Hierarchy is defined largely by the stage of
initiation into clan secrets. Clans are loosely grouped together into
larger dialect groups, commonly referred to as ‘tribes’, which come
together for ceremonies, to share seasonal food abundances like swan
eggs during the swan breeding season, to obtain wives, or for warfare.
These ‘tribes’ are not political units per se in that there is no tribal
leadership structure, each clan remaining strictly autonomous within
the ‘tribe’. What we can see here is that the political structure of the
Australian Aborigine revolves around one which is only slightly
removed by learned culture from an earlier, pre-historic, ‘troop’-like
structure. Learned culture which controls religion and law, called
‘The Dreaming’ by Aborigines and ostensibly handed down from
spirit ancestors, sits above older inherited traits, but in reality only
provides the justification for the inherited, hierarchical structures of
the clans. 


Anthropologist, William Stanner, summed it up quite neatly:

- ''The narrow self-interest of men exploits The Dreaming.''


Following the Australian Aborigines, I am drawn to the work of
anthropologist, Napoleon Chagneon and his descriptions of the
political structure of the Yanomamö Indians of the Amazon basin. 

It would appear that here groups were living closer together than the
Australian Aborigines and were therefore more likely to come into
contact with each other. Because of intergroup aggression, these
groups had developed into larger defensive, and indeed offensive,
associations. These groups were still strictly close family, but now
numbering up to 300 individuals. Chagneon explained that while
increasing size was considered advantageous for defensive or
offensive reasons, the Yanomamö had not developed the cultural
mechanisms to hold such large groups together, and internal
divisions often caused them to fission back into smaller groups.
These groups traded increased vulnerability to outside aggression for
a stronger internal group solidarity and lower internal aggression.
Again, however, I point to the hierarchical structure of these groups,
and the all-powerful patriarch who had complete control over all of
his group.

In the linear development that I am suggesting we would now step
on to tribes, and then kingdoms. Perhaps it is not necessary to go into
any great detail here as most people will be familiar with internal
political structures of both, and have their own personal favourites. 

What I have described here are living examples displaying possible
steps in the evolution, segments of the tape worm if you prefer, to
larger and more complex societies as we pass from primate ‘troop’, to
clan, to tribe, to kingdom. These new political entities required the
negotiated development of new learned cultural forms to hold larger
and larger numbers together, in opposition to the old inherited
instincts which naturally induced animosity and suspicion towards
any individuals other than close family members of the ‘troop’. This is
what was referred to by Hayek in the quote above regarding the
second of his ‘moral traditions’. These comprise the set of learned
culturally-derived traditions passed on over the centuries that arose
by trial and error - traditions that may seem haphazard with many
seemingly strange inexplicable anomalies, the origin and justification
for which is long forgotten, but which ultimately have worked in
holding cultures together into larger workable groups. Hayek used
the ‘biological term’ ‘group selection’ for this second ‘moral tradition’
but in no way did he intend us to believe this was other than learned
culture.


In his book ‘The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism’ Hayek
made the clear distinction between the first two ‘moral belief’ systems
that have been described above.

 "I have been attempting to explain how extended order of human co-operation has evolved despite opposition from our instincts."

- "This book has shown mankind as torn between two states of being. On the one
hand are the kinds of attitudes and emotions appropriate to behaviour in the
small groups wherein mankind lived for more than one hundred thousand
years, wherein known fellows learnt to serve one another, and pursue common
aims. […] On the other hand there is the more recent development in cultural
evolution wherein we no longer chiefly serve known fellows or pursue common
ends, but where institutions, moral systems and traditions have evolved that
have produced and now keep alive many times more people than existed before
the dawn of civilisation, in pursuing thousands of different ends of their own
choosing in collaboration with thousands of persons whom they will never know."

The older instinctive inherited moral belief system was appropriate
for the use in small groups, but as societies grew, new learned
cultural forms were needed to override certain behaviours which
were no longer appropriate in larger group settings. In a sense it’s the
very origins of ‘political correctness!’.

However, critically, we should note that the underlying structure
of these new associations, the new cultural institutions, closely mimic
the original political structures that had developed over the 25
million years of primate behaviour, or Hayek’s one hundred thousand
years of human behaviour. The inequality inherent in the leadership
by a dominant male in the ‘troop’ became leadership by a patriarch,
followed by leadership by a tribal chief, followed by leadership by a
king, as the associations enlarged by novel necessity, and the new
political structures were devised. By the same process, the subdominant males became, in effect, a ruling aristocratic class under
the king.

All successful ‘cultures’ evolve by developing the cultural tools
needed for survival, and all appear to have followed this same path,
developing the same inequality in their political forms, based on this
initial starting point of hard-wired genetic inequality. It worked for a
million generations and thus was an automatic default starting point
for cultural evolution into larger groups as well.
Thus, when Spengler spoke of the natural order of things being
hierarchical, unequal if you like, and yearned for the old proven
system of the old ruling families and a peasantry who are ruled more
or less by consent, he was indirectly alluding back to the ‘natural’
inequalities derived from the primitive ‘troop’."

...

When the new so-called ‘bourgeois’, or ‘burgher’, elites wanted to take over from the
established aristocracy, they pled the case to ‘reason’ for the
establishment of a society of equals (with themselves as the
democratically elected leadership of course). Here we encounter
Hayek’s third level of ‘moral beliefs’. These are the set of moral beliefs
derived by the intellectuals who believe that by the power of their
own intellect they would be able to derive a better set of moral beliefs
for the organisation of society than the seemingly haphazard form
that currently exists. This is the ‘fatal conceit’ that Hayek referred to
in his book of the same name. And what Spengler called ‘a piece of
intellectual stupidity’.

As we have seen, Spengler had no time for the intellectuals and
their utopian ideas, who claimed to be ‘rational’, but misused ‘reason’
as a weapon to displace the old aristocracy and assume power for
themselves. 


In ‘The Hour of Decision’ he derides the ‘Age of Rationalism’:

- The word (Rational) is familiar enough, but who knows how much it implies? It
is the arrogance of the urban intellect, which, detached from its roots and no
longer guided by strong instinct, looks down with contempt on the full-blooded
thinking of the past and the wisdom of ancient peasant stock. It is the period in
which everyone can read and write and therefore must have his say and always ‘knows better.’


These elites based their claim for power on the so-called ‘reasonable’
proposition that all people were created equal and therefore should
have an equal democratic right to determine who ruled and how.

This, however, was actually based on the Pauline fallacy of ‘All souls
are created equal’ - ‘All men are created equal’ – ‘When Adam
delved and Eve span, who was then the gentleman?’ That is, the
fallacy of equality was based on the now dubious proposition of the
Biblical story of man’s creation six thousand years ago, that everyone
equally has a soul, and that all people were created equal before a
‘God’. I am suggesting that not too many people who are cheerleaders
of democracy these days would actually agree with this proposition,
and yet they continue to base their utopian models on this fallacy."

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]