'''= expert on the governance of the [[Commons]]'''

URL = http://law.fordham.edu/ihtml/fac-2bioPP.ihtml?id=507&bid=1283


=Bio=

"Brett Frischmann is an Associate Professor at the Loyola University Chicago School of Law. He teaches and writes in the areas of intellectual property and Internet/cyberspace law. Recently, he published an important article, An [[Economic Theory of Infrastructure and Commons Management]], in the Minnesota Law Review. Stanford Law Professor Lawrence Lessig published a Reply, Re-Marking the Progress in Frischmann, in the same issue. Professor Frischmann's forthcoming work will be published in the Review of Law and Economics, the Columbia Law Review, and the University of Chicago Law Review.

Professor Frischmann received his Bachelors of Arts and Masters of Science degrees from Columbia University and his Juris Doctor, magna cum laude, from the Georgetown University Law Center. Prior to joining the Loyola faculty, Professor Frischmann was an associate with the law firm of Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering in Washington, DC, where his practice focused on communications, e-commerce and intellectual property law. He also clerked for the Honorable Fred I. Parker on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit."
(http://law.fordham.edu/ihtml/fac-2bioPP.ihtml?id=507&bid=1283)

=Publications=

#An Economic Theory of Infrastructure and Commons Management, 89 Minnesota Law Review 917 (2005) (lead article)-Accompanied by a Reply written by Stanford Law Professor Lawrence Lessig titled, Reply: Re-Marking the Progress in Frischmann.
#Infrastructure Commons, Michigan State Law Review (2004) (invited symposium article).
#Online Essay, Infrastructure Commons in Economic Perspective, First Monday, vol. 12, num. 6 (June 2007) (peer reviewed), at http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_6/frischmann/index.html


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:IP]]