

=Bio=

"Fritz Mielert, architect and political activist, was born in 1979. After
finishing school, he worked seven years as a volunteer for Greenpeace
and participated in many direct actions for the environmental
organization. As an architect, he co-founded a company for product
design and conducted research at the Institute for Lightweight
Structures and Conceptual Design at the University of Stuttgart. Early
2010, together with others, he built up a resistance group, called the
Parkschützer, for which he developed different trainings for civil
disobedience and is instrumental for the public relations of the group.

The "Parkschützer" (Park Guards) are one of the most important groups in
the movement against Stuttgart 21, which is a 4-12 billion euro real
estate project. Consisting of activists and an internet platform
(www.parkschuetzer.de <http://www.parkschuetzer.de/>) with over 30,000
users, the Parkschützer are part
of a more radical group who have declared that they will chain
themselves to trees and/or block construction vehicles. The internet
platform allows users to proclaim what form their personal protest will
take and trainings help in networking protesters with others who have
similar (protest) interests. Active members of the Parkschützer
participate in non-violent direct action, inform the public through
tabling actions, presentations and seminars, and are an important
representation of the resistance movement for the media.


=More Information=


Fon +49 (0)176 - 66 68 18 17

*http://www.bei-abriss-aufstand.de
*http://twitter.com/abrissaufstand


[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]