
'''= "an open-source hardware initiative that makes electronics accessible as a creative material for anyone".''' 

URL = http://www.fritzing.org/

=Description=

"Fritzing is an open-source initiative to support designers and artists to take the step from physical prototyping to actual product. We are aiming to create a software in the spirit of Processing and Arduino, that allows the designer/artist/researcher/hobbyist to document their Arduino-based prototype and create a PCB layout for manufacturing. The complimenting website helps to share and discuss drafts and experiences as well as to reduce manufacturing costs.

Fritzing will essentially be an [[Electronic Design Automation Software]] with a low entry barrier, suited for the needs of designers and artists. It will use the metaphor of the breadboard, so that it will be easy to transfer your hardware sketch to the software. From there it will be possible to export CAD files ready to be sent to a PCB manufacturer.
Why Fritzing is needed

Physical prototyping tools have come a long way and already allow non-engineers to quickly turn their ideas into functional interactive prototypes. However, the prototypes on this stage are still raw and not robust. This is where Fritzing comes in: It allows the designer to move to the next stage and create a finished PCB of your individual circuit in the desired shape. This makes the circuit robust and is the basis for a permanent installation or even batch production of your project.
Who is behind it

Fritzing was started in August 2007 by the Interaction Design Lab at the University of Applied Sciences Potsdam, Germany. It is initiated by Prof. Reto Wettach, André Knörig, Zach Eveland, Jonathan Cohen and Dirk van Oosterbosch. The first phase is funded by the MWFK Brandenburg."
(http://www.fritzing.org/)


=More Information=


#[[Wettach, Reto]]




[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]