'''* Book: FROM CAPITAL TO COMMONS Exploring the Promise of a World Beyond Capitalism. Hannes Gerhardt. Bristol University Press, 2023.'''

URL = https://bristoluniversitypress.co.uk/capital-to-commons


=Description=


=Contents=

==ToC==

===PART I Contemporary Capitalism and the Promise of the Digital Revolution===

1 Theorizing Capitalism and its Demise 17

2 The Digital Commons’ Elusive Potential 35

3 Taking Back the Internet 56


===PART II The Material Economy and Commons===

4 Democratizing Infrastructure 75

5 The Promise of ‘Design Global, Manufacture Local’ 93

6 Contending with the Limits of our Natural World 113


===PART III Money and Value===

7 Coping with Money’s Monopoly on Value 137

8 Reinventing Money’s Role in the Economy 155


===PART IV In Pursuit of a Post-Capitalist Future===

9 Compeerists of the World Unite! 175


==The argument==

"The chapters following this introduction are an exposition of the compeerist
idea and movement outlined thus far. They seek to tap into the strengths and
address the weaknesses of existing commons-oriented theorizations, while
drawing lessons from the experiences of actual commons-aligned actions and
mobilizations. As a whole, the aim is to address, and find possible responses
to, the four major hindrances facing a commons-based, post-capitalist
trajectory summarized earlier.

'''In the first part of the book, the digital revolution and the subsequent establishment of a post-Fordist economy is explored''' in terms of affording
new openings for counter-capitalist, commons-based forms of production.


Chapter 1 commences by laying out the theoretical foundation on which
the rest of the book relies, presenting a capitalism that is turning increasingly
to ‘engineered scarcity’ to ensure profits (Kostakis and Bauwens, 2014).
The chapter then turns to the question of possible systemic change.
The compeerism framework is here shown to be aligned with, but also
distinct from, the nascent ‘P2P approach’, with the major difference
being compeerism’s supplemental incorporation of autonomist Marxists’
theorization of capitalism. As such, the prototypical compeerist outlook
presented both embraces Hardt and Negri’s call for a bottom-up ‘exodus’ out
of capital, while also recognizing the need to engage ‘the market’ and ‘the
state’ if capital is ever to be fully overcome. The role of digital technologies
is presented here as an important tool that nonetheless only affords certain
possibilities; nothing is predetermined.


Chapter 2 then delves into the question of how, given capital’s cooptation
of the digital revolution, the expansion of commons-based digital value
production can nonetheless progress and lay the foundation for a knowledgebased commons sector that could eventually outcompete capital, as per Marx
in Grundrisse. Non-capitalist forms of digital commons contributions are
presented, including from government, non-profits, and cooperatives. The
cooperative framework and movement, with its commitment to devolving
ownership and management to a set of localized and relevant stakeholders,
is shown to be particularly aligned with compeerism, a recurring theme
throughout the book. The key takeaway from Chapter 2, however, is the need
for commons-based digital value producers to engage in greater solidarity,
or ‘boundary commoning’, in order to significantly boost the expansion of
the digital commons (De Angelis, 2017b). Especially important here is the
establishment of a peer-property regime that can protect commons-sourced
digital value from unwanted exploitation, thus enabling the producers of
this value to challenge capital in a market context.


Chapter 3 then goes on to study the various options to exit and overcome
the organization of the current internet, that is, a transactional cyberspace
that has given rise to an increasingly powerful and all-consuming platform
capitalism and an emerging ‘data colonialism’ (Couldry and Mejias, 2019).
The chapter considers the promise and challenges involved in ‘taking back’
the internet via ‘platform cooperatives’ and a movement to reclaim private
and commons-sourced data. This includes efforts to establish a ‘self-sovereign
id’ and the creation of a data commons. Within these efforts the important
role of the state, and especially municipalities, comes to the fore.
The next part of the book moves on from the digitally based economy
to tackle the challenge of translating compeerism to the material realm.


Chapter 4 focuses on the electricity and information technology (IT)
infrastructures on which the digital economy depends. Immediate forms of
exit such as opting out of the electrical or internet ‘macrogrid’ are considered,
before possible longer-term options for decapitalizing critical infrastructure
are explored. Compeerism here seeks alternatives to the top-down,
centralized arrangement prevalent in the delivery of IT and electricity services
by promoting localized, smaller operators and ‘prosumers’ (individuals
participating in production) that would enable greater community autonomy
and control. At the same time, limits to localization are identified, pointing
to the need for state engagement to pursue a decapitalization of larger-scaled
infrastructural assets. The creation of networked and highly democratized
stakeholder cooperatives are presented as the most promising organizational
approach to commonifying the trans-local, material basis of our electricity
and internet delivery systems.


Chapter 5 continues the consideration of the material economy by
looking at the organization of manufacturing. The focus here falls on the
‘design global, manufacture local’ (DG-ML) model espoused by some P2P
theorists as a way to achieve a greater democratization of the means of
production (Kostakis et al, 2015). The blossoming of open-source design,
open-hardware, and versatile makerspaces and fab labs are taken up first
as short-term, localized forms of exit. The analysis then moves on to the
challenges and potentials inherent in a larger scaled, integrated network
of community oriented, democratized small-scale factories. Possible
management arrangements for such commons-oriented facilities are then
assessed and compared, ranging from state-run to various cooperative/
collaborative forms of organization.
Next, Chapter 6 delves into the foundational basis of any economy, that is,
the renewable and non-renewable resource sectors and the underlying natural
planetary systems to which they are bound. This chapter therefore deals with
the overarching challenge of establishing a more resilient and environmentally
sustainable economy within a broader commons-based governance regime.
The DG-ML model is here shown to be particularly suited for the needed
shift to a truly circular economy. The chapter also focuses on agriculture as
a quintessential case of renewable resource management, and a design global,
farm local (DG-FL) model is proposed and explored as part of the broader
aim of achieving a compeerist approach to feeding the world.
In each of the previous three chapters, the argument is made that greater
inter-commons solidarity and commons-friendly state policies are essential
if capital’s decisive control over the material economy is to be overcome.
It is also recognized, assuming the desirability of maintaining advanced
and materially prosperous societies, that complete localization is untenable
as some upscaling would still be called for in the pursuit of efficiencies
and comparative advantages. This would, then, also mean a continuation
of some longer distance trade. Finding a compeerist-aligned approach to
trans-local interactions thus becomes critical, especially when it comes to
the postcolonial, exploitative exchanges that continue to define MinorityMajority World connections. This challenge is taken up explicitly in


Chapter 6, with emphasis placed on the need to localize the control and
governance of material assets/resources in the Majority World while
simultaneously empowering their communities via access to a vibrant,
expansive digital commons.


'''After the first six chapters, it becomes clear that compeerist efforts to boost the commons are fundamentally bogged down by market-based money’s
monopolization of all value designation''', a defining feature of capitalism.

This condition calls forth two essential factors required for a compeerist
trajectory to go forward. First and foremost, in order to fund themselves,
compeerist-aligned actors must adapt to the current, exchange-value centred
economic environment without ‘selling out’. Yet, a second, more long-term
imperative entails challenging and ultimately fully overcoming the current
system of valuation altogether, replacing it with one that is more in line with
compeerist values. 

Part III considers both of these efforts.

Chapter 7 begins by making the case that there currently is no real exit for
the commons from a certain dependency on money. Consequently, various
adaptation strategies by commons-oriented actors are explored, including the
pursuit of exit from capital through collaborative consumption, dependency
on gifting from the populace and government, and lastly, by engaging
markets. The case is then made that the only way to truly challenge capital
is via the latter, market-focused strategy. As such, various mechanisms are
reviewed that could be adopted to assure corruption in such an approach is
avoided. Additionally, two monetary/finance specific efforts are considered
that could assist commons-based producers in going toe-to-toe with capital.

One centres on finding savings and credit arrangements that could internalize
the circulation of money within the commons, and the other deals with
the use of alternative cryptocurrencies to help build, manage, and facilitate
engagement with the commons-based ‘subeconomy’.


Chapter 8, in turn, focuses on the broader compeerist task of fully replacing
the current organization of money creation and distribution. The need for
such a move is highlighted by the fact that the banks’ control over the issuing
of debt-based money, conjured out of thin air, has led to the funnelling of
investments into exploitative and unsustainable commercial endeavours
while governments are left unable to address the increasing dysfunctions
precipitated by their economies. By taking up emergent, unorthodox
approaches to monetary theory, the argument is made for the state to reclaim
its sovereign position as money creator and distributor. Such a shift, especially
if matched with a greater commitment to commons-friendly policies,
would be a crucial coup for the compeerist project. However, given that
states may not be willing to go down such a path, the chapter ends by also
considering macroscaled efforts and potentials to use commons-controlled,
crypto-based monies as a way to help establish sizable, autonomous, noncapitalist economies.


Lastly, the final part of the book turns to the political mobilization and organization that would be called for to truly achieve a post-capitalist
trajectory along compeerist lines. 


Chapter 9 thus proceeds by making the case
that such a political-economic upheaval would depend on the emergence of
an intentional, commoner consciousness that could inspire a mass political
‘movement of movements’. Yet for such a movement to outcompete other,
more destructive discourses and mobilizations that are likely to emerge
as capitalism’s failings mount, will depend on being able to deliver actual
benefits from the commons and commoning. Harnessing a mass mobilization
to compeerist ends is thus presented as necessitating both bottom-up forms
of exit and targeted ‘hit-and-run’ demands on the state. This latter focus
on the state is based on a long-term commitment to improve the chances
of localized, compeerist initiatives to form and coalesce to the point where
they can effectively challenge capital.


After having remained squarely focused throughout the book on a
presentation of compeerism within the context of the current capitalist
mode of production, Chapter 10 concludes by looking at what a fullyfledged compeerist economy, released from the fetters of capital dominance,
could look like. Importantly, no universal prescriptions are offered, seeing
that a compeerist economy and society can have multiple configurations.
Nevertheless, the chapter offers a basic outline of the major issues involved
in pursuing a commons-oriented governance of the market, money, and
property. Then, to offer a bit more tangibility, the chapter proceeds to lay
out just one case of a hypothetical compeerist society. Careful consideration
is here given to the interconnected and mutually reinforcing organization
of both the economic and political spheres of society.


As the book comes to an end, the reader should be left with a better
understanding of the compeerist promise and its challenges. The focus
will primarily have been on the techno-economic dimensions of what
a commons-based transition out of capitalism would involve, with some
attention also given to the political breakthroughs that would be required.
As such, the book will have addressed the fundamental question of whether
a post-capitalist future is possible that is not only prosperous but also just
and sustainable. The answer to this question is, in the end, a conditional
but insistent ‘yes’, if societies can find the needed motivation and method
to put the various pieces of the compeerist puzzle together."

=Excerpts=

==From the introduction==

By Hannes Gerhardt:

"This book builds on these approaches while also addressing their current
shortcomings by providing a more holistic analysis of the many technological,
economic, and political shifts that would necessarily be involved in a
commons-centred trajectory out of capitalism. Hence, the starting point for
this endeavour is to home in on the four most fundamental and difficult to
crack obstacles that stand in the way of such a commons-based transition.

These are:

1) capital’s cooptation and subsequent prevention of a fully freed, digitally
empowered general intellect;

2) capital’s continued control and exploitation of the material basis of
the economy;

3) the difficulty of establishing commons-based social relations and forms of
production given that value is monopolized by markets and money; and

4) the lack of a coherent political framework and mobilization that could
succeed in bringing about positive systemic change.


It is worth reviewing these, and the perceived inability of current commonsbased theorizations to deal with them, before summarizing compeerism’s
own particular positionality.

'''The hurdles facing a capital to commons trajectory:'''

To begin, the digital revolution’s promise of liberating a turbocharged,
commons-based general intellect must be acknowledged as far from
inevitable. In fact, while the abundance associated with crowdsourced and
freely accessible digital knowledge/code/data poses a potential threat to
the mediation of scarcity on which capitalism largely depends, it appears
that capital as a whole has effectively adapted to the new technological
environment and, indeed, has turned it to its benefit. This coup has been
achieved in a variety of ways.

For '''one''', capital has engaged in a fierce battle to keep its own digital
productions artificially scarce through intellectual-property protections while
increasingly making use of the digital commons for free, valuable content and
inspiration. Additionally, capital has managed to corral digitized, proprietary
and volunteered material through internet platforms that act as rent-seeking
gatekeepers. These platforms, furthermore, have become a critical source of
data extraction, offering an entirely new realm of highly profitable marketing
information. Not least, the decentralization and modularization of work
enabled by digital networks, heralded as a way to foster geographically
distributed collaboration, has been tapped by capital to acquire a pliable and
easily exploitable pool of labour, as is well documented in the so-called gig
economy (Woodcock, 2021).

Looking to the future, capital is already engaged in shaping and subverting
the next wave of digital technologies to open further profit frontiers. This is
most clearly seen in the embrace of encrypted ledger technologies, such as
blockchain, which enable secure and theoretically infallible digitally-logged
records of ownership and transactions. Blockchain can hence be used to
digitally capture and monetize activities and productions that were previously
outside the reach of commodification (Swan, 2015). One example is the
proliferation of non-fungible tokens, or NFTs, which allow for the secure
marketization of a broad range of digital media by making these into
artificially scarce ‘property’ managed on the blockchain. Thus, in short,
while the digital revolution may have changed the way capitalism works,
it has not made it weaker – if anything, the opposite appears to be true.

The '''second''' major obstruction to a digitally-empowered usurpation
of capitalism pertains to the fact that the underlying materiality of the
economy is still primarily in private, profit-seeking hands. Hence, even
if a liberated general intellect mediated through the digital commons is
accepted as a possible challenge to capital in some areas, it is fair to doubt
that this would be enough to precipitate the demise of the entire capitalist
‘mode of production’, that is, the overarching organization of our labour
and resources (Marx and Engels, 1965). This is because the assumption of
potential abundance linked to digital value, which is the cornerstone of the
argument that commons-based peer production maintains an advantage over
capital, does not apply to the material realm, which is characterized by clear
physical limitations and, indeed, scarcity.

In the absence of a commons-oriented takeover of material assets and
resources, therefore, these will go on being employed in the pursuit of
extractive and exploitative profits. In the digital economy, this means
capital will resume leveraging its ownership of the undergirding material
infrastructure to control and limit access to what could theoretically be
infinitely reproducible information/knowledge. Capital will also retain
control over the physical resources and added value entailed in the unending
amount of material things we want and need, from food and clothing to all
the electronic devices that enable and harness the internet’s value. Not least,
due to this control, capitalist actors and their interests will continue to define
humanity’s currently dysfunctional relationship to the environment. The
overarching question when faced with these realities, then, is how commonsbased rationales and values could break through and become dominant
not only within the digital realm, but also in areas such as infrastructure,
manufacturing, and resource/environmental management.

This brings us to the '''third''' foundational challenge, which gets to the
very heart of why both the digital and material commons struggle to assert
themselves, namely, capitalism’s ability to reduce almost everything of value
to a market-based, money-denominated good or service. With money
here becoming a stand-in for value, it also becomes the de facto means for
accessing almost anything tangible that is worth having. In other words, as
long as access to the goods and services required for living are denominated
in tokens that can generally only be acquired through work, people will
continue to depend on remunerated (paid) employment to live. Indeed, this
is how labour is so easily coopted and exploited by capital, and, subsequently,
disallowed from significantly contributing to the commons. For instance, in
terms of the promise of freeing digital abundance (the general intellect), we
are reminded of Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak’s well-known statement
at the first Hacker Conference of 1984, where he opined that ‘information
should be free but your time should not’ (Brand, 1985, p 49). In other
words, digital producers also want to be paid (and software companies want
to make profits).

Faced with the underlying reality of the monopolization of marketcentred value, a natural conclusion could be that actors seeking to expand
the commons and commons-forms of governance have no choice but to
engage markets in order to fund the labour and resources needed for their
activities. This approach, however, comes with a host of additional difficulties
and conundrums, such as dealing with the apparent contradiction involved
in striving to provide something as a commons-based good that is, at the
same time, intended to generate revenue. Additionally, the commonsoriented entrepreneur must compete within a price-oriented marketplace
that can clash with their adopted principles of production, such as sharing
innovations, investing in the community, and worker-empowerment. Some
even argue that engaging in commodity exchange and money leads to an
inevitable condition in which the worth of resources and labour can only
be understood through the lens of markets, hence making a path out of
capitalist rationales and actions impossible (Pitts, 2018a).

'''Lastly''', turning to the final major obstacle facing a capital-to-commons
trajectory, there is the overarching question of what political action would
be required for the needed shift in social relations to become dominant,
and if successful whether the subsequent governance regimes would be
preferable to what is being replaced. Regarding this latter issue, for instance,
critics like to point out the haphazard and sometimes autocratic managerial
cultures evident in the production of the digital commons (Pentzold,
2021). Additionally, and focusing on commons-based peer production in
particular, some scholars have pointed to the lack of intentional, bureaucratic
governance structures in these endeavours, making them unqualified for
handling complex, long-term and inherently political projects involving
multiple external stakeholders (Kreiss et al, 2010). In other words, it is one
thing to crowdsource an encyclopedia for the commons, but it is a very
different thing , for example, to organize universal access to the internet.
Even if an effective and just commons-centred form of governance can
be achieved at scale and across economic sectors, however, we are still
left with the question of how to get there. In other words, how would a
mass, commons-based transition out of capitalism unfold politically, and,
more to the point, what role would the state, as a bulwark of the current
mode of production, play in such a process? The question of a countercapitalist movement’s relation to the state finds multiple, divergent answers
by proponents of a commons-centred systemic transition, ranging on a
spectrum from calls to ignore, engage, and capture the state. Neither of
these, however, has proven to be broadly convincing for the politically left-leaning populace as a whole."


==[[From Peer Production To Compeerism]]==

Hannes Gerhardt:

"We can begin by first noting that the terminology of ‘commons-based
peer production’ (or just ‘peer production’), still widely embraced by P2P
theorists, is inadequate in capturing the proposal actually being offered.
The main issue here is that it is unclear whether the concept refers to a
supplement to capitalism, as per Benkler, or to an upstart form of production
challenging capital, as posited in the P2P approach. Homing in on the
second of these meanings, the term ‘compeerism’ is offered as a related yet
still distinct outlook, ultimately consisting of an amalgamation and finessing
of existing theorizations of a commons-based transition out of capitalism.

The label of compeerism is apt as it combines the commons and the ‘peer
to peer’ focus into one, while adding a dimension of political intentionality
by making the term an ‘ism’. Compeerism also encapsulates and puts an
emphasis on the commons/community and implies sharing in the word
‘peer’, reflecting a commitment to counter-capitalist ‘commonification’, that
is, the process of shifting critical assets into the commons realm (Broumas,
2020). Furthermore, the actual word ‘compeer’ is defined as ‘an equal’ or
‘peer’, with the archaic verb meaning ‘to be equal to’. This connotation is
fitting as it points to the need to enable equitable opportunities to produce,
access, govern, and collaboratively use the commons.

Lastly, compeerism, as a word, is succinct and evocative, and hence more
likely to inspire a call to action than the rather stale label of ‘commons-based peer production’, or even worse its commonly used acronym
‘CBPP’. Consider, for instance, this adaptation of Hélder Câmara’s famous
quote: “When we purchase goods for the poor, they call us saints; when
we ask why the commons aren’t used to eliminate poverty, they call us
compeerists!”. If we were here to substitute ‘compeerists’ with ‘commons-based peer producers’, the quote would clearly lose its force.
Moving forward, the term compeerism explored and advanced in this
book denotes two interrelated conceptualizations. On the one hand, it
references a broad theoretical framework to make sense of the current and
potential future relationship between the state, capital, and the commons.

This assessment pays special attention to how capital has been, is being, or
could be exited and replaced with commons-oriented forms of production
and governance. On the other hand, compeerism also designates a political-economic positionality that embraces specific, non-capitalist values. Indeed,
the compeerist proposition is not just about theorizing a technologically
enabled reworking of how production is organized, as per Benkler, but
rather how a completely new organization of society could come about,
and, critically, why such a transition is worth pursuing.

The conception of value and values inherent in compeerism, broadly
shared by the counter-capitalist approaches from which it is inspired,
goes a long way in illuminating its underlying drive and fundamental
clash with capital (De Angelis, 2007; Arvidsson and Peitersen, 2016)."

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Post-Capitalism]]