'''* Thesis: Nicolas Buttin. Think Design to Shape Sustainability. From Designing Products to Thinking New Systems. Design Management Thesis 2010'''

The full document can be accessed here: http://www.scribd.com/doc/78400172

design management thesis about sustainability, systems thinking and building tools for paradigm shift. Includes the concept of Goods Commons.



=Abstract=

On the issue of sustainability, designers have been accused of being part of the problem. Building on a design concept, the main research question is: how can design management shape sustainability at local levels through an online platform for exchange, hire and purchase of products and services? The purpose of this study is to outline recommendations for the development of such a product-service system (PSS).


In order to answer the research question three areas of investigations have been established and explored through the analysis of primary and secondary data:

- Definitions of design and design management

- Understandings and solutions to sustainability

- Perceptions, habits and involvement around sustainability at local levels


The literature review covers the first two areas of investigation. It reviews the recent expansion of design and its management to systems and services, notably through design thinking. It also reviews the often-confronting spheres of sustainability (ecological, social, economic). Our field research addresses the neglected fourth sphere of this ‘system’: personal issues and motivations. Two separate surveys in London and Paris where set up – as well as a blog – in order to investigate this area but also the potential of the online PSS with end-users.

Recommendations for this study conclude on building such a PSS concept using design thinking to encapsulate ecological, social, economic and personal issues regarding sustainability. An open, collaborative and generalist platform building on previous PSS successes and initiatives is likely to grasp interest and inspiration from users as shown in our field research. Finally, continuing investigating the question on a global scale would be needed to compare other types of areas and countries.

=Excerpts=


==Product-service systems: a solution?==

Researchers and institutions such as the UN and the EU have stated the need for product-service systems (PSS) to tackle the challenges of sustainability: SCORE!, SusProNet and the UNEP.

A PSS can be defined as consisting of “tangible products and intangible services designed and combined so that they jointly are capable of fulfilling specific customer’s needs” (Tischner et al., 2002). PSS is a new term for an old idea: “emphasizing access over ownership” (Rifkin, 2000). It is simply about sharing products among people – usually at local level – and recognizing that “green systems are just as important as green products” (Manzini, 1993). We already take part in these systems when we use rental DVDs, Laundromats, libraries, gyms and taxis; now people are starting to talk about PSS with regard to things that many of us don’t usually share, such as cars, tools appliances, and workspaces. Many see PSSs as an excellent vehicle to “enhance competitiveness and foster sustainability simultaneously” (Tukker, 2004).

Various classifications of PSS have been proposed: “product-oriented services, use- oriented services, result-oriented” (Behrend et al., 2003; Brezet et al., 2001; Zaring et al., 2001). Product-oriented services are still oriented towards sales of products “with some extra services added” such as product take back, repair or maintenance (Tukker, 2004). Use-oriented services are geared towards use of products in different form, “while ownership usually stays with the provider” like car-sharing system or laundry (Tukker, 2004). In result-oriented services there is “no pre-determined product involved; client and provider agree on a result”, which could be a service or even an experience (Tukker, 2004). Consequently, a great variety of result-oriented services emerged at the community/local level. They are usually isolated, unique and spontaneous systems.

Therefore, use- and result-oriented systems seem more relevant to our proposed design concept. Product manufacturing and sells are inexistent; it is people who share what they already have. Although ownership doesn’t belong to the provider but remains with users, it is indeed a use-oriented system. “Through PSS, people can rent, lease, share and pool products to use instead of buying them. In these services users would be still able to own a product, nevertheless the ownership is rather temporary” (Wimmer and Kang, 2006). Barriers to PSS development are consistent. The “social behaviour of users/customers is potentially the largest barrier for PSS-realisation, as it is often difficult to make the user comprise the freedom gained from total ownership of the product, as opposed to partial ownership of the artefact” (McAloon & Andreasen, 2004; Manzini, 1993).

As researchers in PSS pointed out, from the consumers point of view most of the problems regarding our consumption and production patterns belong to one of three categories, or a combination of them “excessive consuming, product-owning and throw-away culture” (Wimmer and Kang, 2006). In this respect, PSSs are “highlighted because of their holistic lifespan thinking and flexible way of addressing the underlying demand” (Wimmer and Kang, 2006). Further, an integration of services and products is emphasized as a ‘social design activity’. Therefore, one of the “challenge is to facilitate a communication process which links needs and requirements effectively” (Ericsson, Müller, Larsson & Stark, 2009).

Design researchers Ezio Manzini and François Jégou have spent years researching a growing number of small, bottom-up community solutions for sharing tools, mobility, community spaces, and knowledge. They put forward the hopeful observation that these kinds of systems are emerging organically within communities, and they encourage designers to shepherd them forward, improving their visibility and effectiveness. In their research, Manzini and Jégou have tackled the emergence of shared “multiservice centers” (www.sustainable-everyday.net). Such multiservice centers are part of an “empowered place”, a community in which social structures built into everyday life help to create and support sustainable practices. They tried to reference initiatives of what they call “creative communities” and “collaborative services” which gives a comprehensive view of this emerging phenomenon in the digital age. To explain their research Jégou said in an interview with Dwell. “Widespread connectivity is what makes product-service systems a new idea. These solutions already exist in various forms. Our project merely brought them together. There’s nothing sci-fi about it. For example, from Beijing we took the idea of the Lift Club, a sort of safe hitchhiking service organized by way of mobile text messaging. All these things are banal locally, but when we introduce them elsewhere, they are innovations”(2004).

Design thinker John Thackara observed in his book In the Bubble (2005) that “while resources may be limited, people are abundant”. A fundamental shift from an economy based on stuff to one based on people – designed for systems and services, rather than things – is essential in the creation of sustainable communities through PSSs:

- “In a less-stuff-more-people world, we still need systems, platforms, and services that enable people to interact more effectively and enjoyably. These platforms and infrastructures will require some technology and a lot of design. Connecting people, resources, and places to each other in new combinations, on a real-time basis, delivers demand-responsive services that, when combined with location awareness and dynamic resource allocation, have the potential to reduce drastically the amount of hardware – from gadgets to buildings – that we need to function effectively. Most of us are potentially both users and suppliers of resources. The principle use-not-own, can apply to all kinds of hardware: buildings, roads, vehicles, offices – and above all, people. For more or less anything heavy and fixed, we don’t have to own them – just know how and where to find them” (Thackara, 2005)



==Demand for building localized goods and services exchange==

Considering reviewed literature and findings, the potential of the proposed online PSS design concept is significant. 


Several points have been revealed:

- interest of end-users for sustainability issues

- sharing habits in place in surveyed areas

- designers praising for these types of solutions

- government and EU funding for research and implementation


Surveyed groups are by a large margin interested in sustainability issues, however most point out that their concerns are more personal and short-term, than conceptual and long-term. It seems that only through meeting personal and short-term needs, one can get results in the long-term for global sustainability issues. The fact that both groups replied that “helping one another” is their major source of concern regarding such a system is interesting, regarding the poor score of reducing carbon footprint for example. The direct and short-term signification of such a system should probably focus on human and rewarding aspects, which is perhaps a challenge for an online platform. How to humanize and make an online platform connect to reality? This should be a major source of concern for future implementation.

Some sharing habits are in place and a few people are asking for simpler, convenient and cheaper solutions to be sustainable, than traditional green products or recycling. Recommendations, creative solutions and the fun factor are possible drivers for them to change their habits and be involved in more sustainable practices. Breaking past cultural assumptions that equate affluence with ownership may still be the greatest challenge to wide implementation of PSS, but what if the alternative is cheaper and more sustainable, doesn’t clutter our homes, and connects us with our neighbours? What if we use cars, tools, appliances and workspaces the way we use Laundromats, libraries, gyms and taxis? What if, in short, PSS can staggeringly improve our quality of life? For instance, by creating learning experiences, friendly relationships and unexpected stories along the way.

Designers and researchers are praising to make these solutions more global, replicable and open to creativity (SCORE!, SusProNet, UNEP). Indeed online PSSs already working are usually pre-packed solutions to one particular problem or issue. They are not generalist systems that leave the open door to inventing brand new solutions. They are usually isolated systems working independently or even against each other. A stronger need for what we referred to as “service design” in the literature is demanded. Findings indicate on this matter a strong will to participate, co-create and develop creativity. Co-designing services with people at every step of the process is a challenge but also probably a great opportunity. Managing this process from creation, to evolution and continual transformation is a design management challenge.

Besides, demands from the top and funding are emerging, making these kinds of solutions interesting for governments and global institutions. Conceptually they are increasingly seen as drivers of innovation but also sustainable solutions to save money, reduce carbon emissions and therefore meeting environmental objectives and agreements. These public funding opportunities also are making such PSSs viable solutions. Moreover on the economic side, financial partnerships and infrastructure collaboration are being reinforced to reduce costs and risks.


Lastly, regarding demands, some challenges can be identified for successful implementation of such PSS:

- gap between the concept of sustainability and concrete actions to take

- gap between virtual and real-world experiences

- accessibility and convenience of the platform

- effectiveness and trust of products and services provided

- design an inspiring, fun and beautiful PSS in order to change behaviours

- create a generalist alternative to past PSS initiatives



==Recommendations==

“Expand the capabilities of people to lead the kind of lives they value” (Amartya Sen, 1998)


Based on in the in-depth investigation of end-users but also regarding the literature review on sustainability and PSS, several recommendations have been devised regarding the implementation of the proposed design concept:

- A multidisciplinary approach to PSS has been a seminal idea along this thesis. It has been put forward by the literature review and along the discussion. Looking at all sides of the design problem (economic, ecological, social and personal) and reflecting on design management as a potential solution to bringing these different voices and ideas together, we strongly recommend communication, sharing of expertises and experiences to shape a more sustainable future through design.

- Linking designers and users is another point that appeared in this thesis. Not only looking at problem-solving as a solution to the design problems, but putting forward users, in a service design approach way to imagine solutions together. Some people are willing to be more involved and active in the process of design by co-designing services that they (in the end) will use for themselves. In this respect designers should be seen more as facilitators, listeners and translators of needs and aspirations. We argued that it is only this way, that design can shape sustainability.

- The need for collaboration of designers and complementary skill development around issues of sustainability is necessary. Although partially investigated in the paper, we believe that emulation within the design community around sustainability is already happening. Bringing designers from different backgrounds (graphic designers, information designers, service designers and design thinkers) is a key step in making such solutions true innovations. Moreover, we believe that more designers (and design managers) need to become literate in the field of sustainability to reinforce design solutions and transform design to make it more sustainable in the future.

- In this perspective, there is a need for knowledge exchange amongst environmentalists, economists, social experts, designers and managers in order to find viable roadmaps and scenarios. Although, there is no one-size-fits-all scenario or future to achieving a sustainable and wish-able future, it is only through dialogue, debate and common understanding that insightful decisions and smart actions can be taken.


- As far as business model is concerned, again there is no one-size-fits-all business model solution as there isn’t one-size-fits-all solution to achieving sustainability. 


Therefore, we don’t pretend to recommend a single model but rather outline possible scenarios Several business models are plausible:

o Entrance fee or monthly fee to access the service.

o Pay-per-use, fee possibly depending on nature of service/good used.

o Advertising supporting the PSS costs of the online service.

o Virtual credits to be traded among users (in the manner of time banking).

o Mixed approach with free services and commissions on other services.

o Evolving approach from totally free services to successive paying services.


- The evolutionary and somehow organic development of this online service (with users involved), necessitate a continuous feedback and redesign of the platform but also probably its business model. For instance depending on the nature of use, partnerships could be added to the service and change its nature. The open innovation approach represents an opportunity to quickly match and target people’s needs, but on the opposite it is complex and changing overtime. Therefore management is risky and complex but, must be considered at all times.

- Relying on public funding and infrastructure as well a previous public financed research (SCORE!, SusProNet, UNEP) could be an interesting route to consider. Build on previous knowledge, experience and initiatives already undertaken, under development or studied.

- Developing a broad and generalist brand for local PSSs to merge, find new users and market beyond traditional eco-customers.

- Building on previous PSS successes and initiatives, and replicate it in similar areas where these systems are needed. In other words, building a catalyst platform, without necessarily reinventing the wheel.



==Conclusions and further research==

“There are no passengers on Spaceship Earth. We are all crew”.

(Marshall McLuhan, 1964)



This study poses the main research question: how can design management shape sustainability at local levels through an online platform for exchange, hire and purchase of products and services? This question was investigated through an online PSS concept.

Looking at the literature and findings we concluded that design management was well positioned into encapsulating and orchestrating complex aspects of sustainability. In this investigation we extracted relevant sub-concepts in between sustainability and design, what we referred to as the sustainability puzzle: environment, economic, social and personal issues. We argued that these various pieces and perspectives needed to be assembled in a brand new way.

On top of that, the systemic approach of PSS also implies thinking in systems; one thing that design management through design thinking is particularly good at. Linking local and global, virtual and real-world experiences, past initiatives and new needs are true challenges that design management aims to tackle. Looking at personal issues as drivers for involvement we praised for an open innovation approach using service design as a tool to grasp aspirations and imagination.

Lastly, we concluded that putting PSS at the centre, through a more generalist and open perspective was a challenge and an opportunity. In order to be meaningful, attractive and user-friendly, it requires coherence, consistence and a lot of design.


'''Further research'''

Bellow is a list of recommendations for further research and investigations, based on issues raised in this study:

- Continue the research started on other parts of the world to compare urban and rural areas, developed and developing countries. Our first recommendation would be to continue these investigations elsewhere to compare and/or confirm our first results with other panels of respondents.

- Broadening the research, including the two other groups of stakeholders (design management experts; and businesses, organizations and institutions). Design management certainly means confronting and according different points of view to a same (often multifaceted) problem. Therefore, studying other groups of stakeholders would be another recommendation to continue exploring the fields of PSS, sustainability and design management. Our approach was certainly bottom-up oriented, looking at the very end of the materials economy: end-users/consumers. To be faithful to the theories of design thinking, confronting our first findings with analytical thinking such as experts and hands-on experience of businesses would be of great interest in order to triangulate every corner of the studied issue.

- Build on the research and collected information through the blog, perhaps through co-designing and prototyping solutions with users.

- A detailed research on specific aspects raised in this research: sustainability issues detailed in the sustainability puzzle and particularly findings of personal issues and explore further spiritual issues.


=More Information=

'''Suggested reading:'''

Birkeland, J. (2002) Design for sustainability: a sourcebook for integrated, eco-logical solutions. Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Blackburn, W. (2007) The sustainability handbook: the complete management guide to achieving social, economic and environmental responsibility. Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Boland, R. J. Jr. & Collopy, F. ed. (2004) Managing as designing. Stanford: Stanford Business Books

Borja de Mozota, B. (2003) Design management. Using design to build brand value and corporate innovation. New York: Allworth Press.

Brown, T. (2007) Strategy by design [Internet]. Available from <http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/95/design-strategy.html> [Accessed 24 November 2009].

Clayton, A. & Radcliffe, N. (1996) Sustainability: a systems approach. Westview Press.

Cooper, R. & Press, M. (2003) The design experience. The role of design and designers in the twenty-first century. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Cooper, R., Junginger, S. & Lockwood, T. (2009) Design thinking and design management: A research and practice perspective. Design Management Review, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 46-55.

Cox, G. (2005) Cox Review of creativity in business: Building on UK’s strengths. Commissioned by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, London: HM Treasury.

Creasy, S. (2006) Only one company can be the cheapest. All others must use design. Design Council Magazine, Issue I, Winter, pp. 36-39.

Design Council and Creative & Cultural Skills (2008) Design Blueprint. London: Design Council [also available Accessed 4 May 2010]. Available from <http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/Design-Council/3/Publications/>.

Doppelt, B. (2008) The power of sustainable thinking: how to create a positive future for the climate, the planet, your organization and your life. Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Gorb, P. & Dumas, A. (2007) Silent Design. Design Studies, Vol. 8, No. 3, July 1987, pp. 150-156.

Harvard Business Review on Green Business Strategy (2007). Harvard: Harvard Business School
Press.

Jackson, T. (2009) Prosperity without growth: economics for a finite planet. Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Leonard, A. (2010) The story of stuff: how our obsession with stuff is trashing the planet, our communities, and our health-and a vision for change. Free Press.

Lockwood, T. ed. (2009) Design thinking: integrating innovation, customer experience, and brand value. 3rd ed., Allworth Press.

Maeda, J. (2006) The laws of simplicity: design, technology, business, life. Boston: MIT Press

Martin, R. (2009) The design of business: why design thinking is the next competitive advantage. Harvard Business School Press.

Ryan, C. (2006). Dematerializing consumption through service substitution is a design challenge. Journal of Industrial Ecology. 4(1).

Seffen, A. (2008) Worldchanging: a user's guide for the 21st century. Abrams.

Senge, P. (2010) The necessary revolution: working together to create a sustainable world. Broadway Business.

Seybold, P. (2006) Outside innovation: how your customers will co-design your company's future. HarperBusiness.

Shedroff, N. (2009) Design is the problem: the future of design must be sustainable. Rosenfeld Media.

Tukker, A. & Tischner, U. (2006) New business for Old Europe: product-service development, competitiveness and sustainability. Sheffield: Greenleaf Publications


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Sharing]]