'''Book: [[Siefkes, Christian|Christian Siefkes]]. From Exchange to Contributions: Generalizing Peer Production into the Physical World. Ed. C. Siefkes, 2007'''

Website: http://www.peerconomy.org/wiki/Main_Page

Fulltext URL: http://peerconomy.org/text/peer-economy.pdf (July 2008 edition)

==Introduction==

From the author:

The big text I was working on for the last nine months is ready. It is
about the question of the potential of peer production — the way free
software is produced. We know that this new mode of production is of
great importance in regard to free software — success stories like
GNU/Linux, Apache or Wikipedia speak for themselves.

However, is this mode of production only relevant for information goods? Or is there a
potential for more, maybe a revolution of the entire sphere of production?

The results of my considerations are now published under the
title “From Exchange to Contributions: Generalizing Peer Production
into the Physical World”. Initially it was intended to be a long
article, but due to the complexity of the topic it became a book!

The entire text of the book can be downloaded as a [http://www.peerconomy.org/text/peer-economy.pdf PDF] (155 pages). A smaller 2-up version (two pages on one, 77 pages) is also available, on [http://www.peerconomy.org/text/peer-economy.2-letter.pdf letter] or [http://www.peerconomy.org/text/peer-economy.2-a4.pdf A4] paper.

The text can be modified and copied under the conditions of the
Creative Commons NonCommercial-ShareAlike-Licence.

A paperback print [http://www.peerconomy.org/wiki/Main_Page#Buy_the_book is also available] and costs 9.50 euros —
recommendable for all, who want to do their eyes, their printer, or
simply me a favor:-)

I will be happy about feedback, critics, and inspired
debates. If my book leads to a reflection that a post-capitalist
economy is no longer as utopian as might seem, then its ends are
achieved."

==Summary==

A new mode of production has emerged in the areas of software and
content production. This mode, which is based on sharing and
cooperation, has spawned whole mature operating systems such as
GNU/Linux as well as innumerable other free software applications;
giant knowledge bases such as the Wikipedia; a large free culture
movement; and a new, wholly decentralized medium for spreading,
analyzing and discussing news and knowledge, the so-called
blogosphere.

So far, this new mode of production--peer production--has been
limited to certain niches of production, such as information goods.
This book discusses whether this limitation is necessary or whether
the potential of peer production extends farther. In other words:
Is a society possible in which peer production is the primary mode of
production? If so, how could such a society be organized?

Is a society possible where production is driven by demand and not
by profit? Where there is no need to sell anything and hence no
unemployment? Where competition is more a game than a struggle for
survival? Where there is no distinction between people with capital
and those without? A society where it would be silly to keep your
ideas and knowledge secret instead of sharing them; and where
scarcity is no longer a precondition of economic success, but a
problem to be worked around?

It is, and this book describes how."

==Motivation==

Christian Siefkes:

"My approach is a problem-driven one: if people will be faced with this
problem, they'll have to deal with it, and I discuss a possible way of
dealing with it. If the problem never arises, so much the better--in this
case, that part of my book would be unnecessary, which would still leave
about 30% that would be useful. However, I don't think that a transition to
a post-capitalist society will be possible without dealing with this
problem. A society where all demands are satisfied through Selbstentfaltung
may be possible, but I doubt that such a society could grow immediately out
of capitalism.

In so far as current peer production tends to go, my solution is the same as
of current peer production processes: you can take anything, without having
to give anything back, as long as you don't take it _away_ from others. That
means that you can freely take information and anything else that can be
copied freely. Current peer production tends to end here.

The problem that arises next is how to organizing taking when taking does
mean taking away: say if I want to take a bicycle, but somebody else wants
to take it too -- if there's only one bicycle, and if one of us would take
it, she would take it away from the other (she would deny her the
possibility of taking it). My problem to this solution is basically:
"arrange production, through social agreements, so as to avoid that taking
becomes taking away -- i.e. arrange production so as to ensure that there is
one bicycle (etc.) for everyone who needs one." People thus enter a joint
agreement to help each other produce what each of them needs.

Realizing this common goal requires effort, and the agreement must therefore
find a mode for distributing this effort--my proposal here is either to
distribute effort evenly among participants (flatrate model), or to
distribute it roughly proportionally to the effort it takes to satisfy
everyone's wishes ("the more you want, the more you have to give"), plus
some further details and possible modifications. The decision to regard
effort as "abstract human labor", disregarding the specific useful goods it
produces (except that they must of course be useful, i.e. somebody must want
them), is therefore the result of an social agreement, it does not happen
"behind the back of the producers."

The important thing, I believe, is that people enter a joint agreement to
help each other produce what they need--the details of the agreement (how to
distribute effort etc.) will be a matter of experimentation. Feel free to
propose better solutions for these details, if you know any.

But please stop ignoring the difference between freely copyable and other
things: if you take a copy of Linux, nobody else loses a thing, but if you
take the last bicycle, other people lose the possibility to take it. That's
a difference that must be dealt with, merely wishing it away won't help you.

I don't think the problem in capitalism is that you don't get everything for
free. On a deep level, the problem that you have to work in order to consume
even exists in any society, since only goods that have been produced can be
consumed. Thus work (production) is always a necessary precondition for
consumption--maybe not for you personally, but definitely for society as a
whole. (Of course, the people doing it may perceive this work not as
necessity, but as Selbstentfaltung, as something they're doing voluntarily
and with pleasure--that's the best outcome a mode of production can hope to
achieve. But it can only be an outcome, not a precondition for a mode of
production. Otherwise needs which, for whatever reasons, cannot be satisfied
by pure Selbstentfaltung would simply be neglected, and that wouldn't be a
good thing.)

The problem in capitalism is that production only takes place if there is
_profit._ The goal of all capitalist production is to make profit, i.e. to
turn money into more money. So, in order to get the things you need, you
cannot just "work a little"--no, you have to convince some capitalist that
they need you, i.e. that employing you allows them to make more profit than
they would make otherwise. Your mere willingness to work is entirely
unimportant--you must be useful for some capitalist, too. But capitalists
only need a limited number of personnel, much less than there are people on
Earth, so that's the big hurdle which most people fail to overcome (when
speaking on a global scale).

The second aspect of this problem is that, as a worker, you don't sell the
results of your labor, you sell your _labor power_ (workers, or would-be
workers, are people who don't have anything to sell than their labor
power--most people haven't). The deal by selling your labor power is: you
get paid the value of your labor power (what else?), and the value of your
labor power is what you need in order to survive (according to your local
community standard of living); in return, you have to give your full labor
power (according to the local standard for the length of they work day/week,
say, 8 hours a day/40 hours a week). If the production of the goods you need
for your standard of living takes 20 hours a week, you still have to work 40
hours--the other 20 hours are the "surplus"--they go to the capitalist,
become their profit and are, in fact, the only reason why they employed you
in the first place.

In the peer economy, you don't need to be useful for a capitalist, since you
can join, without any preconditions, the general agreement to help each
other produce what they need. And since work is simply divided up, there is
no surplus--if producing your standard of living takes 20 hours a week, you
work 20 hours (assuming a proportional model), if you want a higher
standard, you have to work a bit more, say 25 hours, etc. (In fact, your
workload would probably be even lower, since in capitalism there is much
duplication of work and overload work which would be unnecessary in a peer
economy.) The general agreement to help each other produce what they want
and to divide the necessary work among those that can contribute means that
everybody who can has to work a little, but nobody has to work very much.
(And if you can't contribute at all, then you don't have to. That's how I
describe it, at least, and I believe that rule to be very important, since
the goal of dividing up the labor is to allow everyone to get what they want
with the least possible effort, not to exclude anybody.)

That's the difference between capitalism and the peer economy. For many
people in our society, it would mean the difference between life and death,
or at least between having to live in misery or being able to live a good
life. And for almost everybody else it, it's the difference between having
to work very much (and often with the fear of losing that precious, if
unloved job and the advantages it entails) and having to work much less (and
without fear of dropping out). And that's not even speaking of the fact that
in the peer economy you're part of a equal community of co-producers with a
common goal (produce for everyone what that like to have), while in
capitalism you must subjugate to the command of some boss whose goal (making
profit) has nothing to do with you..."
(Oekonux, September 2008)

==Excerpts==

Contributions to a debate on the main concepts, originally published as a series on http://keimform.de:
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/dialogue-with-christian-siefkes-understanding-material-peer-production-1/2008/01/22
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-hint-based-stigmergic-systems/2008/02/02
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-distributing-effort-through-weighting-labor/2008/02/03
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-distribution-pools/2008/02/11
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-local-associations-for-organizing-material-peer-production/2008/02/12
* http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-decision-making-and-conflict-resolution-in-material-peer-production/2008/02/13

==Reviews==

===Stefan Meretz:===

"Peer Economy. A Transition Concept.

Inside the critical left there is a small group refering to free
software and free culture movement being already start points (»germ
forms«) for new possibilities beyond commodities, money, market, and
state. Such approaches on their part are critized as to be limited to
reproducible information goods and being unable to reach the world of
physical good.

Christian Siefkes now has presented the »Peer Economy« concept dealing
with this central critique of germ form ideas. In his english
book »From Exchange to Contributions« Siefkes generalizes the
principles of free software and free culture production into the
physical world.

Starting point is the consideration, that people have to spend efforts
during the production of their living conditions. While capitalism uses
the market as an »indirection« to allocate produced goods---although
afore it is not clear, if they are needed or can be sold---peer
production does not distribute goods, but the effort to produce them.
Doing this it will only be produced what is needed---the relationship
between needs and products is »direct«.

How can this work? Here the peer principle comes into play. The
term »peer production« was introduced by Yochai Benkler in order to
describe the open and cooperative type of production of free
information goods. Individual people (»peers«) work together on a
voluntary basis, in fact from a single reason: they want to do it. They
make contributions to a project to bring it to success. Intensity,
extent, and duration is determined by each person themself. On the
other side peer projects depend on contributions and will do everything
to be attractive for participation.

Peer production bases on so called Commons being ressources without
owner controlling the usage. As a rule results of peer project are on
the other hand part of the commons. Currently this does not apply to
physical means of production, they are private property of the peers
being contibutors.

Free cooperation is an additional fundament of peer projects. Coercion
as a mean to organize the production does not exist, because means of
coercion are absent. Participation is voluntary and there are no
sanktions when leaving a project. Inside peer projects formal status
and its symbols, but also other criteria like gender, origin, age etc.
don't play a role. What counts are the contributions one makes. They
determine reputation, credit, and confidence one gets.

Now, how can needs of the producers be coordinated with the needs of the
consumers? Today peer projects can function, because peers dispose of
production means and because non-physical goods being once created can
almost arbitrarily be reproduced. This does not apply to the physical
world. Peer projects of physical goods have to demand an adequate
compensation for the taking of goods requiring each time anew an effort
to produce them.

But which contribution is adequate? This question is decided by the
project. It weights the contributions using the time duration inversely
proportional to its popularity: unpopular tasks only require a small
contribution, while popular tasks require a big contribution. This
sounds similar to role the economic value is playing in market economy.

The economic value maps complex actions on simple once. However, while
always complex actions are manifolds of simple once---resulting in less
volume of spending---a generalized peer production tend to function the
other way around: Simple tasks no one likes to do will be highly
weighted to guarantee its execution, while popular and often highly
qualified tasks get a lower weight. The weighting---according to the
proposal---is nothing static, but is permanently adjusted. This
adjustment is done automatically using an »auctioning system« mediating
demand and supply. Thus one hour garbage removal can thoroughly
correspond to one week writing computer programs.

Concerning the allocation of the goods peer projects join together and
form distribution pools, in order to be able to provide a larger
bandwith of useful goods. At the same time the project extent should
(but not need to) be straightforward, problems should be handled
directly »peer to peer«. Everybody contributing something to a local
project can gather goods from the respective distribution pool.
Depending on the type of goods the ways of disribution differ, from
flat rate allocation to preference weighting.

It is remarkable, that Siefkes concretely discusses a number of critical
questions, which are usually avoided by refering to a future »where
everything will be solved«: How will limited resources and goods be
distributed? What about infrastructures and meta-tasks? How will
decisions be made, how conflicts be solved? How will global projects be
organized? What about people being not able or willing to make a
contribution? Who decides what a »contribution« is? What about
migration? Are laws further on necessary?

To my opinion the presented concept is a pragmatic transition model, not
a general model of a post-capitalist society. Main limitation is the
interlinking of contribution and taking. However, it is well
imaginable, that the strict interlinking between contribution and
taking during the phase of competition to capitalism will be resolved
after its overcoming.

Christian Siefkes has not written his book in terms of a notion
critique, but pragmatically oriented at discourses of the english language area."

'''More extensive review by Stefan Merten at http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/Oekonux/DrawingBoard/PeerconomyReview'''

===Additional reviews:===

#Review by Stefan Meretz: [http://peerconomy.org/wiki/Peer_Economy._A_Transition_Concept. Peer Economy: A Transition Concept.] Translation of a [http://www.streifzuege.org/texte_str/str_07-41_meretz_imwo_peer-oekonomie.html German-language article] from the Vienna journal ''Streifzüge'', No. 41
#Critical review by Stefan Merten: http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/Oekonux/DrawingBoard/PeerconomyReview
#* Partial response: [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-the-difference-between-capitalism-and-the-peer-economy/2008/09/29 Christian Siefkes on the difference between capitalism and the peer economy] (an excerpt from [http://www.oekonux.org/list-en/archive/msg04996.html this mail])

===Stefan Merten===

'''Peer production as a concept:'''

In the first two chapters Christian describes some basic principles of peer production. He mentions a lot of important concepts like contributions to a project made by volunteers. He explains that these contributions are made because of Selbstentfaltung - though he doesn't use that word - and that the projects maintain internal and external openness.

In the second chapter he also addresses the topic of means of production. Christian explains that in contemporary peer production projects the means of production are usually privately owned or payed for. Christian also mentions forks in peer production projects - which are possible because at least a part of the means of production are available to anybody.


'''Problems to solve:'''

Then Christian goes on to explain two problems he sees as important. The first problem is how it can be made sure that the societal needs are met by peer production projects. In fact a question which capitalism unfortunately can not always answer. He states that user needs and producer needs are not the same and that there must be some mediation between them.

The second problem Christian perceives is how to deal with limited resources and goods. He shortly mentions fabbers but as the sole solution dismisses them quickly.


'''Non-harmful ways to deal with lack of volunteers:'''

Christian perceives tasks for which there are no volunteers as the basic problem. In fact this can be seen as one of the important problems of peer production - though capitalism has to deal with the lack of workers as well. Christian mentions two important ways to deal with these problems not harming basic peer production principles but are rather expressions of the logic of peer production.

The first way is automation by which unwanted task are simply automated away by moving them to machines. In fact the first peer production project of Free Software is almost completely about automation. Software more or less is a mean to automate tasks away which generally could be done by hand also.

The second way is to raise the fun of some task. This is something which people did throughout history - for instance by singing together while doing hard work. In peer production it would modify a task in a way someone can see it as Selbstentfaltung.

These two ways even complete each other. Automation often shifts the work needed for some task to another realm. This realm often is more likely to be Selbstentfaltung because it employs your creativity.

The first chapters of Christian's book are just fine and they are more or less perfectly aligned with peer production. What is really annoying is that after these chapters he leaves this path and develops a system which in my opinion is structurally equal to capitalism and thus contradicts peer production. The rest of my review deals with this and thus is far more critical."

For the critical parts of the review see here at http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/Oekonux/DrawingBoard/PeerconomyReview

==Discussion==

A critique from the Other Spiral:

"Because the production of open-source software is the production of public goods (non-excludable and non-rivalrous) it unproblematically benefits everyone who wishes to consume it. While ideas are generally considered to have always been public goods, the development of productive forces has essentially eliminated scarcity in the distribution of open-source software.  Open-source software is available for download free of charge, and the cost of its reproduction of trivial.  Furthermore the use of the software does not exclude others from its use, and the ease of reproduction ensures that it is non-rivalrous (A point guaranteed in law by the GPL).

The article does not point out that most other forms of production are productive of excludable and rivalrous private goods. It does mention in passing that “In commonism, as in any society, decisions on how to use the available resources will be necessary.” But its superficial mention of this issue fails to acknowledge that this is the fundamental problem of economics.  How are the excludable and rivalrous products of society be distributed amongst its members? Will the productions of scarce goods for social consumption simply occur spontaneously through “stigmergy?” I have my doubts!

The author argues that “Peer production, on the other hand, is production for others which is neither based on coercion nor motivated by monetary gain.”

This would only be true under conditions of highly-developed socialist automation, where material goods such as bread, houses, and tables would become so easy to produce that they would effectively be public goods, which is hardly a fait accompli.  It is not as though the often back-breaking conditions of agricultural production could instantly be changed by social fiat, and the article itself acknowledges that there are serious limitations to how far worker-oriented automation can progress under capitalism.  A transitional regime of production that would develop this worker-oriented automation and an accompanying egalitarian society is still required, despite the promising developments we can see in today’s “benefit-driven production.”  While the “commonist” argument recognizes the capitalist situation and has a vision of the benefits of communism, it imagines that these benefits will somehow materialize without a transition stage that confronts us with its own problems. This is because the “commonists” want to pretend that the seemingly intractable problems of 20th century Communism do not need to be addressed and that the promise of the socialist project can be achieved through some kind of spontaneous historical dispensation."
(http://theotherspiral.wordpress.com/2012/06/11/against-commonism/)

==More Information==

===Presentation of his book===

#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/book-of-the-week-towards-an-economy-of-contributions-1/2007/12/10 Towards an Economy of Contributions Part one]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/book-of-the-week-towards-an-economy-of-contributions-2/2007/12/12 Towards an Economy of Contributions Part two]

===Topical selections from the P2P Foundation blog===

#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-effort-sharing-vs-market-allocation/2008/05/01 Effort Sharing vs. Market Allocation]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-the-difference-between-the-peer-economy-and-the-market-economy/2008/03/03 On the difference between a Peer Economy and a Market Economy]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-money-and-state-forms-in-the-peer-economy/2008/03/02 On Money and State Forms in the Peer Economy]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-possession-not-property-as-the-basis-of-the-commons/2008/02/15 On possession, not property, as the basis of the Commons]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-decision-making-and-conflict-resolution-in-material-peer-production/2008/02/13 On Decision Making and Conflict Resolution in Material Peer Production]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-local-associations-for-organizing-material-peer-production/2008/02/12 On Local Associations for Organizing Material Peer Production]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-distribution-pools/2008/02/11 On Distribution Pools]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-distributing-effort-through-weighting-labor/2008/02/03 On Distributing Effort through Weighting Labor]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/christian-siefkes-on-hint-based-stigmergic-systems/2008/02/02 On Hint-based Stigmergic Systems]
#[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/dialogue-with-christian-siefkes-understanding-material-peer-production-1/2008/01/22 Understanding Material Peer Production]

===Key Resources===

The book:

#English edition: '''Christian Siefkes. From Exchange to Contributions: Generalizing Peer Production into the Physical World.''' Edition C. Siefkes, Berlin, 2007. ISBN 978-3-940736-00-0.
#German translation: '''Christian Siefkes. Beitragen statt tauschen. Materielle Produktion nach dem Modell Freier Software.''' AG SPAK Bücher, Neu-Ulm, 2008. ISBN 978-3-930830-99-2. Full text: http://peerconomy.org/text/peer-oekonomie.pdf

Important links:

#Old wiki site from Christian Siefkes, at http://peerconomy.org/wiki/Main_Page
#Posts tagged as [http://www.keimform.de/tag/peer-economy/ peer-economy] from the [http://www.keimform.de/ Keimform Blog] (contains articles in German and [http://www.keimform.de/category/english/ English]).


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Peereconomy]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]