=Context and source=

Inspired by 

1) a text from Evan Thompson ([[From Intersubjectivity to Interbeing]], based on the reading notes by '''Michel Bauwens'''

2) the theory of emotional development, in the book [[Human Minds]] by Margaret Donaldson , and her concept of the [[Value Sensing Transcendent Mode]]:


=Discussion=

Michel Bauwens:

"Cognitive empathy enables moral sentiments, which in turn enable moral principles. Feeling is prior to reason. How do emotions differ from feelings ? Emotions are our value feelings, experienced only to that which matters. They presuppose an evaluation stance of an intersubjective personal self. It makes us aware of our personal self.

Margaret Donaldson has a theory of the development of emotions, which are available to us through 'progressive unfoldment'.

- The value-sensing mode requires imagination. For example, meditation on an object.

- The value-sensing, transcendent mode of contemplation, is based on pure awareness without objects or imagination.

These are well attested in the wisdom traditions, and examples are given.

The progress of value-sensing leads to an opening out of the egocentric self, and the expression of compassion. This compassion can extend to all humanity (cfr Christianity), to all sentient being (Buddhism), or to whole universes.

'''What needs to be done then, is to enrich the 'First Enlightenment of Reason' with a 'Second Enlightenment of Value-Sensing".'''

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Bauwens Reading Notes Project]]