
'''* Article: Another Scalability is Possible! From Non-Scalability to Cosmolocal Scalability. By Vasilis Kostakis, Lucas Lemos, and Asimina Kouvara. TripleC, Vol. 22 No. 2 (2024).'''

URL = https://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/1535


=Abstract=

"This article addresses Anna Tsing’s critique of capitalist scalability by introducing the concept of “cosmolocal scalability” as an alternative to approaches that prioritise “scale-at-all-costs.” Cosmolocal scalability challenges the idea of homogeneous, frictionless expansion and instead proposes a context-responsive framework that values biodiversity, as well as the diverse ways of knowing and living. This framework enables local communities of practice to connect globally, fostering collaborative networks. Such connections are facilitated through digital tools and infrastructures that encourage the open exchange of knowledge, skills, and best practices as digital commons. By creating dynamic relationships between different scales – blending global connectivity with localised practices – cosmolocal initiatives nurture an ecosystem of adaptable, decentralised projects that aim to “scale wide” rather than “scale up.” While several challenges still need to be addressed, cosmolocal scalability presents a promising pathway for fostering new social relationships and modes of production, ultimately laying the groundwork for post-capitalist futures."


[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category: P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]