
'''* Ajates Gonzalez, R., Going back to go forwards? From multi-stakeholder cooperatives to Open Cooperatives in food and farming, Journal of Rural Studies (2017),''' 

URL = http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2017.02.018

=Description=

"Many authors have proposed cooperatives as one of the preferred governance structures for realising
alternative food systems, being recommended both in farming and also downstream at consumer level.
However, recommendations for the cooperative model still draw dividing line between producer and
consumer cooperatives. As opposed to conventional agricultural cooperatives (ACs) made up of farmer
members only, the multi-stakeholder model brings together producers, consumers and/or restaurateurs
under one single enterprise. This paper analyses multi-stakeholder cooperatives’ (MSCs) potential to
recreate more sustainable food flows between rural and urban areas and to overcome the limitations of
conventional farmer cooperatives focused more on economic than social and environmental benefits. As
part of this research, historical data from cooperative archives is used to look at the history and early
attempts of multi-stakeholder cooperation in food and farming. Additionally, current supporting evidence
from Spain and UK, in the context of European food policy frameworks, is also presented. A fourfold
proposal for open cooperatives is discussed and applied to the analysis of the case studies in the
framework of global transformative networks and alliances. The introduction of different types of
members seems to both complicate and enrich the cooperative mission, both theoretically and in
practice. Their networks with other social movements reveal how the MSCs presented are trying to
change, rather than adapt to the market economies they struggle to survive in. The findings suggest MSCs
in food and farming are striving to achieve more-than-economic benefits and are moving into the arena
of the open and pro-commons economy and other global social movements."


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Research]]