
URL = http://www.frontlinesms.com/

==Introduction==
quoted from [http://groups.google.com/group/building-a-distributed-decentralized-internet/browse_thread/thread/6fbee37e00c4dbfb The Next Net Google Group]

''"FrontlineSMS (http://www.frontlinesms.com/) is award-
winning free, open source software that turns a laptop and a mobile
phone into a central communications hub. Once installed, the program
enables users to send and receive text messages with groups of people
through mobile phones without necessarily having access to the
internet. We have been working with community radio stations who have
been using the core software to connect with their audiences and this
has given birth to FrontlineSMS:Radio.

We are developing a software plugin for to extend and customise the
FrontlineSMS platform for the requirements of a radio station.  It
will incorporate specific features to assist community radio stations
to achieve more efficient and creative two-way SMS communication to
complement their programme output. Ideas for how this hybrid media
tool might be used include allowing listeners to contribute their
opinions, react to current affairs and register their vote in radio
polls as well as submit news stories and song requests. This
interaction has the potential to engage communities in civic activism
and promote social change. We hope to have a pilot trial in April with
the release of the software later this year.

FrontlineSMS is delighted to pursue this venture in collaboration with
Cambridge University’s Centre of Governance and Human Rights (CGHR -
http://www.polis.cam.ac.uk/cghr/).  In October 2010, the Centre
launched a two-year research project to explore the extent to which
new information and communications technologies influence citizen
participation in governance processes. The research will focus on
monitoring how communities access and input into information on social
issues throughout the lifecycle of the project. As Ken Banks has
explained, this unique partnership and academic scrutiny means that
'from the outset and for the first time, this project will determine
user behaviour, identify system design and monitor impact throughout
the project life cycle.'  For more you can watch a video here (http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=NW4Bk_rh5ro) where Sharath Srinivasan,
Director of CGHR speaks about the project at a recent event on global
poverty and technology in October 2010 or read the CGHR article
'Democratising the Airwaves'.  We are taking part in the Small Media
Initiative (http://www.smallmediainitiative.com/) at SOAS, London next
month which is focusing on closed societies - a serious challenge for
users of SMS.

So for start up - or indeed existing - Radio stations which are not-
for-profit, you might want to consider using FrontlineSMS to manage
two-way communication via text which you can download now completely
free! For more information you can follow us on Twitter @smsradio and
we will soon be launching a dedicated website which will include
updates on the progress of the software development."

==Requirements==

''FrontlineSMS '''requires a GSM modem or a mobile phone to be connected to your computer via Serial, USB or Bluetooth. GSM modems are more commonly used to browse the Internet and send and receive email from a computer, all through your mobile network. These devices come in many shapes and sizes, although you will most probably recognise them as the USB “dongles” sold in many mobile phone shops.'''

Please note that we recommend a GSM modem over a phone because they are much easier to set-up, are becoming increasingly affordable, and have a much higher capacity for sending and receiving messages reliably. GSM modems come in different shapes and sizes, but typically resemble those shown here.
Because of technical differences between makes and models, not all GSM modems or phones will work with FrontlineSMS. In general, most modems should work but we have only been able to test a few. Below you will find a list of some of the modems and phones which we have tested and know work, but there are many more which work we don’t know of.''

==Support==

http://frontlinesms.ning.com/

[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:NextNet]]
[[Category:Application Layer]]