

=Bio=

Social worker and coordinator of cultural and popular education initiatives dedicated to sciences and technology issues since 80s.  I am working with Gazibo, a cooperative company created in 2008, that provides services of project management (logistic, fundraising, coordination, publication, ...etc) based on the uses of digital tools for cooperation.  Since 2011, I have been the coordinator of Remix the commons, a collaborative and evolving multimedia project. It aims to document and illustrate the key ideas and practices of commonning by remixing multimedia materials. 

As activist, I am member of VECAM, a French nonprofit organization dealing with the impact of ICT (information and communication technologies) on society. I have been working for VECAM from 2000 until 2006. I have been involved in some international initiatives and projects for the appropriation of information and communication technology, such as “Fragments du monde,” “I-jumelages.”  Since then I have still been involved in the activities of the association as a volunteer and sometimes provide services by the way of my company Gazibo. I am also member of AITEC a French nonprofit organisation dealing with citizenship expertise and strongly involved in Social Forum and Sciences and Democracy Forum. In 2009, I was involved in the process of writing the manifesto “Reclaim the commons” and was the coordinator for the first World Forum Science and Democracy.  I am now a member of the International Initiative Committee of the World Forum Science and Democracy. 


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Science]]