
'''= "an organization that was created in 2002 after the success of the Water War by Oscar Olivera et al., which fosters participatory processes in the management of water. At the moment it is working on Cochabamba’s Rio Rocha".''' [http://www.knowledgesociety.net/how-to-create-unity-towards-a-common-goal-interview-to-oscar-olivera/]

=Description=

Oscar Olivera:

"On the one hand, the foundation aims to free it from pollution, whilst on the other hand it is turning an open air dump along the river into land that is suitable for growing fruit and vegetables. This work is supported by NGOs and, above all, students from a nearby school. All of the kids that I talked to, though very young, expressed their enthusiasm for this project and seemed eager to contribute.

Stimulating active, participative engagement in very young kids is fundamental. Water is a very pressing problem in Cochabamba, which is located at the bottom of a valley, and the pollution of Rìo Rocha is a very big issue too.

In other cities there may be other problems, such as free education or public health care. Whatever the challenge, every organisation is in constant need for new forces and energies coming from the youth, or it will become static.

Like I said before, we must talk about inspiring examples, and the children’s fruit and vegetable gardens that you mentioned, which Fundaciòn Abril has been working on, stands out as a shining example."
(http://www.knowledgesociety.net/how-to-create-unity-towards-a-common-goal-interview-to-oscar-olivera/)

=More Information=

* [[Water Commons]]


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Bolivia]]