
* Book / Conference Proceedings: Future Learning Spaces. Designs on eLearning Proceedings, 2011. Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss & Owen Kelly (eds.). Aalto University publications series, 2012.

Full text via http://www.owenkelly.net/wp-content/uploads/downloads/Future_Learning_Spaces.pdf


=Description=


Proceedings of the Designs on eLearning conference of 2011.


=Contents=

Introduction 6, Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss


==Part One: Keynote speakers==

#Quality Assurance and the Phenomenological Space Design 10, Mauri Ylä-Kotola
#The place of peer production in the next long wave: opportunities for Romania Michel Bauwens


==Part Two: Institutional Spaces==

*Digital Spaces for Learning and Assessment 
in Art and Design
Ian Pirie, Stewart Cordiner and Jenny Triggs
* Balancing Learning in Organizations.
Antti Katajainen
* Engaging Art and Design students 
using institutional online learning spaces
Tony Reeves
* Learning Space under construction: concepts for 
the change of media and communication
in academic education
Christina Schwalbe and Torsten Meyer
* Digital Multi-User Interactive Systems 
to enrich socialization and the learning process:
E-Learning Centers U. Porto
Pedro Neto, Andrea Vieira, Bruno Moreira, Joäo Sarabando, Ligio Ribeiro
* Using 360 virtual tours to create inspiring learning spaces.
Sandra Franklin


==Part Three: Networked Spaces==

* Extending the virtual and physical learning environments.
Illka Kukkonen
* Web 2.0: enabling students’ critical thinking skills 
through deferred e-learning systems
Nandish V. Patel
* Exploring reuse of educational resource in art and design 
practice based learning and teaching
Chris Follows
* An art school’s website as an upskilling and match-making platform? 
Peter Purg
* Closer to the edge? 
Lucy Renton


==Part Four: Experimental Spaces==

* Open Spaces for arts education - the ALTO ecosystem model.
John Casey, Wolfgang Greller, Hywel Davies, Chris Follows,
Nancy Turner, Ed Webb-Ingall
* Good guys are handsome and bad guys are ugly in entertainment:
could there be a serious application in education?
Juha Keinänen
* Medienbildungsraum: media - art - space.
Torsten Meyer, Timo Meisel and Kontanze Schütze
* Located lexicon: a project that explores how 
user generated content describes space
by Peter Rogers & Juliet Sprake
* Virtual Teaching: the photography experience
in a Spanish fine arts faculty
Yolanda Remacha Menendez


==Part Five: Social Spaces==

* The breaking of the circle: playing with, through, 
against the boundaries of the medial circle
Wey-Hay Tan
* Online social networking sites in education: 
a case study of NTIC-edusocial group
Eva Durall
* Memory Palaces in Pocket Worlds.
Owen Kelly
* The aspects of collaborative creation: a new approach 
for networked learning
Eeva Meltio
* The making of a maker-space for open innovation, 
knowledge sharing and peer-to-peer learning
Elizabet M Nilsson
* New immersive (panoramic) mass media 
Ina Arendt


==Part Six: Interactive Performance Spaces==

* Connective environmental education: augmented-reality 
enhanced landscapes as ditributed learning ecosystems
Salvatore Iaconesi, Luca Simeone, Cary Hendrikson, Oriana Persico
* The sky is falling ( a day in the life...).
Michael Demers



=Excerpts=


==Introduction==

Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss:

"The notion of space regains fresh momentum every time anew we interact with the
world around us. As mobile devices weave into the fabric of everyday life, one is no longer
confined to a specific location, time and place in accessing and interacting with communication
technologies. Thereby the interfaces become more adaptable and fluid according
to the user’s needs for switching seamlessly between augmented, real and virtual information
and communication techniques and practices. In educational contexts, however,
we are still entangled in the three-dimensional space of Eucledian geometry with which
we commonly associate the institutional place of action, yet overlooking at the same the
temporal dimension in it. Fragmentation, acceleration, accumulation, synchronicity,
ubiquity of information storable and retrievable at different locations at the same time
finds its equivalent in mobile and flexible living-, learning- and working arrangements.
The conference topics of investigation delves into these temporal intertwined modes
of action between individuals, groups and institutions so as to uncover hitherto unexplored
and unarticulated concepts and experiences which would help us to co-develop
the creative spaces of the future.

The scope of investigation and participation is conceived as an interdisciplinary
dialogue and discussion among students, academics, researchers, decision and policy
makers, entrepreneurs and practitioners from various fields.
Specific emphasis is laid on cross-disciplinary dialogue between architects, designers,
media artists, educators and entrepreneurs who are passionate about challenging novel
media and means of interaction.


The main conference topics deal with the technological, social, cultural and aesthetic
dimensions of creative learning spaces and will be discussed in four panels with the following themes:

1. Open experimental space

2. Institutional space

3. Social learning space

4. Networked space



How strongly do social software tools impact on current practices in e-learning in
general, and second, what are the implications for the student’s mode of interaction
(social factor), aesthetics (interface culture) and techniques (interoperability)? Some of
my findings derive from actual research on learning ecology and multiple reality constructions,
which reciprocally both affect and are affected by multiple facets in socioeconomic
and culturally encoded concepts of living.

One of these aspects relates to competitiveness in a global job market, which is in fact
the driving force behind the concept of lifelong learning and the prevailing motivation
of our students to continuously qualify. Interestingly, yet not surprisingly, connectivity
has expanded into fluid forms of networking on the basis of immaterial value exchange.
Shared spaces where people can communicate, exchange and aggregate information, coauthor
and co-create areas of common interest, need flexible and adjustable arrangements.
Some of the key problems include the limitations of interactions with structured
tools; another confinement relates to interface design, communication and learning tools.
As an alternative to conventional tools we want to explore how modular tools can
expand functionality; to what extent social tools encourage individual expression and
connect learners and content; how synchronous tools can be integrated; and how learnercentered
tools encourage learning ecology. The types of tools suggested include Blogs,
Wikis, Virtual Worlds, social tools, networking tools, collaborative spaces, and connection-
making protocols. But how do these alternatives provide the learner with control of
the type of content explored, and how do they explore to effectively meet their learning
goals?

In the Open experimental space discussion we want to look at the lessons that can be
learned from the creative use of architectural space, and the modes of interaction that
can arise within it. We will reflect upon innovative & interactive collaborative learning
techniques.

How do social media, augmented spaces and networking tools constitute new forms
of blended learning? In the Social learning space panel we will explore connectivism &
strategies for learning in mobile spaces.

Can we expect to see smooth technology working in sustainable ways?

In the Networked space discussion we want to discover how is learning affected by the
metaverse, ubiquitous computing & the reconceptualisation of cities as dynamic learning
spaces?

How does institutional space extend into informal networked space and what would
be the role of the university if many of its current services were disaggregated to specialist
providers on the web?

At the core of the Institutional spaces discussion is the question what would happen
if we share resources across the institutional boundaries and to work together in a spirit
of collaborative research and teaching?

Digital network culture has not only been changing the modes of media production
and distribution: it coevally conveys emerging models of cooperation, communication
and interaction by accumulating various ideas, talents and capabilities. Hence, the
tasks of tomorrow’s artists is that of an intermediary, a catalyst between diverse fields
of knowledge, ways of thinking, social models and solution strategies. The protagonists
of this development, hackers, software artists, media and knowledge designers who are
irrespectively showing strong commitment in the face of considerable risk, are opening
up new territories in which their role and their scope of action have not yet been fully
explored. This alludes to critical inquiry, research and development in socio-political and
scientific contexts."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Design]]