

'''* Article: Future Visions for 2030: Of Economy, Sustainability and Employment. By Juha Saukkonen, Minh Thu Dang, et al. Journal of Futures Studies, March 2013, 17(3): 119-122.'''

URL = http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/17-3/S04.pdf

A survey of the Students of the International Study Programs in JAMK University of Applied Sciences, 
Finland.


=Summary=

"Key findings of the research can be condensed in following statements:

a. Believe in economic non-growth/de-growth is far from a marginal phenomenon

b. On a personal level, students rely on their abilities to limit or even downsize 
their usage of natural resources (even when their rising socio-economic status 
in the future raises opportunities of spending)

c. Students surveyed have serious doubts about the ability of nations and global 
community to make similar kind of limitations to use of natural resources – 
main doubts were raised based disability of governments to act for it and ways 
of governance in societies 

d. Students have largely abandoned the idea of linear, steadily rising career 
paths. Instead the idea of multidimensional careers (has become the “default 
setting” in their career thinking Volatility in terms of employment and career 
development is the leading mental model. However, in some students groups 
the confidence to own career was far more positive than the view on the 
employment and career development in higher level – national or global

e. Also there was a strong tendency to see self-employment as a viable option for 
future, with lot of variation between different study groups."


=Description=


==Introduction and motivation + background for the research==

JAMK University of Applied Sciences (later in this paper: JAMK) is a Finnish 
institution of Higher Education, offering programs (undergraduate and graduate) in various 
academic fields. As the pedagogical strategy of JAMK (JAMK, 2012) aims at high quality of 
education and internationalization, research initiative “Future Visions 2030” was launched 
in the first half of 2012. By studying the futuribles of its students, the schools of JAMK aim 
at a better understanding of their weltanschaaung, and thus are able to critically review its 
practices and develop curricula to serve the future actors in their respective professional 
fields. 

The key research questions were:

1. How do the students of JAMK envision the state-of-things in year 2030 in terms of 
economy, sustainability and employment?

2. How are the different layers of future visions– personal, national and global 
development inter- or co-acting? 

3. Can we bring our undergraduate students to the picture as contributors to the 
process of future foresight – as researchers as well as informants?

1. Implementation of the study

On the basis given above the following areas of the study were chosen to the 
first implementation round in 2012 : 

a. Economic growth direction (growth, non-growth, de-growth) and pattern 
(stable vs. volatile)

b. Usage of resources

c. Employment and careers. 

The visions of things-to-be in the issues above were assessed by the informants 
on three layers, Global/National/Personal (career visions on Personal level only).

The survey was implemented with a quantitative on-line survey-tool in April 
2012, with the repetition round in September 2012, due to low response rate at first 
sending of the survey link (April timing colliding with heavy student workload with 
course-endings, final exams etc.). To the informant sample the students were chosen 
from the cohort of five International Study Programs (tuition in English and appr. 50 
% of students of Non-Finnish origin): International Business, Facility Management, 
Music and Media Management, Logistics Engineering and Nursing. The students for 
this survey were chosen to be all degree students from these programs from first to 
fourth year of their studies.


==2. Key results and conclusions==

Key findings of the research can be condensed in following statements:

a. Believe in economic non-growth/de-growth is far from a marginal phenomenon

b. On a personal level, students rely on their abilities to limit or even downsize 
their usage of natural resources (even when their rising socio-economic status 
in the future raises opportunities of spending)

c. Students surveyed have serious doubts about the ability of nations and global 
community to make similar kind of limitations to use of natural resources – 
main doubts were raised based disability of governments to act for it and ways 
of governance in societies 

d. Students have largely abandoned the idea of linear, steadily rising career 
paths. Instead the idea of multidimensional careers (has become the “default 
setting” in their career thinking Volatility in terms of employment and career 
development is the leading mental model. However, in some students groups 
the confidence to own career was far more positive than the view on the 
employment and career development in higher level – national or global

e. Also there was a strong tendency to see self-employment as a viable option for 
future, with lot of variation between different study groups.

The main author of this paper acting as a project manager for “Future Visions 
2030” interviewed the three undergraduate students of the research team to find 
out if the research tied to Futures’ issues had an effect to their overall orientation to 
Futures Thinking, something that can be called a Meta-result/effect of the research 
performed. The interest was to see how their engagement to the study had “radiated” 
to their social environment, both inside and outside school. The term used in this 
paper is halo-effect, assuming that being posed near future researcher and research 
has an impact to interest towards future. This “halo-effect” was verified in the 
interviews - as a grown overall interest towards topics surveyed and Futures research 
as a domain.

==3. Summary and ideas for further research==

As Jim Dator (2006) said when writing about Campus Futures, the education 
should be future-orientated, and quest for futures should be part of daily 
development agenda in education as a default setting: “Because the images of the 
future held by young people are, and increasingly will be, much different from the 
images of many of today’s decision makers, college and university faculty and staff 
must also consider the possible and preferred images of future generations when 
mapping institutional directions.” 

The statement above has not lost its appeal in 6 years of aging. On the contrary 
there are signs of growing overall concern of future of our societies , as measured 
in public movements and initiatives launched by governments, companies and “third 
sector” actors, as well as results of the study in hand. 


The path of research now opened at JAMK will hopefully gain strength and 
importance, primarily via two main streams of evolution:


1. Adding more student cohorts (e.g. students of non-international programs, 
exchange students spending limited time at JAMK etc.) to the sample. And 
also of importance: Studying the futuribles of the faculty and administration 
of the University. Do our world views as educators meet those of the students? 

Is that match needed? 


2. By doing longitudinal research the impact of new events and generations to the 
ways of seeing the future and impact of changing curricula can be addressed. 

By following the evolution of the students´ views, especially if there is 
comparable data from another educational institution (or many), universities 
can assess whether the implementation of its strategy has an effect of shaping 
students´ thinking. This effect has been coined by Giroux and Penna as 
“Hidden Curriculum,” which “is a side effect of an education, lessons which 
are learned but not openly intended, such as the transmission of norms, 
values, and beliefs conveyed in the classroom and the social environment” 
(1983). Do we as educators, faculties and institutions transmit values and 
beliefs of the futures and for the futures? Should we?"
(http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/17-3/S04.pdf)


=More Information=

* “Generation Screwed” - Are US youths opting or being forced out of society? By Janet Faulkner. Journal of Futures Studies, March 2013, 17(3): 131-134 [http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/17-3/S07.pdf]


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Articles]]