'''= Report and Panel on the potential for shared and interactive learning made possible by the Internet'''


=Report=

The Future of Learning Institutions in a Digital Age. By Cathy N. Davidson and David Theo Goldberg. John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports on Digital Media and Learning. 

This report is available in a free digital edition on the MIT Press website at http://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262513593.

"In this report, Cathy Davidson and David Theo Goldberg focus on the potential for shared and interactive learning made possible by the Internet. They argue that the single most important characteristic of the Internet is its capacity for world-wide community and the limitless exchange of ideas. The Internet brings about a way of learning that is not new or revolutionary but is now the norm for today’s graduating high school and college classes. It is for this reason that Davidson and Goldberg call on us to examine potential new models of digital learning and rethink our virtually enabled and enhanced learning institutions."
(http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=11841)



=Panel=

Panel at Hastac. April 2007.

URL = http://www.hastac.org/video/archives


"Introductory Remarks: Provost Peter Lange, Duke University (DukeEngage)

Panelists:

* "Building the Field of Digital Media and Learning" Julia Stasch, Vice President, Human and Community Development, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation
(http://www.digitallearning.macfound.org)

* "The Future of Learning Institutions in a Digital Age" Cathy N. Davidson and David Theo Goldberg,
(http://www.futureofthebook.org/HASTAC/learningreport/about/url)

* "A Public School Perspective on the Future of Learning", Durham Public Schools


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]