=Bio=

"Leader of a working group on Access to Knowledge, i.e. [[Accès aux Savoirs]], in Paris, France. PhD candidate in Sociology (Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS)):  “Intellectual Property Vs Access to Medicines: Logic of the State and Collective Action in Free Trade Negotiations”. Member of IRIS, Institute for Interdisciplinary Research on Social Issues (UMR 8156 CNRS, U 799 Inserm, EHESS, University Paris 13)."


=Publications=
* Krikorian G. & Kapczynski, A. (2010 forthcoming), Access to Knowledge in the Age of Intellectual Property. (Zone Books Eds., New York), 652 p.
* Krikorian G. (2010 forthcoming), Décision de l’OMC du 30 août 2003 et l’étude de cas du Rwanda. In G. Velasquez & C. M. Correa, Innovation pharmaceutique et santé publique (L’Harmattan, Paris), 89-101.
* Krikorian G. (2010 forthcoming), Dispositions ADPIC-plus introduites dans le cadre des négociations internationales. In G. Velasquez & C. M. Correa (éd.), Innovation pharmaceutique et santé publique (L’Harmattan, Paris), 131-143.
* Krikorian G. (2010 forthcoming), Usages des licences obligatoires. Conditions de l’action du gouvernement thaïlandais. In ANRS (ed.) (Paris).
* Krikorian G. (2010), Libre-échange Inde-Europe : menace sur les malades, Transversal, n°53, Juillet-Aout 2010, p. 10-11.
* "De la propriété intellectuelle au savoir partagé : renverser la perspective. Entretien croisé avec Gaëlle Krikorian et Florent Latrive" (2009), in "Post Capitalisme. Imaginer l'après" edited by Clémentine Autain, 319-344.
* Krikorian G. (2009), The politics of patents: conditions of implementation of public health policy in Thailand. In S. Haunss and K. C. Shadlen (éd.), The Politics of Intellectual Property: Contestation over the Ownership, Use, and Control of Knowledge and Information (Edward Elgar, UK), 29-55.
* Krikorian G. (2009), New trends in IP protection and health issues in FTA negotiations. In B. Coriat (éd.), The Political Economy of HIV/AIDS in Developing Countries. TRIPS, Public Health Systems and Free Access (Edward Elgar, UK) 52-77.
* Krikorian G., El Filali M. & Himmich H. (2008), L’accès aux médicaments sous le nouveau régime de protection des brevets : cas du sida au Maroc. KEStudies, 2. Available at: http://www.kestudies.org/ojs/index.php/kes/article/view/30/45
* Krikorian G. & Szymkowiak D. (2007), Intellectual property rights in the making: the evolution of intellectual property. Provisions in US free trade agreements and access to medicine. The journal of world intellectual property, 10 (5), 388-418.
* Feher M., Krikorian G. & Mackee Y. (éd.) (2007), Non governmental politics. (Zone Books Eds., New York), 689 p.
* Krikorian G. (2005), Après l’ADPIC, l’ADPIC+. L’accès aux médicaments compromis par les politiques bilatérales de renforcement de la propriété intellectuelle, in Le Développement face aux biens communs de l'information et la propriété intellectuelle, Actes, C&F Editions.
* Krikorian G. (2004), Batailles d’experts et joutes internationales : la production des génériques et l’OMC in Verschave, F.-X. (dir.), 2004, La santé mondiale, entre racket et bien public, Eds Charles Léopold Mayer, Paris, 225-244.
* Krikorian G. (2004), Actions de pays en développement pour l’accès aux médicaments génériques in Verschave, F.-X. (dir.), 2004, La santé mondiale, entre racket et bien public, Eds Charles Léopold Mayer, Paris, 245-250.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]