
=Discussion=

A policy proposal, By Jean-Christophe Duval:

"The GAIA Economic Symposium is an international institution established by the participating nations of the NEMO IMS project. It may affiliate with the United Nations or choose to remain radically independent as a geopolitical decision. Comprising experts and elected officials from all participating nations, its governance model will be both organic and democratic. The Symposium's primary mission is to transition away from fossil fuels and extractivism and to credibly support the preservation of life-sustaining conditions on Earth.

• The creation of the GAIA Economic Symposium marks a departure from policies and the traditional, ineffective ecological approaches. Through its ecological and social conventions, the Symposium aims to reduce the influence of fossil fuel and thermo-industrial lobbies and other activities that are detrimental to sustainability, balance, and harmony on Earth.

• The Symposium will have the authority to issue monetary drawing rights, known as “NEMO Green SDRs,” which will serve as payment for activities linked to the commons. These rights will be convertible at fixed rates into national currencies via NEMO SWIFT and will be immediately destroyed upon conversion.

• Democratic processes within the GAIA Economic Symposium will determine the income levels denominated in NEMO Green SDRs in exchange for extra-financial activities.

• The Symposium will conduct impact studies and establish ecosystem indicators. Its governance will operate on both Top/Down and Bottom/Up models, as accurate data and reports from local to global levels are essential. It will also develop specifications for service providers, issue calls for tenders, and select companies for these intentional contracts.

• In collaboration with central banks and other global institutions, the GAIA Economic Sym- posium will determine the annual allocation of NEMO Green SDRs to each nation based on macro-prudential, demographic, economic criteria, national monetary policy objectives, and their levels of debt.

• The institution will rigorously check the quality of services to ensure the NEMO IMS con- cept remains unblemished by cheating, corruption, or improper business dealings, thereby maintaining its moral and political integrity."

(https://www.academia.edu/118271362/NEMO_IMS)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]