
'''= calculations on the impossibility of perpetual growth in energy usage'''

URL = http://physics.ucsd.edu/do-the-math/2011/07/galactic-scale-energy/

=Discussion=

Tom Murphy:

"Growth has become such a mainstay of our existence that we take its continuation as a given. Growth brings many positive benefits, such as cars, television, air travel, and iGadgets. Quality of life improves, health care improves, and, aside from a proliferation of passwords to remember, life tends to become more convenient over time. Growth also brings with it a promise of the future, giving reason to invest in future development in anticipation of a return on the investment. Growth is then the basis for interest rates, loans, and the finance industry.

Because growth has been with us for “countless” generations—meaning that everyone we ever met or our grandparents ever met has experienced it—growth is central to our narrative of who we are and what we do. We therefore have a difficult time imagining a different trajectory.

This post provides a striking example of the impossibility of continued growth at current rates—even within familiar timescales. For a matter of convenience, we lower the energy growth rate from 2.9% to 2.3% per year so that we see a factor of ten increase every 100 years. We start the clock today, with a global rate of energy use of 12 terawatts (meaning that the average world citizen has a 2,000 W share of the total pie). We will begin with semi-practical assessments, and then in stages let our imaginations run wild—even then finding that we hit limits sooner than we might think."
(http://physics.ucsd.edu/do-the-math/2011/07/galactic-scale-energy/)

=More Information=

Recommended in: [[John Thackara's Thermodynamic Bibliography]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]