
'''= " If literacy is the ability to read and write, then gaming literacy would be the ability to not only play games, but to make them".''' [https://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/libre-game-development]

=Description=

[[Danyl Strype|Strypey]]: 

" If literacy is the ability to read and write, then gaming literacy would be the ability to not only play games, but to make them. The easiest way for people to make games at the moment is to modify existing games. Many popular games have 'mod' communities built up around them, but usually this is quasi-legal, even if it's tolerated or even encouraged by the game publisher. It also relies on the gamer have access to a full-featured computer, rather than a gaming console that is designed to be play-only.

A newer way of collaboratively making games has emerged out of the free software movement. There are now hundreds of games whose source code is licensed under the GNU GPL license, which explicitly allows modification and distribution. Many of them have also licensed their art under CreativeCommons or other licenses that similarly allow distribution, sometimes modification, and sometimes even commercial sale of modified versions. In July of 2009, "Age of Empires" style game 0 AD (pronounced "zero ay-dee") switched to the GPL for its software engine and CC-BY-SA for its artwork.

In recent years a growing community is emerging around the idea of "[[Open Source Games]]" - ie games where the software, the artwork, or ideally both, are released under a libre (free/open) license. This  community is organised around a loose network community of forums and service."
(https://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/libre-game-development)


[[Category:Gaming]]