=Description=

"Gandhian economics is a school of economic thought based on the socio-economic principles expounded by Indian  leader Mohandas Gandhi. It is largely characterised by its affinity to the principles and objectives of nonviolent humanistic socialism, but with a rejection of violent class war and promotion of socio-economic harmony. Gandhi's economic ideas also aim to promote spiritual development and harmony with a rejection of materialism. The term "Gandhian economics" was coined by J. C. Kumarappa, a close supporter of Gandhi."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gandhian_economics)

=Discussion=

From an Interview with Siddharth Sthalekar, founder of [[Sacred Capital]]:

'''* How would you describe Gandhian economics?'''

"Gandhian economics might be best summarised by the works of a senior economist in India, J.C. Kumarappah. His book The Economy of Permanence outlines a broad spectrum of economies that amplify different kinds of value – material, social, intellectual, and even subtler forms like love and empathy. Some of this has been adapted into the classic by E.F. Schumacher, Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered.

A more recent version of this can be found in a book by one of my dear friends and mentors, Rajni Bakshi: Bazaars, Conversations and Freedom. She speaks about the 2008 crisis as the result of the separation of the market and society, and the importance of returning to the age-old paradigm of decentralised markets that were woven with our lives. Gandhian economics stresses the importance of society and markets being interwoven, like a Bazaar. Financial transactions could then be evaluated in the context of societal benefit, as opposed to being removed from it."
(https://holochaincitizen.com/2018/10/07/the-yin-and-yang-of-wealth-qa-with-the-founder-of-sacred-capital/)



=Key Books To Read=

* [[Foundations of Gandhian Economics]]. by Amritananda Das. NY: St Martin's Press, 1979
* [[Gandhi's Economic Thought]]. by Ajit K. Dasgupta. NY: Routledge, 1996

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:India]]

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:India]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]