
'''The Mixed Reality Perfect Storm = the wall between TV, Film, Games and Virtual Worlds is about to crumble'''

URL = http://www.personalizemedia.com/index.php/2007/06/05/the-mixed-reality-perfect-storm/

Podcast at http://lamp.edu.au/podcast/gary_mixedreality.mp3


=Description=

"A short 16m introduction from Gary Hayes who looks at the four forces that are coming together to create perfect conditions for this hybrid form of entertainment. He looks back 10 years at early inhabited TV 3D world experiments when he was an innovation producer at the BBC and then forward to the latest cross-over services where TV properties become virtual and where the virtual world appears inside traditional forms. He looks at virtual worlds such as there.com, second life, PS3 Home, Habbo Hotel, Neopets etc: and how properties such as Big Brother, Laguna Beach, The Hills, Pimp My Ride and a range of consumer brands that are creating engaging and immersive hybrid entertainment."
(http://www.personalizemedia.com/index.php/2007/06/05/the-mixed-reality-perfect-storm/)


=Why Mixed Reality=


"we are really approaching a perfect storm, a mixed reality perfect storm, because we are seeing several things happening. The first one is a long history of games based on TV and films, the foundations are already there. Another force creating this storm is virtual worlds, particularly the exponential growth of customisable ones and more importantly external integration into them. The third force is audience behaviour. They are involved in far more simultaneous activity particularly between broadband web and TV. The fourth element to this perfect storm is actually what is happening to TV and film, especially live reality TV becoming more game like and film becoming fantasy based. All of these forces together are creating a really potent mix."
(http://www.personalizemedia.com/index.php/2007/06/05/the-mixed-reality-perfect-storm/)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]