

==Characteristics==

[[Peter Pogany]]:

# "The whole: Originary givenness spiritually awared.
# Integrity: Harmonious coexistence among all structures in the lived experience of integral consciousness.
# Transparency: Based on the thermodynamic worldview, the individual sees, senses, and feels the unity of past, present, and future. Such a synairetic way of “understanding” becomes the permanent backdrop in dealing with all problems of human life.
# The spiritual: Excessively ambitious calculative deficiency withdraws in the face of originary presence. The intellect is no longer dominated by a compulsion to squeeze the world into categories; quantifying, tabulating, and formalizing every aspect of it. Primal trust overcomes primal fear.
# Supersession of the ego: Reduction of egoity -- Ichhaftigkeit. (Feuerstein describes the outward manifestations of integral consciousness. See, Feuerstein, 1987, p. 170).
# Realization of timelessness: Connection between archaic-magic preconceptual and integral postconceptual “being-without-time.”
# Realization of temporicity: Recognition of mythical elements (e.g., cyclicality and destiny) in the structure of consciousness.
# Realization of the concept of time: While becoming the integrating factor of all dimensions, time itself disappears (becomes amension) both as an absolute scientific/philosophical concept and as the Molach of daily life.
# Realization of time-freedom: The integrative vantage point renders individual, community, and cosmic existence transparent.
# Disruption of the merely systematic: Freedom from mental-rationally perceived causality, liberation of creativity.
# Incursion of dynamics: Conscious appreciation that ceaseless animation is a fundamental aspect of all forms of existence, including human thought.
# Recognition of energy: The science of thermodynamics absorbs and reinterprets conceptualizations and characterizations of time.
# Mastery of movement: Transformation of consciousness begins to take an outward shape.
# Fourth dimension: Conscious absorption that Being is temporally dimensionless. 
# Supersession of patriarchy: Movement toward integrum is catalyzed by the elimination of man/woman duality in the socioeconomic sphere; decline in the relevance of masculine symbolism in theological metanarratives.
# Renunciation of dominance and power: Discovery that imbalances in personal and social relations are ultimately futile, collectively harmful, and consequently, untenable in the long run.
# Acquisition of intensity: The presentiation of “Itself” (Sich) as internal transcendence in opposition to the mere expansion of consciousness. (This theme is too abstractly related to economic theory to make a plausible connection.)
# Clarity (instead of mere wakefulness): Recognition through a “systatic act” that the outer-related (exhaling) mental-rational world of wakefulness, buffeted by previously dominant structures, is insufficient to achieve true freedom.
# Transformation of the creative inceptual basis: History is no longer viewed as a path of some linearly imaged progress; the future as an unlimited design of human volition."<br />
(http://www.humanthermodynamics.com/Fifth_Structure_Emergence_in_Economics.pdf)

==More Information==
* [[Peter Pogany]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]