
'''= "a project which aims at mapping, connecting and studying, at the European level, experiences of formal groups or informal communities of citizens who manage hubs, incubators, co-creation spaces".'''

URL = https://generative-commons.eu

=Description=

"gE.CO Living Lab is a project which aims at mapping, connecting and studying, at the
European level, experiences of formal groups or informal communities of citizens who
manage hubs, incubators, co-creation spaces, social centers created in regenerated urban
voids and providing welfare services. We call such experiences “generative commons”.

So far, the project has mapped more than 200 experiences of communities and of local
public policies implemented for promoting generative commons. A pilot group of 56 cases
(spread in 15 countries and 43 cities) is undergoing a survey, the results of which will be
very helpful in better understanding the phenomenon at a larger scale. Such results will be
relied on for issuing further policy briefs.

The project, however, is already at a stage which enables us to shed a light on a first main
policy implication. Namely, the rise of cooperation as an institutional mean for citizens
to implement welfare solutions from the bottom-up and to promote urban
regeneration and flourishing.

Our findings suggest that generative commons have a significant social impact and that
they are largely widespread in Europe. "
(https://generative-commons.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/policy-brief_last-version-post-round-table.pdf)

[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Europe]]