
'''Geekcorps'''

"Geekcorps was my main project until quite recently. It's '''an international non-profit organization that transfers tech skills from geeks in developed nations to geeks in emerging nations, especially entrepreneurial geeks who are building small businesses. In other words, it's a Peace Corps for geeks.''' I co-founded the organization in early 2000 with a number of friends who were interested in bridging the gaps between the geek world and the international development world. I've had the pleasure of leading teams of extremely cool people in North Adams, MA, USA; Osu, Accra, Ghana; Dakar, Senegal and Bamako, Mali. I stepped down from the organization in April, 2004.

Geekcorps succeeded several orders of magnitude beyond any reasonable expectation, yielding not only some great e-development success stories, but a cool ad for whiskey and occasional friendly words in the press. In August 2001, Geekcorps joined forces with the International Executive Service Corps, resulting in an organization the BBC refers to as "Geeks and Geezers". IESC now manages Geekcorps from its DC office.

Also worth a visit is geekhalla.org, the ongoing online journal of Geekcorps volunteers serving in Accra. Started by the first volunteers in Ghana in late 2000, the site is now in the hands of volunteer geeks around the world. My favorite posting so far is Shara Karaisic's comparison of geek life in Accra and San Francisco... though Richard's obroni site ("obroni" is Twi for "foreigner" or "white person") runs a close second."
(http://www.ethanzuckerman.com )

[[Category:Movements]]