
'''= Geluidsnet (“noisenet”): "a citizen-driven initiative to measure noise pollution around Schiphol airport".'''

URL = https://www.sensornet.nl/english


=Description=

Michiel de Lange:

"Geluidsnet (www.sensornet.nl/english, “noisenet”) was started in 2003 as a
citizen-driven initiative to measure noise pollution around Schiphol airport. There
was at that time considerable controversy in the media about noise pollution
in dense (urban) areas, about whether it was better to calculate or measure,
which party did the calculations or measurement, and about feasibility and
affordability. Schiphol Airport’s NOMOS system combined measurements with
calculation models and published numbers four times per year. Geluidsnet
started with the intention to provide, in their own words, a more “factual” basis
for these discussions. It set up 25 measurement points on the roofs of houses of
private citizens and municipalities willing to contribute/sponsor. This distributed
noise measurement network used fairly cheap certified microphones, servers running open source operating system Free BSD, a centralized server, and proprietary audio analytics software developed at Groningen University, and ended up
being to be much cheaper than Schiphol’s NOMOS system. This setup collected
and displayed real-time aircraft-generated noise in dB(A) on their website
through a cartographic interface that showed periodically blinking green, yellow,
orange, or red dots depending on the dB(A) measurement displayed in it.
Geluidsnet managed to translate an abstract issue like noise pollution and make
it tangible through a data visualization. The combination of hardware, spatial
nodes, data and software, maintenance, institutional support, agenda-setting,
and a public communication strategy established a commons system that provided continuous translations between the issue of noise pollution, quantified
data visualizations, local residents’ lived experiences and the emotions related to
it, and public policy. The project managed to engage citizens and municipalities
as a collective with an issue they previously felt powerless about (see Nold, 2016
for a similar case about Heathrow Airport). The initiative had a public impact.

It influenced the agenda and advice of the state-appointed commission “Aircraft
Noise.” The mandate of this commission was extended to include advise on
using measurements for public information-provisioning. This was an
acknowledgment that sensing data shape peoples’ collective views about matters
of concern. In this case too, what matters is not the data on their own but how
they constitute a common system that acts as an interface to rebalance the relationship between citizens, governments, and corporations. What interests me is
how the self-proclaimed “factuality” of citizen-generated data translated into a
performative force behind the justificatory inclusion of collective civic initiatives
in policy recommendations. By making facts public, the project established a
public, which in turn became a social fact that could not be ignored."

=Source=

* The Right to the Datafied City: Interfacing the Urban Data Commons. By Michiel de Lange. Chapter 5 of: The Right to the Smart City. Emerald Pubn, pp. 71-83, 2019

=More information=

* [[DATAstudio Eindhoven]]

[[Category:Netherlands]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Transportation]]
[[Category:Cases]]