
Video via http://www.metanomics.net/show/archive110507/

=Description=

" Second Life’s Economic Architecture. Gene Yoon, the VP of Business Affairs for Linden Lab (the maker of Second Life), spoke about his controversial perspectives on the nature of the Second Life economy (of which he is often called “the architect.”).

Gene Yoon handles a variety of business matters for Linden Lab, including international market development, corporate and business development, and external developer programs. He was also previously the company’s general counsel and provided interim leadership for finance.

Prior to Linden Lab, he was general counsel and corporate secretary at Airespace, a wireless LAN equipment company, where he negotiated key strategic relationships, including the sale of the company to Cisco Systems. Before joining Airespace, Gene was a principal at KTB Ventures, leading the firm’s investments in wireless communications, networking equipment and semiconductors. He worked with the Airespace founders prior to joining KTB, while consulting with portfolio companies of Storm Ventures. He practiced law at Venture Law Group, advising many technology startups and venture capital firms, and at Kirkland & Ellis in New York, where his practice focused on leveraged buyouts and other complex corporate transactions.

Gene received an A.B. degree from Princeton University and a J.D. from New York University School of Law."
(http://www.metanomics.net/show/archive110507/)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Gaming]]

[[Category:Business]]