'''= "relations of open reciprocity, communal sharing, gift-giving and voluntary collaboration allowed value to circulate in its unalienated forms, including labor power, political expression and interspecies ecological exchanges".''' [http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997]


=Contextual Citation=

"Stressing  the  definition  of  generative  justice  not  only  as bottom-up  circulation  of  unalienated  value,  but  also the rights  of  value  generators  to  create their  own  conditions  of  production  is  a  crucial  foundation  for  in  reconceptualizing  social justice  and  sustainability."

- Ron Eglash [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice]


=Context=

Will Ruddick:

"In “An [[Introduction to Generative Justice]],” he ([[Ron Eglash]]), writes that the aim is “the bottom-up circulation of unalienated value.”

 < ''Unalienated value is value that remains in right-relation to its source, circulating with the consent, authorship, and benefit of the people and ecologies that generate it''. >

It is tempting to read justice as distribution: who gets what slice, how large a slice, how soon. But Eglash shows why redistribution after extraction keeps the wound open. If value is first torn from its living contexts (stripped from hands and soils and songs) and only then poured back from on high, the circuitry of harm remains intact. He offers a triad for healthy circulation: unalienated labor value instead of poverty, unalienated ecological value instead of pollution, unalienated expressive value instead of human rights violations.

Ron offers a definition: “''The universal right to generate unalienated value and directly participate in its benefits; the rights of value generators to create their own conditions of production; and the rights of communities of value generation to nurture self-sustaining paths for its circulation''.”

This, to me, is a watershed. It refuses the sterile debate between capitalism and communism, not by splitting the difference but by stepping off that line entirely. Generative justice, Eglash says, is orthogonal to that spectrum; its questions recur in both state and private ownership because they concern whether value remains with the people and ecologies who generate it, not who presides over its abstractions.

Ron’s conclusion is equally direct: value “can best serve human interests when it is allowed to remain in its unalienated state, and circulated by the human and non-human generators themselves.”

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/on-generative-justice)


=Description=

'''1. Ron Eglash:'''

"Marx proposed that capitalism’s destructive force is caused, at root, by the alienation of labor value from its generators. Environmentalists have added the concept of unalienated ecological value, and rights activists added the unalienated expressive value of free speech, sexuality, spirituality, etc. Marx’s vision for restoring an unalienated world by top-down economic governance was never fulfilled. But in the last 30 years, new forms of social justice have emerged that operate as “bottom-up”. Peer-to-peer production such as open source software or wikipedia has challenged the corporate grip on IP in a “gift exchange” of labor value; community based agroecology establishes a kind of gift exchange with our nonhuman allies in nature. DIY citizenship from feminist makerspaces to queer biohacking has profound implications for a new materialism of the “knowledge commons”; and restorative approaches to civil rights can challenge the prison-industrial complex. In contrast to top-down “distributive justice,” all of the above are cases of bottom-up or “generative justice”." (http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)


'''2. Ron Eglash:'''

"in  contrast  to  Marx’s  theory  of  distributive  justice,  we  seek  a  theory  of  generative justice:  one  in  which  society  is  best  served  when  value  extraction  is  minimized,  and  when the  communities  who  are  generating  value—not Adam  Smith’s  capital  or  Marx’s state—are in  charge  of  its  circulation.  If  we  phrase  this  in  the language  of “rights”—which  is not  the only  way  to think  about it--we  can  define  generative  justice as  follows:The  universal  right to  generate  unalienated  value  and  directly  participate  in  its  benefits;  the  rights  of  value generators  to  create  their  own  conditions  of  production;  and  the  rights  of  communities  of value  generation  to  nurture  self-sustaining  paths for  its  circulation."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice)


'''3. Taylor C. Dotson & James E. Wilcox:'''

"The generative justice model, in contrast, proposes “closing the loop.” That is, value generated
by labor and/or nature are to be governed by the people and recirculated within the systems
doing the producing, rather than redistributed by a centralized state. By allowing values to be
circulated, as opposed to simply extracted, generative capacity is built at the roots or from the
“bottom-up” to a greater extent. Eglash and Garvey (2014) offer up the Open Source
movement as well as the self-organized, decentralized irrigation systems used by Balinese
farmers for centuries as exemplary cases. In both instances, generated values produced by
members of a community are largely circulated and enjoyed within that same community."
(http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52840/50002)


=Example=


==Generative Justice Tradition in Africa==

Ron Eglash and Ellen Foster:

"Traditional African concepts of self-generation, like many indigenous cultures, neither focus on extracting value for export elsewhere, nor on elevating the purity of nature over culture. Rather, they depend on collaborations of humans and non-humans in which value is 1) allowed to remain in non-extracted, unalienated forms, and 2) circulated from the bottom-up.  In Africa this generative recursion has many different symbols, but one of the most vivid is the West African icon of a snake biting its own tail (figure 1). There are two underlying principles. One is what engineers might model as negative feedback: preventing greed, value hoarding, wealth inequality or other dynamics from extracting value. This is well visualized by a Baule carving in which each crocodile has the other’s tail in its jaws, “the chief and the people in balance” (figure 2). The other principle is what engineers might model as positive feedback; a self-expanding source of value, sometimes disruptive or even chaotic, as we see in a second Baule carving, “the cycle of life” (figure 3)."
([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YzzuH10iVm8QgYSccV5s6cRbLpFS-0jckG_Zv_w0DgY/edit])


For more, see: [[African Traditions, Maker Communities and the Politics of Generative Justice]]

==[[Kuapa Kokoo Chocolate Production System]]==

Ron Eglash:

"At  first  it  might  seem  that  the Adinkra  production  system,  while  admirable  for  its  sus-tainability,  is  at best  an artifact  of the  past. But  the  system  took  a  remarkable  turn  in  1993 when  a  traditional  animist  priest,  Nana  Frimpong  Abebrese,  decided  to  organize  cocoa farmers  under  similar principles:  a  collective in  which  the  common pool  of  resources  would benefit the whole. Kuapa Kokoo Ltd (the name means “good cocoa farmer”) obtained a loan from  Twin  Trading,  a  UK  fair  trade  company,  and  set up  22 villages  with weighing  scales, tarpaulins,  gratings  and  other  basics.  Their  mission  is  to  empower  low-income  farmers,  in-crease  women's  participation,  and  to  develop  environmentally  friendly  cultivation.  In  1998, with  the  help  of  Twin  and  other  NGOs,  Kuapa  Kokoo  launched  UK-based  chocolate  com-pany  Divine,  with  the funtunfunefu  and asase  symbols  proudly  displayed  on  the  front wrapper  (figure 4).  Today  Kuapa Kokoo  has 65,000  members  organized  in  about  1400  villages.  Profits  from  their  45%  ownership  in  Divine  chocolate  are  reinvested  in  village projects  for  water,  health,  and  education,  as well  as  preventing  child  labor  and  adapting  to climate  change. When  it  comes  to  low-income  African  farmers  becoming  owners  of  a  multimillion  dollar chocolate  empire,  it’s  hard  to  argue  against  generative  justice."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice)

=More Information=


==Key Concepts==

* [[Critical Growing]]
* [[Unalienated Value]]

==Key Examples==

* [[Makerspaces in Africa]]
** [[iSpace]]
** [[Tech Needs Girls]]
** [[CoCreation Hub in Nigeria]]
** [[Creativity Group Kumasi]]
** [[Agoblogoshie Makerspace Platform]]


==Introductory Articles==

* An [[ Introduction to Generative Justice]]. By Ron Eglash.

* [[Historical Perspective on Generative Justice]]. By Ron Eglash.


==Other Articles==

* [[African Traditions, Maker Communities and the Politics of Generative Justice]]. By Ron Eglash and Ellen Foster.

* [[Contributory Diversity as a Metric for the Ethical Evaluation of Value Production‎]]: CALLAHAN, B.R., C. HATHAWAY & M. KRISHNAMOORTHY, C. (2016). Quantitative Metrics for Generative Justice: Graphing the value of diversity, Revista Teknokultura Vol. 13(2)...

* [[Diversity Initiatives Within Open Technology Projects]]: DUNBAR-HESTER, C. (2016). “Freedom from Jobs” or learning to love to labor? Diversity advocacy and working imaginaries in Open Technology Projects

* [[Opportunities and Challenges for an Emerging Distributed Energy Architecture‎]]

* [[Production and Circulation of Value in Community Energy Initiatives‎‎]]

* [[Recursivity and Anti-Authoritarian Metrics as a Strategy for Post-Capitalism]]

* EGLASH, R., & GARVEY, C. (2014). Basins of attraction for generative justice. In S. Banerjee et al.
(Eds.), Chaos Theory in Politics (pp. 75-88). Germany: Springer Science.

* EGLASH, R. (2014, April 15). Generative justice: The revolution will be self-organized. Tikkun.
[http://www.tikkun.org/nextgen/generative-justice-the-revolution-will-be-self-organized]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Solidarity]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]