
=Contextual Citation=

Roy Bhaskar:

"The starry skies are above me,
but they are also within me, enfolded
within me, like everything else in the
universe. I contain the totality. But on
this theory externality does not collapse.
For just as the whole world is
enfolded within me, I am enfolded
within the whole world, more particularly
within every object in the world."
(http://www.conscjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Integral-In-Dwelling.pdf, p. 13, quote from Bhaskar)


=Description=

Bruce Alderman:

"The concept of generalized co-presence is a central one in the grammar
of Bhaskar’s metaRealist metaphysics. As a term denoting the radical
relationality and mutual indwelling of beings in the cosmos, generalized copresence
finds analogues in the holographic principle of Morin’s Complex
Thought, Wilber’s nondual inflection of holarchy, as well as multiple religious
archetypes of divine interindependence. "
(http://www.conscjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Integral-In-Dwelling.pdf)


=Discussion=

Bruce Alderman:

'''1.'''

"The concept of co-presence, you will
recall, was developed by Bhaskar (2002) as
part of his broader model of nonduality. It
represents the deepest level or form of nonduality,
and is the necessary precondition for the
operation of the other mechanisms of nonduality
that he outlines. Theologically, the principle
of co-presence is akin to a generalized
form of the Catholic Trinitarian doctrine of
circumincession, which is the doctrine of the
reciprocal in-dwelling within one another of
each of the Three Persons of the Godhead.

But in Bhaskar’s (2002) formulation, circumincession
or co-presence is not a truth pertaining
only to God; it is a truth about all things,
that all things in-dwell each thing. On this
view, each religious practitioner, and each
tradition, can be seen to enfold the totality, or
the potential for the realization of any aspect
of the totality."
(http://www.conscjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Integral-In-Dwelling.pdf)


'''2.'''

"Both nonduality and the holographic
metaphor involve the concept of the interpenetration
of mutual enfoldment of beings in the
universe, but they differ in their scope and
(prepositional) intensity, as the table below
makes clear:

Paradigmatic Stance: Prepositional Relation

* Pantheistic: One-is-All, Each-in-All

* Holographic: Each-in-All, All-in-Each

* Nondual: One-in-Each, Each-is-One, Each-in-All, All-in Each, One-in-All


==Roy Bhaskar on the evolutionary potential of the theory of co-presence==

Bruce Alderman:

"Bhaskar (2002) contends that the theory
of co-presence has profound evolutionary
and soteriological implications, for if the
alethic potential of all beings is enfolded in
each being, then “there are enormous possibilities
of awakening, unfolding, and consolidating
or in-building new powers in the evolutionary
process” (p. 79). He sees the developmental
trajectory for all beings as necessarily
open-ended and entangled, with the evolutionary
process itself likely undergoing its own
evolutionary development, and this is true
soteriologically as well: by virtue of our copresence
to each other, any of the spiritual 
realizations sought or enacted by a particular
tradition become part of the implicit possibilities
for all beings. This does not mean, however,
that all beings are equally able to actualize
these potentials at any given point in their
development."

=More Information=

'''* Article: Alderman, B., Integral in-dwelling: A prepositional theology of religions. Consciousness: Ideas and Research for the Twenty First Century | Fall 2016 | Vol 1 | Issue 4'''

URL = http://www.conscjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Integral-In-Dwelling.pdf

"In this paper, I will explore the potential
of this concept for framing a “deep participatory,” Complex Integral Realist
model of interreligious relationship that can amplify the integrative potential of
the metaRealist, Integral, and participatory approaches to this topic that have been
articulated to date. To facilitate this inquiry, and to situate it in a context that I
believe will be most fruitful, I will first broadly outline the contours of two related
metaphysical projects which I believe are highly relevant for integral metatheorizing:
prepositional philosophy and theology."

* Related concept: [[Hologrammatic Principle]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Relational]]