
'''= 2004 declaration critical of WIPO policies, signed by Cory Doctorow, Lawrence Lessig and others'''

List of signatories at http://www.futureofwipo.org/signatures.html

=Text=


URL = http://www.futureofwipo.org/futureofwipodeclaration.html
 
"Humanity faces a global crisis in the governance of knowledge, technology
and culture. The crisis is manifest in many ways.
 
* Without access to essential medicines, millions suffer and die;
* Morally repugnant inequality of access to education, knowledge and
technology undermines development and social cohesion;
* Anticompetitive practices in the knowledge economy impose enormous
costs on consumers and retard innovation;
* Authors, artists and inventors face mounting barriers to follow-on
innovation;
* Concentrated ownership and control of knowledge, technology, biological
resources and culture harm development, diversity and democratic
institutions;
* Technological measures designed to enforce intellectual property rights
in digital environments threaten core exceptions in copyright laws for
disabled persons, libraries, educators, authors and consumers, and undermine
privacy and freedom;
* Key mechanisms to compensate and support creative individuals and
communities are unfair to both creative persons and consumers;
* Private interests misappropriate social and public goods, and lock up
the public domain.
 
At the same time, there are astoundingly promising innovations in
information, medical and other essential technologies, as well as in social
movements and business models. We are witnessing highly successful campaigns
for access to drugs for AIDS, scientific journals, genomic information and
other databases, and hundreds of innovative collaborative efforts to create
public goods, including the Internet, the World Wide Web, Wikipedia, the
Creative Commons, GNU Linux and other free and open software projects, as
well as distance education tools and medical research tools. Technologies
such as Google now provide tens of millions with powerful tools to find
information. Alternative compensation systems have been proposed to expand
access and interest in cultural works, while providing both artists and
consumers with efficient and fair systems for compensation. There is renewed
interest in compensatory liability rules, innovation prizes, or competitive
intermediators, as models for economic incentives for science and technology
that can facilitate sequential follow-on innovation and avoid monopolist
abuses. In 2001, the World Trade Organization (WTO) declared that member
countries should "promote access to medicines for all."
 
Humanity stands at a crossroads - a fork in our moral code and a test of our
ability to adapt and grow. Will we evaluate, learn and profit from the best
of these new ideas and opportunities, or will we respond to the most
unimaginative pleas to suppress all of this in favor of intellectually weak,
ideologically rigid, and sometimes brutally unfair and inefficient policies?
Much will depend upon the future direction of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO), a global body setting standards that regulate
the production, distribution and use of knowledge.
 
A 1967 Convention sought to encourage creative activity by establishing WIPO
to promote the protection of intellectual property. The mission was expanded
in 1974, when WIPO became part of the United Nations, under an agreement
that asked WIPO to take "appropriate action to promote creative intellectual
activity," and facilitate the transfer of technology to developing
countries, "in order to accelerate economic, social and cultural
development."
 
As an intergovernmental organization, however, WIPO embraced a culture of
creating and expanding monopoly privileges, often without regard to
consequences. The continuous expansion of these privileges and their
enforcement mechanisms has led to grave social and economic costs, and has
hampered and threatened other important systems of creativity and
innovation. WIPO needs to enable its members to understand the real economic
and social consequences of excessive intellectual property protections, and
the importance of striking a balance between the public domain and
competition on the one hand, and the realm of property rights on the other.
The mantras that "more is better" or "that less is never good" are
disingenuous and dangerous -- and have greatly compromised the standing of
WIPO, especially among experts in intellectual property policy. WIPO must
change.
 
We do not ask that WIPO abandon efforts to promote the appropriate
protection of intellectual property, or abandon all efforts to harmonize or
improve these laws. But we insist that WIPO work from the broader framework
described in the 1974 agreement with the UN, and take a more balanced and
realistic view of the social benefits and costs of intellectual property
rights as a tool, but not the only tool, for supporting creativity
intellectual activity.
 
WIPO must also express a more balanced view of the relative benefits of
harmonization and diversity, and seek to impose global conformity only when
it truly benefits all of humanity. A "one size fits all" approach that
embraces the highest levels of intellectual property protection for everyone
leads to unjust and burdensome outcomes for countries that are struggling to
meet the most basic needs of their citizens.
 
The WIPO General Assembly has now been asked to establish a development
agenda. The initial proposal, first put forth by the governments of
Argentina and Brazil, would profoundly refashion the WIPO agenda toward
development and new approaches to support innovation and creativity. This is
a long overdue and much needed first step toward a new WIPO mission and work
program. It is not perfect. The WIPO Convention should formally recognize
the need to take into account the "development needs of its Member States,
particularly developing countries and least-developed countries," as has
been proposed, but this does not go far enough. Some have argued that the
WIPO should only "promote the protection of intellectual property," and not
consider, any policies that roll back intellectual property claims or
protect and enhance the public domain. This limiting view stifles critical
thinking. Better expressions of the mission can be found, including the
requirement in the 1974 UN/WIPO agreement that WIPO "promote creative
intellectual activity and facilitate the transfer of technology related to
industrial property." The functions of WIPO should not only be to promote
"efficient protection" and "harmonization" of intellectual property laws,
but to formally embrace the notions of balance, appropriateness and the
stimulation of both competitive and collaborative models of creative
activity within national, regional and transnational systems of innovation.
 
The proposal for a development agenda has created the first real opportunity
to debate the future of WIPO. It is not only an agenda for developing
countries. It is an agenda for everyone, North and South. It must move
forward. All nations and people must join and expand the debate on the
future of WIPO.
 
There must be a moratorium on new treaties and harmonization of standards
that expand and strengthen monopolies and further restrict access to
knowledge. For generations WIPO has responded primarily to the narrow
concerns of powerful publishers, pharmaceutical manufacturers, plant
breeders and other commercial interests. Recently, WIPO has become more open
to civil society and public interest groups, and this openness is welcome.
But WIPO must now address the substantive concerns of these groups, such as
the protection of consumer rights and human rights. Long-neglected concerns
of the poor, the sick, the visually impaired and others must be given
priority.
 
The proposed development agenda points in the right direction. By stopping
efforts to adopt new treaties on substantive patent law, broadcasters rights
and databases, WIPO wi ll create space to address far more urgent needs.
 
The proposals for the creation of standing committees and working groups on
technology transfer and development are welcome. WIPO should also consider
the creation of one or more bodies to systematically address the control of
anticompetitive practices and the protection of consumer rights.
 
We support the call for a Treaty on Access to Knowledge and Technology. The
Standing Committee on Patents and the Standing Committee on Copyright and
Related Rights should solicit views from member countries and the public on
elements of such a treaty.
 
The WIPO technical assistance programs must be fundamentally reformed.
Developing countries must have the tools to implement the WTO Doha
Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health, and "use, to the full" the
flexibilities in the TRIPS to "promote access to medicines for all." WIPO
must help developing countries address the limitations and exceptions in
patent and copyright laws that are essential for fairness, development and
innovation. If the WIPO Secretariat cannot understand the concerns and
represent the interests of the poor, the entire technical assistance program
should be moved to an independent body that is accountable to developing
countries.
 
Enormous differences in bargaining power lead to unfair outcomes between
creative individuals and communities (both modern and traditional) and the
commercial entities that sell culture and knowledge goods. WIPO must honor
and support creative individuals and communities by investigating the nature
of relevant unfair business practices, and promote best practice models and
reforms that protect creative individuals and communities in these
situations, consistent with norms of the relevant communities.
 
Delegations representing the WIPO member states and the WIPO Secretariat
have been asked to choose a future. We want a change of direction, new
priorities, and better outcomes for humanity. We cannot wait for another
generation. It is time to seize the moment and move forward."


=More Information=

* http://www.futureofwipo.org/

* To sign the declaration, send an email to geneva_declaration@cptech.org, including your support for the declaration, and how you would like to be identified.   



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Policy]]