
=Cases=

[[GeCo Living Lab]]:


==[[Communitism - Athens, Greece]]==

"Communitism is a self-funded sociο-cultural project,
organized in Athens in 2015. It aims at mobilizing social structures into reactivating
abandoned buildings of cultural heritage. It is structured in three consecutive events that
are designed to involve three broader communities: creative audience, local artists and
international artists. To achieve this, they have formed a dynamic community consisting
of people of different personalities, nationalities, ages, educational levels and orientations.
At this time, they have been granted the use of a building in downtown Athens, which
acts as a field of action for their purposes. As they connect, form synergies and learn how
to work collectively, they have created the conditions for the building to become a
common good: a vibrant center where the involved parties can communicate their social
and artistic actions. Their experiment succeeded and, in the spring of 2018, they set up a
strategy for founding a self-organized socio-cultural center. At a broader level, they are
envisioning the creation of a new model for the activation of abandoned spaces that other
communities can use, thus contributing to a new approach of the commons."
(https://generative-commons.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/policy-brief_last-version-post-round-table.pdf)


==[[Melissa - Athens, Greece]]==

"Another example is Melissa, a network for migrant women in Athens, promoting
empowerment, communication and active citizenship. It aims at promoting, creating and
sustaining bonds, and at building a bridge of communication with the host society. Melissa
was founded in September 2014 with the direct involvement of migrant women leaders,
it has members from 45 countries who live and work in Greece. It operates on the basis
of a common platform, a hub where networks and individuals can meet, share their
concerns and ideas, and support each other in the pursuit of their common goals. It
provides a platform for networking, capacity building and advocacy and runs an
innovative integration program supporting refugee women and children. Melissa’s vision
of society is not as a collection of isolated cells, but as a beehive of creativity,
communication and exchange. Their aim is to motivate migrant and refugee women and
engage them in the public sphere, in order to be the change, they wish to see. Despite the
adversities that they have faced and continue to face in the current crisis, migrant and
refugee women are multipliers and integrators. They are capable of making something out
of almost nothing, multiplying their scarce resources in order to feed, nurture and care.
What they create with their work, their dedication, their talents, their efforts and
ambitions, promotes social cohesion and contributes to the host society in countless
visible and invisible ways."
(https://generative-commons.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/policy-brief_last-version-post-round-table.pdf)

[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Greece]]
[[Category:Cases]]