
'''* The GENIUS Act: [[Permission-Based Planetary Ownership]]'''

URL = https://indoeden.substack.com/p/the-day-nature-became-a-security


=Description=

MAATR:

"On July 18, 2025, the GENIUS Act became law.


Buried in regulatory language was this line:

"Only permitted issuers may issue a payment stablecoin for use by U.S. persons, subject to certain exceptions and safe harbors."

This sentence restructures planetary ownership.

The act grants states the right to issue digital financial instruments but requires they operate on federally readable and interoperable rails.

Embedded compliance logic: digital ID, zero-knowledge proofs, MRV standards.

When Texas wants to tokenize oil reserves, California to securitize water rights, or Alaska to back tokens with minerals they need federal permission.


The architecture is elegant:

States appear sovereign, issuing their own tokens. But every transaction flows through "federally readable and interoperable rails."

It's not centralization disguised as decentralization. It's permission-based sovereignty controlled freedom with the illusion of autonomy.


* Who gets permission to issue nature-backed money:

States (with federal approval)

Banks (with compliance frameworks)

Corporations (with oversight structures)


* Who doesn't:

Communities

Tribes

Individuals

Anyone without institutional blessing


The system preserves the illusion of access while concentrating control over who creates money backed by Earth's resources."

(https://indoeden.substack.com/p/the-day-nature-became-a-security)

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]