=Discussion=

Melissa Y. Rock on Modelski’s World Leadership Cycle:

"Modelski’s model is a historically based theory founded on his interest in naval history. 


Some key elements of his theory are:

* Power is a function of global reach (the ability to influence events across the globe).

* Historically, world power rested upon the ability to control the oceans (“ocean-going capacity”).

* Ocean-going capacity is measured by the combined tonnage of a country’s military and merchant navies.

* Power in this model is about strength and dominance. ...

* A world leader is able to offer an “innovation” that provides geopolitical order and security.

* An innovation refers to bundles of institutions, ideas and practices.

* Cycles of world leadership are dynamic—they rise and fall.


Each cycle of world leadership is comprised of four phases (pg 199):

#Phase of global war
#Phase of world power
#Phase of delegitimation
#Phase of deconcentration"

(https://www.e-education.psu.edu/geog128/node/646)


* '''Table 7.1 Cycles of World Leadership:'''

World Leader	 Century	   Global War	     Challenger	         Coalition Partners

#Portugal	 // 1500s	   // 1494-1516	     // Spain	         // Netherlands
#Netherlands	 // 1600s	   // 1580-1609	     // France	         // England
#Great Britain	 // 1700s	   // 1688-1713	     // France	         // Russia
#Great Britain	 // 1800s	   // 1792-1815	     // Germany	         // US plus allies
#United States	 // 1900s	   // 1914-1945	     // Soviet Union     // NATO


[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Geopolitics]]
[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]