== Bio ==

Pór, George (UK). Commons educator and activist. Evolutionary thinker-activist, pioneer of  collective intelligence research and adviser to visionary leaders in civil  society, business, and governments in matters of social innovation, culture  change, communities of practice, and social media strategies. 

Co-Director of the [[School of Commoning]] that defines "commoning" in three ways: http://www.schoolofcommoning.com/about-us#4. 

Founding Editor of The Future of Occupy, the "Commons" issue of which is here: http://thefutureofoccupy.org/foo-magazine/the-commons-issue/ 

Publications: 

* http://www.academia.edu/1981860/Commoning_Our_Way_to_the_Great_Transition and 
* http://www.schoolofcommoning.com/blogs/george-p%C3%B3r 
* http://commonsrising.ning.com/profiles/blog/list?user=3nv27724dcaq3                                       

Contact via george(at)schoolofcommoning.com

== Details ==

===Initiatives===

'''[[Community Intelligence]]''' is a social enterprise. We believe a better world is not only possible but in need of our wise action, today. We envision a world in which all organizations are responsible to the whole – not only to their members and stakeholders, but also to society, the biosphere and future generations. 

It is a world in which the full development of everyone is the goal of the whole. Work as creative self-expression is not the privilege of the few, and all social institutions are designed to increase aliveness, joy, and prosperity for all. Our mission is to contribute to such a world, by amplifying collective intelligence and wisdom in organizations and social systems. We do that by combining social, cognitive, and electronic technologies for resilience, innovation, and regeneration.

'''[[Earth Commons Rising]]''', a forum of commons news of global relevance [http://www.worldcitizenpanels.org/forum/topics/earth-commons-rising]

===Publications===

* Evolutionary Worldview Rising, Integral Leadership Review, http://www.integralleadershipreview.com/archives-2010/2010-06/2010-06-notes-por.php
* Collective Intelligence and Collective Leadership: Twin Paths to Beyond Chaos, University of Amsterdam, http://sprouts.aisnet.org/8-2/
* Connecting Our Conversations for Becoming Wiser Together, Kosmos Journal, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/104
* Collective Intelligence as a Field of Multi-disciplinary Study and Practice, Evolutionary Nexus, http://www.evolutionarynexus.org/node/606
* Designing for the Emergence of a Global-scale Collective Intelligence, The First Global Brain Workshop, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/106 
* Nurturing Systemic Wisdom through Knowledge Ecology, The Systems Thinker, http://www.community-intelligence.com/?q=node/98 
* Quest for Collective Intelligence, Community Building: Renewing Spirit and Learning in Business, http://www.visionnest.com/btbc/cb/chapters/quest.htm

== More Information ==
* [https://www.linkedin.com/in/georgepor/ on LinkedIn]
* As [http://wealthofthecommons.org/contributor/george-p%C3%B3r an author] in the [[Wealth of the Commons]]
* Articles [https://medium.com/@technoshaman in Medium]
* [https://blogofcollectiveintelligence.com/author/coevolvingwithyou/page/2/ Blog of Collective Intelligence]
* As [https://www.enliveningedge.org/team_member/gp/ team member at Enlivening Edge]
* [https://twitter.com/technoshaman on Twitter]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]
[[Category:UK]]