Podcast via https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/ep8-translocal-care-chains-for-planetary-health-with/id1749844384?i=1000692661339


=Description=

"EP8 - Translocal Care Chains for Planetary Health (with Geordan Shannon)

The declining health of our planet is a decline in your own health. I cannot be healthy unless you are healthy. This is Planetary health.

Dr. Geordan Shannon is a medical doctor, founder, and global health specialist.

She brings a critical approach to understanding and acting on global challenges including social inequity, globalization, health systems, and environmental crises.

Her current work sits at the intersection of Web3, planetary health, and public goods for health.

She is the co-founder and director at United Health Futures, co-founder of Unexia & Planet.health.

...

In this conversation we explore:

Planetary Health as a concept: How health is not just about individuals but about relationships—with communities, ecosystems, and the planet itself. (00:07:55)

Geordan's journey into Planetary Health (14:00)

Translocalism: A New Model for Global Action: Why decentralized, place-based action is more effective than top-down global solutions. (00:20:47)

The Role of Care & Care Chains in Planetary Health: How care extends beyond human labor to include our relationships with each other, our bodies, and the environment. (00:31:30)

Two Loops Model of System Change: How old systems collapse while new systems emerge—and the different roles we play in this transition. (00:47:23)

Web3 & Decentralized Technologies for Health & Regeneration: How Web3 offers new governance and funding models for planetary health. (00:56:00)

=More information=

• Website: https://www.geordanshannon.com/

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]