
'''= German music industry visionary and media futurist'''


=Bio=

'''1.'''

"His projects are Sonific (Co-Founder and CEO), his personal online universe MusicFuturist.com (founder) and his GerdLeonhard-Blog. His publications include the must-read-book The [[Future Of Music]] (2005), numerous presentations, his video channel, his podcasts and his new book The End Of Control (Release in 2007). 

His career: 

*1987: Diploma in Jazz Performance (Boston´s Berklee College of Music) 
*1993 to 1996: Expert Advisor to the European Comission in Brussels 
*.com-era: Founder and president of LicenseMusic.com (based in San Francisco) 
*2004: Founder and CEO of ThinkAndLink (advisory agency for financing and strategic partnerships) 
*2004/05: Senior Advisor of Media Rights Technologies (based in: Santa Cruz, California) 
(http://thinnerism.cc/2007/10/28/music20-overview-–-part-1-gerd-leonhard-„music-like-water“-and-sonific/)


2.

"The Wall Street Journal calls Gerd one of the leading Media Futurists in the World. He is the Co-Author of the influential book ‘The Future of Music’ (2005, Berklee Press), as well as the Author of ‘Music2.0’ (January 2008 www.music20thebook.com), and ‘The End of Control’ (see the preview chapters at www.endofcontrol.com, print publication in 2009).
 
Gerd's background is in Music (he won the Quincy Jones Award in 1986 and is a graduate of Boston's Berklee College of Music) and in Technology, Internet and Media. His work focuses on the Future of Media, Content, Technology, Business, Marketing, Advertising, Branding, Communications and Culture, and he is considered a leading expert on topics such as social media, Web/Media 2.0, mobility, innovation, UGC and peer production, social networking, cultural changes due to disruption by new technologies, education, copyright and IPR issues, digital content commerce models, media convergence, mega trends, mobile entertainment, entrepreneurship, the future of advertising and branding, future scenarios and planning, digital content strategies and the development of next-generation business models.

Gerd's keynotes, speeches, presentations and think-tank appearances are renowned for his hard-hitting and provocative yet inspiring and motivational style. With over 80 engagements in 17 countries during the past 3 years Gerd has addressed executives and professionals in the sectors of communications and telecom / wireless, recorded music & music publishing, radio, TV, film/video and broadcasting, online gaming and virtual worlds, and advertising, marketing and branding.

His diverse client list includes Nokia, Google, SonyBMG, RTL, ITV, the BBC, France Telecom / Orange, Deutsche Telekom, The Financial Times, TribalDDB, DDB, Omnicom, the European Commission, Nokia-Siemens-Networks, Kuoni and many others. Gerd is a fellow of the Royal Society for the Arts (London), and resides in Basel, Switzerland."
(http://gleonhard.blip.tv/#1455358)



=More Information=

#Check out Gerd´s book:  The [[Future Of Music]]
#More details are at http://www.mediafuturist.com



[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Music]]