

=Description=

Dr. [[Stephan Krall]]:

"The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) is a federally owned organisation. We work worldwide in the field of international cooperation for sustainable development. Our mandate is to support the German Government in achieving its development objectives. We provide viable, forward-looking solutions for political, economic, ecological and social development in a globalised world. Sometimes working under difficult conditions, we promote complex reforms and change processes. Our corporate objective is to improve people’s lives on a sustainable basis. Our core competency is capacity development. Capacity is the ability of people, organisations and societies to shape development on a sustainable basis. This entails identifying problems and then developing and successfully implementing strategies to reach solutions. We support developing and emerging countries in building their capacities and managing the learning and change processes involved. Who We Work For GTZ is based in Eschborn near Frankfurt am Main. It was founded in 1975 as a company under private law. Most of our activities are commissioned by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ). We also operate on behalf of other German ministries, the governments of other countries and international clients – such as the European Commission, the United Nations and the World Bank – as well as on behalf of private companies. We act on a public-benefit basis, channelling all surpluses back into our own international cooperation projects for sustainable development. Worldwide operations GTZ has operations in 128 countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Mediterranean and Middle Eastern regions, as well as in Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia. We have our own offices in 88 countries. We employ almost 15,000 staff worldwide, more than 11,000 of whom are national personnel. About 1,800 people work at Head Office in Eschborn and elsewhere in Germany."


[[Category:Germany]]