For a list of pages see [[:Category:Germany]].

=Resources=

'''Kefk Network''', http://www.kefk.net/P2P/Website/Language/index_de.asp

Looks like a very well documented scientific website about various aspects of P2P

'''[[CoForum]]''', http://coforum.de

Wiki dedicated to all aspects of a cooperative culture (which may be essentially synonym to p2p culture) run by Thomas Kalka.

'''oekonux''' http://www.oekonux.org

This group emerged as a BooF session at the Wizards of OS Conference in 1999, started to gain life of its own, organized 3 international conferences and an extensive mailinglist and became the grandfather of several other initiatives after forks and other dissociations in 2006; seeks to go international now and switch to English.

'''Freie-Gesellschaft-Wiki''' (Free Society Wiki), http://www.freie-gesellschaft.de/wiki/Hauptseite

The goal of this wiki is to find out whether and in which ways [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commons-based_peer_production commons-based peer production] has a potential that extends beyond the areas of free software and open content production where it has first emerged. It this just a phenomenon of limited relevance, or might it one day cover all aspects of production? Is a society possible in which peer production is the primary mode of production? If so, how could such a society be organized?

'''keimform.de''', http://www.keimform.de

A group weblog discussing and analyzing the emergence and spreading of new particitory and open approaches in all areas of life – software development, content production, (non-)education, physical production, and beyond. Main authors: Benni Bärmann, Christian Siefkes, Stefan Meretz, Thomas Berker, Thomas Kalka.

'''Freie Modi''' (Free Modes descriptions), http://de.wiki.oekonux.org/FreieModi

Definitions of the various expressions of the free paradigm.

'''Open Theory''', (access to essays), http://opentheory.org/


=Complementary Currencies=

Information provided by [http://www.stunde.at Georg Pleger]: 

"We use [http://project.cyclos.org/ Cyclos] for transactions within regional communities and for transactions between communities with different currencies.

[http://zart.tele-select.info/index.php?id=16 za:rt] is a nonprofit organization ("Verein") focussing on the networkting between complementary currencies in the German speaking area
(Germany, Austria, Switzerland)

German speaking Cyclos clearing just starts at:
http://zart.tele-select.info/index.php?id=20

Regiogeld Verband is a nonprofit organization in Germany:
http://www.regiogeld.de

Our Poster-Exhibition is online at
http://neuesgeld.com"


[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:Country]]
[[Category:Germany]]