

=Bio=

Translate from German bio page by Google Translate:

"Dr. Geseko v. Lüpke

was born in 1958, studied political science, anthropology and journalism, and traveled extensively throughout the world. Many trips to Asia aroused his interest in human growth and political and cultural development. After graduation and doctorate he attended the German School of Journalism in Munich. He works as a freelance journalist, author and freelance editor for various broadcasters, newspapers and magazines. He is specialized in the interdisciplinary areas between sustainable development, new holistic approaches to culture and science, health education, environmental ethics, modern spirituality and human development. Through his many contacts in the world he sees himself as a networker and interpreters' between different cultures, approaches and worldviews.

By meeting with many pioneers of the deep ecology movement (Joanna Macy, John Seed, Arne Naess, James Lovelock, Thomas Berry, Matthew Fox, Tom Brown and many others) were not only numerous radio programs and books (so others 1995 collaboration on the book: Gottwald, Klepsch: Deep ecology, as we want to live in the future.. Diederichs 1995). The contact also led to participation in the first HOLON training, a new professional orientation and the beginning of its own seminar activities in the field of deep ecology.

Since 2001 he works together with his partner Richard Xenia also in Germany, Slovenia, South Africa, with people in the wilderness, in order to accompany vision quests' and methods of the initiatory nature working through life crises and life transitions. About this work co-authored with Sylvia Koch-Weser, the book: " Vision Quest. Vision Quest: Alone in the wilderness on the way to himself "(3rd edition 2005). Geseko v. Lüpke-chairs with Xenia and Gabriele Richard Kaupp, the vision quest in the Holon training.

The long-standing dispute with pioneers sustainable thinking and acting in 2003 led to the publication of the book: " The Alternative. Ways and ideologies of the Right Livelihood Award , "in which the holistic and deep ecological worldview of the winners, the story of its approximately 100 projects and the sources of their mental and spiritual resources to be told. 2003 saw the book: "Politics of the heart. Sustainable Concepts for the 21st Century - discussions with the methods of our time out ", which is now in its second edition.

In May 2005 he organized for the headquarters of the Goethe Institute, the conference "The Alternative. Views of another globalization ", in the 13 winners of the" Right Livelihood Award "(Alternative Nobel Prize) participated. About this meeting, he published together with Peter Erlenwein 2006 the book " projects of hope. View of another globalization : alternative Nobel laureates learn "oekom Verlag 2006th A similar meeting with pupils is the late autumn of 2007 in planning."
(http://www.tiefenoekologie.de/de/menschen/dr-geseko-von-luepke.html)


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]