URL = http://web.getaround.com/

=Description=

'''1. By Jessica Scorpio:'''

"Peer-to-peer car-sharing solutions like Getaround offer an innovative and risk-free way to share your car and participate in the New Economy. As a car owner, you can make money by sharing your car when you aren’t using it. People in need of a car can get access to one nearby. The peer-to-peer model is the most scalable option and will spread the benefits of carsharing to more people than ever before.

This new model of car sharing also requires new technology. Similar to other solutions, Getaround has developed carsharing technologies such as the Getaround Carkit, which means the car owner doesn’t have to meet the renter with the keys. The soon to be released Getaround smartphone application will make it easy for owners to manage rentals and for individuals to rent a car in three easy steps.

Getaround provides insurance, support for the community, and facilitates payment. We aim to make sharing fun and easy while increasing people's awareness of car sharing. Core to our platform is community and finding ways to establish trust between near strangers. To reinforce this, renters and owners build a reputation through ratings on past rentals.

Many '''traditional car-sharing services (such as Zipcar) use a fleet model that’s intrinsically limited. While fleet-based carsharing providers can offer a few cars at select locations, Getaround's peer-to-peer model allows for every vehicle in a community to be a shared vehicle'''. 

Peer-to-peer car-sharing programs, like Getaround, can help create a sense of trust and community around sharing. This will lead to higher percentages of people willing to share, while having a positive impact on the environment."
(http://shareable.net/blog/share-your-car-join-the-new-economy)


'''2. Details'''

"How it Works: Car owners earn money by renting out their unused vehicle through a peer-to-peer rental service. People in need of wheels for a day can get a car for a few dollars an hour.

How it Makes Money: Getaround charges a 40 percent commission for car owners."
(http://www.inc.com/ss/7-start-ups-changing-peer-peer-commerce#4)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Transportation]]