
=Discussion=

Kojin Karatani:

"Generally speaking, Marxists  have  made  few  contributions  to our understanding of pre-capitalist  societies. This  was  because  they relied on the  formulas  of  historical  materialism. As a  result, the  epochal  breakthrough in our understanding of  the  social  formation in clan societies came  not  from  a  Marxist  but  rather  Marcel  Mauss. 

He  analyzed it  not  in terms  of  productive forces  or means  of  production, but  rather of  exchange. This  was  not  commodity exchange, but rather the  reciprocal  exchange  of  gift/counter-gift. I call  this  mode  of  exchange  A  to distinguish it  from  commodity exchange  (mode  of  exchange  C). This  kind of  exchange  is  comprised of  three rules:  one  must  give  gifts, one  must  accept  gifts, and one  must  reciprocate  for gifts  received. These  rules  are  not  something that  people  invented. They are  instead imposed  by a  ‘magical power’ (hau) that  people  are  compelled to obey. The  social  formation of  clan society is  created through this  principle  of  exchange. For example, the  form  of  kinship is  established through reciprocal  exchanges  in which one  gives  one’s  daughter or son to another community and then receives  in turn a  reciprocal  return gift. In this  sense, the  clan society social  formation was established by exchange  in this  broad sense, and this  is  what  constitutes  its  true  economic  base.   Incidentally, the  Marxist  anthropologist  Marshal  Sahlins  argued for the  existence  of  a “family mode  of  production”  at  the  root  of  reciprocal  exchanges, while  Maurice  Godelier proposed a  mode  of  inalienable  communal  ownership.7  Both are  trying above  all  to salvage  the theory of  historical  materialism. But  in reality it  was  the  reciprocal  mode  of  exchange  that brought  about  the  family mode  of  production and communal  ownership, not  the  other way around. Accordingly, we  have  to start  from  modes  of  exchange  in understanding primitive societies—as  we  can see  from  consulting Marx’s  own views  on the  matter.   In his  later years, when Marx praised Morgan’s  Ancient  Society  and discussed clan society, he  did not  invoke  mode  of  production. Marx paid less  attention to the  economic  equality of  clan society than to the  freedom  and autonomy of  its  individual  members. “All  the  members of  an Iroquois  gens  personally  free, bound  to defend each other’s  freedom; equal  in privileges [and]  personal  rights.  Sachem  [and] chiefs  claiming no superiority;  a  brotherhood bound together  by  the  ties  of  kin. Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal  principles  [of  the]  gens….”8   If  that  is  the  case, what  is  the  source  of  the  principles  of  liberty, equality, and fraternity in the clan society?  This  cannot  be  explained by way of  mode  of  production or communal  ownership. Marx never argued this  point  explicitly himself, but  in my view, they arise  from  the  principle  of reciprocal  exchange, and this  is  what  formed the  economic  base  that  determined clan society. Moreover, Marx described future  communism  as  being ‘the  return in a  higher dimension’ of  the principles  of  clan society. This  shows  that  he  did not  regard future  communism  as  a  situation arising simply out  of  the  further development  of  modes  of  production. While  he  didn’t  explicitly spell  this  out, Marx did hint  that  future  communism  should be  sought  through modes  of exchange."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)

=More Info=
* [[Introduction To Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Evolution of the Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Historical Approach to Shifts in Modes of Exchange]]
* [[From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Kojin Karatani on Why We Should Move from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Power and Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Mode Of Production]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]