
'''* - Article: Gift and free software. Martin Studer. Commoner (.org), No. 9, Spring-Summer 2004'''

URL = https://thecommoner.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Matthias-Studer-Gift-and-Free-Software.pdf

=Summary=

From the reading notes of Michel Bauwens, 2006:

- '''An interpretation of free software in terms of the Maussian theory of the gift'''. 

"What is a gift ? From a juridical standpoint, gift differs from exchange by the fact that the giver refuses his right to demand an equivalent exchange."

"Gifts are made in the name of a relationship, of the tie ... The gift must make sense in the relation,"

The recipient must be able to refuse the gift, but the liberty to return another gift is crucial, because it involves subjectivity and recognition of the recipient.

Free software involves a recognition of the individual by the community, and a recognition of community by the participant. In a broader sense one gives to the broader community of free software projects, to a culture.

- "That is one of enormous strengths of the movements, to accept as gifts an enormous variety of contributions. Small efforts make great systems. In free software because of the perenniality of project, 'one gives forever, to everyone everywhere'."


Stuber then explains the utilitarian assumptions which found the market theory of rational choice:
    
- a separation of ends and means, with the ends being disregarded
    
- separation of objects and subjects
    
- freedom from relationship and 'debt'


In a gift, the ends and means are confused, a function of the relationship. There is no subject/object split.

- "In free software there is an affirmation of ethics of meaning which goes beyond the relation."

- "Whereas within the gift the capacity to exist is quite small, it is affirmed in free software. There is no obligation to cooperate, one is free."


Linus Torvalds wrote: "the users act as another form of producers: they do not produce code, but information related to the product and a precious evaluation of how it can be improved."

Stuber then examines free software projects in the context of Albert Hirschman's 'exit-voice-loyalty' frame. FS affirms exit and voice.

Thus a new form of social organism is born: "even if hierarchical authority exists, one has no obligation with respect to it", as there is no direct salaried dependence. However, there are historical leaders, and leaders by competence, social or technical.


[[Category:Free Software]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Bauwens Reading Notes Project]]

[[Category:Free Software]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Bauwens Reading Notes Project]]