

=Discussion=

==Gift Commons: The Inalienability of Social and Natural Being==

James Quilligan:

"The years 800-200 BCE were a period of enormous transformation
across ancient China, India, Persia, Palestine and Greece. As
German philosopher Karl Jaspers marveled, the Axial Age was a
time of great upheaval in many realms—scientific, intellectual,
political, agricultural, cultural, philosophical and spiritual. These
revolutionary dynamics also led to the introduction of coinage,
widening trade, the increasing authority of the state and the
enclosure of common areas, resulting in the removal of people
from their lands and means of subsistence. All of this destroyed
the social cohesion of earlier gift cultures and the customary practices
that were deeply woven into the lives of these people.

Some historians and free market theorists have questioned the
importance—and even the existence—of gift economies. It’s true
that documentation of gift cultures is tricky since most of them
didn’t leave records. After all, the advent of writing was also the
advent of post-gift cultures. Still, there is a large body of literature
on gift economies in history. Max Weber and others explored the
pre-market cultures of India, China and Judaism, many of which
were gift-based. Anthropologists such as Marcel Mauss cited
dozens of cultures which practiced gift exchange and our understanding
of gift-giving in contemporary indigenous cultures is
also extensive. Based on the research of evolutionary biologists,
geneticists and neurologists, the gift economy appears to be as
old as humanity itself. As an expression of spontaneous social organization—
whether in fending off the harsh elements and dangerous
predators or in providing food and shelter for the family
and clan—informal gift commons of subsistence and exchange were
clearly practiced long before the development of categorical thinking,
formal laws and state institutions. So there is no point in getting
lost in the empirical data about the existence of gift cultures.
Communities have always been guided by presuppositions and
beliefs. Every community sees individual actions within a larger
social whole of ideas, norms and practices—whether real or ideal
—and it is this shared understanding that allows people to develop
their own social realities and thereby create value. The following
overview of gift economies should be viewed in this light.

The intent is not to marshal evidence but to get to the essence of
the gift economy, both real and ideal.

A gift economy requires at least three people and the gift must
circulate among them. A receiver gives a gift to the third party,
rather than returning the gift to the original giver. Whatever one
is given should not be kept but given away again—or if it is kept
or consumed, then something of equal value should be passed
on. One can neither own a gift in isolation nor give a gift with the
expectation of reciprocal benefit. A different set of dynamics is at
work. The recipient of a gift is in an open, attentive relationship
with others, which creates a kind of existential emptiness. This
involves experiencing a deep identity with the gift itself, and
thereby with the donor and the next person to whom the gift will
be given.

Mauss believed that when gifts are given away they hold a lingering
element of the personality of the giver, which suggests that
gift-giving is not an inalienable process. But this cannot be universally
true. Sharing needn’t involve personal sentiment or attachment.
When we feel what others are feeling, we experience
their being. Through empathy and intersubjectivity, one’s own experiences
and the experiences of others flow together in the same
field without distinction. Since awareness of the self is not experienced
as a separation from others, gift exchange does not take
place between us as separate selves. Indeed, personal concern
with the feelings, wishes and needs of other people arises, not
through our individuality as isolated entities, but because each of
us is a physically instantiated self in a living body, sharing experiences
with (and through) the bodies of others and the environment
where we live. This is what makes the social benefit of gift
exchange more valuable than its benefit to a single individual.
At the same time, the common being of the community, experienced
through the exchange of gifts with other embodied individuals,
does not distinguish this increase in social benefit from the
natural growth of living things. The exchange of gifts is identified
both with social and natural growth through fertility, vitality, liveliness,
worth, abundance and creative potential for action—all of
which enhance a giver’s capacities for production, the significance
of the gift through its circulation, and the realization of community
goodwill, well-being and social cohesion. This co-mingling
of being with growth allows each member of the community to
be nourished by a wholeness of spirit and power—of presence
and meaning—that is greater than one’s own. It is a form of shared
experience that is irreducible to any other kind and irredeemable
on any other terms."
(kosmosjournal.org | fall.winter 2011 40)


[[Category:Commons]]