This wiki page serves as a placeholder. Its intent is to collect information on existing Gift Economy/Resource-Based Economy Implementations as well as principles and approaches for desired Gift Economy Software. The goals are:
* to create a simple and accessible platform with little developmental effort first so we can start gaining a user base and testing soon. One of the first testing candidates might be the member organisations of the [[Technate]] (Raffael)
* to develop ideas for knowledge representation and knowledge sharing protocols (ibu)

== Intro ==
* Presentation by Elf Pavlik on Polyeconomy at Easterhegg Basel 2012: [http://stories.hackers4peace.net/easterhegg12-basel/ Link]

Individuals currently interested in a Gift Economy Software implementation:

* [[Raffael_Kéménczy]]
* [http://ibu.a.radempa.de ibu radempa] (disclaimer: I'm in no way aligned to technocratic ideas or any other form of power exertex by humans over humans)

== Step-by-step structure ==
I'd like to propose a structure roughly like this (ibu):

=== Knowledge representation ===
;(How) Should the domain of knowledge be restricted?
:The diversity of the knowledge used in economical activities is so big that it practically cannot be restricted.
;How is knowledge represented?
: Alternative 1:
:: Knowledge is modelled (ontologically) as classes (patterns), instances (+copies) and relations, cf. [http://meta.cosmopool.net/wiki/index.php/Main_Page cosmopool]

=== Knowledge sharing protocol ===
; Who are the cooperating entities? Groups or individuals?

; Will the lowest common denominator protocol 'win'?

=== Software architectures ===
; Completely P2P, or client-server?

=== Software packages ===
; Programming langugages?

=== User-user interaction ===
; How can the software contribute to a culture shift among real persons?



[[Category:Software]]
[[Category:Resources]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Peereconomy]]
[[Category:Sharing]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]