=Contextual Quote=

"Among thinkers of ethics and techne of the twentieth century, the French philosopher Gilbert Simondon stands out as someone who put the co-emergent relationship of form and matter at the center of his thought. Rethinking the relationship between form and matter was key for Simondon in his attempt to theorize a novel relationship with technology that would be at the same time an ethical relationship with nature. For Simondon, much was at stake in articulating this relationship."

- Michel Fisch [https://www.academia.edu/31622933/The_Nature_of_Biomimicry_Toward_a_Novel_Technological_Culture]


=Discussion=

==Gilbert Simondon's Critique of Cybernetics==

Arran Gare:

"Gilbert Simondon, ... a student of Merleau-Ponty ... subjected the claims of information science
and cybernetics to a searching critique in his Ph.D. thesis, published as a book with a
dedication to Merleau-Ponty, although it was also influenced by Jean Piaget. This
work has only recently been translated into English as Individuation in Light of Notions
of Form and Information (2020), with a belated appreciation of its significance.
Simondon’s major concern was to challenge and reformulate the notion of information
as it had been developed by Shannon, Weaver, von Neuman, and Wiener, and along
with information, the notion of cybernetics and the way it had been used as an analogy
for living processes. Some of the ideas associated with this challenge were developed
at a conference in Paris in July 1962, organized by Simondon, in which Norbert Wiener
was a major participant (Bardin 2015, p.31). Simondon embraced the development of
information science and cybernetics, seeing them as a creative hybrid of advances in
logic and technology, but argued that the source of these ideas in technologies of
communication must lead to the exclusion of what is most important when it comes
to understanding information. He then pointed out the problems with the
assumptions on which information science was developing. It presupposed an
individual sending a message, an individual bit of information or signal and a code 
through which it is encoded, and an individual receiving the message by decoding it,
as though information could be identified and understood in complete abstraction
from the process of informing. Information is individuated as such only where there
are metastable systems receptive to being informed. The problem is to account for this
individuation. Living beings are theatres of individuation, and it is only when
individuation is achieved and maintained, that mechanistic models of living processes
have some applicability. Life is more fundamental than mechanisms, which always
presuppose a life-based teleology. Without life, there would be no mechanisms, and
life cannot be understood as just the sum of all its mechanisms. Simondon thus
provided strong support for Hoffmeyer’s critique of information science when
applied to biology (Gare, 2020)."

(https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves)

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]