'''In-depth conversation/interview between Geert Lovink and Christopher Spehr, cooperation expert on the opportunities and problems of the give away economy.'''


URL = [http://www.networkcultures.org/geert/out-cooperating-the-empire-exchange-with-christoph-spehr/] 



=Excerpts=


"The Prospects of ‘Giving Away’

GL: How do you look at the tension between giving away code, music,  
texts, for free, and the growing desperation of (young) people and how  
they make a living? For me there is a direct link, a strange  
dialectical relationship between McJobs and Linux. The more  
peer-to-peer networks there are, the less likely it will be for  
‘precarious’ creative workers to get out of the amateurization trap.  
Instead of Lawrence Lessig, Joi Ito and other Creative Commons gurus we  
should argue in favour of professionalization. Not so much in order to  
defend existing professions and related IP-regimes, but as a way to  
invent new professions. My example here would be the VJ. It would be  
great if many more VJs could live from their work and be taken  
seriously – not just by the club culture but by society at large.

CS: We have two important notions. The first is that some people, some  
cooperations, some structures get out-cooperated by others in the  
course of things. This is a typical way economy develops – its  
Darwinian logic, if you like. And the dark side to the all-too-often  
friendly discourse of cooperation. ‘Let’s all do it together, but do it  
funkier than the rest’. Today it happens to the editors of the  
Encyclopedia Britannica who get out-cooperated by Wikipedia. They  
cannot compete. But it happens to millions of workers as well – in the  
harbours, in the ship industry, in the production of goods, in the  
proliferation of services. They lose their jobs, or they have to work  
for less income, with longer working days, harder conditions, less  
rights. Is this the same thing? Obviously, we have an idea of positive  
out-cooperating – this is when new forms of collaboration arise that  
are applied by the workers themselves, and old forms of hierarchy get  
ruled out in the same process. And we have a notion of negative  
out-cooperating – that is, when global power structures aim at the  
dis-empowerment of workers and local people, when hierarchy is  
re-inforced by the power of being global, of combining and re-combining  
global workforce, resources and markets without participation of  
workers and people. Can we say which is which in any case? That would  
be important, even if it’s not all simply black and white, of course.

The second notion is that exploitation happens not only inside the  
factory. That’s the question: who exploits whom, who makes capital out  
of whose paid or unpaid work, is crucial in old and new capitalism? So,  
working for free does not guarantee anti-capitalism. That much should  
be clear. Nonetheless we have to take a very close look at this  
phenomenon as it operates within the networks of ‘open cultures’. I  
wrote a paper on symbolic value and how it is produced in free software  
and network projects, how it is appropriated by some, and how it can  
even be exchanged into ‘real’ money in the end (‘Trust No One - Some  
Remarks on the Political Economy of Virtual and Global Networking’,  
http://www.all4all.org/2004/05/820.shtml). Symbolic value is the object  
of the ‘style wars’ in HipHop, the tremendous fights about Who  
Represents, sometimes a fight to death. HipHop is as very instructive  
example. It tossed aside the ‘old school’ of the left, setting up a  
‘new school’ of ‘Representation’, of self-assertion. At the same time  
HipHop found itself sucked up by neo-liberalism. Successful HipHopers  
could avoid the pain of ‘being low’, but got the disparity of  
competition instead – fighting a war on representation almost without  
any content, except that of competition itself. ‘What are you talking’  
about? I’m not talking about anything, I’m just dissin’.’ HipHop really  
used the possibilities of ‘racing’ the system by using the cultural  
surplus of the imagined ’hood, of individuallyselling the cultural  
productivity of collectivesin a post-modern world where there seems to  
be no us and them in the old, class-informed way.

We have to realize that ‘free’ projects can be more exclusive than  
‘non-free’ structures in terms of gender, race, qualification, class.  
You need institutions to be inclusive. This sounds strange to us, but  
institutions are not only a matter of alienation. They are  
materializations of compromise, of conflict-borne rules on  
partizipation and mutual obligation. The alleged freedom of many  
structures means actually that there’s just free competition where the  
priviledged prevail. As soon as you want gender equality in your  
network, as soon as you start to practice gender mainstreaming, as soon  
as you enable gender autonomy in the sense of working-groups and forums  
etc., you’re building institutions. Because an institution means that  
you do not have to put up the same fight at every single occasion but  
establish a certain base of rule and compromise.

The notion of ‘prolonged exploitation’ is also a reminder to the first  
notion of out-cooperating. The Encyclopaedia editors are out-cooperated  
because the Wikipedia authors work for free. But this is partly an  
illusion, because the Wikipedia authors have to eat and dress and live  
in houses too. Only they get paid by other structures, outside the  
Wikipedia collaboration, not by the project itself. So we do not know,  
so far, which form of collaboration is more productive. The costs of  
Wikipedia are hidden, they are externalized. Whoever can externalize  
its costs, wins – that’s a basic rule in capitalism, and that’s why  
ecological movements always claim the internalization of costs. The  
reason Wikipedia is really more productive is because it does not have  
to spend work, money etc. into means of forcing people to work, because  
editorial work is spread among all participants and not located in a  
fixed editors’ class, because the roles of producer and consumer get  
blurred, because a strong responsibility of the worker for his or her  
work is established, etc.

GL: Is it productivity that counts? Ultimately a new system will win  
against the existing system, just because it’s more productive?

CS: Yes, I think so. More productive, not more efficient. Usually, a  
new way of production, and a new society linked to it, is successful  
because it can accomplish something the old way of production (and the  
old social structures linked to it) could not. Machines, weapons,  
ideologies, structures of environmental control, intelligent machines,  
you name it. It is not successful because it is more cost-efficient. If  
something really new, really useful, really powerful can be  
accomplished, costs really don’t matter. That’s a very important  
historical lesson. So the question is: what is it about the new modes  
of production, as they emerge today, that enables them to accomplish  
things the old ones could not? It’s not that Wikipedia authors work for  
free. That’s not the point. But maybe it is Wikipedia indeed. And  
what’s related to it. Maybe it’s the astonishing productivity of free  
cooperation in such forms. That would be the new forces of production,  
and the new relations of production would be that of free basic income,  
personally free labour and shared means of production.

So what is it that new cooperations, like Wikipedia, can produce that  
older forms of cooperation could not? Wikipedia, using the tool of the  
wiki and the knowledge of online community building, creates a product  
that is completely up-to-date, that is mistake-free, error-free, while  
it works in extremely error-friendly ways at the same time. It is quite  
unbiased in terms of cultural hegemony, it is strongest when it comes  
to entries other encyclopaedias wouldn’t even have. You may find better  
articles elsewhere, more to your gusto, but usually ideology is kept  
checked, balanced, controlled in Wikipedia. If you want it unbiased,  
you go there.

I think it’s not even imagined where we could take that. Compare that,  
combine that, with real-world approaches like participatory economics.  
Could we build wikis that contain the knowledge about how our city, our  
village, our neighbourhood works and how it functions? Could we  
establish that kind of economic, political, cultural transparency?  
Could we lay economic source codes that open? What would that mean?  
Ain’t that a road to economic democracy? We could use these new tools  
for cooperative decision-making. Just open up. We could use Artificial  
Intelligence as a means of empowering Lenin’s female cook to really run  
a factory, a city, the state – collectively. If people can play  
SimCity, why shouldn’t they be able to govern their real city? Why  
shouldn’t they likeit?

The Future of Creative Work

GL: Let’s go back to the question of the (im)possibility of an online  
economy. Is giving away for free really the only option left? 

CS: The culture of giving it all away needs a closer look. That you  
cannot sell your product to make a living,is not so new a situation in  
history. Before capitalism, a lot of things could only happen when the  
producergot paid, got supported, was kept alive – it wasn’t the product  
that was paid for, it was the producer that was financed. That’s how  
medieval courts sustained art in the 13th century. We can see this  
development at several points in history: first, culture as religious  
work, as performed by a priest cast; then, second, stuff that was  
directly paid for as a service that was ordered; third, stuff that was  
produced as hobby work in free time (soldier poets, the antecedents of  
free software programmers, in that sense); fourth, stuff that was  
produced by real freelancers that worked for a kind of market system,  
people who were paid because they were ‘good’, who made a living out of  
their work (that is, they could choose between different possible  
clients).

Is there a rule? Is it that culture is controlled by an elite class,  
and then starts to slip, to break loose, to become ‘free’ (often  
commercial at the same time), then changes its domain of containment to  
a new, emerging class; and then this new elite class stops this  
ambivalent ‘freedom’ and uses direct service work, again? Then the  
freedom of hobby production, of giving away, of working for markets,  
etc. would not seem to be real opponents, but changing forms of  
inbetweeness, of emancipation from the old elite class. It’s just using  
opportunities. That would fit well for the internet today. It would fit  
well for the whole semi-world of semi-precarious intellectual labour  
today. We’re just shifting. The problem is, can we keep this state of  
not-being-bound, this time? Can we take part in a new movement of  
change while, at the same time, defining our role in more autonomous  
ways, both in the present as well as in a utopian future?

GL: Is it really necessary to live precariously when you’re working  
with the Internet, and in particular when you’re producing content?

CS: Stephen King could not raise money with internet content. But why?  
It is not that his content has no ‘value’ – out of the internet, his  
books sell very good. But the internet proved unable to deliver a  
stable structure of allocation for his artistic production. The  
business model was this: you could read the chapters of the book for  
free, but were asked to pay a dollar so that the production could go  
on. This didn’t work, because the individual prospect of non-paying was  
real while the goal of continued production could not be guaranteed by  
an individual paying anyway. This, combined with a completely anonymous  
social context, failed to establish a stable structure of allocation.  
There is a specific problem of re-allocation raised by the internet and  
the digital copy: it is difficult to prevent people from consumption  
without contributing to the costs of production. And there is another  
problem – a lot of content loses its value because in an easily  
accessible global medium it’s no longer special or distinct. In a  
global area, there’s always someone better than you, and enough who are  
equal to you. So why pay you? Why work with you? We’ve already reached  
the point that local cultural producers, local creative workers, are  
not paid for their work - but that they payfor being allowed to do  
their work, for the opportunity of being visible. This is not a problem  
for the top dogs in cultural production, but for the others – the local  
bands, authors, artist, cultural workers – there’s the problem of being  
out-of-time and out-collaborated by a global market. These are not  
necessarily good things for the development of collaborative or free  
cultures.

Here again we face what you mentioned before: the connection between  
McJobs and Linux. In a global economy almost every content loses its  
value except the most outstanding products that escape competition  
because they have no real competiton in the quality stakes. The winners  
are the producers of high quality products for global markets, and the  
producers of the cheapest mass products for global markets. The rest  
loses. So it’s Hollywood and China, German Hi-Tech export firms and  
Eastern European assembly lines, the Pentagon and the maquiladora belt.  
Not the people who work there; the people and institutions that own  
them, ‘run’ them. That’s the way it’s meant to be from the perspective  
of today’s global elite class.

The exact relation between the elite class and ruling class has to be  
discussed. Ruling is not government work, of course. But ruling is more  
contested today, it seems, more difficult, more compromised work, more  
taking into account of the global masses, at least the more privileged  
parts of them.

Are there alternatives emerging? New coalitions between intellectuals  
and workers, ‘new’ (more set-free, semi-precarious,  
academic-proletarian) intellectuals and ‘new’ (more cooperative, more  
self-ruling, more collectively responsible, more organized, more  
educated) workers? I hope so. That’s the new proletariat, and Wikipedia  
is its bible, perhaps. And it’s really the internet that shaped it:  
open source as it is, connecting and opening the knowledge of the  
world. Some of it. Some other parts stay hidden. And some parts cannot  
be taught, learned, transferred in this way, they need personal  
training.

But lines get blurred, hybrid forms of knowledge transfer and creation  
emerge and become more and more important. The hybrids. We have to talk  
more about the hybrids. We have to watch out for the hybrids.

We have two extreme approaches to the issue at the moment. One  
standpoint it that of the traditionalists in the music business:  
protect your content. Downloading is stealing. Catch the thieves. The  
other standpoint is that of Oekonux: give everything away for free. The  
only way of allocation for a future society is, according to Oekonux,  
that all goods are free, all services are free, all content is free,  
and that work is done completely independent from money, done only by  
the motivation of self-fulfilment. Reality tends to a third way at the  
moment: Use it, but don’t sell it – and if you do sell it, then  
contribute to the production costs, which have to be covered if the  
production is to go on. The whole thing splits into different parts: A  
part of ‘general production’ which is done by ‘general work’ that is  
not paid by special means, and a part of ‘special production’ which is  
done by ‘special forces’ and is paid – and the ways and rationality of  
payment change, too. A Star Wars film raises more money by licenses for  
toys and advertisements than by selling ticket, which means people  
contribute to the costs of production by paying a kind of global Star  
Wars tax that is raised by selling silly Star Wars products. Strange,  
but it works.

And here, maybe, we get a preliminary idea about why and how new forms  
of cooperation may out-cooperate the Empire. Neo-liberalism was very  
good in ‘special work’ – in combining and re-combining labour,  
resources, connectivity, on a global scale. Dissolving first, of  
course, but then re-combining for new, huge, global tasks. Free  
cooperation is very good in ‘general work’ – in producing the ‘white  
noise’ of production, the general background, the overall element.  
These are factors often addressed as ‘social capital’ today, but this  
is a poor definition because it doesn’t explain anything. It’s like the  
alchemists talking of an all-abundant, but invisible, insensible  
element called ‘Ether’. This is something the Empire has great  
difficulties in producing. That’s why they cannot build stable civil  
societies in countries they have occupied. That’s why they keep borders  
flowing between formal and informal labour – not only to throw out  
people from inside, but also to breath, to take in, people and content  
and any results of cooperation from outside.

Our whole thinking about distribution and markets has to be re-shaped.  
Classical theory doesn’t work, but giving-away ideologies don’t work,  
either. The point is: a classical capitalist market, like theory  
sketches of it (where competition works towards lowest possible prices  
and most efficient ways of production), needs some closure in space and  
openness in time. We act by bounded rationality, we have no sufficient  
knowledge, no total information, never. So the crucial question and the  
structuring decision is: shall I buy his product again? It’s a kind of  
tit-for-tat-strategy, which is normal for bounded rationality, as game  
theory teaches us. Only repetition rules out fraud. Only closure in  
space gives a chance of gathering sufficient information over time. At  
the same time, calculation (as part of organising production) is never  
frozen in time, calculation is always open in time: if I sell something  
cheaper, more people will buy, and I will become somewhat dominant in  
this market segment, I can then sell goods or services at a more  
expensive price – so futureexpectations are always built-in to the  
smart business strategy, however unpredictable that may be. So this  
assumes also a strategy that can handle risk, loss and contingency. And  
in this sense, it’s never a case of pure ‘efficiency’ in the neoclassic  
sense. This is always true. It’s nothing new. Now: if an economy  
enlarges to global markets, at a high speed with low transport costs,  
relations shift. Fraud rules. Buyers have trouble keeping path with  
sellers in terms of information. Strategies that link present and  
future become dominant over strategies stuck in the present. Market  
domination becomes more important than tit-for-tat-adeptness.

My point is that economy never worked through ‘the market’ alone. It  
was always through the market in a very special way, as one tool among  
others, as part of a more complex strategy and mechanism of rule. We  
have to think, if we think about the future, in terms of these kind of  
mechanisms and strategies. ‘You can’t sell CDs any longer’ is too  
simple. But this is something that ‘Wikipedia forms of production’ can  
solve much better. They are a solution to the fraud problem. They  
reduce fraud considerably. Because there are rules and checks and, you  
might call them, ‘institutions’. But also because the work isn’t paid.

GL: Lately, interesting critiques of Creative Commons have been voiced.  
For some it is the legal contract itself, which is the problem. Both  
GPL and TRIPS are legal documents. It’s already often stated that  
Creative Commons is a form of copyright. CC does not transcend the  
legal system and is not pointing in any new direction how we can  
develop sustainable structures. It’s a mere defensive license in that  
it explicitly refuses to tell how professionals and amateurs that  
attempt to make a living out of their work can start to earn money.  
It’s dogmatic in this one message: abandon all hope and give it all  
away for free, put that funky CC license on your content and shut your  
mouth. Both Joi Ito and Lawrence Lessig are good at staying on the  
message. How you make a living is your individual problem and we’ll be  
the last ones to tell you how to solve this problem… apart from wishing  
you good luck with your t-shirt sales. That’s the cynical logic of  
these Creative Commons leaders. For them CC is about the ‘freedom’ of  
‘amateurs’ to ‘remix’. But we are not all amateurs that fool around on  
the Net in our spare time. What should concern us is how amateurs can  
professionalize. Amateurs that want to remain amateurs is fine, of  
course. The amateur status should be a personal choice, not the default  
destiny.

CS: Who could really ever make money out of content? Ain’t that always  
a problem? Problem is, the producer of creative content has such a  
strong interest in publicity, in making it public, that he/she has  
almost no bargaining power. He/she would do it for zero, even pay for  
it sometimes. Because he/she needs that, it’s the kind of investment  
he/she can never afford him/herself. So every producer of creative  
content tends to work for zero, always, because it’s so crucial to be  
heard. Not only for a mission, for the belief in what you do, but for  
economic reasons. The only chance you’ll ever have of getting really  
paid is global prominence. So meanwhile, you get paid in  
advertisements. That’s why we need public support for creative  
producers. They just starve, or completely lose track of their creative  
work.

That’s the main way to understand so-called ‘free’ or ‘give-away’  
economy in the net. The smart bands virtually give away some stuff for  
free, as a kind of self-advertisement, and that’s all that counts.  
Often it works. They don’t sell their music if it comes packaged in  
digital forms. They sell themselves in the form of giving concerts. The  
rest is a global advertisement. And that’s the trend we see in the  
e-economy. The companies that do well, like Google, EBay, Amazon, earn  
more and more through advertisements, while they provide more and more  
services for free.

GL: Yes, but what have writers to offer? Does it mean that writers have  
to give away all their texts for free and will have to live from the  
lecture tours they do? And who is going to organize these lecture  
tours, if not a publishing house? What strategies could we develop to  
turn interesting and creative work, done by artists, designers, writers  
and activists into more or less sustainable jobs, without going back to  
the old regime of intellectual property rights? There is no going back  
anyway. Creative Commons is already the default option, and I don’t  
mind that.

CS: We have to get organized, and we have to develop some vision. There  
are four problems that need different, but consistent answers. The  
first is the problem of the Encyclopaedia Britannica editors and  
authors: that there are free and better alternatives to their product,  
produced by ‘amateur’ collectives in their leisure time. Here the only  
answer is: give it up. If the work is done by a distributed,  
non-professional collectivity, there is no more need for a professional  
to do the job. Change your job profile, re-define your professional  
activity to another field, like printers had to do when hot type was  
disabled.

The second problem is the Stephan King problem, that there is no sound  
re-allocation for the investment of your workforce when it comes to  
digitally reproducible content and creative mass commodities, like  
online novels or mp3-tracks. The radical solution would be: No more  
individual payments; introduction of a ‘content tax’ on PC hardware;  
financing artists by public programs and democratically controlled  
public culture institutions. The GEMA (German music revenue collector)  
is a step into that direction. At the same time, instead of privatising  
science production, there has to be a growth of public education and  
knowledge production that encompasses more than classical science work  
but ‘basic creative work’ as well.

The third problem arises when you do specialized creative work for a  
company that actually sellsa product where your work is a part of it. A  
printed book, for example, belongs to this category: What sells is a  
complex product made of writing, editing, marketing, product placement,  
access to distribution and control of cultural markets. That’s the  
difference between being printed and being published. Here the problem  
is that powerful actors can force others to accept poor contract  
conditions. The solution is getting organized in a trade-union style,  
like scriptwriters demonstrated in Hollywood, with support from state  
regulation that guarantees minimum wages and fair contract conditions.

The fourth problem is that companies try to privatise collective  
knowledge and heritage and raise quasi-feudalistic fees. Here the only  
answers are laws that prevent any such privatisation of ‘intellectual  
goods’ – very simple. Such a non-dogmatic, but visionary approach would  
bring a real advantage to the whole of creative production.

GL: How should artists make the collaborative aspect in their work  
visible? In opera, theatre, film and in television and radio there are  
very well defined rules for that. Credits make the division of labour  
and importance of each individual contribution in a production pretty  
clear."


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Business Models]]