
'''= world peace and global governance campaigner'''

=Bio=

"Glen T. Martin, Ph.D., is Emeritus Professor of Philosophy at Radford University in Virginia, USA. He is the founder and former Chair of the Program in Peace Studies at Radford University. He is President of International Philosophers for Peace (IPPNO), President of the World Constitution and Parliament Association (WCPA), and President of the Earth Constitution Institute (ECI), the last two are worldwide organizations that sponsor the Constitution for the Federation of Earth.  He has traveled and lectured worldwide on behalf of the Earth Constitution and the philosophical foundations of emerging world law, as well as on behalf of WCPA projects such as sessions of the Provisional World Parliament and the development of a World Court system.

Born on 21 January 1944, he was in college when the U.S. government was drafting young people into its imperial military machine. Martin declared as a conscientious objector and refused to enter any organization dedicated to war, which he considers to be just another form of murder. Martin has long been a critic and resister of the dominant world system of capitalism integrated within a political organization of militarized sovereign nation-states and has articulated an alternative world federalist vision for a world of peace with justice and sustainability. He has received several international peace awards, including the GUSI Peace Prize International in Manila, Philippines, 2013. He has published hundreds of articles concerning freedom, peace, justice, human rights, and sustainability in popular as well as academic venues."

=Publications=

"He is author or editor of thirteen books, including his well-known book, Millennium Dawn: the Philosophy of Planetary Crisis and Human Liberation (2005). Among is many subsequent books, he published Global Democracy and Human Self-Transcendence: The Power of the Future for Planetary Transformation in 2018. His most recent book in the year 2021 is called The Earth Constitution Solution: Design for a Living Planet. His newest book (April 2024) is entitled Human Dignity and World Order: Holistic Foundations of Global Democracy."


=More information=

The WCPA/ECI website is found at www.earthconstitution.world.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]