

=Description=

"The Global Exchange Trading Systems (GETS technology for credit clearing) was launched in 2006. It is a multi-functional transaction software platform that supports an online computerized marketplace for non-cash, mutual credit transactions and also has components to facilitate multi-currency forms, including loyalty programs."
(http://www.getsplus.com/?q=node/28)


=Context=

"Richard Logie and Linda Sim own and operate a B2B credit clearing system called The Business Exchange (TBEx) in Aberdeen, Scotland. They established TBEx in 1995. Together they share a philosophy that has always been based on quality, governance of procedures, and the power of mutual ownership. They applied their knowledge and experience of strict controls and good business practices to run TBEx. These principles have ensured the sustainability of the TBEx Exchange system and the retention of the local client base in Scotland. The TBEx currency is respected, stable and does not suffer from inflation.

Richard and Linda became aware of complimentary currency systems and engaged and collaborated with various systems in the U.K., Europe, and the U.S. Their work and experience with such systems led them to see the need for an evolutionary approach to promoting sustainable practices with technology that supports them. That approach is GETS Plus.

The Global Exchange Trading Systems (GETS technology for credit clearing) was launched in 2006. It is a multi-functional transaction software platform that supports an online computerized marketplace for non-cash, mutual credit transactions and also has components to facilitate multi-currency forms, including loyalty programs."
(http://www.getsplus.com/?q=node/28)


=More Information=

#[[Richard Logie]] and [[Linda Sim]]
#[[TBEx]]


[[Category:Money]]