
'''* Book: Global Auction of Public Assets: Public sector alternatives to the infrastructure market & Public Private Partnerships.  by Dexter Whitfield. Spokesman Books, 2010.'''

URL = http://www.forumonpublicdomain.ca/global-auction-of-public-assets

"demonstrates why new public investment priorities are needed
with radical changes in global financial markets and the abandonment of the Public Private Partnership
model."

=Description=

"This book explains why public infrastructure has a vital
role in economic development, increases productivity, generates employment and
improves community well-being.

However, Public Private Partnerships and the global infrastructure market, financed by
investment and pension funds, are fuelling a new era of public asset sales. A
secondary market has emerged in which schools, hospitals and roads are traded
like commodities. Yet, globally,
nearly 1,000 PPP and privatisation projects, valued at over US$500bn, have been
terminated or radically reduced. Most PPP projects have little or no democratic
control or transparency, are costly, poor value, lack innovation and
flexibility, reduce employment and exaggerate risk transfer.
Global Auction of
Public Assets demonstrates why new public investment priorities are needed
with radical changes in global financial markets and the abandonment of the PPP
model. It sets out a strategy for building trade union and community alliances."
(http://www.forumonpublicdomain.ca/global-auction-of-public-assets)


=Contents=

1. Global crisis and the new infrastructure agenda 

2. The political economy of infrastructure 

3. Transformation and globalization of infrastructure 

4. Infrastructure - the new global wealth machine? 

5. Growth of global private infrastructure investment market 

6. Global spread of PPPs and privatisation 

7. Trading portfolios of schools, hospitals, and prisons 

8. Abandoned and terminated projects 

9. Impacts of infrastructure PPPs and privatisation 

10. Strategies for public investment 11. Strengthening strategic alliances for the future



[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Public Services]]