
URL = http://www.edu-factory.org


=Description=

by: "avinash jha":

"1. Autonomous global university will be in the form of 

'''*a global network of various auto-education initiatives in various parts of the world* '''

which have sought in different ways to construct knowledge
activities either outside the university or in opposition to dominant trends
in the university. (On the top left of their website
www.edu-factory. org you can see the 'map of living knowledge' which
also provides the websites related to these initiatives in US, Europe, Latin
America and India.)


2. These initiatives are quite diverse in their perspectives, but they
are all concerned with 

'''the *search for an emancipatory perspective*''' in society. 

They are not interested merely in restoring some nostalgic idea of
university, but in bringing about a fundamental change in society.


3. As a result of this 

'''*the interface between university and society becomes much more intense*'''. 

While it is widely recognized by the
participants that the boundaries between the university and society is
porous the analysis of this relationship leans more heavily on the analysis
of cognitive labour. Here probably Vidya Ashram's contribution to the
dialogue has been and can be distinctive with our framework of 'Knowledge in
Society'. We start with the fact that there are diverse locations of
knowledge in society and point out that there is an hierarchical order of
knowledge in society which needs to be addressed. This also clearly
distinguishes the idea of any future university which must proceed from the
assumption of an abundance of knowledge in society from the classical
European idea which works from the assumption of scarcity of knowledge in
society.


4. '''*The network will be driven mainly through electronic connectivity*''' .

A global network involving global face-to-face activity in an organised
fashion in today's world would necessarily have to be implicated in complex
and elaborate fund-raising activities with dynamics of their own. This does
not preclude face-to-face interaction as and when it becomes possible and
feasible.


5. Lastly, 

'''*the discussion of constructing an autonomous global university should deal with the technical and financial questions as an integral part of the discussion.*'''
(Knowledge Dialogue mailing list, 12/2007)



[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Movements]]