'''Global MindShift aims to help make the emergence of global community unstoppable.'''

==Introduction==
Global MindShift began as a project of the Foundation for Global Community (www.globalcommunity.org), a 501 (c) (3) non-profit organization whose purpose is to "discover, live, and communicate what is needed to build a world that functions for the benefit of all life."

Global MindShift became an independent non-profit organization in 2005. We are non-partisan and non-denominational.

We have two full time staff, an executive director and a networking director, as well as a growing global network of volunteers.

==Purpose and Mission==

Our purpose is to "contribute to the emerging global community," and our mission is to "help make the emergence of global community unstoppable."

To help make the emergence of global community unstoppable, we want to play a part in engaging 20% of the world's people in conversation about what living in global community really means, and in creating models of creative action that help demonstrate its value. Why 20%?

We are encouraged knowing we are only one among thousands of organizations working toward the same goal, each with its own particular focus, strategy and appeal. Together, we are creating the worldwide presence we need to succeed.

==Strategy==

We believe that to unite as a human species, we need to engage, globally, in dialogue that will help bring our collective interests and objectives into focus. Only then can we truly begin to work together in a spirit of creative cooperation so necessary to our survival.

In the final analysis, change is all about motivation, and if we can see that beneath our many differences is a powerful undercurrent of connection — reflected in our common origins and our shared hopes for a better world for ourselves and for our children — we will find the motivation we need to change in ways that benefit not only some small group, but humanity, and life, as a whole.

==A Global Perspective==

If we are to see what unifies us, then we need a perspective large enough to transcend our many differences. What we are learning from modern science — particularly about our 13.7 billion year evolutionary journey — provides just such a perspective.

While wisdom traditions have long taught that all life is one interconnected and interdependent whole, it is only in the last few generations that science has provided the empirical validation of this crucial insight. For some of us, such validation may not be necessary — the wisdom of the ancients coupled with our personal experiences suffice. But for many others, the awe-inspiring story of the evolution of the cosmos and of life itself opens the door, perhaps for the first time, to an expanded and more integrated view of the world and our place within it.

Discovering the implications of the unity of life, and learning how evolutionary principles can help us work together to meet the tremendous challenges of our times, is the essence of the core conversation we now need to be having as a human family. And it is perhaps here that science and wisdom traditions most keenly converge — for the implications of what we are now learning from science go to the very heart of humanity's three most ancient questions: who are we, where are we, and what are we to do.

In our times more than any other, the converging of these two streams of knowing — modern and ancient, empirical and intuitive — holds the potential to play a powerful role in helping us emerge a better future for all life.


==Key Resources==
* http://www.global-mindshift.org/
* [http://globalmindshift.wordpress.com/ Global MindShift Blog]

==See Also==
*Global MindShift and [[Feel Good]] to [http://globalmindshift.wordpress.com/2009/09/06/global-mindshift-and-feelgood-to-merge/ merge]
*[[Global Oneness Project]]


[[Category:Movements]]