This is a huge pile; needs to be organized:


=Global Risk Reports=

* World Economic Forum. (2023). The Global Risks Report 2023. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/global-risks-report-2023/ *

* World Economic Forum. (2022). The Global Risks Report 2022. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/global-risks-report-2022/*

* World Economic Forum. (2019). The Global Risks Report 2019. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2019/*

* World Economic Forum. (2018). The Global Risks Report 2019. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2018/*

* United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. (2022). Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2022. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. https://www.undrr.org/gar2022-our-world-risk-gar*

* Sillmann, J., Christensen, I., Hochrainer-Stigler, S., Huang-Lachmann, J., Juhola, S., Kornhuber, K., Mahecha, M., Mechler, R., Reichstein, M., Ruane, A.C., Schweizer, P.-J. and Williams, S. (2022). '''Briefing note on systemic risk'''. International Science Council. https://doi.org/10.24948/2022.01*

* AXA. (2022). AXA Future Risks Report 2022. AXA. https://www.axa.com/en/press/publications/future-risks-report-2022*

* Eurasia Group. (2022). Top Risks 2022. Eurasia Group. https://www.eurasiagroup.net/issues/top-risks-2022*
Special Competitive Studies Project. (2022). Mid Decades Challenges to US competitiveness. Special Competitive Studies Project. https://www.scsp.ai/2022/09/special-competitive-studies-project-releases-first-

* International Monetary Fund. (2021). World Economic Outlook, April 2021. International Monetary Fund. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2021/03/23/world-economic-outlook-april-2021*

* Union of Concerned Scientists. (2021). 2021 Annual Report. Union of Concerned Scientists. https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/2021-annual-report*

* Rios Rojas C., Rhodes, C., Avin, S, Kemp, L., & Beard, SJ. (2021). Foresight for unknown, long-term and emerging risks, Approaches and Recommendations. https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.64582*

* Global Challenges Foundation. (2021). Global Catastrophic Risks 2021: Navigating the Complex Intersections. Global Challenges Foundation. https://globalchallenges.org/initiatives/analysis-research/reports/*

* World Economic Forum. (2021). The Global Risks Report 2021. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2021/*

* Future Earth, Sustainability in the Digital Age, and International Science Council. (2021). Global Risks Perceptions Report 2021. Future Earth Canada Hub. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5764288*

* United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. (2019). Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2019. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. https://www.undrr.org/publication/global-assessment-report-disaster-risk-reduction-2019*

* Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2022). States of Fragility 2022. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. https://doi.org/10.1787/c7fedf5e-en*

* United Nations. (2021). Our Common Agenda. United Nations. https://www.un.org/en/common-agenda *
Ord, T., Mercer, A., Dannreuther, S. (2021). Future Proof. The Centre for Long-Term Resilience. https://www.longtermresilience.org/futureproof*

* Dahl, A., Lopez-Claros, A., & Miller, J. (2022). The Global Catastrophic Risk Index 2022. Global Governance Forum. https://globalgovernanceforum.org/initiatives/global-catastrophic-risk-index/*

* Avin, S., Wintle, B. C., Weitzdörfer, J., Ó hÉigeartaigh, S. S., Sutherland, W. J., & Rees, M. J. (2018). Classifying global catastrophic risks. Futures, 102, 20–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.02.001*

* World Economic Forum. (2020). The Global Risks Report 2020. World Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2020/*

* Future Earth. (2020). Risks Perceptions Report 2020. Future Earth. https://futureearth.org/initiatives/other-initiatives/grp/the-report/*

* Wisner, B., Blaikie, P. M., Blaikie, P., Cannon, T., & Davis, I. (2004). At risk: natural hazards, people's vulnerability and disasters. Psychology Press.*


==Metrics / Governance

* Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2022). Goalkeepers - The Future of Progress. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. https://www.gatesfoundation.org/goalkeepers/report/2022-report/*
World Wildlife Fund. (2022). Living Planet Report 2022. World Wildlife Fund. https://livingplanet.panda.org/en-US/*

* Edelman. (2021). 2021 Edelman Trust Barometer. Edelman. https://www.edelman.com/trust/2021-trust-barometer 

* Liu, H.-Y., Lauta, K. C., & Maas, M. M. (2018). Governing Boring Apocalypses: A new typology of existential vulnerabilities and exposures for existential risk research. Futures, 102, 6–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.04.009*

* Kemp, L., & Rhodes, C. (2020). The cartography of global catastrophic governance. Global Challenges Foundation. https://globalchallenges.org/the-cartography-of-global-catastrophic-governance/*

* Wilson, D. S. (2016). Two meanings of complex adaptive systems. Complexity and evolution: Toward a new synthesis for economics, 19.*

* O'Sullivan, T. L., Kuziemsky, C. E., Toal-Sullivan, D., & Corneil, W. (2013). Unraveling the complexities of disaster management: A framework for critical social infrastructure to promote population health and resilience. Social Science & Medicine, 93, 238-246.*

* Beard, S., & Torres, P. (2020). Identifying and assessing the drivers of global catastrophic risk: A review and proposal for the global challenges foundation. Global Challenges Foundation.*

* Bratton, B., & Aguera y Arcas, B. (2022). The model is the message. Noema Magazine. https://www.noemamag.com/the-model-is-the-message/*

* Rios Rojas, C., Payne, B., Kuang Heng, Y., Fysh, A., Kane, A., Rickli, J. M., ... & Okechukwu Effoduh, J. (2023). Building a Science-Policy Interface for tackling the Global Governance of Catastrophic and Existential Risks.*

* Goodhart's Law. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart%27s_law

* Coy, P. (2021). Goodhart's law rules the modern world: here are nine examples. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-03-26/goodhart-s-law-rules-the-modern-world-here-are-nine-examples*

* Koehrsen, W. (2018). Unintended Consequences and Goodhart’s Law: The Importance of Using the Right Metrics. Towards Data Science, 24.*


==Metacrisis / Polycrisis / Risk Governance ==

* Lawrence, M. Janzwood, S. Homer-Dixon, T. (2022). What is a Global Polycrisis?. Cascade Institute. https://cascadeinstitute.org/technical-paper/what-is-a-global-polycrisis/*

* Crisis Bureau Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery for Building Resilience Team. (2022). The social construction of systemic risk: Towards an actionable framework for risk governance. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. https://www.undrr.org/publication/social-construction-systemic-risk-towards-actionable-framework-risk-governance-0*

* Global Energy Institute. (2020). International Index of Energy Security Risk: 2020 Edition. Global Energy Institute. https://www.globalenergyinstitute.org/international-index-energy-security-risk-2020-edition*

* Patton, S. (2019). The peace of westphalia and it effects on international relations, diplomacy and foreign policy. The Histories, 10(1), 5.*

* Osiander, A. (2001). Sovereignty, international relations, and the Westphalian myth. International organization, 55(2), 251-287.*

* Gunderson, L. H., & Holling, C. S. (Eds.). (2002). Panarchy: understanding transformations in human and natural systems. Island press.*

* Burger, A., Kennedy, W. G., & Crooks, A. (2021). Organizing theories for disasters into a complex adaptive system framework. Urban Science, 5(3), 61.*

* McKinsey Global Institute. (2022). On the cusp of a new era?. McKinsey Global Institute. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/risk-and-resilience/our-insights/on-the-cusp-of-a-new-era*

* Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., ... & Liang, P. (2021). On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258.*

* Anderies, J. M., Barfuss, W., Donges, J. F., Fetzer, I., Heitzig, J., & Rockström, J. (2022). Conceptualizing World-Earth System resilience: Exploring transformation pathways towards a safe and just operating space for humanity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04471.*

* Faulseit, R. K. (Ed.). (2016). Beyond collapse: Archaeological perspectives on resilience, revitalization, and transformation in complex societies. SIU Press.*

* The Collective Intelligence Project. (n.d.). The Collective Intelligence Project Whitepaper. The Collective Intelligence Project. https://cip.org/whitepaper*

* Fritsch, F., Emmett, J., Friedman, E., Kranjc, R., Manski, S., Zargham, M., & Bauwens, M. (2021). Challenges and approaches to scaling the global commons. Frontiers in blockchain, 4, 578721.*

* Liu, H.-Y., Lauta, K. C., & Maas, M. M. (2018). Governing Boring Apocalypses: A new typology of existential vulnerabilities and exposures for existential risk research. Futures, 102, 6–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.04.009

* Bostrom, N. (2019). The Vulnerable World Hypothesis. Global Policy, 10(4), 455–476. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12718

* Manheim, D. (2020). The Fragile World Hypothesis: Complexity, Fragility, and Systemic Existential Risk. Futures, 122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102570

* Beard, S., & Torres, P. (n.d.). Identifying and Assessing the Drivers of Global Catastrophic Risk: A Review and Proposal for the Global Challenges Foundation. Global Challenges Foundation. https://globalchallenges.org/wp-content/uploads/Assessing-the-Drivers-of-Global-Catastrophic-Risk-Final.pdf

* Ord, T. (2020). The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. Hachette Books.
Deudney, D. (2020). Dark skies: Space expansionism, planetary geopolitics, and the ends of humanity. Oxford University Press.
=Energy / Resources =


==Energy==

* International Energy Agency. (2021). Security of Clean Energy Transitions. International Energy Agency. https://www.iea.org/reports/security-of-clean-energy-transitions-2*

* International Energy Agency. (2021). Energy security and the risk of disorderly change. International Energy Agency. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2021/energy-security-and-the-risk-of-disorderly-change*

* Michaux, S. (2021). Assessment of the Extra Capacity Required of Alternative Energy Electrical Power Systems to Completely Replace Fossil Fuels. http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.34895.00160*

* International Energy Agency. (2020). Power Systems in Transition. International Energy Agency. https://www.iea.org/reports/power-systems-in-transition*

* Kennedy, S. (2022). Scraping the Barrel. Energy Flux. https://www.energyflux.news/p/scraping-the-barrel*
Hall, C. A., Lambert, J. G., & Balogh, S. B. (2014). EROI of different fuels and the implications for society. Energy policy, 64, 141-152.*

* Mulder, K., & Hagens, N. J. (2008). Energy return on investment: toward a consistent framework. Ambio, 37(2), 74–79. https://doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447(2008)37[74:eroita]2.0.co;2*


== Resources / Materials ==

* Teer, J. Bertolini, M. (2022). Reaching breaking point: The semiconductor and critical raw material ecosystem at a time of great power rivalry. The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies. https://hcss.nl/report/reaching-breaking-point-semiconductors-critical-raw-materials-great-power-rivalry/*

* Michaux, S. (2021). The Mining of Minerals and the Limits to Growth. http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.10175.84640*

* Ibrahim, S. E., Centeno, M. A., Patterson, T. S., & Callahan, P. W. (2021). Resilience in global value chains: A systemic risk approach. Global Perspectives, 2(1), 27658.*


== Food / Agriculture ==

* International Monetary Fund. (2022). Tackling the Global Food Crisis: Impact, Policy Response, and the Role of the IMF. International Monetary Fund. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/IMF-Notes/Issues/2022/09/27/Tackling-the-Global-Food-Crisis-Impact-Policy-Response-and-the-Role-of-the-IMF-523919 

* Stockholm Resilience Center. (2022). Navigating transformations in times of crises towards healthy, sustainable and just Swedish and planetary food systems. Stockholm Resilience Center. https://doi.org/10.17045/sthlmuni.21275946.v1*

* Central Intelligence Agency. (2022). Field Listing - Food insecurity. Central Intelligence Agency. https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/food-insecurity/*

* The Global Food Security Programme. (2015). Extreme weather and resilience of the global food system. The Global Food Security Programme.https://www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/publications/extreme-weather-resilience-global-food-system.pdf*





Barry, G. (2014). Terrestrial ecosystem loss and biosphere collapse. Management of Environmental Quality: An International Journal, 25(5), 542–563. https://doi.org/10.1108/MEQ-06-2013-0069

Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., de Wit, C. A., Diamond, M. L., Fantke, P., Hassellöv, M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Søgaard Jørgensen, P., Villarrubia-Gómez, P., Wang, Z., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2022). Outside the Safe Operating Space of the Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities. Environmental Science & Technology, 56(3), 1510–1521. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158

Mostofa, K. M. G., Liu, C.-Q., Zhai, W., Minella, M., Vione, D., Gao, K., Minakata, D., Arakaki, T., Yoshioka, T., Hayakawa, K., Konohira, E., Tanoue, E., Akhand, A., Chanda, A., Wang, B., & Sakugawa, H. (2016). Reviews and Syntheses: Ocean acidification and its potential impacts on marine ecosystems. Biogeosciences, 13(6), 1767–1786. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-13-1767-2016

Guinotte, J. M., & Fabry, V. J. (2008). Ocean acidification and its potential effects on marine ecosystems. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1134, 320–342. https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1439.013

Malagó, A., & Bouraoui, F. (2021). Global anthropogenic and natural nutrient fluxes: From local to planetary assessments. Environmental Research Letters, 16, 054074. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abe95f

de Vries, W., Kros, J., Kroeze, C., & Seitzinger, S. P. (2013). Assessing planetary and regional nitrogen boundaries related to food security and adverse environmental impacts. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(3), 392–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2013.07.004

Kulionis, V., & Pfister, S. (2022). A planetary boundary-based method to assess freshwater use at the global and local scales. Environmental Research Letters, 17(9), 094031. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac84f2

Zipper, S. C., Jaramillo, F., Wang-Erlandsson, L., Cornell, S. E., Gleeson, T., Porkka, M., Häyhä, T., Crépin, A.-S., Fetzer, I., Gerten, D., Hoff, H., Matthews, N., Ricaurte-Villota, C., Kummu, M., Wada, Y., & Gordon, L. (2020). Integrating the Water Planetary Boundary With Water Management From Local to Global Scales. Earth’s Future, 8(2), e2019EF001377. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019EF001377

Gleeson, T., Wang-Erlandsson, L., Porkka, M., Zipper, S. C., Jaramillo, F., Gerten, D., Fetzer, I., Cornell, S. E., Piemontese, L., Gordon, L. J., Rockström, J., Oki, T., Sivapalan, M., Wada, Y., Brauman, K. A., Flörke, M., Bierkens, M. F. P., Lehner, B., Keys, P., … Famiglietti, J. S. (2020). Illuminating water cycle modifications and Earth system resilience in the Anthropocene. Water Resources Research, 56(4), e2019WR024957. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR024957

Bunsen, J., Berger, M., & Finkbeiner, M. (2021). Planetary boundaries for water – A review. Ecological Indicators, 121, 107022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2020.107022

Heistermann, M. (2017). HESS Opinions: A planetary boundary on freshwater use is misleading. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 21(7), 3455–3461. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-21-3455-2017

Wang-Erlandsson, L., Tobian, A., van der Ent, R. J., Fetzer, I., te Wierik, S., Porkka, M., Staal, A., Jaramillo, F., Dahlmann, H., Singh, C., Greve, P., Gerten, D., Keys, P. W., Gleeson, T., Cornell, S. E., Steffen, W., Bai, X., & Rockström, J. (2022). A planetary boundary for green water. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 3(6), Article 6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-022-00287-8

Shaikh, M. A., Hadjikakou, M., & Bryan, B. A. (2021). National-level consumption-based and production-based utilisation of the land-system change planetary boundary: Patterns and trends. Ecological Indicators, 121, 106981. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2020.106981

Conijn, J. G., Bindraban, P. S., Schröder, J. J., & Jongschaap, R. E. E. (2018). Can our global food system meet food demand within planetary boundaries? Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 251, 244–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2017.06.001

Kedward, K., Ryan-Collins, J., & Chenet, H. (2022). Biodiversity loss and climate change interactions: Financial stability implications for central banks and financial supervisors. Climate Policy, 0(0), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2022.2107475

Lade, S. J., Fetzer, I., Cornell, S. E., & Crona, B. (2021). A prototype Earth system impact metric that accounts for cross-scale interactions. Environmental Research Letters, 16(11), 115005. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac2db1

Lade, S. J., Steffen, W., de Vries, W., Carpenter, S. R., Donges, J. F., Gerten, D., Hoff, H., Newbold, T., Richardson, K., & Rockström, J. (2020). Human impacts on planetary boundaries amplified by Earth system interactions. Nature Sustainability, 3(2), Article 2. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0454-4

Lade, S. J., Norberg, J., Anderies, J. M., Beer, C., Cornell, S. E., Donges, J. F., Fetzer, I., Gasser, T., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., & Steffen, W. (2019). Potential feedbacks between loss of biosphere integrity and climate change. Global Sustainability, 2, e21. https://doi.org/10.1017/sus.2019.18

Chrysafi, A., Virkki, V., Jalava, M., Sandström, V., Piipponen, J., Porkka, M., Lade, S. J., La Mere, K., Wang-Erlandsson, L., Scherer, L., Andersen, L. S., Bennett, E., Brauman, K. A., Cooper, G. S., De Palma, A., Döll, P., Downing, A. S., DuBois, T. C., Fetzer, I., … Kummu, M. (2022). Quantifying Earth system interactions for sustainable food production via expert elicitation. Nature Sustainability, 5(10), Article 10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00940-6

Chen, S., Chen, D., Tan, Z., Chen, M., & Han, J. (2022). Knowledge mapping of planetary boundaries based on bibliometrics analysis. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 29(45), 67728–67750. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-22292-6

Folke, C., Polasky, S., Rockström, J., Galaz, V., Westley, F., Lamont, M., Scheffer, M., Österblom, H., Carpenter, S. R., Chapin, F. S., Seto, K. C., Weber, E. U., Crona, B. I., Daily, G. C., Dasgupta, P., Gaffney, O., Gordon, L. J., Hoff, H., Levin, S. A., … Walker, B. H. (2021). Our future in the Anthropocene biosphere. Ambio, 50(4), 834–869. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01544-8

Campbell, B., Beare, D., Bennett, E., Hall-Spencer, J., Ingram, J., Jaramillo, F., Ortiz, R., Ramankutty, N., Sayer, J., & Shindell, D. (2017). Agriculture production as a major driver of the Earth system exceeding planetary boundaries. Ecology and Society, 22(4). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-09595-220408

Kopittke, P. M., Menzies, N. W., Dalal, R. C., McKenna, B. A., Husted, S., Wang, P., & Lombi, E. (2021). The role of soil in defining planetary boundaries and the safe operating space for humanity. Environment International, 146, 106-245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106245

Kim, R. E., & Kotzé, L. J. (2021). Planetary boundaries at the intersection of Earth system law, science and governance: A state-of-the-art review. Review of European, Comparative & International Environmental Law, 30(1), 3–15. https://doi.org/10.1111/reel.12383

MacLeod, M., Breitholtz, M., Cousins, I. T., Wit, C. A. de, Persson, L. M., Rudén, C., & McLachlan, M. S. (2014). Identifying Chemicals That Are Planetary Boundary Threats. Environmental Science & Technology, 48(19), 11057–11063. https://doi.org/10.1021/es501893m

Barbosa, M., Bertolami, O., & Francisco, F. (2019). Towards a Physically Motivated Planetary Accounting Framework (arXiv:1907.10535). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1907.10535

Algunaibet, I. M., Pozo, C., Galán-Martín, Á., Huijbregts, M. A. J., Dowell, N. M., & Guillén-Gosálbez, G. (2019). Powering sustainable development within planetary boundaries. Energy & Environmental Science, 12(6), 1890–1900. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE03423K

Baum, S. D., & Handoh, I. C. (2014). Integrating the planetary boundaries and global catastrophic risk paradigms. Ecological Economics, 107, 13–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.07.024

Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S. R., de Vries, W., de Wit, C. A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson, L. M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., & Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 347(6223), 1259855. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855

Gerten, D., Heck, V., Jägermeyr, J., Bodirsky, B. L., Fetzer, I., Jalava, M., Kummu, M., Lucht, W., Rockström, J., Schaphoff, S., & Schellnhuber, H. J. (2020). Feeding ten billion people is possible within four terrestrial planetary boundaries. Nature Sustainability, 3(3), Article 3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0465-1

Nykvist, B., Persson, Å., Moberg, F., Persson, L., Cornell, S., & Rockström, J. (2013). National Environmental Performance on Planetary Boundaries: A study for the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency (No. 6576). Swedish Environmental Protection Agency. https://mediamanager.sei.org/documents/Publications/SEI-Report-Naturvardsverket-

NationalEnvironmentalPerformance-2013.pdf
de Vries, W., Kros, J., Kroeze, C., & Seitzinger, S. P. (2013). Assessing planetary and regional nitrogen boundaries related to food security and adverse environmental impacts. Current Opinion in Environmental

= Technology Risk = 


==AI==

* Galaz, V., Centeno, M. A., Callahan, P. W., Causevic, A., Patterson, T., Brass, I., … Levy, K. (2021). Artificial intelligence, systemic risks, and sustainability. Technology in Society, 67, 101741. doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101741*

* National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. (2021). Final Report. National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. https://www.nscai.gov/2021-final-report/*

* Brundage, M., Avin, S., Clark, J., Toner, H., Eckersley, P., Garfinkel, B., … Amodei, D. (2018). The Malicious Use of Artificial Intelligence: Forecasting, Prevention, and Mitigation. ArXiv [Cs.AI]. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.07228*

* Shackelford, G. E., Kemp, L., Rhodes, C., Sundaram, L., ÓhÉigeartaigh, S. S., Beard, S., … Sutherland, W. J. (2020). Accumulating evidence using crowdsourcing and machine learning: A living bibliography about existential risk and global catastrophic risk. Futures, 116, 102508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2019.102508*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Artificial Intelligence and Arms Control. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/artificial-intelligence-and-arms-control*

* Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China. (2022). Artificial Intelligence White Paper (2022). Center for Security and Emerging Technology. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/artificial-intelligence-white-paper-2022/*

* Huang, J., Gu, S. S., Hou, L., Wu, Y., Wang, X., Yu, H., & Han, J. (2022). Large language models can self-improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610.*

* Yglesias, M. (2022). At last, an AI existential risk policy. Slow Boring. https://www.slowboring.com/p/at-last-an-ai-existential-risk-policy*

* Barrett, A. M., Hendrycks, D., Newman, J., & Nonnecke, B. (2022). Actionable Guidance for High-Consequence AI Risk Management: Towards Standards Addressing AI Catastrophic Risks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08966.*

* Dafoe, A., Bachrach, Y., Hadfield, G., Horvitz, E., Larson, K., & Graepel, T. (2021). Cooperative AI: machines must learn to find common ground. Nature, 593(7857), 33-36.*

* Conitzer, V. (2022). AI agents may cooperate better if they don't resemble us. Cooperative AI Foundation. https://www.cooperativeai.com/seminars/ai-agents-may-cooperate-better-if-they-dont-resemble-us*

* Yudkowsky, E. (2016). The AI alignment problem: why it is hard, and where to start. Symbolic Systems Distinguished Speaker.*

* L_Agents. (n.d.). Redwood research AI alignment. Redwood Research. https://www.redwoodresearch.org/
Stokes, J. (2023). Here’s What It Would Take To Slow or Stop AI. https://www.jonstokes.com/p/heres-what-it-would-take-to-slow

* Marcus, G., & Garner, M. R. (2023). Is it time to hit the pause button on AI? The Road to AI We Can Trust. https://garymarcus.substack.com/p/is-it-time-to-hit-the-pause-button

* Bakker, M. A., Chadwick, M. J., Sheahan, H. R., Tessler, M. H., Balaguer, J., McAleese, N., Glaese, A., Aslanides, J., Botvinick, M. M., & Summerfield, C. (2022). Fine-tuning language models to find agreement among humans with diverse preferences. ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.15006.pdf

* Eckersley, P. (2019). Impossibility and Uncertainty Theorems in AI Value Alignment (or why your AGI should not have a utility function). ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.00064.pdf

* Thomas, R., & Uminsky, D. (2020). The Problem with Metrics is a Fundamental Problem for AI (arXiv:2002.08512). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.085

Sedova, K., McNeill, C., Johnson, A., Joshi, A., & Wulkan, I. (2021). AI and the Future of Disinformation Campaigns Part 1: The RICHDATA Framework. Center for Security and Emerging Technology.

Zhang, D., Maslej, N., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Lyons, T., Manyika, J., Ngo, H., Niebles, J. C., Sellitto, M., Sakhaee, E., Shoham, Y., Clark, J., & Perrault, R. (2022). Artificial Intelligence Index Report 2022. Stanford University Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/2022-AI-Index-Report_Master.pdf

Goldstein, J. A., Sastry, G., Musser, M., DiResta, R., Gentzel, M., & Sedova, K. (2023). Forecasting potential misuses of language models for disinformation. Stanford Internet Observatory. https://cdn.openai.com/papers/forecasting-misuse.pdf

Brundage, M., Avin, S., Wang, J., Belfield, H., Krueger, G., Hadfield, G., Khlaaf, H., Yang, J., Toner, H., Fong, R., Maharaj, T., Koh, P. W., Hooker, S., Leung, J., Trask, A., Bluemke, E., Lebensold, J., O’Keefe, C., Koren, M., … Anderljung, M. (2020). Toward Trustworthy AI Development: Mechanisms for Supporting Verifiable Claims (arXiv:2004.07213). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.07213

Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E., Brynjolfsson, E., Buch, S., Card, D., Castellon, R., Chatterji, N., Chen, A., Creel, K., Davis, J. Q., Demszky, D., … Liang, P. (2022). On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models (arXiv:2108.07258). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.07258

Nilsson, N. J. (2009). The Quest for Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511819346

Mohamed, S., Png, M.-T., & Isaac, W. (2020). Decolonial AI: Decolonial Theory as Sociotechnical Foresight in Artificial Intelligence. Philosophy & Technology, 33(4), 659–684. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-020-00405-8

Altman, S. & 2021. (2021). Moore’s Law for Everything. Moore’s Sam Altman. https://moores.samaltman.com/

Drexler, K. E. (2019). Reframing Superintelligence: Comprehensive AI Services as General Intelligence [FHI Technical Report]. Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford. https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Reframing_Superintelligence_FHI-TR-2019-1.1-1.pdf

Eckersley, P., & Nasser, Y. (2017, June 12). AI Progress Measurement. Electronic Frontier Foundation. https://www.eff.org/ai/metrics

Broussard, M. (2019). Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers Misunderstand the World. MIT Press. https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262537018/artificial-unintelligence/

Greer, J. (2022, August 29). The Apocalypse is Coming or Why I’ve Been Existentially Depressed. John Greer. https://www.johncgreer.com/the-apocalypse-is-coming/

Chapman, D. (2023). Better without AI. https://betterwithout.ai/

Barrett, A. M., Hendrycks, D., Newman, J., & Nonnecke, B. (2023). Actionable Guidance for High-Consequence AI Risk Management: Towards Standards Addressing AI Catastrophic Risks (arXiv:2206.08966). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08966

Karnofsky, H. (2022, June 9). AI Could Defeat All Of Us Combined. Cold Takes. https://www.cold-takes.com/ai-could-defeat-all-of-us-combined/

“Most important century” series: Roadmap. (2021, September 24). Cold Takes. https://www.cold-takes.com/most-important-century-series-roadmap/

Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion, J., Jones, A., Chen, A., Goldie, A., Mirhoseini, A., McKinnon, C., Chen, C., Olsson, C., Olah, C., Hernandez, D., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Li, D., Tran-Johnson, E., Perez, E., … Kaplan, J. (2022). Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback (arXiv:2212.08073). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.08073

Boulanin, V., Saalman, L., Topychkanov, P., Su, F., & Carlson, M. P. (2020). Artificial Intelligence, Strategic Stability and Nuclear Risk. Stockholm Peace Research Institute. https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2020-06/artificial_intelligence_strategic_stability_and_nuclear_risk.pdf

Huang, J., Gu, S. S., Hou, L., Wu, Y., Wang, X., Yu, H., & Han, J. (2022). Large Language Models Can Self-Improve (arXiv:2210.11610). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.11610

Wolfram, S. (2023, February 14). What Is ChatGPT Doing … and Why Does It Work? https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt-doing-and-why-does-it-work/
Transcript of EP 181 – Forrest Landry Part 1: AI Risk. (n.d.). Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://jimruttshow.blubrry.net/the-jim-rutt-show-transcripts/transcript-of-ep-181-forrest-landry-on-ai-risk/

Landry, F. (n.d.). AI Alignment Area Index. MLFB. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://mflb.com/ai_alignment_1/index.html#p1

Wu, M., Parbhoo, S., Hughes, M. C., Roth, V., & Doshi-Velez, F. (2019). Optimizing for Interpretability in Deep Neural Networks with Tree Regularization (arXiv:1908.05254). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1908.05254

Garg, V. K., & Kalai, A. T. (2017). Meta-Unsupervised-Learning: A supervised approach to unsupervised learning (arXiv:1612.09030). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1612.09030

Doshi-Velez, F. (n.d.). Finale Doshi-Velez. https://finale.seas.harvard.edu/

Kim, B. (n.d.). Human-centered AI. https://beenkim.github.io/

Doshi-Velez, F., & Kim, B. (2017). Towards A Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning (arXiv:1702.08608). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1702.08608

Rahwan, I. (2018). Society-in-the-loop: Programming the algorithmic social contract. Ethics and Information Technology, 20(1), 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8

Gabriel, I. (2020). Artificial Intelligence, Values, and Alignment. Minds and Machines, 30(3), 411–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-020-09539-2

Conitzer, V., Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Schaich Borg, J., Deng, Y., & Kramer, M. (2017). Moral Decision Making Frameworks for Artificial Intelligence. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 31(1). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v31i1.11140

Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P., Schulman, J., & Mané, D. (2016). Concrete Problems in AI Safety (arXiv:1606.06565). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.06565

Hanson, R., & Yudkowsky, E. (n.d.). The Hanson-Yudkowsky AI-Foom Debate. Machine Intelligence Research Institute. https://intelligence.org/files/AIFoomDebate.pdf

Lee, K.-F. (2018). AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Kanaan, M. (2020). T-Minus AI: Humanity’s Countdown to Artificial Intelligence and the New Pursuit of Global Power. BenBella Books.

How to make AI trustworthy. (2020). ScienceDaily. https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/08/200827105937.htm

10 Breakthrough Technologies 2021. (2021, February 24). MIT Technology Review. https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/02/24/1014369/10-breakthrough-technologies-2021/

Neuro-Symbolic AI Archives. (n.d.). MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://mitibmwatsonailab.mit.edu/category/neuro-symbolic-ai/

Marcus, G. (2020). The Next Decade in AI: Four Steps Towards Robust Artificial Intelligence (arXiv:2002.06177). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2002.06177

Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D. M., Wu, J., Winter, C., … Amodei, D. (2020). Language Models are Few-Shot Learners (arXiv:2005.14165). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2005.14165

Potember, R. (2017). Perspectives on Research in Artificial Intelligence and Artificial General Intelligence Relevant to DoD. https://irp.fas.org/agency/dod/jason/ai-dod.pdf

Sculley, D., Holt, G., Golovin, D., Davydov, E., Phillips, T., Ebner, D., Chaudhary, V., & Young, M. (2014). Machine Learning: The High Interest Credit Card of Technical Debt. SE4ML: Software Engineering for Machine Learning (NIPS 2014 Workshop). https://research.google/pubs/pub43146/

King, A., Lippmann, R., Miller, B., Reynolds, D., Richardson, F., Sahin, C., Tran, A., Trepagnier, P., Zipkin, J., Roeser, C., Hennighausen, K., Mohindra, S., & Thornton, J. (2019). Artificial Intelligence: Short History, Present Developments, and Future Outlook. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. https://www.ll.mit.edu/sites/default/files/publication/doc/2021-03/Artificial%20Intelligence%20Short%20History%2C%20Present%20Developments%2C%20and%20Future%20Outlook%20-%20Final%20Report%20-%202021-03-16_0.pdf

Moore, A. W., & Shaneman, S. (2018). The AI stack: A blueprint for developing and deploying artificial intelligence—The Robotics Institute Carnegie Mellon University. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2309483

Artificial Intelligence Ethics Framework for the Intelligence Community. (2020). Intelligence. https://www.intelligence.gov/artificial-intelligence-ethics-framework-for-the-intelligence-community

Horowitz, M. C. (2018). Artificial Intelligence, International Competition, and the Balance of Power. Texas National Security Review, 1(3), 36–57. https://doi.org/10.15781/T2639KP49

Sisson, M., Spindel, J., & Kozyulin, V. (2020). The Militarization of Artificial Intelligence. Stanley Center for Peace and Security. https://stanleycenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/TheMilitarization-ArtificialIntelligence.pdf

DOD Adopts Ethical Principles for Artificial Intelligence. (n.d.). U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved April 9, 2023, from https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2091996/dod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-intelligence/https%3A%2F%2Fwww.defense.gov%2FNews%2FReleases%2FRelease%2FArticle%2F2091996%2Fdod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-intelligence%2F

Allison, G., & Schmidt, E. (2020). Is China Beating the U.S. to AI Supremacy? (Avoiding Great Power Conflict Project). Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/2020-08/AISupremacy.pdf

Webster, G., Creemers, R., Triolo, P., & Kania, E. (2017). Full Translation: China’s “New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan” [2017]. New America. http://newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/

Allen, G. C. (2019). Understanding China’s AI Strategy: Clues to Chinese Strategic Thinking on Artificial Intelligence and National Security. Center for New American Security. https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/hero/documents/CNAS-Understanding-Chinas-AI-Strategy-Gregory-C.-Allen-FINAL-2.15.19.pdf?mtime=20190215104041&focal=none

Tanner, M. S. (2017, July 20). Beijing’s New National Intelligence Law: From Defense to Offense. Lawfare. https://www.lawfareblog.com/beijings-new-national-intelligence-law-defense-offense

Zwetsloot, R., & Dafoe, A. (2019, February 11). Thinking About Risks From AI: Accidents, Misuse and Structure. Lawfare. https://www.lawfareblog.com/thinking-about-risks-ai-accidents-misuse-and-structure
United Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence (AI) 2021. (2021). ITU Hub. https://www.itu.int/hub/publication/s-gen-unact-2021/

Yudkowsky, E. (2017, December 7). A reply to Francois Chollet on intelligence explosion. Machine Intelligence Research Institute. https://intelligence.org/2017/12/06/chollet/
Redwood Research. (n.d.). Exploratory AI Alignment Research. Retrieved April 9, 2023, from https://www.redwoodresearch.org

AI Risk Management Framework. (2021, July 12). NIST. https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework

==Bioterrorism==

* Complete genomes: Ebolavirus. (n.d.). National Center for Biotechnology Information. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/GenomesGroup.cgi?taxid=186536

* Meyer, R. F., & Morse, S. A. (2008). Viruses and Bioterrorism. Encyclopedia of Virology, 406–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012374410-4.00549-5

* Sharma, A., Gupta, G., Ahmad, T., Krishan, K., & Kaur, B. (2020). Chapter 12 - Next generation agents (synthetic agents): Emerging threats and challenges in detection, protection, and decontamination. In S. J. 

* S. Flora & V. Pachauri (Eds.), Handbook on Biological Warfare Preparedness (pp. 217–256). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-812026-2.00012-8

* A vaccine printer at your local drugstore? We are making it happen. (2020, December 16). Telesis Bio. https://telesisbio.com/2020/12/16/a-vaccine-printer-at-your-local-drugstore-we-are-making-it-happen/

* Hessel, A. (2019). Printing vaccines at the pharmacy or at home will be the way of the future. Ars Technica. https://arstechnica.com/science/2019/06/printing-vaccines-at-the-pharmacy-or-at-home-will-be-the-way-of-the-future/

* Bioterrorism. (n.d.). INTERPOL. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://www.interpol.int/en/Crimes/Terrorism/Bioterrorism

* Bioterrorism: Applying the Lens of COVID-19. (2021). Counter Terrorism Preparedness Network. https://biosecuritycentral.org/resource/core-guidance-and-recommendations/bioterrorism-with-a-covid-19-lens/

* Tucker, J. B. (Ed.). (2000). Toxic Terror: Assessing Terrorist Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons. MIT Press.

* Melin, A. (2021). Overstatements and Understatements in the Debate on Synthetic Biology, Bioterrorism and Ethics. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 9, 703-735. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.703735

* Lentzos, F., Jefferson, C., & Marris, C. (2014). The myths (and realities) of synthetic bioweapons—Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. https://thebulletin.org/2014/09/the-myths-and-realities-of-synthetic-bioweapons/

* Collett, M. (2007). Impact of Synthetic Genomics on the Threat of Bioterrorism with Viral Agents. https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/39653

* Baric, R. (2007). Synthetic Viral Genomics: Risks and Benefits for Science and Society. https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/39652

* Wickiser, J., O’Donovan, K., Washington, M., Hummel, S., & Burpo, F. J. (2020). Engineered Pathogens and Unnatural Biological Weapons: The Future Threat of Synthetic Biology. Combatting Terrorism Center Sentinel, 13(8), 1–7.


==Blockchain==

* Pandey, S. (2023, February 6). Using Blockchain to Store Illicit or Copyrighted Content: To Censor or Validate? BeInCrypto. https://beincrypto.com/using-blockchain-store-illicit-copyrighted-content-censor-validate/

* Somers, M. (2019). The risks and unintended consequences of blockchain. MIT Sloan. https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/risks-and-unintended-consequences-blockchain


= Democracy / Elections / Politics =

* International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. (2021). Global State of Democracy 2021. International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. https://doi.org/10.31752/idea.2021.91*

* The Alan Turing Institute. (2020). Tackling threats to informed decision-making in democratic societies. The Alan Turing Institute. https://www.turing.ac.uk/news/publications/tackling-threats-informed-decision-making-democratic-societies*

* Carpenter, D. P., & Moss, D. A. (Eds.). (2014). Preventing regulatory capture: Special interest influence and how to limit it. Cambridge University Press.

* Mouffe, C. (2009). Democracy in a Multipolar World. Millennium, 37(3), 549–561. https://doi.org/10.1177/0305829809103232


==Media / Journalism ==

Kavanagh, J., & Rich, M. D. (2018). Truth Decay: An Initial Exploration of the Diminishing Role of Facts and Analysis in American Public Life. https://doi.org/10.7249/RR2314*

* Sedova, K., McNeill, C., Johnson, A., Joshi, A., & Wulkan, I. (2021). AI and the Future of Disinformation Campaigns - Part 1: The RICHDATA Framework. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. https://doi.org/10.51593/2021CA005*

* Sedova, K., McNeill, C., Johnson, A., Joshi, A., & Wulkan, I. (2021). AI and the Future of Disinformation Campaigns - Part 2: A Threat Model. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. https://doi.org/10.51593/2021CA005*


==Refugees / Migration / Poverty / Social Issues ==

* United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2021). Global Trends Report 2021. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. https://data.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/93791*

* Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative. (2022). Global Multidimensional Poverty Index 2022. United Nations Development Programme. https://hdr.undp.org/content/2022-global-multidimensional-poverty-index-mpi*


=Climate Change / Environment =

* Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China. (2022). National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2035. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/national-climate-change-adaptation-strategy-2035/*

* McKinsey Global Institute. (2020). Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts. McKinsey Global Institute. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-insights/climate-risk-and-response-physical-hazards-and-socioeconomic-impacts*

* United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security. (2022). Interconnected Disaster Risks 2022. United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security. https://interconnectedrisks.org/*

* United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security. (2021).  UNU Interconnected Disaster Risks Report 2020/2021. United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security. http://collections.unu.edu/view/UNU:8288*

* International Military Council on Climate and Security. (2021). The World Climate and Security Report 2021. International Military Council on Climate and Security. https://imccs.org/the-world-climate-and-security-report-2021/*

* Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., … Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 347(6223), 1259855. doi:10.1126/science.1259855*

* Hilton, B. (2022). Climate Change. 80,000 Hours.  https://80000hours.org/problem-profiles/climate-change/*

* Beard, S. J., Holt, L., Tzachor, A., Kemp, L., Avin, S., Torres, P., & Belfield, H. (2021). Assessing climate change’s contribution to global catastrophic risk. Futures, 127, 102673. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102673*

* The Council on Strategic Risks. (2022). Societal and Security Implications of Ecosystem Service Declines, Part 1: Pollination and Seed Dispersal. The Council on Strategic Risks. https://councilonstrategicrisks.org/societal-and-security-implications-of-ecosystem-service-declines-part-1-pollination-and-seed-dispersal/*

* International Military Council on Climate and Security. (2020). The World Climate and Security Report 2020. International Military Council on Climate and Security. https://imccs.org/report2020/*

* Izdebski, A., Haldon, J., & Filipkowski, P. (2022). Perspectives on Public Policy in Societal-Environmental Crises: What the Future Needs from History (p. 347). Springer Nature.*


= Military / Defense =

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Artificial Intelligence and Arms Control. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/artificial-intelligence-and-arms-control*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Lighting the Path: Framing a Transatlantic Technology Policy. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/lighting-the-path*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Sanctions by the Numbers: Economic Measures against Russia Following Its 2022 Invasion of Ukraine. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/sanctions-by-the-numbers-economic-measures-against-russia-following-its-2021-invasion-of-ukraine*

* United Nations. (2021). The State of Global Peace and Security. United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. https://dppa.un.org/sites/default/files/2010245_sg_report_web.pdf*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Dangerous Straits: Wargaming a Future Conflict over Taiwan. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/dangerous-straits-wargaming-a-

* Council on Strategic Risks. (2020). Confronting Systemic Security Risks: Proposals For The Next U.S. Administration. Council on Strategic Risks. https://councilonstrategicrisks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Confronting-Systemic-Security-Risks_Proposals-for-the-Next-US-Administration_2020_10.pdf*

* Cyberspace Solarium Commission. (2020). Cyberspace Solarium Commission Final Report. Cyberspace Solarium Commission. https://www.solarium.gov/report*

* International Military Council on Climate and Security. (2021). The World Climate and Security Report 2021. International Military Council on Climate and Security. https://imccs.org/the-world-climate-and-security-report-2021/*

* Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. (2022). Environment of Peace: Security in a New Era of Risk. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. https://doi.org/10.55163/LCLS7037*

* International Military Council on Climate and Security. (2020). The World Climate and Security Report 2020. International Military Council on Climate and Security. https://imccs.org/report2020/*

* Rand Corporation. (2018). The Emerging Risk of Virtual Societal Warfare. Rand Corporation. https://doi.org/10.7249/RR2714*

* World Bank Group. (2018). Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict. World Bank Group. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/28337*

* Arms Control Association. (n.d.). Treaties & Agreements. Arms Control Association. https://www.armscontrol.org/treaties

* Mutual assured destruction. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_assured_destruction
dEAsign. (n.d.). The threat of synthetic bioterror demands even further action and leadership—EA Forum. EA Forum. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/EArsSv7QuKyy8GyBg/the-threat-of-synthetic-bioterror-demands-even-further


==Geopolitics==

* Nissenbaum, D., Faucon, B., & Lubold, G. (2021). Israel strikes Iran amid new international push to contain Tehran. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/israel-strikes-iran-amid-new-international-push-to-contain-tehran-11675004979

* Deudney, D. H. (Ed.). (2009). Bounding power: Republican security theory from the polis to the global village (3. printing, and 1. paperback printing). Princeton University Press.

== Nuclear Weapons ==

* Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. (2022). 2022 Doomsday Clock Statement. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. https://thebulletin.org/doomsday-clock/2022-doomsday-clock-statement/*

* Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. (2021). Annual Report 2021. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. https://thebulletin.org/about-us/annual-report-2021/*

* Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. (2020). Annual Report 2020. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. https://thebulletin.org/about-us/annual-report-2020/*

* Nuclear Threat Initiative. (2021). Strengthening Global Systems to Prevent and Respond to High-Consequence 
Biological Threats. Nuclear Threat Initiative. https://www.nti.org/analysis/articles/strengthening-global-systems-to-prevent-and-respond-to-high-consequence-biological-threats/*

* Zaidi, W., & Dafoe, A. (2021). International Control of Powerful Technology: Lessons from the Baruch Plan for Nuclear Weapons. Centre for the Governance of AI. https://www.governance.ai/research-paper/international-control-of-powerful-technology-lessons-from-the-baruch-plan-for-nuclear-weapons*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Long Shadows: Deterrence in a Multipolar Nuclear Age. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/long-shadows-deterrence-in-a-multipolar-nuclear-age*

* Center for a New American Security. (2022). Risk and Responsibility: Managing Future Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction Threats. Center for a New American Security. https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/risk-and-responsibility*

* Richards, P. G. (1999). Building the global seismographic network for nuclear test ban. https://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~richards/EARTHmat.html*

* Affinidi. (2021, May 26). Applications of Zero-Knowledge Proofs — Part 2: Nuclear Disarmament. Affinidi Pte. Ltd. https://academy.affinidi.com/applications-of-zero-knowledge-proofs-part-2-nuclear-disarmament-abb5c879a7c5

* Panko, B. (2016). Nuclear physicists may have just invented a “zero-knowledge” warhead inspection system. https://www.science.org/content/article/nuclear-physicists-may-have-just-invented-zero-knowledge-warhead-inspection-system

* Chandler, D. L. (2018). For nuclear weapons reduction, a way to verify without revealing. MIT News. https://news.mit.edu/2018/nuclear-weapons-isotope-detection-method-0419


= Health / Physical & Mental / Natural Disasters=

* World Health Organization. (2022). Global report on infection prevention and control. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240051164*

* World Health Organization. (2022). World mental health report: transforming mental health for all. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240049338*

* Mani, L., Tzachor, A. & Cole, P. (2021). Global catastrophic risk from lower magnitude volcanic eruptions. Nat Commun 12, 4756 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25021-8*

* National Research Council. (2015). Potential risks and benefits of gain-of-function research. National Academies Press. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK274343/*

* World Health Organization. (2021). Emerging technologies and dual-use concerns: a horizon scan for global public health. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240036161*

* United Nations Development Programme. (2022). Human Development Report 2021/2022. United Nations Development Programme. https://hdr.undp.org/content/human-development-report-2021-22*


=Generalities=

* Brand, S. (2018). Pace layering: How complex systems learn and keep learning. Journal of Design and Science, 3, 1576.*

* Ngo, R., Chan, L., & Mindermann, S. (2022). The alignment problem from a deep learning perspective. ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2209.00626.pdf

* Yudkowsky, E. (2017). Inadequate Equilibria: Where and How Civilizations Get Stuck. Machine Intelligence Research Institute.



=Debates=

* Paulson, S., D'Alisa, G., Demaria, F., & Kallis, G. (2020). The case for degrowth. John Wiley & Sons.*
O'Keefe, C., Cihon, P., Garfinkel, B., Flynn, C., Leung, J., & Dafoe, A. (2020, February). The windfall clause: Distributing the benefits of AI for the common good. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (pp. 327-331).*

* Yglesias, M. (2022). What's long-term about longtermism?. Slow Boring. https://www.slowboring.com/p/whats-long-term-about-longtermism*

Greer, J. C. (2022).The Apocalypse is Coming or Why I’ve Been Existentially Depressed. https://www.johncgreer.com/the-apocalypse-is-coming/*


==Economics==

Constitutional economics. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitutional_economics#Hayek

Buchanan, J. M. (1987). The constitution of economic policy. Science, 236(4807), 1433-1436.
Perverse incentive. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perverse_incentive

* Hagens, N. J. (2020). Economics for the future–Beyond the superorganism. Ecological Economics, 169, 106520.*

* Stantcheva, S. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://scholar.harvard.edu/stantcheva/home
Chinoy, S., Nunn, N., Sequeira, S., & Stantcheva, S. (2022). Zero-Sum Thinking and the Roots of US Political Divides.*

* Helbling, T. (n.d.). Externalities: Prices Do Not Capture All Costs. International Monetary Fund.  https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/38-externalities.htm*

* Yudkowsky, E. (2013). Intelligence explosion microeconomics. Machine Intelligence Research Institute, accessed online October, 23, 2015.*

* Yudkowsky, E. (2011). Complex value systems are required to realize valuable futures. The Singularity Institute, San Francisco, CA.*

* Bancor. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bancor

* Tooze, A. (2018). Crashed: How a decade of financial crises changed the world. Penguin.*

* Special drawing rights. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_drawing_rights

* Triffin dilemma. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triffin_dilemma
Marshall Plan. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_Plan

* Carew, A. (1987). Labour under the Marshall Plan: The politics of productivity and the marketing of management science. Wayne State University Press.*

* Nixon shock. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nixon_shock
Lowenstein, R. (2011). The Nixon Shock. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-08-04/the-nixon-shock

* Ghizoni, S. (2013). Establishment of the Bretton Woods System. Federal Reserve History. https://web.archive.org/web/20150916005310/http://www.federalreservehistory.org/Events/DetailView/28*

* Eichengreen, B. (2011). Exorbitant privilege: The rise and fall of the dollar and the future of the international monetary system. Oxford University Press.*

* Exorbitant privilege. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exorbitant_privilege

* International Monetary Fund. (n.d.).The Incredible Shrinking Gold Supply. International Monetary Fund. https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/center/mm/eng/sc_sub_3.htm*

* Frum, D. (2008). How we got here: The 70's: the decade that brought you modern life (for better or worse). Basic Books.*

* Nixon, R. (1971). Address to the nation outlining a new economic policy: The challenge of peace. The American Presidency Project, 15.

* Garber, P. M. (1993). The collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system. In A retrospective on the Bretton Woods system: Lessons for international monetary reform (pp. 461-494). University of Chicago Press.*

* Bordo, M. D., & Eichengreen, B. (Eds.). (2007). A retrospective on the Bretton Woods system: lessons for international monetary reform. University of Chicago Press.*

* Xiaochuan, Z. (2009). Reform the international monetary system. Bis Review, 41, 1-3.
Xin, Z. (2017). China's central bank chief makes reform appeal: 'Please free the yuan'. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2114601/chinas-central-bank-chief-makes-reform-appeal-please-free-yuan

* United Nations General Assembly. (2009). Recommendation of the Commission of Experts of the President of the General Assembly on reforms of the international monetary and financial system. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/653789

* Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commission_on_the_Measurement_of_Economic_Performance_and_Social_Progress

* Stiglitz, J., Sen, A., & Fitoussi, J. P. (2009). The measurement of economic performance and social progress revisited. Reflections and overview. Commission on the measurement of economic performance and social progress, Paris.

* International Monetary Fund. (2010). Reserve accumulation and international monetary stability. International Monetary Fund. https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/041310.pdf

* Bretton Woods Conference. (2023, March 22). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_Conference

* Bretton Woods Project. (n.d.). https://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/

Robert, M., S. Edward,Asher, E. (n.d.). The World Bank since Bretton Woods: The origins, policies, operations, and impact of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the other members of the World Bank Group [Text/HTML]. World Bank. Retrieved March 30, 2023, from https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/306851505231641661/The-World-Bank-since-Bretton-Woods-the-origins-policies-operations-and-impact-of-the-International-Bank-for-Reconstruction-and-Development-and-the-other-members-of-the-World-Bank-Group

* Schuler, K., & Rosenberg, A. (2013). The Bretton Woods Transcripts. Center for Financial Stability. https://centerforfinancialstability.org/brettonwoods.php

* General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Agreement_on_Tariffs_and_Trade

* Markwell, D. (2006). John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace. Oxford University Press. https://academic.oup.com/book/26655

* Ghizoni, S. K. (2013). Creation of the Bretton Woods System. Federal Reserve History. https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/bretton-woods-created

* Bretton Woods System. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system

* Keynes, J. M. (1978). The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781139524292

* Manheim, D., & Garrabrant, S. (2018). Categorizing Variants of Goodhart's Law. ArXiv. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.04585.pdf

* Manheim, D. (2018). Building Less Flawed Metrics. Munich Personal RePEc Archive. https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/98288/5/MPRA_paper_98288.pdf

* World currency. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_currency

* Reserve currency. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency


=Miscellaneous=

Aris, B., & Campbell, D. (2004). How Bush’s grandfather helped Hitler’s rise to power. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/25/usa.secondworldwar

* Zero-Knowledge Proof: Verification Without Information. (n.d.). MAE Princeton University. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://mae.princeton.edu/about-mae/spotlight/zero-knowledge-proof-verification-without-information

* Alexander, S. (2018, January 25). Conflict Vs. Mistake. Slate Star Codex. https://slatestarcodex.com/2018/01/24/conflict-vs-mistake/

* Hanlon's razor. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanlon%27s_razor
2022 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community. (2022). Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence. https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2022-Unclassified-Report.pdf

* Global Trends 2040. (2021). Office of the Director of National Intelligence. https://www.dni.gov/index.php/gt2040-home


==Finance==

* Gabuev, A. (2023, March 14). The Yuan Is an Unlikely Winner From Russia’s Growing Isolation. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-03-14/russia-ukraine-the-yuan-is-an-unlikely-winner-from-moscow-s-isolation

* Said, S., & Kalin, S. (2022, March 15). Saudi Arabia Considers Accepting Yuan Instead of Dollars for Chinese Oil Sales. Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/saudi-arabia-considers-accepting-yuan-instead-of-dollars-for-chinese-oil-sales-11647351541


==International Law==

Fassbender, B., & Peters, A. (Eds.). (2012). The Oxford Handbook of the History of International Law. In The Oxford Handbook of the History of International Law (p. 0). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/law/9780199599752.002.0008

International law. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_law
International organization. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_organization

Nations, U. (n.d.). History of the United Nations. United Nations; United Nations. Retrieved April 8, 2023, from https://www.un.org/en/about-us/history-of-the-un


==Non-State Actors==

* Thomas, J. (2017, August 24). The New Era of Non-State Actors: Warfare and Entropy. Small Wars Journal. https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/the-new-era-of-non-state-actors-warfare-and-entropy

* Widiatmaja, A., & Rizqi, F. H. (2019). The Rise of Non-State Actors in Globalization and Democratization Era: Terrorist Group versus State Actors. Jurnal Sentris, 2(2), Article 2. https://doi.org/10.26593/sentris.v2i2.4180.47-62


=What ??=

Christiano, P. (n.d.). Paul F. Christiano. https://paulfchristiano.com/
Piper, K. (n.d.). Kelsey Piper. Vox. https://www.vox.com/authors/kelsey-piper

=Until Here=


Sustainability, 5(3), 392–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2013.07.004
Steffen, W., Sanderson, A., Tyson, P., Jäger, J., Matson, P., Moore, B., Oldfield, F., Richardson, K., Schellnhuber, H. J., Turner, B. L., & Wasson, R. J. (2005). Global Change and the Earth System: A Planet Under Pressure. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/b137870

Armstrong McKay, D. I., Staal, A., Abrams, J. F., Winkelmann, R., Sakschewski, B., Loriani, S., Fetzer, I., Cornell, S. E., Rockström, J., & Lenton, T. M. (2022). Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points. Science, 377(6611), eabn7950. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn7950

Boers, N., Ghil, M., & Stocker, T. F. (2022). Theoretical and paleoclimatic evidence for abrupt transitions in the Earth system. Environmental Research Letters, 17(9), 093006. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac8944
Mackie, E. (2021). Tipping Points in the Earth System. Cambridge Open Engage. https://doi.org/10.33774/coe-2021-fvll2

Brovkin, V., Brook, E., Williams, J. W., Bathiany, S., Lenton, T. M., Barton, M., DeConto, R. M., Donges, J. F., Ganopolski, A., McManus, J., Praetorius, S., de Vernal, A., Abe-Ouchi, A., Cheng, H., Claussen, M., Crucifix, M., Gallopín, G., Iglesias, V., Kaufman, D. S., … Yu, Z. (2021). Past abrupt changes, tipping points and cascading impacts in the Earth system. Nature Geoscience, 14(8), Article 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-021-00790-5

Heinze, C., Blenckner, T., Martins, H., Rusiecka, D., Döscher, R., Gehlen, M., Gruber, N., Holland, E., Hov, Ø., Joos, F., Matthews, J. B. R., Rødven, R., & Wilson, S. (2021). The quiet crossing of ocean tipping points. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(9), e2008478118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2008478118

Pereira, J. C., & Viola, E. (2018). Catastrophic Climate Change and Forest Tipping Points: Blind Spots in International Politics and Policy. Global Policy, 9(4), 513–524. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12578

Lenton, T. M., Held, H., Kriegler, E., Hall, J. W., Lucht, W., Rahmstorf, S., & Schellnhuber, H. J. (2008). Tipping elements in the Earth’s climate system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(6), 1786–1793. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0705414105

Franzke, C. L. E., Ciullo, A., Gilmore, E. A., Matias, D. M., Nagabhatla, N., Orlov, A., Paterson, S. K., Scheffran, J., & Sillmann, J. (2022). Perspectives on tipping points in integrated models of the natural and human Earth system: Cascading effects and telecoupling. Environmental Research Letters, 17(1), 015004. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac42fd


Wunderling, N., Donges, J. F., Kurths, J., & Winkelmann, R. (2021). Interacting tipping elements increase risk of climate domino effects under global warming. Earth System Dynamics, 12(2), 601-619.

Klose, A. K., Wunderling, N., Winkelmann, R., & Donges, J. F. (2021). What do we mean,‘tipping cascade’?. Environmental Research Letters, 16 (12), 125011. 

Xu, X., Zhang, X., Riley, W. J., Xue, Y., Nobre, C. A., Lovejoy, T. E., & Jia, G. (2022). Deforestation triggering irreversible transition in Amazon hydrological cycle. Environmental Research Letters, 17(3), 034037. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01263-3.

Pinho, P. F., Anjos, L. J., Rodrigues-Filho, S., Santos, D. V., & Toledo, P. M. (2020). Projections of Brazilian biomes resilience and socio-environmental risks to climate change. Sustainability in Debate, 11(3), 225-259. 

Wunderling, N., Staal, A., Sakschewski, B., Hirota, M., Tuinenburg, O. A., Donges, J. F., ... & Winkelmann, R. (2022). Recurrent droughts increase risk of cascading tipping events by outpacing adaptive capacities in the Amazon rainforest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(32), e2120777119.

Lawrence, D., & Vandecar, K. (2015). Effects of tropical deforestation on climate and agriculture. Nature Climate Change, 5(1), 27-36. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2430.

Boers, N., & Rypdal, K. (2021). Critical slowing down suggests that the western Greenland Ice Sheet is close to a tipping point. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(23), e2024192118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2024192118.

Feldmann, J., & Levermann, A. (2015). Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet after local destabilization of the Amundsen Basin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(46), 14191-14196. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1512482112.

Rosier, S. H. R., Gudmundsson, G. H., & Green, J. A. M. (2021). The tipping points and early warning indicators for Pine Island Glacier, West Antarctica. The Cryosphere, 15(3), 1501-1516. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-1501-2021.

Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin III, F. S., Lambin, E. F., ... & Nykvist, B. (2009). Planetary boundaries: exploring the safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and Society, 14(2). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-03180-140232.

Gupta, J., Liverman, D., Prodani, K., Aldunce, P., Bai, X., Broadgate, W., ... & Verburg, P. H. (2023). Earth system justice needed to identify and live within Earth system boundaries. Nature Sustainability, 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-023-01064-1. 

Mengel, M., Levermann, A., & Born, A. (2012). Enhanced Atlantic subpolar gyre variability through baroclinic threshold in a coarse resolution model. Earth System Dynamics, 3(2), 189-197. https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-3-189-2012.

Swingedouw, D., Bily, A., Esquerdo, C., Borchert, L. F., Sgubin, G., Mignot, J., & Menary, M. (2021). On the risk of abrupt changes in the North Atlantic subpolar gyre in CMIP6 models. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1504(1), 187-201.

Franzke, C. L., Ciullo, A., Gilmore, E. A., Matias, D. M., Nagabhatla, N., Orlov, A., ... & Sillmann, J. (2022). Perspectives on tipping points in integrated models of the natural and human Earth system: Cascading effects and telecoupling. Environmental Research Letters, 17(1), 015004.

Ciemer, C., Winkelmann, R., Kurths, J., & Boers, N. (2021). Impact of an AMOC weakening on the stability of the southern Amazon rainforest. The European Physical Journal Special Topics, 230(14), 3065-3073.
Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner's Dilemma: John von Neumann, Game Theory, and the Puzzle of the Bomb. Doubleday.

Schelling, T. C. (1978). Micromotives and Macrobehavior. W. W. Norton & Company.

Schelling, T. C. (1960). Strategies of Conflict. Harvard University Press.

Schelling, T. C. (1984). Choice and Consequence. Harvard University Press.

Gibbons, R., & Murphy, K. J. (1992). Optimal incentive contracts in the presence of career concerns: Theory and evidence. Journal of political Economy, 100(3), 468-505.
Schelling, T. C. (1984). Strategic commitment. In R. H. Coase (Ed.), Essays in Positive Economics (pp. 201-226). University of Chicago Press.

Schelling, T. C., & Halperin, M. H. (1961). Strategy and Arms Control. Pergamon Press.

Schelling, T. C. (1966). Arms and Influence. Yale University Press.

Jervis, R. (2006). American Foreign Policy in a New Era. Routledge.

Jervis, R. (1984). The Illogic of American Nuclear Strategy. Cornell University Press. 

Jervis, R. (1976). Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Princeton University Press.

Jervis, R. (1997). System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life. Princeton University Press.

Kissinger, H. A., Schmidt, E., & Huttenlocher, D. (2021). The age of AI: and our human future. Hachette UK.
McNamara, R. S. (1968). The Essence of Security: Reflections in Office. Harper & Row.
Ostrom, E., Gardner, R., & Walker, J. (1994). Rules, Games, and Common-Pool Resources. University of Michigan Press.

Schoonover, R., Cavallo, C., & Caltabiano, I. (2021). The security threat that binds us: the unraveling of ecological and natural security and what the United States can do about it. The Converging Risks Lab, an institute of The Council on Strategic Risks. Washington, DC.

Chen, D. B., van der Beek, J., & Cloud, J. (2019). Hypothesis for a Risk Cost of Carbon: Revising the Externalities and Ethics of Climate Change. Understanding Risks and Uncertainties in Energy and Climate Policy: Multidisciplinary Methods and Tools for a Low Carbon Society, 183-222.
Chen, D. (2018). Utility of the blockchain for climate mitigation. The Journal of The British Blockchain Association, 1(1).

Yudkowsky, E. (n.d.). Agi ruin: A list of lethalities. LessWrong. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/uMQ3cqWDPHhjtiesc/agi-ruin-a-list-of-lethalities

Anderies, J. M., Janssen, M. A., & Ostrom, E. (2004). A framework to analyze the robustness of social-ecological systems from an institutional perspective. Ecology and society, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-00610-090118.

Battersby, S. (2017). Can humankind escape the tragedy of the commons?. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1), 7-10. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1619877114

Danilovic, V. (2002). When the Stakes Are High: Deterrence and Conflict among Major Powers. University of Michigan Press. https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.16953

Deudney, D. (1983). Whole Earth Security: A Geopolitics of Peace. Worldwatch Paper 55. Worldwatch Institute.
Dietz, T., Ostrom, E., & Stern, P. C. (2003). The struggle to govern the commons. Science, 302(5652), 1907-1912. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015

Finch, J. P., & Steene, S. (2011). Finding Space in Deterrence: Toward a General Framework for “Space Deterrence”. Strategic Studies Quarterly, 5(4), 10-17.

Jervis, R. (2002). Mutual assured destruction. Foreign Policy, (133), 40. https://doi.org/10.2307/3183553.
Joyce, A. A. (1989). The nuclear arms race: An evolutionary perspective. Politics and the Life Sciences, 7(2), 186-202. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0730938400004263

Landsberger, M., & Tsirelson, B. (2003). Bayesian Nash equilibrium; a statistical test of the hypothesis.
Sagan, S. D. (1994). The perils of proliferation: Organization theory, deterrence theory, and the spread of nuclear weapons. International Security, 18(4), 66-107. https://doi.org/10.2307/2539178

Scharre, P. (2021). Debunking The AI Arms Race Theory. Texas National Security Review, 4(3), 122–132.

Sokolski, H. D. (Ed.). (2004). Getting MAD: a nuclear mutual assured destruction, its origins and practice. Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War College.

Talbot, B. J. (2020). Getting Deterrence Right. Journal of Strategic Security, 13(1), 26-40. https://doi.org/10.5038/1944-0472.13.1.1748
Wallace, M. D. (1979). Arms races and escalation: Some new evidence. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 23(1), 3-16. https://doi.org/10.1177/002200277902300101

Bauwens, M., & Jandrić, P. (2021). The seeds of the commons: Peer-to-peer alternatives for planetary survival and justice. Postdigital Science and Education, 3, 575-591.

Homer-Dixon, T. (1999). Environment, Scarcity, and Violence. Princeton University Press.

Homer-Dixon, T. (2000). The Ingenuity Gap. Knopf.

Homer-Dixon, T. (2006). The Upside of Down: Catastrophe, Creativity, and the Renewal of Civilization. Island Press.

Homer-Dixon, T. (2020). Commanding Hope: The Power We Have to Renew a World in Peril. Knopf Canada.
https://ourworldindata.org/war-and-peace

Davey, T. (2022, October 28). Benefits & Risks of Biotechnology. Future of Life Institute. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://futureoflife.org/biotech/benefits-risks-biotechnology/.

Calvo, R. A., Deterding, S., Flick, C., Lütge, C., Powell, A., & Vold, K. V. (2022). After COVID-19: Crises, Ethics, and Socio-Technical Change. IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society, 3(4), 248-251.

Bonaci, T., Michael, K., Rivas, P., Robertson, L. J., & Zimmer, M. (2022). Emerging Technologies, Evolving Threats: Next-Generation Security Challenges. IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society, 3(3), 155-162.

Russell, S., Aguirre, A., Javorsky, E., & Tegmark, M. (2022, July 12). Lethal autonomous weapons exist; they must be banned. IEEE Spectrum. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://spectrum.ieee.org/lethal-autonomous-weapons-exist-they-must-be-banned#toggle-gdpr.

Scharre, P. (2018). Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the Future of War. W. W. Norton & Company.

Brose, C. (2020). Kill Chain: Defending America in the Future of High-Tech Warfare. Hachette Books.

Knake, R., & Clarke, R. (2019). The Fifth Domain: Defending Our Country, Our Companies, and Ourselves in the Age of Cyber Threats. Penguin Press.

Kaplan, F. (2016). Dark Territory: The Secret History of Cyber War. Simon & Schuster.
Greenberg, A. (2019). Sandworm: A New Era of Cyberwar and the Hunt for the Kremlin's Most Dangerous Hackers. Doubleday.

Hanson, R. (2018, November 16). World Government Risks Collective Suicide. Overcoming Bias. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/11/world-government-risks-collective-suicide.html. 

Ord, T. (2020). The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. Hachette Books.

Zeihan, P. (2022). The End of the World is Just the Beginning. Harper Business.
The Verification Research, training and information centre. Vertic. (2023, January 18). Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://www.vertic.org/. 

Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center. (2006). Remote Sensing and Environmental Treaties. Retrieved from https://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/rs-treaties/

Dorn, W. H. (1987). Peace-keeping satellites: the case for international surveillance and verification (Vol. 10, No. 5). Dundas, Ont.: Peace Research Institute-Dundas. 

Dorn, A. W. (2011). Keeping watch: Monitoring, technology and innovation in UN peace operations (p. 209). Tokyo: United Nations University Press.

Avtar, R., Aggarwal, R., Kharrazi, A., Kumar, P., & Kurniawan, T. A. (2020). Utilizing geospatial information to implement SDGs and monitor their Progress. Environmental monitoring and assessment, 192, 1-21.

Avtar, R., Komolafe, A. A., Kouser, A., Singh, D., Yunus, A. P., Dou, J., ... & Kurniawan, T. A. (2020). Assessing sustainable development prospects through remote sensing: A review. Remote sensing applications: Society and environment, 20, 100402.

Avtar, R., Kouser, A., Kumar, A., Singh, D., Misra, P., Gupta, A., ... & Besse Rimba, A. (2021). Remote sensing for international peace and security: Its role and implications. Remote Sensing, 13(3), 439.

Deudney, D. (2020). Dark skies: Space expansionism, planetary geopolitics, and the ends of humanity. Oxford University Press, USA.

Gain Forest. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.gainforest.com/

United Nations Operational Satellite Applications Programme. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.unitar.org/unosat/

The Geospatial Technology and Human Rights program at the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.aaas.org/programs/geospatial-technology-and-human-rights
Hettling, J. K. (2003). The use of remote sensing satellites for verification in international law. Space Policy, 19(1), 33-39.

Kroker, P. (2015). Satellite Imagery As Evidence For International Crimes.' coalitionfortheicc.org.

Kroker, P. (2014). Emerging issues facing the use of remote sensing evidence for international criminal justice. Harvard Humanitarian Initiative. https://hhi. harvard. edu/publications/emerging-issues-facing-use-remote-sensing-evidence-international-criminal-justice-0.

Marx, A., & Goward, S. (2013). Remote sensing in human rights and international humanitarian law monitoring: Concepts and methods. Geographical Review, 103(1), 100-111.

Wang, B., Raymond, N., Gould, G., & Baker, I. (2013). Problems from hell, solution in the heavens?: identifying obstacles and opportunities for employing geospatial technologies to document and mitigate mass atrocities. Stability: International Journal of Security and Development, 2(3).

Teorell, J., Sundström, A., Holmberg, S., Rothstein, B., Alvarado Pachon, N., & Dalli, C. M. (2022). The Quality of Government Standard Dataset, version Jan22. University of Gothenburg: The Quality of Government Institute, 10.

Bågenholm, A., Bauhr, M., Grimes, M., & Rothstein, B. (Eds.). (2021). The Oxford handbook of the quality of government. Oxford University Press.

Rothstein, B. (2021). Controlling corruption: The social contract approach. Oxford University Press, USA.

Rothstein, Bo, and Jan Teorell. (2015). Causes of Corruption. Routledge Handbook of Political Corruption, Routledge, London. 

Heywood, P. (Ed.). (2015). Routledge handbook of political corruption (p. 137). Abingdon: Routledge.

Holmberg, S., & Rothstein, B. (2015). Good societies need good leaders on a leash. Elites, institutions and the quality of government, 13-32.

Holmberg, S., & Rothstein, B. (2017). Trusting other people. Journal of public affairs, 17(1-2), e1645. https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.1645.

Rothstein, B. (2009). Preventing Markets from Self-Destruction: The Quality of Government Factor The Quality of Government Institute, University of Gothenburg. Working paper 2009: 2.

Rothstein, B. (2018). Fighting systemic corruption: The indirect strategy. Daedalus, 147(3), 35-49. https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_00501

Charron, N., & Rothstein, B. (2018). Regions of trust and distrust: how good institutions can foster social cohesion. In Bridging the Prosperity Gap in the EU (pp. 220-242). Edward Elgar Publishing.

Rothstein, B. (2019). Epistemic democracy and the quality of government. European Politics and Society, 20(1), 16-31. https://doi.org/10.1080/23745118.2018.1515873.

Persson, A., Rothstein, B., & Teorell, J. (2019). Getting the basic nature of systemic corruption right: A reply to Marquette and Peiffer. Governance, 32(4), 799-810. https://doi.org/10.1111/gove.12403.

Renn, O. (n.d.). Selected publications. Retrieved from https://www.iass-potsdam.de/en/people/ortwin-renn#m-tab-0-selectedpublications

Renn, O. (2022). The Systemic Risk Perspective: Social Perception of Uncertainty and Tipping Points. Strategies for Sustainability of the Earth System, 15-31.. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74458-8_2
Schweizer, P. J., Goble, R., & Renn, O. (2022). Social perception of systemic risks. Risk analysis, 42(7), 1455-1471.


Renn, O., Beier, G., & Matthess, M. (2022). Risks and opportunities of the digital transformation. towards more inclusive and sustainable international cooperation and development. IDEES magazine (Centre d'estudis de temes contemporanis (CETC))-Rethinking Development Cooperation to Meet the Challenges of the 21st Century, 12.05. 2022, 2021(55).
Renn, O. (1992). Risk communication: Towards a rational discourse with the public. Journal of hazardous materials, 29(3), 465-519.
Homer-Dixon, T., Renn, O., Rockstrom, J., Donges, J. F., & Janzwood, S. (2021). A call for an international research program on the risk of a global polycrisis. Available at SSRN 4058592.
Renn, O. (2021). Transdisciplinarity: Synthesis towards a modular approach. Futures, 130, 102744.
Lawrence, M. G., Williams, S., Nanz, P., & Renn, O. (2022). Characteristics, potentials, and challenges of transdisciplinary research. One Earth, 5(1), 44-61.
Pitt, J. (n.d.). Publications. Retrieved from https://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/j.pitt/publications.html
Pitt, J., Schaumeier, J., & Artikis, A. (2012). Axiomatization of socio-economic principles for self-organizing institutions: Concepts, experiments and challenges. ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems (TAAS), 7(4), 1-39. https://doi.org/10.1145/2382570.2382575.
Sengupta, A., Cranefield, S., & Pitt, J. (2022, October). Solving social dilemmas by reasoning about expectations. In Coordination, Organizations, Institutions, Norms, and Ethics for Governance of Multi-Agent Systems XIV: International Workshop, COINE 2021, London, UK, May 3, 2021, Revised Selected Papers (pp. 143-159). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Pitt, J., Whittington, S., & Sweeting, J. (2022). Novelty search and the hardness of approximating optimization problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12896. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12896
Pitt, J., Michael, K., & Abbas, R. (2021). Public interest technology, citizen assemblies, and performative governance. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 40(3), 6-9.
Pitt, J. (2021). Knowing the unknowable: Soft laws and hard decisions. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 40(4), 5-9.
Pitt, S., van Meelis Lacey, M., Scaife, E., & Pitt, J. (2021). No app is an island: Collective action and sustainable development goal-sensitive design.
Pitt, J. (2021). Self-Organising Multi-Agent Systems: Algorithmic Foundations of Cyber-Anarcho-Socialism. World Scientific. https://doi.org/10.1142/q0307
Srivathsan, S., Cranefield, S., & Pitt, J. (2022, October). A bayesian model of information cascades. In Coordination, Organizations, Institutions, Norms, and Ethics for Governance of Multi-Agent Systems XIV: International Workshop, COINE 2021, London, UK, May 3, 2021, Revised Selected Papers(pp. 97-110). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Marsh, S., Atele-Williams, T., Basu, A., Dwyer, N., Lewis, P. R., Miller-Bakewell, H., & Pitt, J. (2020). Thinking about trust: People, process, and place. Patterns, 1(3), 100039.
Valetto, G., Bucchiarone, A., Geihs, K., Buscher, M., Petersen, K., Nowak, A., ... & Bernardeschi, P. (2015, September). All together now: Collective intelligence for computer-supported collective action. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems Workshops (pp. 13-18). IEEE.
Pitt, J., Busquets, D., & Riveret, R. (2013, September). Formal models of social processes: The pursuit of computational justice in self-organising multi-agent systems. In 2013 IEEE 7th International Conference on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems (pp. 269-270). IEEE.
Fuentes, M. A. (n.d.). Work. Retrieved from https://sites.google.com/site/miguelfuentessite/work
Furtado, B. A., Sakowski, P. A. M. E., & Tóvolli, M. H. E. (2015). Modeling complex systems for public policies.
Rodriguez-Sickert, C., Cosmelli, D., Claro, F., & Fuentes, M. A. (2015). The underlying social dynamics of paradigm shifts. PloS one, 10(9), e0138172.
Cárdenas, J. P., Vidal, G., Urbina, C., Olivares, G., Rodrigo, P., & Fuentes, M. (2018). Social crises: signatures of complexity in a fast-growing economy. Complexity, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/9343451.
Cárdenas, J. P., Vidal, G., Urbina, C., Olivares, G., & Fuentes, M. A. (2018). Social crises. A network model approach. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 505, 35-48. 
Cárdenas, J. P., Urbina, C., Vidal, G., Olivares, G., & Fuentes, M. (2022). Digital Outburst: The Expression of a Social Crisis through Online Social Networks. Complexity, 2022.
Fuentes, M. A., Tessone, C. J., & Furtado, B. A. (2019). Public policy modeling and applications. Complexity, 2019.
Turchin, P., Currie, T. E., Whitehouse, H., François, P., Feeney, K., Mullins, D., ... & Spencer, C. (2018). Quantitative historical analysis uncovers a single dimension of complexity that structures global variation in human social organization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(2), E144-E151. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1708800115
Currie, T. E., Turchin, P., Whitehouse, H., François, P., Feeney, K. C., Mullins, D., ... & Spencer, C. (2021). Seshat history of the Axial Age project: Testing hypotheses about moralizing gods, prosociality, and complex societies. Science Advances, 7(42), eabn3517. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abn3517
Turchin, P., Hoyer, D., Korotayev, A., Kradin, N., Nefedov, S., Feinman, G., ... & Whitehouse, H. (2021). Rise of the war machines: Charting the evolution of military technologies from the Neolithic to the Industrial Revolution. PloS one, 16(10), e0258161. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0258161.
Seshat Global History Databank. (n.d.). Consequences of crisis. Retrieved from https://seshatdatabank.info/seshat-projects/crisis-and-recovery-database/consequences-of-crisis/
Center for Strategic and International Studies. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.csis.org/
Allen, G. (2022). Choking China's access to the future of AI. Center for Strategic and International Studies. Retrieved from https://www.csis.org/analysis/choking-chinas-access-future-ai.
Sutter, K., and Casey, C. (2020). Global Economic Effects of Covid-19 (Report No. IF11627). Retrieved from https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11627.
Thomson Reuters. (2022, June 29). Chip exports to Russia plunged by 90% after curbs-U.S. official. Reuters. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://www.reuters.com/technology/chip-exports-russia-plunged-by-90-after-curbs-us-official-2022-06-29/. 
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed. Yale University Press.
Hagens, N. (2021). Reality blind: Three dozen reasons civilization has become blind to its energy, ecology, and economic predicament. The Post Carbon Institute.
Harris, M. (1979). Cultural materialism: The struggle for a science of culture. Random House.
Bratton, B. H. (2016). The stack: On software and sovereignty. MIT Press.
Habermas, J. (1975). Legitimation crisis. Beacon Press.
Wallerstein, I. (2004). World-systems analysis: An introduction. Duke University Press.
West, G. (2017). Scale: The universal laws of growth, innovation, sustainability, and the pace of life in organisms, cities, economies, and companies. Penguin Books.
Capra, F., & Luisi, P. L. (2014). The systems view of life: A unifying vision. Cambridge University Press.
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J., & Behrens, W. W. (1972). The limits to growth. Universe Books.
Fuller, R. B. (1981). Critical path. St. Martin's Press.
Deudney, D. (2007). Bounding power: Republican security theory from the polis to the global village. Princeton University Press.
Turchin, P. (2016). Ages of discord: A structural-demographic analysis of American history. Beresta Books.
Tainter, J. A. (1988). The collapse of complex societies. Cambridge University Press.
Baudrillard, J. (1994). Simulacra and simulation. University of Michigan Press.
Schneier, B. (2012). Liars and outliers: Enabling the trust that society needs to thrive. John Wiley & Sons.
Rothstein, B. (2005). Social traps and the problem of trust. Cambridge University Press.
Osinga, F. P. B. (2007). Science, strategy and war: The strategic theory of John Boyd. Routledge.
Alexander, S. (2021, April 3). Meditations on moloch. Slate Star Codex. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/30/meditations-on-moloch/.
Ricon, J. L. (n.d.). Slaying alexander's moloch. Nintil. Retrieved March 31, 2023, from https://nintil.com/slaying-alexanders-moloch/.
Zaidi, W., & Dafoe, A. (2021). International Control of Powerful Technology: Lessons from the Baruch Plan for Nuclear Weapons.
Hadfield-Menell, D., & Hadfield, G. K. (2019, January). Incomplete contracting and AI alignment. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (pp. 417-422).
Stern, P. (2011). Design principles for global commons: Natural resources and emerging technologies. International Journal of the Commons, 5(2). https://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.305
Kemp, L., & Rhodes, C. (2020). The cartography of global catastrophic governance. Global Challenges Foundation.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of management review, 14(1), 57-74. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1989.4279003.
Platt, J. (1973). Social traps. American psychologist, 28(8), 641. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0035723.
Costanza, R. (1984). Review essay: the nuclear arms race and the theory of social traps. Journal of Peace Research, 21(1), 79-86. https://doi.org/10.1177/002234338402100107
Costanza, R. (1987). Social traps and environmental policy. BioScience, 37(6), 407-412.
Rittel, H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sciences, 4(2), 155-169. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01405730.
Bostrom, N., & Cirkovic, M. M. (Eds.). (2008). Global catastrophic risks. Oxford University Press.
Scholnikoff, E. B., & De la Mothe, J. (2001). International governance in a technological age. Science, Technology and Governance, Continuum Press, New York.
Wright, R. (2000). Nonzero: The logic of human destiny. Vintage Books.
Deudney, D. H. (2010). Bounding power: Republican security theory from the polis to the global village. Princeton University Press.
Peterson, C., Duettmann, A., Miller, M. (2022). Gaming the Future. Foresight Institute Press.
Hayek, F. A. (2009). The use of knowledge in society. In Knowledge management and organizational design (pp. 7-15). Routledge.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups. Harvard University Press.
Sandler, T. (2015). Collective action: fifty years later. Public Choice, 164(3-4), 195-216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-015-0252-0
Jervis, R. (1988). Realism, game theory, and cooperation. World politics, 40(3), 317-349. https://doi.org/10.2307/2010216
Von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton University Press.
Kuhn, S. (2019, April 2). Prisoner's dilemma. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved April 1, 2023, from https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2019/entries/prisoner-dilemma/. 
Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. Basic Books.
Bendor, J., & Swistak, P. (1997). The evolutionary stability of cooperation. American Political Science Review, 91(2), 290-307.
Khadjavi, M., & Lange, A. (2013). Prisoners and their dilemma. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 92, 163-175.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2013.05.015.
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162(3859), 1243-1248. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.162.3859.1243.
Dietz, T., Ostrom, E., & Stern, P. C. (2003). The struggle to govern the commons. science, 302(5652), 1907-1912. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015.
MacMullen, R. (1988). Corruption and the decline of Rome. Yale University Press.
Bueno de Mesquita, B., Smith, A., Siverson, R. M., & Morrow, J. D. (2003). The logic of political survival. MIT Press.
Winner, L. (1986). The whale and the reactor: A search for limits in an age of high technology. University of Chicago Press.
Scholnikoff, E. B., & De la Mothe, J. (2001). International governance in a technological age. Science, Technology and Governance, Continuum Press, New York.
Mulder, K., & Hagens, N. J. (2008). Energy return on investment: toward a consistent framework. Ambio, 74-79.
Marmot, M., Friel, S., Bell, R., Houweling, T. A., & Taylor, S. (2008). Closing the gap in a generation: health equity through action on the social determinants of health. The lancet, 372(9650), 1661-1669.
How feedback loops are making the climate crisis worse. The Climate Reality Project. (2022, September 30). Retrieved April 1, 2023, from https://www.climaterealityproject.org/blog/how-feedback-loops-are-making-climate-crisis-worse.
Frederiksen, M. (2019, September 27). The shrinking Arctic ice is uncovering new business opportunities. World Economic Forum. Retrieved April 1, 2023, from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/09/4-ways-climate-change-is-opening-the-arctic-up-to-business/.
Henkin, L. (1979). How nations behave: Law and foreign policy. Columbia University Press.
Bederman, D. J., & Keitner, C. I. (2016). International law frameworks (4th ed.). Foundation Press.
Freedman, A., & Kramer, M. (2021, May 11). Satellites are ushering in a new era of environmental transparency. Axios. Retrieved April 1, 2023, from https://www.axios.com/2021/05/11/satellite-data-environmental-transparency.
Rozas, D., Tenorio-Fornés, A., & Hassan, S. (2021). Analysis of the potentials of blockchain for the governance of global digital commons. Frontiers in Blockchain, 15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2021.577680.
Tucker, J. B. (Ed.). (2012). Innovation, dual use, and security: Managing the risks of emerging biological and chemical technologies. MIT Press.
OpenAI. (2023). GPT-4 System Card. Retrieved March 15, 2023, from https://www.openai.com/gpt-4-system-card/.


—-----------------------—----------------------- —----------------------- —----------------------- —----------------------- 






 
sovereignty, international relations, and the myth of westphalia - https://www.jstor.org/stable/3078632 

two meanings of complex adaptative systems - https://davidsloanwilson.world/papers-and-studies/two-meanings-of-complex-adaptive-systems/

building the global seismographic network for nuclear test ban - https://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~richards/EARTHmat.html 

EROI research

  - https://www.energyflux.news/p/scraping-the-barrel
  - EROI of different fuels and implications for society - https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421513003856 
  - Nate EROI constistent framwork - https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18488548/ 
  - economics for the future - https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0921800919310067?token=EF40DD6D625BDDF73A661B6DD9BA3F33DA7C35B7ADAE69F1F9A2BA81F5192C31F010BB977D7762C2056745F300BAFE5D&originRegion=us-east-1&originCreation=20220919182307 


Pace layering: how complex systems learn - https://jods.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/issue3-brand/release/2 


At risk - natural hazards, vulnerabilities  - https://www.preventionweb.net/files/670_72351.pdf 


Unraveling the complexities of disaster management - https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953612005953 


Use of CAS for modeling global change - https://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/handle/10535/2630/use_of_complex.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 


Organizing theories of disaster into CAS framework - 
mckinsey global institution: on the cusp of a new era https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/risk/our%20insights/on%20the%20cusp%20of%20a%20new%20era/mgi-on-the-cusp-of-a-new-era.pdf 

Opportunities and risks of foundations ml models - https://arxiv.org/pdf/2108.07258.pdf 


Large language models improving recursively - https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11610 


the case for degrowth - https://www.wiley.com/en-gb/The+Case+for+Degrowth-p-9781509535620


windfall clause - https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/windfallclause/


at last an ai risk rpolicy -https://www.slowboring.com/p/at-last-an-ai-existential-risk-policy?utm_source=email


what's long-term about longtermism - https://www.slowboring.com/p/whats-long-term-about-longtermism




actionable guidance for high-consequence AI risk management: standards addressing AI catastrophic risks - - https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.08966 




CIP whitepaper - https://static1.squarespace.com/static/631d02b2dfa9482a32db47ec/t/63e01fcbf73bb003a722792f/1675632588509/CIP+Whitepaper.pdf


cooperative AI - https://www.cooperativeai.com/


conceptualizing world-earth system resilience - wolfram barfuss -- https://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.04471.pdf


vincent conitzer & ai agents may cooperate better if they don't resemble us - https://www.cooperativeai.com/seminars/ai-agents-may-cooperate-better-if-they-dont-resemble-us


challenges and approaches to scaling the global commons - https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2021.578721/full


assessing the drivers of GCRs (global challenges foundation) - https://globalchallenges.org/assessing-the-drivers-of-global-catastrophic-risk-final/ 




the model is the message - https://www.noemamag.com/the-model-is-the-message/

Collapse - https://muse.jhu.edu/book/43700/#:~:text=In%20Beyond%20Collapse%3A%20Archaeological%20Perspectives,and%20reorganization%20of%20complex%20societies

Cser science and policy interface 
https://www.cser.ac.uk/media/uploads/files/UCA970_Report_on_the_challenge_of_GCRs_v10_AW_FOR_EMAILDOWNLOAD.pdf



Comprehensive list of arms control agreements - https://www.armscontrol.org/treaties 
John greer ai apocalypse https://www.johncgreer.com/the-apocalypse-is-coming/
Bretton woods project https://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/
Human development report UN
Constitutional economics - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitutional_economics#Hayek 
Buchanan nobel lecture - https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1986/buchanan/lecture/ 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perverse_incentive


https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-03-26/goodhart-s-law-rules-the-modern-world-here-are-nine-examples#xj4y7vzkg


https://towardsdatascience.com/unintended-consequences-and-goodharts-law-68d60a94705c


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart%27s_law
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-review/article/abs/improving-ratings-audit-in-the-british-university-system/FC2EE640C0C44E3DB87C29FB666E9AAB
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afghanistan_Papers
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_11_56


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_choice


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Externality


https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/stantcheva/files/lecture7.pdf


https://scholar.harvard.edu/stantcheva/home


https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/stantcheva/files/zero_sum_us_political_divides.pdf


https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/pdf/helbling-externalities.pdf

Israel strikes defense compound in iran - https://www.wsj.com/articles/israel-strikes-iran-amid-new-international-push-to-contain-tehran-11675004979 

Intelligence explosion microeconomics - https://intelligence.org/files/IEM.pdf 

Ai alignment why its’ hard and where to start - https://intelligence.org/2016/12/28/ai-alignment-why-its-hard-and-where-to-start/ 

Complex value systems are required to realize valuable futures - ​​https://intelligence.org/files/ComplexValues.pdf 

Bancor - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bancor 

Adam tooze’ crash - https://www.amazon.com/Crashed-Decade-Financial-Crises-Changed/dp/0670024937 

Special drawing rights - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_drawing_rights 

Triffin dilemma - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triffin_dilemma 

Marshall plan - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_Plan 

Labour under the marshall plan - https://archive.org/details/labourundermarsh0000care 

Nixon shock - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nixon_shock 

The nixon shock - https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-08-04/the-nixon-shock#xj4y7vzkg 

https://web.archive.org/web/20150916005310/http://www.federalreservehistory.org/Events/DetailView/28 

Exorbitatn privilege - rise and fall of the dollar  - https://books.google.com/books?id=TIlpAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA4#v=onepage&q&f=false 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exorbitant_privilege 

Shrinking gold supply - https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/center/mm/eng/sc_sub_3.htm 

How we got here - the 70s https://books.google.com/books?id=hNsSttYnmxsC&pg=PA296#v=onepage&q&f=false 

Nixon’s address “the challenge of peace” - https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-the-nation-outlining-new-economic-policy-the-challenge-peace 

The collapse of the bretton woods fixed exchange rate system - https://www.nber.org/system/files/chapters/c6876/c6876.pdf 

A retrospective on teh bretton woods system - ​​https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/R/bo3632896.html 

Zhou xiaochuan: reform the international monetary system - https://www.bis.org/review/r090402c.pdf 

China’s central bank chief makes reform appeal - https://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2114601/chinas-central-bank-chief-makes-reform-appeal-please-free-yuan 

Recommendation of the commision of experts of the preseitn of the general assembly on reforms of the IMF – https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/653789?ln=en#record-files-collapse-header 

Commission on the measurement of economic performance and social progress - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commission_on_the_Measurement_of_Economic_Performance_and_Social_Progress 
The measurement of economic performance and social progress revisited - https://web.archive.org/web/20140211022119/http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/documents/overview-eng.pdf 

International monetary fund - reserve accumulation and international monetary stability - https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/041310.pdf 

Bretton woods conference - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_Conference 

The world bank since bretton woods - https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/306851505231641661/the-world-bank-since-bretton-woods-the-origins-policies-operations-and-impact-of-the-international-bank-for-reconstruction-and-development-and-the-other-members-of-the-world-bank-group 

Bretton woods transcripts – https://www.amazon.com/Bretton-Woods-Transcripts-Kurt-Schuler/dp/1941801013 

General agreement on tariffs and trade - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Agreement_on_Tariffs_and_Trade 

John maynard keynes and international relations: economic paths to war and peace – https://www.amazon.com/John-Maynard-Keynes-International-Relations/dp/0198292368 

Federal reserve, creation of the bertton woods system - https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/bretton-woods-created 

Bretton woods system - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system 

Keynes the economic consequences of the peace – https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Economic_Consequences_of_the_Peace 





****


***


How it feels to have your mind hacked by an AI - https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9kQFure4hdDmRBNdH/how-it-feels-to-have-your-mind-hacked-by-an-ai 

Gradient Dissent - better without AI - https://betterwithout.ai/gradient-dissent 
Artificial neurons considered harmful - https://betterwithout.ai/artificial-neurons-considered-harmful 
A better future without backpropagation - https://betterwithout.ai/beyond-backprop 
How to understand AI systems - https://betterwithout.ai/understanding-AI-systems 

Language theoretic security - http://langsec.org/ 
Capability-based security - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability-based_security 
Capability hardware enhanced RISC instructions - https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/security/ctsrd/cheri/ 
Limits to reasoning, reduction, and simulation - https://betterwithout.ai/limits-to-AI-simulation#fn_Lowe_Shrager 


Here’s why we’re not prepared for the next wave of biotech innovation - https://www.statnews.com/2022/11/03/why-were-not-prepared-for-next-wave-of-biotech-innovation/ 


Alignment research center - https://alignment.org/


Towards a philosophy of safety - https://rootsofprogress.org/towards-a-philosophy-of-safety 




Yudokowsy’s reply to chollet on intelligence explosion - https://intelligence.org/2017/12/06/chollet/ 
Pugwash conferences on science and world affairs - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pugwash_Conferences_on_Science_and_World_Affairs 


Russell- einstein manifesto - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russell%E2%80%93Einstein_Manifesto 


Perhaps it is a bad thing that the world’s leading AI companies cannot control their AIs - https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/perhaps-it-is-a-bad-thing-that-the 


My current summary of the state of AI risk - https://musingsandroughdrafts.com/2023/02/17/my-current-summary-of-the-state-of-ai-risk/ 


Most people start with the same few bad ideas (ai alignment) - https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Afdohjyt6gESu4ANf/most-people-start-with-the-same-few-bad-ideas 


Worlds where iterative design fails - https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/xFotXGEotcKouifky/worlds-where-iterative-design-fails#Why_RLHF_Is_Uniquely_Terrible 


Redwood research AI alignment - https://www.redwoodresearch.org/ 


Here’s what it would take to slow down AI - https://www.jonstokes.com/p/heres-what-it-would-take-to-slow 


Is it time to hit pause on AI - https://garymarcus.substack.com/p/is-it-time-to-hit-the-pause-button 
Preventing regulatory capture - https://www.tobinproject.org/books-papers/preventing-capture 
The alignment problem from a deep learning perspective - https://arxiv.org/pdf/2209.00626.pdf 
Inadequate equilibria - https://equilibriabook.com/ 
Fine tuning language models to find agreement among diverse preferences - https://openreview.net/forum?id=G5ADoRKiTyJ 
Categorizing variants of goodhart’s law - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.04585.pdf 
Building less flawed metrics - https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/98288/5/MPRA_paper_98288.pdf 
Impossibility and uncertainty theorems in AI alignment - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.00064.pdf 
Reliance on metrics is a fundamental problem for AI - https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.08512.pdf  
history of international law - https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/43488
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_law
international organizations -- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_organization 
prescott bush funding the third reich - https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/25/usa.secondworldwar 






***
global reserve currency histories 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_currency
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency
history of the united nations  https://www.un.org/en/about-us/history-of-the-un 
mutually assured destruction - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_assured_destruction
The threat of synthetic bioterror demands even further action and leadership - EA Forum forum.effectivealtruism.com 

Complete genomes: Ebolavirus ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Viruses and Bioterrorism - PMC ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Next generation agents (synthetic agents): Emerging threats and challenges in detection, protection, and decontamination - PMC ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 

A vaccine printer at your local drugstore? We are making it happen - Telesis Bio telesisbio.com
Printing vaccines at the pharmacy or at home will be the way of the future | Ars Technica arstechnica.com

Bioterrorism interpol.int
Bioterrorism: Applying the Lens of COVID-19 - Report 2021 london.gov.uk
Toxic Terror mitpress.mit.edu
Overstatements and Understatements in the Debate on Synthetic Biology, Bioterrorism and Ethics frontiersin.org
The myths (and realities) of synthetic bioweapons - Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists thebulletin.org
Impact of Synthetic Genomics on the Threat of Bioterrorism with Viral Agents dspace.mit.edu
Synthetic Viral Genomics: Risks and Benefits for Science and Society Ralph S. Baric University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill jcvi.org
Engineered Pathogens and Unnatural Biological Weapons: The Future Threat of Synthetic Biology ctc.westpoint.edu

Using Blockchain to Store Illicit or Copyrighted Content: To Censor or Validate? Beincrypto.com
The risks and unintended consequences of blockchain - https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/risks-and-unintended-consequences-blockchain 
Zero knowledge proofs and nuclear disarmament - https://academy.affinidi.com/applications-of-zero-knowledge-proofs-part-2-nuclear-disarmament-abb5c879a7c5 
https://www.science.org/content/article/nuclear-physicists-may-have-just-invented-zero-knowledge-warhead-inspection-system 
https://news.mit.edu/2018/nuclear-weapons-isotope-detection-method-0419 
https://mae.princeton.edu/about-mae/spotlight/zero-knowledge-proof-verification-without-information 
Conflict vs mistake theory - https://slatestarcodex.com/ 
Hanlon’s razor - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanlon%27s_razor#:~:text=Hanlon's%20razor%20is%20an%20adage,unlikely%20explanations%20for%20human%20behavior. 
US Intelligence Community's Annual Threat Assessment 2022 Report Summary Report
And for 2023
National Intelligence Council's Global Trends 2040: A More Contested World Summary
The yuan is an unlikely winner from russia’s growing isolation - https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-03-14/russia-ukraine-the-yuan-is-an-unlikely-winner-from-moscow-s-isolation?leadSource=uverify%20wall 
Saudi arabia considers accepting yuan instead of dollars for chinese oil sales - https://www.wsj.com/articles/saudi-arabia-considers-accepting-yuan-instead-of-dollars-for-chinese-oil-sales-11647351541 
Nonstate actors, warfare, entropy - https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/the-new-era-of-non-state-actors-warfare-and-entropy 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344848497_The_Rise_of_Non-State_Actors_in_Globalization_and_Democratization_Era_Terrorist_Group_versus_State_Actors 
Democracy in multipolar world - https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0305829809103232 
Governing Boring Apocolypse- 
The vulnerable world hypothesis - https://nickbostrom.com/papers/vulnerable.pdf 
The fragile world hypothesis - https://philpapers.org/archive/MANSFA-3.pdf 
assessing the drivers of GCRs (global challenges foundation) - https://globalchallenges.org/assessing-the-drivers-of-global-catastrophic-risk-final/ 
Ord’s the precipice 
Daniel deudney
Dark skies
Bounding power 
AI and the future of disinformation campaigns - georgetown 
Stanford university AI index report 2022- https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/2022-AI-Index-Report_Master.pdf 
Forecasting potential misuses of language models for disinformation campaigns - https://cyber.fsi.stanford.edu/news/forecasting-potential-misuses-language-models-disinformation-campaigns-and-how-reduce-risk 
Toward trustworthy AI development - https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07213 
Opportunities and risks of foundations ml models - https://arxiv.org/pdf/2108.07258.pdf 
history of AI research (2010 - -what’s the change ?)  https://ai.stanford.edu/~nilsson/QAI/qai.pdf 
decolonial AI theory : https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13347-020-00405-8 
moores law for everything https://moores.samaltman.com 
reframing superintelligence - comprehensive AI services as General intelligence https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Reframing_Superintelligence_FHI-TR-2019-1.1-1.pdf 
EFF AI Progress Measurement: https://www.eff.org/ai/metrics 
Artificial unintelligence: How computers misunderstand the world (Broussard) https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/artificial-unintelligence  
John greer ai apocalypse https://www.johncgreer.com/the-apocalypse-is-coming/
better without AI link: https://betterwithout.ai/
actionable guidance for high-consequence AI risk management: standards addressing AI catastrophic risks - - https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.08966 
ai could defeat all of us combined - https://www.cold-takes.com/ai-could-defeat-all-of-us-combined/
most important century series - https://www.cold-takes.com/most-important-century-series-roadmap/ 
anthropic constitutional AI - https://www.anthropic.com/constitutional.pdf
Artificial intelligence, strategic stability and nuclear risk
https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2020-06/artificial_intelligence_strategic_stability_and_nuclear_risk.pdf 
Large language models can self improve - https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11610 
What is chatgpt doing - https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/02/what-is-chatgpt-doing-and-why-does-it-work/ 
Forrest on AI risk - https://mflb.com/ai_alignment_1/single_post_psr.html#note3 & https://mflb.com/ai_alignment_1/index.html  
optimizing for interpretability in deep neural nets with tree regularization - https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/12558/26715 


meta-unsupervised-learning: supervised approach to unsupervised learning - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.09030.pdf 


finale doshi-velez - https://finale.seas.harvard.edu/ 


been kim - humam-centered AI - https://beenkim.github.io/ 


towards a rigrous science of interpretable ML - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.08608.pdf 




***

society-in-the-loop: programming the algorithmic social contract - https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8 


artificial intelligence, values, and alignment - https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11023-020-09539-2 
moral decision making frameworks for AI - https://users.cs.duke.edu/~conitzer/moralAAAI17.pdf 
Concrete problems in AI safety https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565 
Hanson yudokowsky debate - http://intelligence.org/files/AIFoomDebate.pdf 
ai superpowers - https://www.amazon.com/AI-Superpowers-China-Silicon-Valley/dp/0358105587/ref=asc_df_0358105587/?


t-minus ai - https://www.amazon.com/T-Minus-Humanitys-Countdown-Artificial-Intelligence/dp/1948836947

How to make ai trustworthy - https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/08/200827105937.htm 
Mit tech review - https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/02/24/1014369/10-breakthrough-technologies-2021/ 
Neuro-symbolic AI - https://mitibmwatsonailab.mit.edu/category/neuro-symbolic-ai/ 
Marcu,s, next decade in AI : four steps towards robust artificial intelligence - https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06177 
Language models are few-shot learners - https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165 
Darpa perspective on artificial intelligence - https://www.darpa.mil/attachments/AIFull.pdf 
Machine learning: high interest credit card of technical debt- https://research.google/pubs/pub43146/ 
Artificial intelligence history, developments, prospects - https://www.ll.mit.edu/sites/default/files/publication/doc/2021-03/Artificial%20Intelligence%20Short%20History%2C%20Present%20Developments%2C%20and%20Future%20Outlook%20-%20Final%20Report%20-%202021-03-16_0.pdf 
The AI stack: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/10635/2309483/The-AI-stack--a-blueprint-for-developing-and-deploying/10.1117/12.2309483.short 
Ai ethics framework for the intelligence community - https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/AI_Ethics_Framework_for_the_Intelligence_Community_10.pdf 
Artificial intelligence international competition and the balance of power - https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/65638/TNSR-Vol-1-Iss-3_Horowitz.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y 
Militarization of AI - https://stanleycenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/MilitarizationofAI-Russia.pdf 
DOD ethics of AI - https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2091996/dod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-intelligence/ 
Is China beating the US to AI supremacy - https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/2020-08/AISupremacy.pdf 
China’s new generation of artificial intelligence translation - https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/ 
Understanding China’s AI strategy - https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/understanding-chinas-ai-strategy 
Beijing’s New National Intelligence LAw - https://www.lawfareblog.com/beijings-new-national-intelligence-law-defense-offense  
Framework for AI risk - https://www.lawfareblog.com/thinking-about-risks-ai-accidents-misuse-and-structure 
UN ON AI The latest and first report on United Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence (AI) 2021 can be found here. As per the associated website, the report is characterized as an “interactive directory [and] highlights over 200 cases and AI projects run by the UN system, covering all 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) ranging from smart agriculture and food systems to transportation, financial services, healthcare and AI solutions to combat COVID-19. In this edition, 46 UN entities were contacted, 40 entities participated, and 226 projects have been presented.”
Eliezer yudkowsky - we’re all gonna die – https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gA1sNLL6yg4 
Minute 28 he describes super intelligence x-risk scenario 
Resources pulled from this:
Debate with chollet on intelligence explosion - https://intelligence.org/2017/12/06/chollet/ 
Redwood ai alignment research - https://www.redwoodresearch.org/ 
Paul christanio - https://paulfchristiano.com/ 
Kelsey piper - https://www.vox.com/authors/kelsey-piper 
NIST AI risk governance framework - https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework 
Quantifying Earth system interactions for sustainable food production via expert elicitation, Chrysafi et al. (2022)
Knowledge mapping of planetary boundaries based on bibliometric analysis, Chen et al. (2022)
Our future in the Anthropocene biosphere, Folke et al. (2021)
Agriculture production as a major driver of the Earth system exceeding planetary boundaries, Campbell et al. (2017)
The role of soil in defining planetary boundaries and the safe operating space for humanity, Kopittke et al. (2021)
Planetary boundaries at the intersection of Earth system law, science and governance: A state-of-the-art review, Kim & Kotze (2020)
Identifying Chemicals That Are Planetary Boundary Threats, MacLeod et al. (2014)
Towards a physically motivated planetary accounting framework, Barbosa et al. (2020)
Powering sustainable development within planetary boundaries, Algunabeit et al. (2019)
Integrating the planetary boundaries and global catastrophic risk paradigms, Baum & Handoh (2014)



Tipping points 
Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points, Armstrong-McKay et al. (2022)
Theoretical and paleoclimatic evidence for abrupt transitions in the Earth system, Boers et al. (2022)
Tipping Points in the Earth System, Mackie (2021)
Past abrupt changes, tipping points and cascading impacts in the Earth system, Brovkin et al. (2021)
The quiet crossing of ocean tipping points, Heinze et al. (2021)

Catastrophic Climate Change and Forest Tipping Points: Blind Spots in International Politics and Policy (2018)
Tipping elements of the Earth’s climate system, Lenton et al. (2008)
Perspectives on tipping points in integrated models of the natural and human Earth system: cascading effects and telecoupling, Franzke et al. (2022)
Interacting tipping elements increase risk of climate domino effects under global warming, Wunderling et al. (2021)
What do we mean, ‘tipping cascade’ Klose et al. (2021)
Deforestation triggering irreversible transition in Amazon hydrological cycle, Xu et al. (2022)

…


Projections of Brazilian biomes resilience and socio-environmental risks to climate change, Pinho et al. (2020)
Recurrent droughts increase risk of cascading tipping events by outpacing adaptive capacities in the Amazon rainforest, Wunderling et al. (2021)
Effects of tropical deforestation on climate and agriculture, Lawrence & Vandercar (2015)
Critical slowing down suggests that the western Greenland Ice Sheet is close to a tipping point, Boers & Rypdal (2021)
Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet after local destabilization of the Amundsen Basin Feldmann & Levermann (2015)
The tipping points and early warning indicators for Pine Island Glacier, West Antarctica
Rosier et al. (2021)
Rockström, Johan, et al. "Planetary boundaries: exploring the safe operating space for humanity." Ecology and society 14.2 (2009).
Earth systems justice - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-023-01064-1 


Enhanced Atlantic subpolar gyre variability through baroclinic threshold in a coarse resolution model, Mengel et al. (2012)



** 
On the risk of abrupt changes in the North Atlantic subpolar gyre in CMIP6 models, Swingedouw et al. (2021)
Perspectives on tipping points in integrated models of the natural and human Earth system: cascading effects and telecoupling, Franzke et al. (2022)
Impact of an AMOC weakening on the stability of the southern Amazon rainforest, Ciemer et al. (2021)





***

Thomas homer dixon 
environment , scarcity, violence 
Ingenuity gap
The upside of down 
Commanding hope 

delay, detect, defend - thousands can release new pandemics -- https://dam.gcsp.ch/files/doc/gcsp-geneva-paper-29-22  
https://futureoflife.org/background/benefits-risks-biotechnology/ 
current edition on emerging risks of tech - https://technologyandsociety.org/transactions/current-edition/ 
next generation security challenges - https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9889776  
BISMARCK ON DRONES
https://spectrum.ieee.org/lethal-autonomous-weapons-exist-they-must-be-banned#toggle-gdpr
army of none - https://www.amazon.com/Army-None-Autonomous-Weapons-Future/dp/0393608980
Autonomous weapons are new territory for arms races and therefore a new semi-precedented MPT – particularly cause it’s post nuclear 
Exampels 
kill chain - https://www.amazon.com/Kill-Chain-Defending-America-High-Tech/dp/031653353X 
Us perspective of new warfare given tech – security theory and examples 
the fifth domain- https://www.amazon.com/Fifth-Domain-Defending-Companies-Ourselves/dp/052556196X
Cyber security defense 


dark territory - https://www.amazon.com/Dark-Territory-Secret-History-Cyber/dp/1476763267 


sandworm - https://www.amazon.com/Sandworm-Cyberwar-Kremlins-Dangerous-Hackers/dp/0385544405 

Risk from authoritarianism 
https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/11/world-government-risks-collective-suicide.html  
CYBER
See notes on foresight’s defend against cyber threats 
fragile world hypothesis - https://philpapers.org/archive/MANSFA-3.pdf 
vulnerable world hypothesis - https://nickbostrom.com/papers/vulnerable.pdf 
lethal autonomous weapons exist - https://spectrum.ieee.org/lethal-autonomous-weapons-exist-they-must-be-banned 
us rejects bio weapons convention protocol - https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1173329/ 
ensuring compliance with the bio weapons convention - https://armscontrolcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/SWG-sponsored-bwc_compliance-meeting-1.pdf 
benefits and risks of biotech - https://futureoflife.org/background/benefits-risks-biotechnology/ 
the malicious use of AI https://img1.wsimg.com/blobby/go/3d82daa4-97fe-4096-9c6b-376b92c619de/downloads/MaliciousUseofAI.pdf?ver=1553030594217 
Advanced Persistent Threat Compromise of Government Agencies, Critical Infrastructure, and Private Sector Organizations - https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/aa20-352a 
chinese state-sponsored cyber operations - https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/aa21-200b 
cyber war - https://www.amazon.com/Cyber-War-Threat-National-Security/dp/0061962244 
transparent society - https://www.amazon.com/Transparent-Society-Technology-Between-Privacy/dp/0738201448#:~:text=The%20Transparent%20Society%20is%20full,than%20one%20where%20secrecy%20reigns. 
world government risks collective suicide - https://www.overcomingbias.com/2018/11/world-government-risks-collective-suicide.html 
the great filter - https://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/greatfilter.html 
engines of creation - https://archive.org/details/enginesofcreatio0000drex/page/188/mode/2up 
nano solutions for the 21st century - https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/201310Nano_Solutions.pdf 
big nanotech - https://web.archive.org/web/20181123032424/https://www.theguardian.com/science/small-world/2013/oct/14/big-nanotech-post-industrial-manufacturing-apm 
the precipice -  https://theprecipice.com/ 
treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty_on_the_Non-Proliferation_of_Nuclear_Weapons 
risks and benefits of gain-of-function research - https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/21666/potential-risks-and-benefits-of-gain-of-function-research-summary 
gernot heiser - https://gernot-heiser.org/ 
computer security as the future of law - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOFzisF7aNw 
long tail problem in ai, autonomous markets, ali yahya - https://a16z.com/2020/07/24/long-tail-problem-in-a-i/ 
ethereum is dark forest - https://www.paradigm.xyz/2020/08/ethereum-is-a-dark-forest 
cyber security links 
architectures of robust openness - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NAfjEnu6R2g&list=PLzDw4TTug5O0ywHrOz4VevVTYr6Kj_KtW&index=24&t=714s 
horton; delegating responsibility in digital systems - https://research.google/pubs/pub33037/ 
automated vulnerability detection - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.06162.pdf 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2692915.2628165
http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/543048/26931843/1464016046717/A2_SP_2016.pdf?token=dkkDM4KAn4b1AbIo4Df%2Bxa0U2YM%3D
Colonial pipeline ransomware attack - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colonial_Pipeline_ransomware_attack 

Peter zeihan’s the end of the world is just the beginning 




Further Resources Section: individuals, organizations, and articles

VERTIC’s Verification and Implementation - Analysis on International Agreements
About VERTIC: “The Verification Research, Training and Information Centre (VERTIC) is an independent, not-for-profit, non-governmental organization. Our mission is to support the development, implementation and effectiveness of international agreements and related regional and national initiatives, with particular attention to issues of monitoring, review, legislation and verification”


Remote Sensing and Environmental Treaties work by SEDAC - last updated 2006


Walter Dorn  
Book: PeaceKeeping Satellites: The Case for International Surveillance and Verification
Book: Keeping Watch: Monitoring, Technology & Innovation in UN Peace Operations


Ram Avtar
Article: “Utilizing geospatial information to implement SDGs and monitor their progress”
Article: “Assessing Sustainable Development Prospects through Remote Sensing”
Article: “Remote sensing for international peace and security”


Daniel Deudney, author of Dark Skies: Space Expansionism, Planetary Geopolitics, and the Ends of Humanity 


Gain Forest – integrating AI enabled smart-contracts with satellite data for sustainability purposes


UNOSAT – the United Nations Operational Satellite Applications Programme 


The Geospatial Technology and Human Rights program at the American Association for the Advancement of Science


Miscellaneous articles 
“The Use of remote sensing satellites for verification in international law” 
“Sattelite imagery as evidence for international crimes”
“Emerging issues facing the use of remote sensing evidence of international criminal justice”
“Remote sensing in human rights and international humanitarian law monitoring: concepts and methods”
“Problems from hell, solution in the heavens?: identifying obstacles and opportunities employing geospatial tech to mitigate mass atrocities”






Bo Rothstein
quality of government standard dataset codebook - https://www.qogdata.pol.gu.se/dataarchive/qog_std_jan21.pdf 
oxford handbook of quality of government - https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/33431 
controlling corruption: the social contract approach - https://academic.oup.com/book/39713 
causes of corruption - https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781315739175-9/causes-corruption-bo-rothstein-jan-teorell
from routledge handbook of political corruption - https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/edit/10.4324/9781315739175/routledge-handbook-political-corruption-paul-heywood?refId=ef337ce5-a1c0-4dea-a6f2-ecfc1f686c0b&context=ubx  
good societies need good leaders on a leash - https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/9781137556288_2 


***
trusting other people - https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pa.1645 
preventing markets from self-destruction: the quality of government factor - -file:///Users/creativityculture/Downloads/SSRN-id1328819.pdf 
the indirect strategy for fighting systemic corruption - https://watermark.silverchair.com/daed_a_00501.pdf?token=AQECAHi208BE49Ooan9kkhW_Ercy7Dm3ZL_9Cf3qfKAc485ysgAAAq8wggKrBgkqhkiG9w0BBwagggKcMIICmAIBADCCApEGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAeBglghkgBZQMEAS4wEQQMnCjTjeHz-v6KritpAgEQgIICYpmfLmcJs-yfV9YshggCwStBc8vlsI1bqdVH4DCAbTksSVRF1rbyjCvjzSIZSs5MzaAoXexQB7y1gKlr7UIxxz76bo9CZ2yXDShBwAMMstVhOD518P3_lC6l8eVHj-ueCxJdsaTqegnnsyX2JBYb1iHgSdHNRmdHb_6P9g7DX-G4HPO35qI7H6OHH1je5r-XFmhsRXlf6LMzKhll4op8QXMOkUDiUUFUKvGwjymL5Hl6BeQnhRG54goHy_NgL-MTe9sylIdhBonhUgeK1QJ1iFYEuqTb6t2Y_9T88ej2Bbcim2RKwzmzweoTujYo6JIO6bu4hjz425MSPDefJDr9cWUp1CkANCVSNv6aoFljVHR57N2oQObkTCTScs56CYhdbiZ_4q9LeSgoHeU0Fox7aJEwzXdu4FWUWWH_6C9oadxGpRuJut2I8v8ChgZKieTijey4-XOsxwxsjWb5_fkJHAr_eK07MPmjRoHWIjJ4qCBEtrSxab70jPItVafSQs8f8EdLuI7Atc6vdJO9lKvJZ7lPTsgYTvol7-ZPtYvMFjhp5CUnIRKZq_v6Oq8nQVTEilhWFgkAADH2umG5Pr5l5ld_4Y9eLSAR4a3N3FAl4k0YfRY_k_UP8NqkNieSuLPqsyiUQICE8QvwnfvH5HZfRuR99BDrx_CViuoAJ68AeOPYr3vITwR2bQTz5-wi7mOQ4oA_bWexWbMRRcEzdmTp7X1QfgeLGwNUdUn5evFvcf0MKpOc6ANxV_gkXu_SldLEWDPJSb8AmwsPBfS3-P3tt1wZdwdUrdTcFw076P1wVFQdz_U 
regions of trust and distrust: how good institutions can foster social cohesion - https://ora.ox.ac.uk/catalog/uuid:e20194bb-663c-4e66-92f5-00e2904404b8/download_file?file_format=application%2Fpdf&safe_filename=Regions%2Bof%2BTrust%2Band%2BDistrust%2BTBP.pdf 
epistemic democracy and the quality of government - https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23745118.2018.1515873 
getting the basic nature of systemic corruption right- https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/gove.12403 


ortwin renn: https://www.iass-potsdam.de/en/people/ortwin-renn#m-tab-0-selectedpublications
systemic risk perspective: social perception of uncertainty and tipping points -https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-74458-8_2 
social perception of systemic risks - https://publications.iass-potsdam.de/rest/items/item_6001249_6/component/file_6001250/content 
risks and opportunities of the digital transformation - https://revistaidees.cat/en/risks-and-opportunities-of-the-digital-transformation/ 
risk communication - https://publications.iass-potsdam.de/rest/items/item_6001774_2/component/file_6001973/content 
call for international research on global polycrisis - https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4058592 
transdisciplinarity: synthesis towards a modular approach - https://publications.iass-potsdam.de/rest/items/item_6000908_2/component/file_6000909/content 
characteristics, potentials, and challenges of transdisciplinary research - https://public

Jeremy pitt -https://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/j.pitt/publications.html?respub-action=search.html&id=00004695&limit=30&keywords=collective+action&iminyear=1994&imaxyear=2020&itypes=Book%2CBook+chapter%2CConference+paper%2CJournal+article%2COther%2CPatent%2CPoster%2CReport%2CScholarly+edition%2CSoftware%2CThesis+dissertation%2CWorking+paper&_type=on&type=Book&type=Book+chapter&type=Conference+paper&type=Journal+article&type=Other&type=Patent&type=Poster&type=Report&type=Scholarly+edition&type=Software&type=Thesis+dissertation&type=Working+paper&minyear=1994&maxyear=2020&page=1&person=true 
axiomatization of ostrom - https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2382570.2382575
Solving social dilemmas by reasoning about expectations - https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.03552 
Pitt also does work on novelty search - https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12896 
Public interest technology, citizen assemblies, and performative governance - https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9527285 
Soft laws and hard decisions - https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9640314 
Sustainable development goal-sensitive design - https://www.ijimai.org/journal/sites/default/files/2021-02/ijimai_6_5_3.pdf 
Self-organising multi-agent systems - algorithmic foundations of cyber-anarcho-socialism - https://www.worldscientific.com/worldscibooks/10.1142/q0307#t=aboutBook 
Bayesian model of information cascades - https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.03166 
Trust and other things  - thinking about trust - https://www.cell.com/patterns/fulltext/S2666-3899(20)30044-1?_returnURL=https%3A%2F%2Flinkinghub.elsevier.com%2Fretrieve%2Fpii%2FS2666389920300441%3Fshowall%3Dtrue 
Collective intelligence for computer supported collective action - https://spiral.imperial.ac.uk/bitstream/10044/1/32234/8/ATN-coacts.pdf
Formal models of social processes: the pursuit of computational justice in self-organizing multi-agent systems - https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6676519 
miguel fuentes: https://sites.google.com/site/miguelfuentessite/work 
complex systems modeling for public policy - https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/11581/1/150727_livro_modeling_complex_systems_public_policies.pdf 
social dynamics of paradigm shifts - https://repositorio.udd.cl/bitstream/handle/11447/223/The%20Underlying%20social.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
social crises: signatures of complexity in fast-growing economy - https://downloads.hindawi.com/journals/complexity/2018/9343451.pdf 
social crises - network model approach - https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378437118303510 
digital outburst: expression of a social crisis through online social networks - https://www.hindawi.com/journals/complexity/2022/8980913/ 
public policy modeling and applications 2021 https://downloads.hindawi.com/journals/complexity/2022/9764151.pdf 

Seshat database 
single dimension of social complexity - https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1708800115 
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.abn3517 
rise of the war machines: charting evolution of military tech - https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0258161 
consequences of crisis - https://seshatdatabank.info/seshat-projects/crisis-and-recovery-database/consequences-of-crisis/ 


center for strategic and international studies - https://www.csis.org/ 
Choking chinas access to AI - https://www.csis.org/analysis/choking-chinas-access-future-ai 
gregory allen
US export controls and china -https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11627 
chip exports to russia plunged - https://www.reuters.com/technology/chip-exports-russia-plunged-by-90-after-curbs-us-official-2022-06-29/  

James Scott - seeing like a state and legibility

Nate Hagens Reality Blind (particularly energy and monetary theory sections)

Harris, Cultural Materialism 

Bratton, The Stack 

Habermas, Legitimation Crisis

Wallerstein, World Systems Analysis

West, Scale

Capra & Luisi, The Systems View of Life 

Dona Meadows et al. Limits to Growth

Fuller, Critical Path

Deudney, Bounding Power 

Turchin, the Ages of Discord

Tainter, Collapse of Complex Societies

Beaudrillard, Simulacra 

Schneier, Liars and Outliers 

Rothstein, Social Traps and The Problem of Trust (particularly intro)

Frans P.B. Osinga, Science, Strategy and War: The Strategic Theory of John Boyd 

Slate Star Codex, “Meditations on Moloch” 
Also see Nintil’s response “Slaying Alexander’s Moloch”

“International Control of Powerful Technology: Lessons from the Baruch Plan for Nuclear Weapons” -  ​​https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/International-Control-of-Powerful-Technology-Lessons-from-the-Baruch-Plan-Zaidi-Dafoe-2021.pdf 

AI alignment and the Principal Agent Problem – https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.04268.pdf 

Paul Stern - Design Principles for Global Commons 

The Cartography of Global Catastrophic Governance :  ​​https://globalchallenges.org/the-cartography-of-global-catastrophic-governance/ 





Citations from social traps piece 


[1] The term social trap is often traced to John Platt’s, “Social Traps” in American Psychology: https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fh0035723 


[3] For example, see Robert Costanza’s “Review Essay: The Nuclear Arms Race and the Theory of Social Traps.” Journal Of Peace Research, Vol. 21, No. 1, 1985 and his “Social Traps and Environmental Policy.” BioScience, Vo. 37. No. 6 (Jun., 1987). p 407-412; 


[4] For the concept of a wicked problem, see for example, Rittel, H.W.J., Webber, M.M. “Dilemmas in a general theory of planning.” Policy Sci 4, 155–169 (1973). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01405730
For a discussion of catastrophic risks, see Global Catastrophic Risks edited by Nick Bostrom and Milan M. Cirkovic’s. 
For the novelty of 21st century traps, see Paul Stern’s “Design principles for global commons: natural resources and emerging technologies.” International Journal of the Commons. Vol. 5, No. 2 (August 2011). Pp 213-232
Also see Eugen Skolnikoff’s international governance in a technological age 
[9] Robert Wright’s Nonzero, Deudney Bounding Power


The foresight institute’s “Gaming the Future: technologies for intelligent voluntary cooperation


Hayek’s “Use of Knowledge in Society” - summary ( http://www.coordinationproblem.org/2016/05/hayeks-the-use-of-knowledge-in-society-a-summary.html 
Lastly, see the seminal text by Mancur Olson The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press, 1965, and its revisittation by Todd Sandler, “Collective Action fifty years later.” Public Choice (2015) 164: 195-216. https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s11127-015-0252-0.pdf 
[16] See, Robert Jervis’ “Realism, Game Theory, and Cooperation.” World Politics. Vol. 40, No. 3 (Apr., 1988), pp. 317-349. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2010216 
John Von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern’s Theory of Games and Economic Behavior was arguably the seminal text on the topic. 
[19] For an overview of variations on the prisoners’ dilemma, see Kuhn, Steven, "Prisoner’s Dilemma", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2019/entries/prisoner-dilemma/.
For game theory applied to the study of cooperation, see Robert Axelrod’s seminal, The Evolution of Cooperation, New York: Basic Books ,1984. And Jonathan Bendor and Piotr Swistak, “The Evolutionary Stability of Cooperation,” American Political Science Review, 91 (2): 290–307 1997.
Note, however, that the results of the prisoners’ dilemma are not necessarily empirically the case; see Menusch Khadjavi, Andreas Lange,"Prisoners and their dilemma." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Volume 92,2013, Pages 163-175, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2013.05.015. 


[24] Citation from Trinley on nuclear war not leading to total extinction [ZS] 


[27] See Garret Hardin’s original “The Tragedy of the Commons.”Science, vol. 162, no. 3859, 1968, pp. 1243–48. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/1724745. Accessed 15 Sep. 2022. Also see Dietz, T., Ostrom, E., & Stern, P. C. (2003). The Struggle to Govern the Commons. Science, 302(5652), 1907–1912. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015


[29] See Ramsay MacMullen’s Corruption and the Decline of Rome. Yale University Press, 1988. 
[30] Robert Wright, Nonzero. Vintage, 2001.  
[31] The Logic of Political Survival 
[36] Autonomous technics  
[38] See Eugene Skolnikoff, “International Governance in a Technological Age.” in Science, Technology and Global Governance. Routledge, 2013.  


[43] https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18488548/ 
[44]  https://www.climaterealityproject.org/blog/how-feedback-loops-are-making-climate-crisis-worse 
 Mads Qvist Frederiksen, “4 ways climate change is opening the Arctic up for business,” World Economic Forum, September 27, 2019, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/09/4-ways-climate-change-is-opening-the-arctic-up-to-business/ https://brief.bismarckanalysis.com/p/russias-long-term-bet-on-the-arctic 
[50] See Louis Henkin’s infamous quote in How Nations Behave. Columbia University Press, 1979: "Almost all nations observe almost all principles of international law and almost all of their obligations almost all of the time." For an overview of international law see David Bederman and Chimène Keitner’s International Law Frameworks. Foundation Press, 2016. 
[53] https://www.axios.com/2021/05/11/satellite-data-environmental-transparency 


[55] See David Rozas, Antonio Tenorio-Fornès, and Samer Hassan. “Analysis of the Potentials of Blockhain for the Governance of Global Digital Commons.” Frontiers in Blockhain, 28 April 2021. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2021.577680 


Innovation, dual use and security - edited by tucker


GPT-4 System Card OpenAI March 15, 2023

[[Category:Existential Risk]]