
'''= The Global Oneness Project is exploring how the radically simple notion of interconnectedness can be lived in our increasingly complex world.''' 


URL = http://globalonenessproject.org/

==Introduction==

The idea of oneness is not new. For thousands of years it's been a basic part of human consciousness, taking countless forms in the world's spiritual, religious, artistic, and cultural traditions. Indigenous lifeways, myths showing the interconnectedness of all things, intricate philosophical systems, literature, and art are just a few of the ways we've sought to understand and express oneness.

For the most part, however, these different expressions have been isolated from one another by geography, language, and time, or restricted to an intellectual or spiritual elite. In contrast, today we experience global interdependence with a unique level of clarity and urgency. In natural sciences like biology, physics, and mathematics; in technology, economics, and ecology; and in spiritual, cultural, and social movements across the planet new perspectives on oneness are emerging with breathtaking beauty and transformational power.

Right now, for example, as you read these words on the World Wide Web, you are participating in oneness in a way that was inconceivable just a few decades ago. In this moment you are connected to the millions of Web-users all over the world -- a global network of people exchanging ideas and finding common ground across different histories, nationalities, languages, interests, and lives.

So what does it mean to talk about oneness in this increasingly globalized world? Are there simple ways people can recognize and experience oneness in their daily lives? To explore these questions, and many others, we've decided to bring our inquiry to people from different parts of the world whose work is grounded in a perspective of oneness, and to you. We hope you will join us in our journey to discover how emerging consciousness of oneness is impacting people's lives.

A partial list of the fields that our interview subjects are working in includes: Arts, Business, Conflict Resolution, Cultural Criticism, Economics, Environment, Global Development, Grassroots and Community Work, Human Rights, Indigenous Traditions and Culture, Integral/Evolutionary Thought, International Relations and Law, Internet/Technology, Journalism, Life Sciences, Media, Medicine, Microfinance, Philanthropy, Philosophy, Physics, Politics, Pop Culture, Social Entrepreneurship, Social Justice, Spirituality and Religion.
(http://globalonenessproject.org/about-project)

==See Also==

[[Global MindShift]]


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]