
'''* Book: Lopez-Claros, Augusto, Arthur L. Dahl and Maja Groff. 2020. Global Governance and the Emergence of Global Institutions for the 21st Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 545 p. doi:10.1017/9781108569293''' 

URL = www.cambridge.org/core/books/global-governance-and-the-emergence-of-global-institutions-for-the-21st-century/AF7D40B152C4CBEDB310EC5F40866A59


=Context=

Arthur L.Dahl:

""We now have an opportunity to imagine in more detail what the Great Transition might do to address the crises that are now so obvious. What global health system should we build that would guarantee to every human being an adequate level of care in a pandemic, as well as during their normal life, and that would bring together all the world’s capacities to respond to such emerging threats? How might we use the new information technologies to coordinate global food production more effectively than markets can, both ensuring a fair revenue to all farmers and rural workers at the base of our food chain, and guaranteeing a healthy diet to everyone on the planet? What global financial system could raise the revenue to provide these services as basic human rights, with graduated taxation on all forms of wealth creation, guaranteeing a minimum revenue to everyone in need, and preventing the present excessive accumulation of individual wealth? What system of global governance could ensure world peace, protect and manage the global environmental commons, eliminate corruption, and extreme inequality, and ensure national autonomy and diversity in a spirit of subsidiarity? My recent book with Augusto Lopez-Claros and Maja Groff, Global Governance and the Emergence of Global Institutions for the 21st Century, has proposals on this last point. 

We need to be able to convince both world leaders and the global public that there are practical and positive ways forward towards the Great Transition, and that now is the time to start. We may not be able to prevent the crises on the immediate horizon, but we can already start planning and building what should come after. We do not have all the answers, but we have through our values a direction of travel and a willingness to learn. If we share openly, listen to each other in all our diversity, explore contributions from whatever source, act on the best ideas, and reflect together on the results, we can move forward. In these dark times, we all need to rise to the occasion and to face the future positively and creatively."

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Books]]