
=Discussion=

Tiberius Brastaviceanu, founder of the [[Sensorica]] project, is interviewed by Sebastian Klemm, in the context of the [[Open Climate Collabathon]]:

"* Sebastian Klemm: We share but one single atmospheric CO2 budget worldwide. Why is the development of a global open climate accounting system indispensable?


Tiberius Brastaviceanu: This is not just about CO2, but it is a good start. A few centuries ago, people perceived the planet as being an almost infinite reservoir of resources, compared to our consumption, or to our measurable impact, at that time. Today, the finite nature of the planet is more present in our minds, not just because we have seen pictures of Earth taken from space and visualized the finitude of our physical environment, but because we actually see global resources being depleted and ecosystems being disrupted, as a consequence of our activities.


We are not sustainable. To become sustainable, we need first to see and understand what we are currently doing, to be able to eventually adjust our course.  A global open and transparent climate accounting system is one way to look at it, from the climate change perspective. It doesn’t cover the entire story about sustainability, but it is a big part of it.

Tracking our energy consumption, for example, helps us become more efficient. Knowing the amount of energy that we consume and also the type of energy that we consume helps us realize our impact on the environment. But sustainability and climate change are wicked problems, they are systemic and complex. We cannot address climate change by tweaking our way of life here and there, by regulating one industry, building more solar panels or by voting politicians out of office.


We need tools like the open climate accounting system to gather information about the entire system at once, to be able to obtain a global, holistic picture of what’s going on, in order to open the possibility of, one day, inducing systemic change."
(https://www.collabathon.openclimate.earth/post/enhance-collective-intelligence-an-interview-with-tiberius-brastaviceanu)

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]