
'''= the GODAN initiative seeks to support global efforts to make agricultural and nutritionally relevant data available, accessible, and usable for unrestricted use worldwide''' [http://www.godan.info/about]

URL = http://www.godan.info/

"a 330+ partner organization formed to encourage world leaders to make their data in agriculture and nutrition open so that it is freely available and usable worldwide for better policy and decision-making" [http://linkeddataorchestration.com/2016/09/14/godan-feeding-the-world-with-open-data/]

=Description=

"Last week saw the launch of the brand new initiative GODAN initative, coordinated by the UK and US governments. The Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) initiative seeks to support global efforts to make agricultural and nutritionally relevant data available, accessible, and usable for unrestricted use worldwide. The initiative focuses on building high-level policy and public and private institutional support for open data. The initiative encourages collaboration and cooperation among existing agriculture and open data activities, without duplication, and brings together all stakeholders to solve long-standing global problems. agINFRA is already working toward the promotion of Open Data in Agriculture and as such we are delighted to be one of the launch supporters of the GODAN movement.
 
Open access to research, and open publication of data, are vital resources for food security and nutrition, driven by farmers, farmer organizations, researchers, extension experts, policy makers, governments, and other private sector and civil society stakeholders participating in ‘innovation systems’ and along value chains. Lack of institutional, national, and international policies and openness of data limit the effectiveness of agricultural and nutritional data from research and innovation. Making open data work for agriculture and nutrition requires a shared agenda to increase the supply, quality, and interoperability of data, alongside action to build capacity for the use of data by all stakeholders.
 
The GODAN initiative is a voluntary association brought together around a shared purpose. Launched in October 2013, the initiative welcomes all those who share this purpose to join as members and to participate in shaping coordinated activities that can deliver on the potential of open data for agriculture and nutrition. Together, initiative partners seek to support this initiative through the following guidelines and principles."
(http://aginfra.eu/en/news-and-achievements/acheivements/420-aginfra-part-of-flagship-new-global-open-data-in-agriculture-and-nutrition-initiavtive)

=More Information=

* [[Data Commons for Food Security]]


[[Category:Open Data]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]