'''* Article: Desperate Measures: Global Crises of Measurement and Their Meta-Theoretical Solutions. By Zachary Stein.(Meridian University Center for Integral Wisdom). Paper prepared for the 4th Biannual Integral Theory Conference, Sonoma, CA. July 2015'''

URL = http://www.zakstein.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/CrisesOfMeasurment_STEIN_ITC_2015.pdf


=Abstract:=

"Measurement infrastructures come in many forms and impact our lives in
many ways, from the intimacy of psychometrics and biometrics, to the anonymity of
econometrics and global climate change indicators. This paper explores the need for
meta-theoretical approaches that address measurement infrastructures in terms of the
ethical, political, and metaphysical aspects of our current global crises of measurement.
This term—global crises of measurement—is meant to convey the fact that, despite
appearances, the majority of our global challenges revolve around measurement
infrastructures. For example, the recent economic crisis was largely the result of
inadequate and deceptive econometric practices (e.g., the ratings applied to collateralized
debt obligations), while the ecological crisis continues to revolve around disputes over,
and innovations in, measurement (e.g., calculations of global temperature changes).
Measurement infrastructures function to generate (and impose) a shared understanding of
the world, and in so doing literally create realities; whether these realties are true, good,
and beautiful is another matter. Measures and their related standards also facilitate
complexly coordinated social actions and set the terms by which a wide range of
evaluative judgments are made, from those about the self (bathroom scale; IQ) to those
about whole countries (GDP). Recent decades have brought a rapid proliferation of
measurement infrastructures and related forms of standardization, which impact the most
intimate details of our lives and the most significant planetary initiatives. A metatheoretical
approach is needed that can expose the false realities created by inadequate
and oppressive measurement practices as well as inform the creation of new approaches
to the representation of complex global realities, including transactions involving nonmonetary
value, psychological interiority, and non-linear dynamical systems. This paper
takes the first steps toward outlining just such a meta-theory of measurement, drawing
heavily on the work of Ken Wilber and Roy Bhaskar."

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]