'''* White Paper: The Commons 2.0 - A Global Blockchain Land-Trust Framework. [[Terrafina Foundation]], May 2018'''

URL = https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf

=Description=

"Sustainable farming holds the potential to mitigate or revert some of the
greatest challenges we are facing today, including climate change, food security,
loss in biodiversity, social equality and animal welfare. The purpose
of this Framework is to enable sustainable, small-scale farmers long-term
access to farmland at reasonable lease rates.

Terrafina Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of the non-profit [[Terrafina Foundation]],
will issue a land-backed, stable-value cryptocurrency, that falls
under the classification as a security under Swiss Financial Market Supervisory
Authority (FINMA) regulations. Capital raised through issued TerrafinaTokens
(TFTs) is invested in Farmland-Stewardship Organizations (FSOs),
providing them with the capital to buy large areas of land and securing it
for sustainable use. To prevent Farmland-Stewardship Organizations (FSOs)
from engaging in speculative land sales practices, Terrafina Foundation will
hold a golden share in all FSOs, giving it a veto right on all land sales and
changes to the statutes of the FSOs.

With this Framework in place, farmers will not be required to put up capital
to buy the farmland but instead, will get long-term, affordable land leases
for up to 99 years that are secured in the Global Blockchain Land Registry.

All land within this Framework will be cultivated according to recognized
organic farming standards (e.g. EU Organic). At a later stage, a blockchain-based
liquid democracy model will allow people to decide on the
land-use criteria locally. The liquid voting system enables direct voting on
issues or the ability to delegate voting power on specific topics to peers
over a secure network without a central authority.

Terrafina Foundation will create a high-granularity Global Blockchain Land
Registry that supplements nation-state land registries, ensuring that land
ownership records are immutable – not susceptible to theft, corruption,
damage or fraud, even by nation-states themselves. All relevant legal documentation
and information from the national land registry, official land 
valuations, land-use criteria as well as all lease contracts shall become a
transparent part of the blockchain land registry.

Farmland has consistently proven to be one of the most value-stable assets
class. Thus TFT is guaranteed to maintain a stable valuation. All affiliated
FSOs will be audited on a regular basis. Independent auditors will assess
the net asset value (NAV) of Terrafina Ltd. and its affiliated FSOs based on
official land valuations."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)

=Excerpts=

==[[Farmland-Stewardship Organization Cooperatives in Europe]]==

Thomas Rippel on FSO's:

"Kulturland Genossenschaft, BioBoden Genossenschaft, and Terre de Liens
are European FSO cooperatives founded in the past ten years. Their purpose
is to end the problems created by commercial land grabbing by purchasing
farmland and leasing it to organic farms at low fees. As of late
2017, 100 million Euros has been raised to purchase over 6,000 hectares
of land. In early 2018, the Kulturland Genossenschaft conducted a
pilot crowd-investing campaign that raised over one million Euros for one
farm. 

This cooperative model is however not without limitations. First, the investment
is unattractive. Cooperatives charge farmers low lease prices
to reduce their financial burden and thus are unable to pay dividends to
investors. Due to the fact that share prices for the cooperatives are fixed,
shareholders do not profit from any increase in land values owned by the 
cooperative. Additionally, investments in these cooperatives are highly illiquid.
Periods of notice for the liquidation of shares can be up to three
years in some cases.

Despite these limitations, a remarkable amount of capital has been raised
for such a purely idealistic investment. However, it is becoming apparent
that the model will most likely remain an investment niche and be unable
to significantly tackle the challenges resulting from global land-grabbing.
The democratic governance structure of FSOs creates the second problem.
A qualified majority of shareholders could decide to sell the land
and monetize unrealized profits of the cooperative. This constellation
could lead to a dangerous misalignment between the financial interests
of shareholders and the core mission of the cooperatives to protect land
from financial speculation."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)

==[[Blockchain Technology for Land Registries]]==

Thomas Rippel:

"The versatility of blockchain means that it is widely considered as a way to
manage financial transactions, asset transfers, and regulatory obligations.
Blockchain is seen by many as the future of land registration.
Blockchain has been touted as the future of land registries because of its
myriad of benefits. The technology has the potential to significantly reduce
property fraud. Each property would be assigned a unique code and
linked to a smart key, held by the owner only.

Blockchain technology also underpins ‘smart contracts’. A programmable
contract self-executes when certain conditions are met, accelerating the
registration process of land if a blockchain registry is used. Titles could be
transferred automatically upon receipt of funds in the vendor’s account
and ledgers updated immediately, thus eliminating gaps in the registration
process and allowing greater efficiency and cost saving for land registries.
Furthermore, blockchain could reduce many of the ongoing costs and demands
for the management of land registries because property transactions
and management information would be updated automatically and
viewable in real time.

Several countries including Russia, India, Sweden, Brazil, Ukraine
and the UK are currently developing blockchain technology for their respective
national land registries."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)

=More information=

* For inquiries, please get in touch with Thomas Rippel, thomasrippel@terrafina.org,
+41 79 860 63 74.

* [[Global Blockchain Land-Trust]] ; [[Global Blockchain Land Registry]]
* [[Mietshäuser Syndikat]]

==Statistics==

* “Savills UK | Spotlight: Global Farmland Index 2018.” 22 Jan. 2018, http://www.savills.co.uk/research_articles/141557/226831-0.
Accessed 8 Mar. 2018.

* “Agriculture statistics - family farming in the EU - Statistics Explained.” 8 Sep. 2017, http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Agriculture_statistics_-_family_farming_in_the_EU. Accessed 25 Feb. 2018

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Open_Company_Formats]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Post-Corporate]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Articles]]