=Directory=

Compiled and updated at http://www.rbefoundation.com/resources.php:

* [http://www.i-recycle.info/ I-Recycle] is a central point for people offering items free of charge including a map location.
* [[Who Pools]] [http://whopools.net/]is an online-tool for sharing resources.
* The [[Free Economy]] [http://www.free-economy.org/]- goods and services database.
* [http://www.justfortheloveofit.org/ Freeconomy Community] - The aim is to get people together locally through the simple act of sharing services, tools, and land.
* [http://groups.yahoo.com/group/babykidexchange/ BabyKid Exchange Group] - For parents who are on a tight budget. Regifting items you no longer need and want to give them to someone who can really use them.
* [http://www.freeebay.net/ FreeeBay]
* [[Book Crossing]] [http://www.bookcrossing.com/]is a way to share your books, clear your shelves, and conserve precious resources at the same time.
* [[CouchSurfing]] [http://www.couchsurfing.com/] is a worldwide network for making connections between travelers and the local communities they visit.
* [[Hospitality Club]] [http://www.hospitalityclub.org/] was the world's largest hospitality exchange organization.
* [[BeWelcome]] [http://bewelcome.org/] is a hospitality exchange network based on the spirit of cooperation, free software and freedom of speech
* [[Global Freeloaders]] [http://www.globalfreeloaders.com/] is an online community, bringing people together to offer you free accommodation all over the world.
* [[Freecycle]] Communities [http://freecycle.org/]- (obsoleted by FreeShare) exchange of unwanted items.
* [[Hitchwiki]] [http://hitchwiki.org/] is a world-wide guide by and for [[hitchhikers]]
* [[Trash Wiki]] [http://trashwiki.org/] - a dumpster diving world wide guide of creating value from trash!
* Repurposing wiki [http://fruwiki.com/index.php?title=Repurposing] - By repurposing items, find new uses for items that would otherwise end up in the trash and even find alternatives to things you would otherwise have to purchase.
* [http://www.petfinder.com/shelters/MD248.html Rehoming pets list]
* [http://euro.recycle.net/exch/index.html Information & Material Exchange Index]
* [[Give Away Websites List]][http://www.altruists.org/projects/ga/websites/]
* [http://www.hitchhikers.org/ Hitchhikers Worldwide]


=More Information=

#[[Peer to Peer Exchanges]]
#[[P2P Exchange Infrastructure Projects]]
#[[Localized Exchange Communities]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sharing]]