= The concept posits the existence of a social sphere, a global civil society, above and beyond national, regional, or local societies. [http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/Yearbooks/2001/2001chapter1.pdf]

=Concept=

John Keane:

Global civil society is a vast, interconnected, and
multi-layered social space that comprises many
hundreds of thousands of self-directing or nongovernmental
institutions and ways of life. It can
be likened—to draw for a moment upon ecological
similes—to a dynamic biosphere. This complex
biosphere looks and feels expansive and polyarchic,
full of horizontal push and pull, vertical conflict,
and compromise, precisely because it comprises a
bewildering variety of interacting habitats and
species: organisations, civic and business initiatives,
coalitions, social movements, linguistic communities,
and cultural identities. All of them have at least one
thing in common: across vast geographic distances
and despite barriers of time, they deliberately
organise themselves and conduct their cross-border
social activities, business, and politics outside the
boundaries of governmental structures, with a
minimum of violence and a maximum of respect for
the principle of civilised power-sharing among
different ways of life.

To liken global civil society to a vast biosphere
that stretches to every corner of the earth is to
underscore both its great complexity and, as we shall
see, its vulnerability to internal and external
interference. Just as nearly every part of the earth,
from the highest mountains to the deepest seas,
supports life, so too global civil society is now found
on virtually every part of the earth’s surface. To be
sure, everywhere it is tissue-thin, just like the natural
biosphere, which resembles a paper wrapping that
covers a sphere the size of a football; and its fringes,
where ice and permafrost predominate, are virtually
uninhabited. In the interior of the Antarctic, only
restricted populations of bacteria and insects are to
be found; and even on its coasts there are very few
living inhabitants. Global civil society is similarly
subject to geographic limits: whole zones of the
earth—parts of contemporary Afghanistan, Burma,
Chechnya, and Sierra Leone, for instance—are no-go
areas for civil society, which can survive only by
going underground. But in those areas of the earth
where it does exist, global civil society comprises
many biomes: whole areas, like North America and
the European Union, characterised by specific animals
and plants and climatic conditions. Each biome in
turn comprises large numbers of living ecosystems
made up of clusters of organisms living within a nonliving
physical environment of rocks, soil, and climate.
These ecosystems of global civil society—cities,
business corridors, and regions, for instance—are
interconnected. And they are more or less intricately
balanced through continuous flows and recycling of
efforts among, as it were, populations of individuals
of the same species, which thrive within communities,
such as smaller cities, that are themselves embedded
within non-living geographic contexts.

Biospheric similes are helpful in picturing the
contours of global civil society, but they should not
be overextended, if only because global civil society
is not simply a naturally occurring phenomenon.
Although it is naturally embedded within a terrestrial
biosphere, global civil society is an ensemble of more
or less tightly interlinked biomes that are in fact
social processes. The populations, communities,
and ecosystems of global civil society comprise
flesh and blood, symbol-using individuals, households,
profit-seeking businesses, not-for-profit nongovernmental
organisations, coalitions, social
movements, and cultural-religious groups. Its biomes
feed upon the work of charities, lobby groups,
citizens’ protests, small and large corporate firms,
independent media, trade unions, and sporting
organisations: bodies like Amnesty International,
Sony, the Catholic Relief Services, the Federation of
International Football Associations, Transparency
International, the International Red Cross, the Ford
Foundation, News Corporation International, and
the Indigenous Peoples Bio-Diversity Network. Such
bodies lobby states, bargain with international
organisations, pressure and bounce off other nonstate
bodies, invest in new forms of production,
champion different ways of life, and engage in direct
action in distant local communities: for instance,
through ‘capacity-building’ programmes that supply
jobs, clean running water, sporting facilities,
hospitals, and schools. In these various ways, the
members of global civil society help to conserve or
to alter the power relations embedded in the chains
of interaction linking the local, regional, and
planetary orders. Their cross-border networks help to
define and redefine who gets what, when, and how
in the world. Of great importance is the fact that
these networks have the power to shape new
identities, even to stimulate awareness among the
world’s inhabitants that mutual understanding of
different ways of life is a practical necessity, that we
are being drawn into the first genuinely transnational
order, a global civil society.

Defined in this way, the ideal-type concept of
global civil society invites us to improve our
understanding of the emerging planetary order, to
think more deeply about it, in the hope that we can
strengthen our collective powers of guiding and
transforming it. This clearly requires sharpening up
our courage to confront the unknown and to imagine
different futures. And it most
definitely obliges us to abandon
some old certainties and prejudices
grounded in the past. The words
‘global civil society’ may be said to
resemble signs that fix our thoughts
on winding pathways that stretch
not only in front of us but also
behind us. To utter the words ‘global
civil society’, for instance, is to sup
with the dead, with an early
modern world in which, among the
educated classes of Europe, ‘world
civil society’ meant something quite
different than what it means, or
ought to mean, today. Just how
different our times are can be seen by dwelling for
a moment on this older, exhausted meaning of ‘world civil society’."
(http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/Yearbooks/2001/2001chapter2.pdf)


Please note:

"The earlier terms ‘world civil society’ and ‘international
society’ still have their champions,5 but from
the standpoint of the new concept of global
civil society their ‘governmentality’ or state-centredness
are today deeply problematic. Neither the
classical term societas civilis nor the
state-centric concept of ‘international
society’ is capable of grasping the
latter-day emergence of a nongovernmental
sphere that is called
‘global civil society’. [http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/Yearbooks/2001/2001chapter2.pdf]

==Critique==

Ronaldo Munck:

"For me, one of the underlying conceptual problems in this call is the reliance on the notion of global civil society, which I (and others) have critiqued at length elsewhere (www.researchgate.net/publication/225521084_Global_Civil_Society_Royal_Road_or_Slippery_Path ). Global civil society (GCS) in contemporary guise (See, for example, John Keane's Democracy and Civil Society or Mary Kaldor's Global Civil Society: An Answer to War) is based on universalist moral norms and values. This normative vision owes much to the work of Habermas, in particular the importance of communicative dialogue to fulfill the promise of the European Enlightenment. Thus, GCS is an ideal or virtual space, quite distinct from the actually existing civil societies around the world. This normative space is characterized by non-instrumental dialogue and ethical principles. It eschews all that smacks of self-interest and, of course, the merest hint that force might play a role in progressive social change and
democratization. Reflecting its origins in Eastern European oppositional discourse pre-1989, this view of GCS is deeply imbued with the notion of “anti-politics,” the rejection of all state-oriented or party or mass politics in favour of an ethical, moral, and individualistic conception of the good politics.

I have no problem with that, but it is not a global perspective. It cannot be the basis for a World Political Party because it does not reflect the politics of the global South in any way."
(http://www.greattransition.org/publication/world-political-party)

=Book=

'''* Book. John Keane. Global Civil Society.'''

URL = http://www.johnkeane.net/books/gcs/gcs.htm

"In this timely book, John Keane tracks the recent development of a big idea with fresh potency - global civil society. Keane explores the contradictory forces currently nurturing or threatening its growth, and he shows how talk of global civil society implies a political vision of a less violent world, founded on legally sanctioned power-sharing arrangements among different and intermingling forms of socio-economic life. Keane’s reflections are pitted against the widespread feeling that the world is both too complex and too violent to deserve serious reflection. 

Amid fears of terrorism, rising tides of xenophobia, and loose talk of ‘antiglobalisation', John Keane mounts a defence of global civil society, stressing the need for new democratic ways of living. His book traces the historical origins, present-day meanings and political potential of the idea, and how it is linked with such developments as turbocapitalism, social movements and the political institutions of ‘cosmocracy'. Challenging the silence and confusion within much of contemporary literature on globalisation and global governance. 

Keane's provocative reflections draw upon a variety of scholarly sources to breathe life into contemporary political thinking, in search of new political answers to new global problems."


==More Information==

#sample chapter via http://www.johnkeane.net/pdf_docs/gcs_sample_chapter.pdf



=More Information

#Global Civil Society? - Chapter 2, pp. 23-47, published in Helmut Anheier, Marlies Glasius, and Mary Kaldor (eds.), Global Civil Society 2001, Oxford University Press, 2001. [http://www.johnkeane.net/essays/essay_gcs2001.htm]
#Yearbook 2001: Global Civil Society 2001. Anheier, Helmut, Marlies Glasius and Mary Kaldor (eds.) [http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/yearbook01chapters.htm]
#The [http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/Yearbooks/2001/2001chapter6.pdf Internet and Global Civil Society]. John Naugthon.


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]