

URL =  http://globalparliamentofmayors.org/

=Description=

Eric Corijn:

"The project of a Global Parliament of Mayors is about creating a legitimate political authority
that can add some governance capacity beyond and besides existing global institutions that
are all legitimised by member states, to add some regulatory power to the world system, to
restructure the shape of the political battlefield. It is about filling up the democratic deficit
that has been created by the uneven globalization process, led by inter-national political and
economic decisions without reference to a global constituency, civil society, citizenship or
global public opinion."


=History=

Eric Corijn:

"The inaugural session of the Global Parliament of Mayors has been convened by the city of
The Hague on September 9-11, 2016, on the weekend of the 15th anniversary of 9/11.
Following three years of planning, and three preparatory meetings in Seoul, Amsterdam and
Washington, the effective launch of a global platform for common urban action took place in
the “city of peace and justice”. Mayor Jozias van Aartsen hosted the two and a half day
convening, which drew nearly 70 cities from across the world. In addition several urban
networks and NGO’s actively participated including Eurocities, the US Conference of
Mayors, OECD, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, Habitat III, ICORN, EFUS and
the Council of Europe. Several hundred invited observers, young people, experts, activists
and representatives of civil society were present at the plenary sessions and enjoyed a special
parallel programme with presentations of Advisory Board members. The opening plenary
listened to short statements of the mayors of Amman, Palermo, Cape Town, Delhi and
Oklahoma City.

The agenda focused on two substantive challenges where concerted action by cities can make
a crucial difference and where the urban approach is different from most national policies.
The first was climate change and the specific urban role in combating it. The second was
immigration and refugees, with also specific urban approaches to citizenship, integration and 
access to services. A third theme discussed was the challenge of urban governance, with
special focus on the relationship with civil society and the agenda of participatory democracy.
The discussions led to a draft Statement of Shared Principles on the three topics, a Mission
Statement for the Global Parliament of Mayors, the instalment of a first list of members, a
Steering Committee, a Consultative Committee, a Call to Action in the context of the
upcoming deliberations of Habitat III, OECD gatherings, COP21 and COP22. These
declarations of principles, the commitment of the participating cities and the instalment of a
Steering Committee and a Secretariat are the practical outcomes of a first meeting. The
further development is now in the hands of a preliminary governance structure for the GPM.
After the mayor of The Hague left office, the chair of the Steering Committee has been taken
by Mayor Patricia de Lille of Cape Town18. It is oriented towards developing membership,
organising and financing the structure, putting in place a virtual platform and preparing for a
second venue in 2018. A first annual report has been issued and a new website has been put
on-line."

(chapter of upcoming book)

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]