=Example=

==[[Terrafina Foundation]]==

Thomas Rippel:

"Terrafina Foundation is a non-profit entity to be registered in Zug, Switzerland.
The Foundation develops and maintains a high-granularity Global
Blockchain Land Registry that supplements nation-state land registries.

This mechanism allows land to be “uplifted” into a cryptographic asset.

The Global Blockchain Land-Registry will record all relevant information
from the national land registries, official land valuations, land-use criteria
as well as all lease contracts, thus providing unrestricted transparency.
Terrafina Foundation holds a golden share in all token-issuing FSOs giving the Foundation a veto power on all land sales and changes to the
statutes of the FSOs. The Foundation shall not have any other authority
over any affiliated FSO.

Terrafina Foundation ensures that all governance and financial incentives
align with its mission of maintaining a trusted Global Blockchain Land
Registry and preventing the sale of farmland of its affiliated FSO outside
the Terrafina Framework.

Terrafina Foundation will fund itself by receiving 5% of net proceeds
from issued TFTs as well as a moderate fixed amount per hectare of land
bought by the FSOs with capital provided by Terrafina. The percentage of
net proceeds allocated to Terrafina will gradually decrease as the raised
capital reaches 100 million Euros."
(https://terrafina.org/assets/pdfs/v0.1.0.4_White-paper_A-global-blockchain-land-trust-framework.pdf)


=More information=

* see: The [[Global Blockchain Land-Trust Framework]]

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]