
= "Global Footprint Network bridges science, policy, and economics to change how the world manages its natural resources and creates a sustainable future". [https://www.footprintnetwork.org/resources/data/]



URL = http://www.footprintnetwork.org/

=Description=

"Humans are the most successful species on the planet. But we are using more resources than the Earth can provide. We are in global ecological overshoot.

In 2003, Global Footprint Network, a 501c (3) nonprofit organization, was established to enable a sustainable future where all people have the opportunity to live satisfying lives within the means of one planet.

An essential step in creating a one-planet future is measuring human impact on the Earth so we can make more informed choices.

That is why our work aims to accelerate the use of the Ecological Footprint — a resource accounting tool that measures how much nature we have, how much we use, and who uses what.

...

Our efforts are fueled by a future vision in which human demand on nature is monitored as closely as the stock market. A time when designers are shaping products, buildings, and cities that have one-planet Footprints. A world where all humans prosper and development succeeds because we are finally recognizing ecological constraints and using innovation to advance more than just the economic bottom line.

Making this vision a reality is our work. We provide the scientific data necessary to drive large-scale, social change.

Together with hundreds of individuals, 200 cities, 23 nations, leading business, scientists, NGO’s, academics and our 90-plus global Partners — spanning six continents — we are advancing the impact of the Footprint in the world, applying it to practical projects and sparking a global dialogue about a one-planet future and how we can facilitate change."
(http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/at_a_glance/)



=More Information=

* [[Ecological Footprint]]
* [[P2P Metrics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]