
=Description=

Rok Krancj:

"Global foresight commons has been taken up by some scholars as a concept denoting »a network of globally distributed and shared resources between people, institutions, businesses and other communities, which provides an increasing and useful pool of knowledge, ideas and capabilities that potentiate all of humanity’s capacity to think about shared futures in effective ways."
(http://labgov.city/thecommonspost/gaming-the-future-and-the-futures-of-gaming-on-pathways-and-possibilities-of-anticipatory-commoning/#_edn11)

=More information=

* Ramos, J.M, Mansfield, T. & G. Priday (2012). . Journal of Futures Studies, 17(1), 71–90; 

** w/ Raford, N. (2014). Online foresight platforms: Evidence for their impact on scenario planning & strategic foresight. Technological Forecasting & Social Change (97): 65–76.

* Ramos, J.M. (2014). Anticipatory Governance: Traditions and Trajectories for Strategic Design. Journal of Futures Studies, 19(1), 35–52; 

* Boyd, E., Borgstrom, S., Nykvist, B., & I.A. Stacewicz (2015). Anticipatory governance for social-ecological resilience. Ambio, (44): 149–161.; 

* Ravetz, J. (2017). From “smart” cities to “wise”: synergistic pathways for collective urban intelligence, JPI Urban Europe – Urban Transition Pathways Symposium; http://actionforesight.net/anticipatory-governance-and-the-city-as-a-commons/.

* http://seedmagazine.com/content/article/on_a_global_foresight_commons/.

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Commons]]