

=Text=



Franz Nahrada:

"The Vision of Global Villages

The term Global Village originally was coined by Marshall McLuhan to
express the sensation of proximity in an era of mass media and mass
communication. Increasingly, the very near and the very remote – something
anywhere on the globe - can happen and be experienced synchronously by the
users of media. For McLuhan, the media that connect our thoughts and our
feelings were the primordial structures that shape the direction of our
perception, intention and culture. A change in media would allow certain
things to grow to new extremes, while blocking out other things. Also this
change would revitalize and retrieve older structures, while preparing new
developments in future.

When we use the term Global Village it is in plural: Global Villages. What
can grow to extremes is the potential of human beings to access any kind
of information or experience from any point of this globe, which can mean
that we either can be “nomads” or we can be “settlers” and bring work,
relations, learning with us. This holds an exciting promise: we can gain
new liberty in choosing the place of our lives, without being lost in a
strange place. We can choose to ignore the place of our lives as well and
dive into the sphere of communication and virtual excitement. But we can
also do the very opposite: use the power of communication to enhance the
quality of a place, its capacity to support life, solve problems.

A very few people can create a dense field of local interactions
especially when supported by the immense power of ingenuity, know-how,
counsel, creativity, inventiveness that emerges between likeminded beings
around the world. We have chosen to use the term “Global Village” in this
particular sense, as the description of an information–enhanced physical
place. Its also connected to the idea of “retrieval”, expressing that we
can finally return to a more healthy and more appropriate environment that
has been the environment of humans for thousands of years; a place that
relates to nature, is of human size, allows the individual to influence
its surroundings. We bring our mind home again, as architect Tony Gwilliam
once said. We take some sophistication out of the centralised
institutions, the sophistication that helped so much to increase our
knowledge and abilities, and we apply and melt it to the small and
immediate environment around us that allows us to unfold in freedom and
self-determination. This environment is one that has its own traditional
sophistication, often forgotten. This environment used to be the village,
which is often connotated with terms like “miserable”, “dumb” and “poor”.
We retrieve the village and we want to make it smart and abundant. In
this goal, we are at the same time linked with a large number of
equal-minded people who live and work somewhere else on this globe. We
discover that this ubiquitous village spaces hold much more space for
human development than the overcrowded cities. We discover that we can
blend the natural potential of landscapes, plants, animals with the
technological potential of automation - to form a new “city-organism”
embedded in cultured landscape in which we live efficiently and safe. We
might still be adventurous, hungry for experience and therefore nomadic –
but we know there is something to return to, where we can spend most of
our life at. The main goal of our lives is to cultivate this network of
villages by increasing the technological base that helps us building,
growing, harvesting. From primarily market oriented we return to primarily
subsistence – oriented, and we share all knowledge freely that allows us
to build, grow, harvest better. We share it with all villages and people
of the world, and the world of Global Villages shares with us. Thus we
out-cooperate structures of intellectual property and competition. Yet we
might want to continue to buy and sell, but it is not for outperforming
each other - which led to the monstrous structures of industrialism. It is
rather a retrieval of craftsmanship, skill, uniqueness. We don’t have
“trade secrets”, but there is more individuality and uniqueness than ever
– a blend of place, people, culture that materializes in products and
services.

Villages might join together in different ways, as virtual cooperatives,
trade partners, barter circles, might use currencies or gift economy
schemes: the exciting thing is that all those possibilties are open. If in
this pattern we choose a place to live, it is because not just the place
but also the people with whom we live are in resonance with us. Culture is
an issue of choice, and this choice creates diversity between cultures on
one side and a test of cultures on the other side. We might intentionally
choose certain belief systems to live them out in full consequence, but we
will not claim there is only one true belief system, rather put them
constantly to test. Imagine a world where capitalism and communism is
possible at the same time, just at different locations!

This also means that we are decreasing dependence on external factors. One
of the main sources of the Kenyan Crisis in 2008, for example, is that a
decent life according to the promises of civilisation is not possible
without a share of money. When there is not enough internal accumulation
in a country, the source of that money is corruption. The scarce resources
are allocated by a system of monopolisation and power, and it is
existential to be in the right group to survive. The result of elections
determines the conditions of survival. This holds true not only for Kenya,
but for many countries and areas in the world. So it is about time to
radically think about internal accumulation of resources – but in a new
way, not for the sake of competition.

Global Villages as we foresee them will survive and thrive by their
internal capacities, which are constantly supported by networking. Every
invention or pattern that proves efficient and meaningful on one corner of
the world can be multiplied, tested elsewhere, can thus be refined and
enhanced. To give a simple example, only one percent of the sunflowers
mass is used for valuable production, the rest is “biomass” that is burned
one or the other way. Green chemistry is discovering enormous wealth in
this biomass, that can be processed in many ways and be the source of much
more valuable stuff.

Global Villages are a project of peace. The idea is to make it possible
for everyone, every group, each culture, to have a home place, to thrive
and share knowledge and therefore thrive more and so also develop a
positive interest into the growth of the commonwealth of villages
regardless of their denomination– simply because the more there are, the
greater the possibilities for all. The idea has to be tested, and it has
never been tested before. We know that the building blocks are there:
sophisticated communication technologies and therefore unlimited local
learning by access to networks, a new and deepened understanding of the
power and capacities of nature - if it is well-understood and well-managed
- , new patterns in architecture, solar and material technology, of
feedback cycles, interactions, fields. Carpenters will work with virtual
cooperatives of carpenters, shoemakers with shoemakers, bakers with bakers
and brickmakers with brickmakers! Almost each person in the village is
supported by a global network that cares about the persons profession,
calling, endavours, allowing to raise the quality and find the worlds best
answers to each question that might arise locally.

There are several perspectives why we think that Global Villages are an
important and substantial goal to work for.

From the perspective of the individual, especially of the independent
thinkers that we care for, villages in the broadest sense are environments
where there is potentially a larger degree of freedom and choice. In
large institutions and in crowded settlements little respect is paid to
individual freedom and creativity, to a balance between social norms and
the personal ability to modify them, change them, refine them. There is
anonymity and a feeling of alienation, of distance between what determines
society and what moves the individual (and what the individual can move).
Creativity is seen as a quality of entertainment, not of life. Even
though such alienation might even be worse and crushing in circumstances
of smaller communities, when an individual is labelled outsider by an old
elite, we can imagine that this situation is easier to change by
intensified local communication and direct challenge. In the context of
the Minciu Sodas / Orchard of Thought network we support the creative
power of people against the inertia of institutions, because institutions
tend to dampen and discourage the inventiveness and inner potential of
people, which is the main source of progress and evolution. We think that
independent thinkers seek an environment which they can influence (and
thus might even be found in villages rather than cities), and we help each
other bringing out the best – which also means manifestation in the life
circumstances of a community.

There is a radically different perspective - the perspective of the planet
as a living entity - which also supports the idea of Global Villages and
converges with the first. In this perspective, the better cooperation and
connection between humans, landscape, plants and animals stabilizes and
enhances the ecosystems, supports the intensification of the web of life
and the layer of beauty that is the surface of our common home. The earth
will look radically different if we continue to choose to live in urban
agglomerations or if we dare to reverse the trend and strengthen the
peripheries. In the latter case we understand that human presence and
regenerative design can also be the key to fertility and integrity of
soil, ubiquity of plants, stabilisation of climate, in short the breathing
and vitality of the being that we are part of. Human needs not to be
alienated and separated from ecology; human activities can be shaped in a
way that they are both creating abundance for humans and resources for
natural cycles. One example is the human-supported building of soil,
something that biological farming and composting is at the very beginning
to understand completely. New ways of composting, recycling, planting,
building, producing are sought that feed back in a non-toxic way into the
sources of life stock. Human presence and interest is required to do that,
and therefore the Global Villages where people live a more decentralized
life, assimilated to the exciting possibilities of every kind of
landscape, spreading but not sprawling, gentle and dense at the same time,
lean and green, connected by the virtual networks of united
problem-solving, are an interesting and essential element of our planets
future.

'''What are the next steps?'''

It is self – explanatory that we are far away from even coming close to
the vision of Global Villages just outlined, but we can start weaving the
pattern by understanding that each and every telecenter, networked
education place, virtual cooperation project, sharing of information and
so on is a tiny step towards a great goal. Therefore it is crucial to
foster and enhance networking around practical questions, mutual support,
solidarity of local communities around the world in cherishing their
immediate places. We must increase the awareness and the perception of
each others presence, we must start to understand that it is necessary to
invite and engage others into our local circumstance. We should be able to
find each other quickly and commonly develop a matrix of problem-solving
activities around the world.

Franz Nahrada, Hochegg, February 2008


=More Information=

#[[Global Villages]]
#[[Global Village Movement Status Report 2010]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Movements]]