
'''= "humanity's ability to holistically coordinate upon an emergent shared goal and accomplish it in a worldwide complex context".''' [https://sintropiadao.org/the-solution-sintropiadaos-life-centric-global-coordination-tool-a-3-dimensional-support-system-that-weaves-self-relationships-and-planetary-impact/]

=Discussion=

Flavia Macedo:

"Collective intelligence alone does not entail that the shared intent of the group is benevolent, on the contrary, it has been used for many evil doings. The same can apply to GCI, if we don't internalize wholeness and the greater well-being of all life forms as our most fundamental shared goal we risk falling into the same miserable outcomes. That's why some thinkers and friends prefer to use the term Collective Wisdom to bring about a shared intent for an overall benign outcome.    

Moreover, once you start to see other humans, not as enemies, but as forms of you that were shaped and maintained in different parts of the flowing movement of humanity through different experiences and biological formations, you begin to realize that the autonomous slice of you finding its highest place and function in the whole is just as important as the other slices finding their perfect place and function. Thus, we can suggest that another fundamental shared goal would be guaranteeing that all humans have their basic needs met so they can thrive as capable and benevolent beings.

It might be hard to imagine some close-minded individuals embracing such a narrative. But as mentioned before, once we shape our tools, our tools shape us. So, if a group of individuals, who I'll call Sintropians, have such foundations as an emergent shared goal and they design a tool to foster that through GCI then it will model the behavior of others.  

'''Sintropians''' are people who agree to be forces of syntropy inside the humanity spectrum. [[Syntropy]] (Sintropia) is the coordination force of creation, it's life's energetic principle of order and internal organization that attracts together ever-increasing complex forms to create something new. While entropy breaks things down, syntropy guides them together. It could be translated as life force or the energy behind the phenomena in which life creates conditions conducive to life, as it is mostly diffused through regenerative agriculture practices. The Sintropians I'm calling forth work inspired by life's coordinating principles to guarantee that we, as life forms, also create conditions conducive to life by building GCI as a life-centric tool.

...

The Sintropians who feel as an emergent property of their being the calling to build GCI in pursuit of these goals must initially look to the current state of the world, where we are drowning in wars, polarization, social inequalities, fake news, environmental destruction, corruption, and all the others symptoms of a failed world to realize all we need to let go of.

Most of our current habits of interaction and organization, which are rooted in fragmentation and destructive competition, are not suited for the development of a wholeness-based GCI. The basic cognitive processes needed for any kind of intelligence—collective or otherwise, like decision-making, problem-solving, sensemaking, remembering, and learning, are heavily impaired by the conflicting interests embedded in our geopolitical-economic arrangements. The first step to developing such cognitive processes globally is eradicating the perverse incentives guiding people toward individualistic actions by presenting them with an alternative coordinating language written through wholeness principles."

(https://sintropiadao.org/the-solution-sintropiadaos-life-centric-global-coordination-tool-a-3-dimensional-support-system-that-weaves-self-relationships-and-planetary-impact/)


[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]