
=Discussion=

Vasilis Kostakis, Alex Pazaitis et al.:

"Ref. [46] propose four different possible outcomes for
these social struggles over the P2P infrastructures, stemming
from the combinations of whether control will be
central or distributed along with whether the goal will be
the expansion of capital or the benefit of the commons. On
the one side, there can be found a new form of capitalism.

One adapted to the new techno-economic paradigm
brought forth by ICT [61]. This distributed capitalism takes
advantage of P2P infrastructures in order to exact profits
and ensure its continued survival. On the other side, we
witness the new commons-oriented practices, also made
possible by the same infrastructures. Within this framework,
our model falls into the distributed control of
commons-oriented P2P infrastructures. That of “resilient
communities” according to [46]. These communities,
emerging around the world, are poised against capitalist
growth and strive for sustainability, energy efficiency and
environmental awareness [49]. Movements like the Transition
Network are akin to the presented model in this
paper as they strive for a holistic shift from today's unsustainable
consumer lifestyle.

For our “energy commons” to become a global reality,
such communities need to develop a conscience that will
accommodate such a leap. The energy system needs to
attain the traits that made the Internet (and the P2P
infrastructure in general) so innovative. A turn towards the
spirit of sustainability and cooperation promoted by CBBP
appears like a viable vehicle for change. The energy system
proposed in this paper anticipates a similar shift from
traditional industrial production of scale to small-scale,
local production of scope enabled by desktop
manufacturing technologies and CBPP [45]. So the model
would aim to cover not just the domestic consumption but
also energy for the production of goods. Energy that usually
is outsourced to the market of goods and consequently fed
by another energy production source. It could be argued
that the seeds for this change are currently emerging. As
was mentioned already, a step towards open hardware is
being taken. Open source technology enables the unrestricted
and free adoption and adjustment of hardware
designs according to one's resources and needs, thus promoting
knowledge diffusion, innovation and cooperation
[63]. There are several examples of open designs for energy
production infrastructure available. For instance, the Rural
Electrification Research Group of the NTUA has developed a
cost-effective and fairly easy to reproduce wind turbine
[48] and a pico-hydro turbine based on designs that were
already available on the Internet, while [14] make a
compelling case for the advantages of open source development
for PV."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


=More information=

* references at http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf

* sourced from: [[P2P_Approach_To_Energy_Production]]


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Global Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]