'''= The GENI Initiative focuses on linking renewable energy resources around the world using international electricity transmission.'''

URL = http://www.geni.org/


=Description=

Global Energy Network Institute (GENI) is a research and education organization founded by Peter Meisen in 1986 and registered as a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization in 1991. GENI's focus is on the interconnection of electric power transmission networks between nations and continents, emphasizing tapping abundant renewable energy resources, and utilizing the efficiencies of seasonal, time of day, and load differences around the world.

GENI's goal is to educate world leaders and policy makers on the benefits of this global strategy. The concept of an interconnected global grid linked to renewable resources was first suggested by Buckminster Fuller in the World Game simulation in the 1970s. Fuller concluded that this strategy is the highest priority of the World Game simulation, (see page 206 of Fuller's book Critical Path (1981, ISBN 0-312-17491-8).

GENI has organized international workshops on international electricity transmission grids and coordinated workshops on renewable energy generation, the latter hosted by the IEEE Power Engineering Society.

GENI is one of the original members of American Council on Renewable Energy and has been a regular presence at the World Energy Congress, held internationally every 3 years.

GENI has stated that one reason technologies to accelerate the use of renewable energy and to avert climate change were not making headway in the marketplace has been the lack of ways for investors to track and easily invest in these technologies. Because of this, in 2004, GENI partnered with KLD, who creates socially-conscious investing stock indexes in the US, to create the KLD Global Climate 100 stock index. The index became available for investment in Japan in 2005 and in the U.S. on April 24, 2007."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Energy_Network_Institute)



[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Movements]]