'''= A proposal on how to perpetuate the creative and cooperative spirit of the occupations and transform them into lasting forms of social organization.'''

URL = http://www.theglobalsquare.org [http://wiki.theglobalsquare.org/wiki/Main_Page wiki]


See also the related project: [[Federated General Assembly]]

=Introductory Citations=

'''1.'''

'A move away from mainstream social networks is already happening on several levels within the Occupy movements — from the local networks already set up for each occupation to an in-progress, overarching, international network project called Global Square, that Knutson is helping to build. Those networks are likely to be key to Occupy’s future, since nearly all of the largest encampments in the United States have been evicted — taking with them the physical spaces where activists communicated via the radically democratic General Assemblies."
(http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/12/occupy-facebook/all/1)




=Description=

"The idea behind the Global Square, as we proposed it, was to create an online platform for our movement that could eventually transition into a functional model for direct global democracy, where local assemblies are linked together through an open-source network allowing them to coordinate grassroots activities and formulate common aspirations at the global level. Much more than building just another Facebook, the Global Square project aims to be a revolutionary experiment in radical self-organization at the global level.

The initiative, which received early support from Wikileaks and Richard Stallman, has since taken on a life of its own, with some extremely clever and creative people making major strides forward in its realization. As Captain reports, “The Global Square Knutson is helping to build is finalizing its tech and will launch, probably in January, with basic linkages for various Occupy sites to trade messages, re-publish articles and allow cross-commenting on them.”
(http://roarmag.org/2011/12/wired-covers-the-global-square-a-facebook-for-the-99/)


=Characteristics=

"his online platform could include the following (note that this list is far from exhaustive and will grow organically to include many other functionalities):

    
* An interactive map that lists all ongoing assemblies around the world;
    
* A search option allowing users to find squares, events, working-groups, etc.;
    
* An aggregated news feed that lists the most relevant ‘status updates’ shared by the various assemblies (à la Facebook);
    
* Individual ‘pages’ for each local square/assembly where participants can organize collectively, including the following functionalities:

      – A calendar with upcoming events/actions;
      – A forum for public debate, with the ability to open different threads;
      – A list of all relevant documents/minutes uploaded by the assembly;
      – The ability to create and edit new documents collaboratively;
      – The ability to vote on specific decisions;
      – The ability to submit new proposals.
    
* A public and private messaging system that allows all individual users and assemblies to communicate and exchange information, reinforcing solidarity and mutual collaboration;
    
* The ability to ‘scale-up’ local decisions, actions, and initiatives to the global level through a ‘sharing’ system that allows local assemblies to pose ideas, votes, and proposals to other assemblies in a horizontal, non-hierarchical fashion (i.e., straight from the local to the global level).


Furthermore, The Global Square should be 100% multilingual and open-source, so a community of developers can continue to add languages as well as functions."
(http://roarmag.org/2011/11/the-global-square-an-online-platform-for-our-movement/)


=The Proposal=

"This is a proposal made by a group of concerned global citizens who also act as volunteers for Take the Square, United for Global Change, 15october.net, European Revolution and Reflections on a Revolution (ROAR). We do not pretend to represent or speak on behalf of anyone but ourselves.

'''The Global Square: Towards an Online Platform for the Occupy Movement'''

In its most recent tactical briefing for the Occupy movement, Adbusters correctly pointed out that, “of the many questions swirling around #OCCUPY, the most challenging is how to gel into a global movement without sacrificing the decentralized, leaderless model.” In the wake of the global day of action on October 15, the question now arises how our movement can evolve new organizational structures that will allow the assemblies — and their highly innovative participatory model of decision-making — to survive beyond the occupations and become a permanent fixture of our emerging global society.


'''How, in other words, can we perpetuate the creative and cooperative spirit of the occupations and transform them into lasting forms of social organization — at the global as well as the local level?'''

Currently, the organization of the occupations and the collaboration between them rests in part upon the innovative use of social media. However, as a group of volunteers who were directly involved in the coordination of the worldwide protests of October 15, we have found the existing social media to be increasingly restrictive in their functionality. While Facebook and Twitter have been very helpful for disseminating basic information and aiding mass mobilization, they do not provide us with the tools for extending our participatory model of decision-making beyond the direct reach of the assemblies and up to the global level.

What we need, at this point, is a platform that allows us to radically democratize our global organizational efforts. In addition to the local squares, we now need a global square where people of all nations can come together as equals to participate in the coordination of collective actions and the formulation of common goals and aspirations. For this reason, we call upon the revolutionary wizkids of the world to unite and assist in the development of a new online platform – The Global Square – that combines the communicative functions of the existing social networks with the political functions of the assemblies to provide crucial new tools for the development of our global movement.

The aim of the platform, in this respect, should not be to replace the physical assemblies but rather to empower them by providing the online tools for (trans)national organization and collaboration. The ideal would be both to foster individual participation and to structure collective action. The Global Square could be our own virtual Zuccotti Park, serving as a public space where different groups can come together to organize their local assemblies — and where different assemblies can join hands to coordinate their collective projects. In a way, The Global Square could be a groundbreaking experiment in building a global participatory decision-making system from the grassroots up."
(http://roarmag.org/2011/11/the-global-square-an-online-platform-for-our-movement/)


=Discussion=

==Why We Need It==

'Facebook and the other social networks have until now only offered the possibility to share and promote content. The Global Square, by contrast, should encourage the active participation of citizens, the consolidation of online working groups, the collaborative scheduling of events, the establishment of consensus, the process of participatory budgeting, and the exchange of needs, proposals and ideas – in a local and a global context – between individuals and assemblies. Furthermore, to promote the widespread uptake of the platform, the creation of a minimalist, user-friendly and aesthetically-pleasing design is of the utmost importance.

We are aware of the existence of social platforms like n-1.cc, used by the Spanish movement, yet we feel that these have a number of shortcomings. They are not very user-friendly and not universally accessible for citizens from different national backgrounds. Also, resulting from a lack of funds and time, these platforms have not been able to develop the level of complexity required to provide all the functionalities listed above. We realize that the project we are proposing is a very ambitious one. But we hope that our movement can seize this opportunity to prove once and for all that creativity, innovation and dynamism can flourish in a collaborative, non-profit framework — and that it is possible to ensure a form of participatory democracy beyond the nation state.

We believe The Global Square could make a significant contribution to the consolidation of the assemblies and the development of our global movement. It is important to note, however, that the project will require significant funding, as well as a team of full-time professional developers. As we know that Occupy Wall Street plays an exemplary role within the movement, we are turning specifically to you for help in further refining this idea and initiating the search for funds and developers for a beta-version of the platform. We would be very interested to hear your ideas, suggestions and criticisms of this proposal. We can be reached at tts@riseup.net.

Finally, we have registered a domain (theglobalsquare.org — not active yet) that we would happily share with the movement (other suggestions are, of course, very welcome too). We are looking forward to a public conversation with all of you on how to make this idea work in a way that involves and benefits all. From the local village square to the global village square — it is time for us to unite!"
(http://roarmag.org/2011/11/the-global-square-an-online-platform-for-our-movement/)


=More Information=

"we are turning specifically to you for help in further refining this idea and initiating the search for funds and developers for a beta-version of the platform. We would be very interested to hear your ideas, suggestions and criticisms of this proposal. We can be reached at tts@riseup.net."

* [[Federated General Assembly]]


[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:15M Movements]]