=Contextual Quote=

'''1.'''

"If something crucial arose during the primeval evolution of the geosphere, and something equivalent recurred in the ancient evolution of the biosphere, then it’s bound to recur as well in the evolution of the noosphere.

Geological evolution led to the formation of enormous tectonic plates under-girding Earth’s continents. They are still there, supremely importantly so — seven major, and a dozen or so minor ones. So I’ve wondered whether biological and societal evolution may have led to structural-functional equivalents. I’m not sure what to propose for plant, animal, and fungal life — perhaps the key ecological zones associated with Earth’s major mountain ranges and river basins. However, the formations known as history’s axial religions and civilizations (800–200 BCE), five to eight in number, sure look like rough societal equivalents to tectonic plates that still matter profoundly today.

So let’s therefore ask what equivalents or analogues the noosphere’s growth may entail."


'''2.'''

"Just as evolution has not resulted in one tectonic plate, nor one master ecology, religion or civilization, it surely will not result in a singular noospheric entity. That would contravene a “law” that evolution requires variety and flux, without which evolution will not occur.

My deduction is that something like five to ten AI-derived, -endowed, and -empowered entities will emerge that resemble noospheric superorganisms, all the more so as people become attracted to associating with them. These novel noospheric entities and their AI operating systems will all be somewhat different from each other, yet united in having a sacred purpose I’ll specify in a moment. I say “something like” and “resemble” because what emerges may appear to fit the superorganism model for a while, when in fact something quite different takes form — something yet to be understood and named, something not “alive” yet devoted to “life.”

If so, it’ll signify another evolutionary commonality across all three planetary spheres. These noospheric entities will exist loosely atop our biosphere’s axial religions, civilizations, and ecologies, and they atop our geosphere’s tectonic plate."


- David Ronfeldt [https://davidronfeldt.substack.com/p/updates-about-superorganisms-holospheres]


=Description=

"From Nate Hagens paper on "Economics for the Future: Beyond the Superorganism"

Highlights

• We lack a cohesive map on how behavior, economy, and the environment interconnect.

• Global human society is functioning as an energy dissipating superorganism.

• Climate change is but one of many symptoms emergent from this growth dynamic.

• Culturally, this “Superorganism” doesn’t need to be the destiny of Homo sapiens.

• A systems economics can inform the ‘reconstruction’ after financial recalibration."

(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800919310067#bib0335)


=Discussion=

==Cultural evolution, Ultrasociality and the Superorganism==

Nate Hagens:

“What took place in the early 1500s was truly exceptional, something that had never happened before and never will again. Two cultural experiments, running in isolation for 15,000 years or more, at last came face toface. Amazingly, after all that time, each could recognize the other’s in-stitutions. When Cortés landed in Mexico he found roads, canals, cities, palaces, schools, law courts, markets, irrigation works, kings, priests, temples, peasants, artisans, armies, astronomers, merchants, sports, theatre, art, music, and books. High civilization, differing in detail but alike in essentials, had evolved independently on both sides of the earth.” 
(Ronald Wright, A Short History of Progress (2004, pp50-51)

“Ultrasociality refers to the most social of animal organizations, with fulltime division of labor, specialists who gather no food but are fed by others, effective sharing of information about sources of food and danger, self-sacrificial effort in collective defense.” (Campbell, 1974; Gowdy and Krall,2013). Humans are among a small handful of species that are extremely social. Phenotypically we are primates, but behaviorally we’re more akin to the social insects (Haidt, 2013). Our ultrasociality allows us to function at much larger scales than as individuals. At the largest scales, cultural evolution occurs far more rapidly than genetic evolution (Richerson and Boyd, 2005). Via the cultural evolution that began with agriculture, humans have evolved into a globally interconnected civilization, ‘outcompeting’ other human economic models along the wayto becoming a de facto ‘superorganism’ (Hölldobler and Wilson, 2008).A superorganism can be defined as "a collection of agents which can act in concert to produce phenomena governed by the collective"(Kelly, 1994). Via cooperation (and coordination), fitness transfers from lower levels to higher levels of organization (Michod and Nedelcu, 2003). The needs of this higher-level entity (today for humans; the global economy) mold the behavior, organization and functions of lower-level entities (individual human behavior) (Kesebir, 2011). Human behavior is thus constrained and modified by ‘downward causation’ from the higher level of organization present in society (Campbell, 1974). All the ‘irrationalities’ previously outlined have kept our species flourishing for 300,000 years. What has changed is not ‘us’ but rather the economic organization of our societies in tandem with technology, scale and impact. Since the Neolithic, human society has organized around growth of surplus, initially measured physically e.g. grain, now measured by digital claims on physical surplus, (or money) (Gowdy and Krall, 2014). Positive human attributes like cooperation have been co-opted to become coordination towards surplus production. Increasingly, the “purpose” of a modern human in the ultrasocial global economy is to contribute to surplus for the market (e.g. the economic value of a human life based on discounted lifetime income, the marginal productivity theory of labor value, etc.) (Gowdy 2019, in press)."

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339604726_Economics_for_the_future_-_Beyond_the_superorganism)

Source: essay by Nate Hagens: Economics for the future – Beyond the [[Superorganism]].


=More information=


* [[Axial Entities of the Noosphere]]


==Bibliography==

'''* “The Global Superorganism: an evolutionary-cybernetic model of the emerging network society” (2007), Francis Heylighen'''

URL  = https://researchportal.vub.be/en/publications/the-global-superorganism-an-evolutionary-cybernetic-model-of-the-


* Stewart, John E., “The Trajectory of Evolution and Its Implications for Humanity,” Journal of Big History, vol. III, no. 3, 2007, pp. 141 – 155, online at: [https://doi.org/10.22339/jbh.v3i3.3380 doi]

* Stewart, John E., “Towards a general theory of the major cooperative evolutionary transitions,” BioSystems, vol. 198, December 2020, online at [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2020.104237 doi]

[[Category:Global_Governance]]

[[Category:Noosphere]]