
=Context=

''= this article distinguishes a 'verticalized' Globalization Studies approach, which according to the author is an extension of an elitist Western Civilization approach, vs the horizontal premises of 'mondialisation', a global ecological and social vision of the world as a whole''

=Article=

'''* Article / Chapter: The Evolution of Macro-History  in the United States  Barry H. Rodrigue. Chapter 5 of: Evolution: A Big History Perspective 2011 71–81'''

URL = http://www.socionauki.ru/almanac/issues/evolution_2_en/full_text_rodrigue.pdf


=Abstract=

"The inclusion of large-scale studies in the world's educational systems is of great importance for resolving the most serious problems that humans face today. In the United States, the development of such macro-historical studies began with courses in Western Civilization a hundred years ago. Global studies came to be increasingly offered in universities after World War II and evolved in two directions. The first developed into Globalization Studies, a hierarchical model that was discipline-based and focused on power-relationships in regions and markets. The second was a ‘mondialisation’ or horizontal model, which was interdisciplinary and used the entire world as a reference point. Similar academic models also came into existence around the world that paralleled this U.S. experience in macro-history. A problem that today's scholars face is how to reconcile these two visions, not only for global benefit but for our very own survival. One suggestion is to continue moving with the current trajectory and to adopt a model of macro-studies, such as the example provided by Big History."


=Source=

* " A version of this paper was originally presented at the Russian Academy of Sciences' Fifth International Conference on Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations in Moscow (Russian Federation) on 23 June, 2009. A brief version of this paper was published in the National Education Association journal, Thought & Action, in December 2010."

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]