
=Directory=

Copied from the Solar Array blog of 'Gmoke' [http://solarray.blogspot.com/2016/01/world-game-notes-moocs-global-displays.html]:

"An online, ad hoc “Dashboard for Spaceship Earth” can also be cobbled together from existing resources with some of theseWorld Game Dashboards and Visualizations:
 
http://www.worldometers.info
 
clock of various Earthly vital statistics
http://www.poodwaddle.com/worldclock/
 
Breathing Earth - carbon output, births and deaths
http://www.breathingearth.net  
 
AP's interactive map of countries, emissions, and climate goals (2009)
http://hosted.ap.org/specials/interactives/_science/globalWarming/index.html?SITE=WSAW
 
NASA's Aqua/AIRS animation on carbon, watching the Earth breathe
https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/details.cgi?aid=3947
 
http://www.modelearth.org - associated with Solutions Journal
 
http://show.mappingworlds.com
 

Environmental Performance Index 
http://beta.sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/epi/
 
Arctic Jet Stream
http://squall.sfsu.edu/scripts/nhemjetstream_model.html
 
Yale's Environmental Performance Index (http://epi.yale.edu) is global in scope. 
And the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (http://www.ipcc.ch) tracks everything from temperature change to carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. 

Terralingua is tracking something unique they call Vitality Index(http://terralingua.org/our-work/vitality-index-of-tek/). 
What are other groups tracking? 
What global measures are there for biodiversity, ocean health, arable land, rainforest, ice coverage, number of species, etc? 
 
realtime wind/temperature Earth:  http://earth.nullschool.net
 
Worldwatch Institute's Vital Signs (http://www.amazon.com/State-World-2015-Confronting-Sustainability/dp/1610916107/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1453084737&sr=1-1&keywords=state+of+the+world+2015). 

The Skeptical Environmentalist (http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521010683/) has a lot of interesting statistics and comes from another perspective. 

UNESCO (http://en.unesco.org) has good statistics about education and science from a global perspective.

NASA's Earth Observatory (http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov) has some cool maps and interesting analysis of what is happening on earth as seen by satellites.  For example, while biodiversity is going down, the total amount of life on earth as measured by Net Primary Productivity has actually increased on average by 6% from 1982 to 1999.
 
Crisis Commons (http://crisiscommons.org) and CrisisCamps like this 2010 one for Haiti in Boston are already a kind of narrow World Game:
http://crisiscampbos02132010.eventbrite.com
Saturday, February 13, 2010 CrisisCamp will bring again together volunteers in Boston, MA to collaborate on technology projects which aim to assist in Haiti's relief efforts by providing data, information, maps and technical assistance to NGOs, relief agencies and the public.
 
The Buckminster Fuller Institute (http://www.bfi.org) is preserving and continuing Fuller's work and OS Earth (http://www.osearth.com) runs corporate and student simulations based upon the World Game.
 
There are disaster preparedness (http://www.stopdisastersgame.org) and humanitarian assistance training (http://www.virtualpeace.org) simulations online. Bright Neighbor (http://www.brightneighbor.com) is a community resilience software package marketed to city and town governments.  [There is also http://Recovers.org which has worked with Occupy Sandy in NYC and helps cities and towns prepare for recovery before the disaster happens.]
 
One game designer, Jane McGonigal has built a number of real world problem solving games, including SuperStruct for the Institute for the Future (http://www.iftf.org) in 2009 and Evoke http://blog.urgentevoke.net, in 2010. The first challenge in that game is a famine in Tokyo ten years from now. There are ten challenges to be completed in ten weeks. McGonigal's writings are at www.avantgame.com/... 
 
John Robb of Global Guerrillas (http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2010/02/journal-alternative-ways-to-incentivize-work-and-innovation.htm) theorizes about "a real world company that operates like a massively multiplayer online (MMO) game. One reason I believe that this type of venture would work (and that my dream wasn't purely a fantasy) is this simple insight: MMOs with persistent environments (aka 'worlds') have proven an ability to incentivize tens of millions of players to do billions of hours of work...."

 
'''Additional Links:'''

http://ayiti.newzcrew.org/..."  The Cost of Life is a pre-earthquake game of rural life in Haiti (Ayiti) from UNICEF. The object of this game is to follow one family for four years. It is not an MMO.
 
http://permaculturehaiti.org  and http://transitionhaiti.ning.com are both sites trying to compile permaculture and transition town information as it applies to Haiti

Enersa (http://enersahaiti.com)  is a Haitian group doing solar as a cottage industry.

For more information contact Richard Komp, PhD, Director of Skyheat Associates <www.skyheat.org>.  His report on a 2007 visit is at [pdf alert]
http://www.mainesolar.org/Haiti07.pdf

Ozone Hole Watch
ozonewatch.gsfc.nasa.gov
 
International Institute for Sustainable Development on climate policy
http://www.iisd.ca/process/climate_atm.htm
 
Gamification of Systems Thinking
http://blog.sustainabilitylearningcentre.com/2014/01/28/1438/
 
urban world app from McKinsey "offers previously unavailable data from a proprietary MGI database of more than 2,600 cities around the world”
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/in_the_news/urban_world_app
 
10 science games doing real research, including a game to find cropland at www.geo-wiki.org
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/25/online-gamers-solving-sciences-biggest-problems
 
realtime model of (commercial) planes in http://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2014/aviation-100-years
 
There is a board game version that approaches the World Game called the World Peace Game (http://worldpeacegame.org) developed by John Hunter for Fourth Graders and other elementary school students.  I've talked with him and he knows about Buckminster Fuller's World Game but has his hands full with his won World Peace Game.  He has been working with a gaming group at MIT to make a digital version of the tabletop version of the game."

(http://solarray.blogspot.com/2016/01/world-game-notes-moocs-global-displays.html)

(http://solarray.blogspot.com/2016/01/world-game-notes-moocs-global-displays.html)

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Statistics]]

[[Category:Maps]]