

'''* Report (French-language): Rapport de la Recherche-Action. GLOCAL LOW-TECH « Exploration des voies, méthodes et outils
pour un essor systémique de la Low-Tech ». Période 10/11/2020 - 10/08/2022. Michel Foata-Prestavoine. Ademe et al., 2022.'''

URL = [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1zxnnNNVwYUJSPBlKofphtPvCxf-EoXUX/view Report]

''"this French research program took place between 2020 and 2022"''


=Description=

"This document reports on the collaborative action-research program "Glocal Low-Tech" for the period between November 2020 and August 2022. All the work described here should be received as a collective work and as proposals for the Low-Tech ecosystem. These proposals aim to help us reveal, more quickly and together, the full value of the Low-Tech approach in the face of current ecological, democratic, and economic challenges.

The operation was coordinated by the OseOns association, under an agreement with ADEME Ile-De-France following the 2020 "Call for Expressions of Interest 'Towards Low-Tech Innovation in Ile-de-France - For a Systemic Transformation of Territories - Low-Tech Innovation Strategy'."

The "Glocal Low-Tech" program involves numerous actors from the Low-Tech movement united around a common intention: "To explore the pathways and design methods and tools to foster a systemic rise of the Low-Tech approach in service of transition challenges and territorial resilience."

The action is organized around three axes conceived as the pillars of the "Glocal Low-Tech" strategy (see Figure 1 in § 4.1.2):

The "Territory" Axis: Its main objective is the development of a methodology for supporting the "inhabitants" of a territory, enabling them to define and launch their own local Low-Tech projects. The goal is to foster the emergence of a demand for Low-Tech whose value is solidly founded on the legitimacy and expertise of the inhabitants of the impacted territories. In this section, we describe both the theoretical foundations of our approach and the support actions for inhabitants experimented with on L'Île-Saint-Denis, which was the pilot territory for the operation. These actions led to the launch of two local Low-Tech projects led by the inhabitants of the Island.

The "Ecosystem" Axis: It aims to progress towards establishing the necessary tools for Low-Tech actors to know each other, recognize each other, and synergize their actions (particularly in response to territorial Low-Tech demands as they would emerge from a broader deployment of the support methods described in the previous axis). This ecosystem axis is structured around the following main actions: the preparation of a survey of Low-Tech actors at the national level; the conduct of an investigation to identify and understand the foundations of the Low-Tech approach endemic to the territory of L'Île-Saint-Denis; the development, with our partner Assemblée Virtuelle, of functional mapping tools for actors and their relationships; the initiation of a dynamic to share all of this work with other actors in the Low-Tech ecosystem.

The "Mobilization Levers" Axis: It proposes an analysis of the current barriers and levers to the emergence of collective dynamics and strategies for the rise of "Low-Tech" in our societies and economies. It leads to the design of a set of technical, economic (currency and activity evaluation methodology), and legal tools. These tools are proposed to the Low-Tech ecosystem to collectively overcome the difficulties described previously and to enable the deployment of effective and balanced cooperation among a broad and diverse set of actors. This is so that increasingly numerous and ambitious Low-Tech innovation approaches can emerge, while remaining faithful to the current fundamental values of the movement.

Prospects for the operation are proposed, both at the local and national scales. Most of them are based on the establishment of one or more legal organizations capable of caring for the "Common Goods" of the Low-Tech ecosystems."


[[Category:Commons Policy]]