'''= Concept from [[Peter Pogany]]: GLObal Population Plus Economy.'''


=Definition=

“The global population plus its economy (GLOPPE) is the combined substance of the human biomass, other life-forms in human service, and objects created through the economic process” 

(https://daviddmacleod.substack.com/p/drifting-toward-a-new-form-of-self)


(Source: Havoc, Thy Name is 21st Century: [[Thermodynamic Isolation and the New World Order]], 2015).


=Discussion=

David MacLeod:

"GLOPPE is also described as “a life phenomenon,” a thermodynamic spontaneous process that includes all of the contours that define an organism with a primordial entropic drive of a dissipative self-organizing structure. Pockets of order are eventually exceeded by the disorder required by the 2nd law of thermodynamics. Hence, a “superorganism” by any other name - one that actively defends its niche via feedback loops.

“As has been observed in many natural phenomena and demonstrated in physics and mathematics, dissipative material entities undergo alternating phases of relative (dynamic) steady states and chaotic transitions as they expand. The parameters or control variables of a given level of self-organization allow their growth only to a certain point. When they get in the way, the system breaks down (“bifurcates”) and the search for a new set of growth-accomodating parameters/control variables begins. Transition from one form of self-organization to another is chaotic per force since conflicting alternatives compete to become the new system’s “blueprint.”

World history reflects this pattern. The first form of GLOPPE’s self-organization, laissesz-faire/metal money/zero multilateralism (GS1), broke down in 1914 and a chaotic transition led to its second (and current) form, mixed economy/minimum reserve banking/weak multilateralism (GS2). The world is now facing a crisis because GLOPPE behaves as if the terrestrial sphere, which it dissipates as it grows, were an open thermodynamic system when, in reality, it is a closed system.

If humanity passes its first collective test of cosmic intelligence, the impending chaotic transition ought to lead to a form of self-organization that takes this physical fact into consideration. Emergence of a new global system, two-level economy/maximum bank reserve money/strong multilateralism (GS3) is highly probable. It would be equivalent to GLOPPE’s acquisition of an effective central nervous system.” 

(https://daviddmacleod.substack.com/p/drifting-toward-a-new-form-of-self)

(Source: Value and utility in a historical perspective, 2012).


==Peter Pogany's Three Levels of Reality==

David MacLeod:

"As Michel Bauwens shared recently in a discussion with Daniel Garner, Pogany is giving attention to three levels of reality. First is the physical world, where Pogany stresses the need to adjust the way we live to match biophysical realities. The economy is derivative from ecology. and so we must live in balance with the Earth over the long term.

Second is human social organization. He calls his theory New Historical Materialism, which looks at how societies deal with this material reality, as described above in the sections on Global Systems and GLOPPE.

The third level is the human mode of consciousness, based on the work of Jean Gebser. The ways in which we participate in reality are dependent upon our structure of consciousness. As Bauwens notes, we have an ecological challenge and a societal response, all of which is linked to a particular way of viewing the world.

Pogany is encouraging us to “lay the foundations for a future, truly global approach to global problems” (Havoc, p. 98) - For the Good of the Whole.

“What will the parameters of a warranted new global system be? Regardless of how rightly or wrongly “GS3” may characterize it; any consistent attempt to answer that question must imply a radically new social, economic, and political organization.

‘Ay, there’s the rub…’” (Havoc, p. 98)"

(https://daviddmacleod.substack.com/p/drifting-toward-a-new-form-of-self)

[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]