

=Bio=

'''1.'''

Journalist, blogger, mostly about GNU/Linux, open source, open data; the commons, copyright, patents and digital rights. In 1997 he wrote the first mainstream feature about GNU/Linux and free software, which appeared in Wired magazine. His most recent books are Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution, and Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics is Revolutionizing Science, Medicine and Business. 


'''2.'''

Glyn Moody is a writer, blogger and speaker.  His journalism appears in national newspapers, magazines and online; his blog about open source, open content and open culture is at http://opendotdotdot.blogspot.com.

After gaining two degrees in mathematics from Cambridge University, Moody entered business journalism before specialising in the field of computers in 1983. He started writing, lecturing and consulting about business use of the Internet in early 1994, and about open source in 1995.  In 1997 he wrote the first mainstream feature about GNU/Linux and free software, which appeared in Wired magazine (http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/5.08/linux.html).

=Publications=

“Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution” - the only detailed history of free software written so far - was published in 2001.   “Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics is Revolutionising Science, Medicine and Business” appeared in 2004, and explores the rise and importance of the open genomics commons.


=More information=

* http://opendotdotdot.blogspot.com.

+ contact details

# glyn.moody@gmail.com
# glynmoody@twitter.com
# glynmoody@identi.ca


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]