'''* Article: The struggle for good leadership in social movement organizations: Collective reflection and rules as basis for autonomy. By Ruth Simsa and Marion Totter. Ephemera, volume 20(4). Special Issue: Work, reconfigured'''

URL = http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/struggle-good-leadership-social-movement-organizations-collective-reflection-and-rules [http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4SimsaTotter.pdf PDF] 


=abstract=

"This paper analyzes how leadership is practiced in social movement organizations (SMO). Drawing arguments from Critical Leadership Studies, and based on qualitative empirical research conducted within the organizations of the Spanish protest movement 15M, this paper analyzes the perceptions of leadership, fields of tension and practices for dealing with these tensions. By empirically investigating a rather unexplored area of research, the paper makes three contributions. First, it offers in-depth investigations of leadership-practices in SMO, showing that activists are highly aware of the importance of leadership. Second, it contributes to leadership theory by confronting views of critical leadership studies with the empirical results. Activists share quite precise views on what good leadership means for them, which we propose to characterize as autonomous, reflexive and rule-based. Third, with the emphasis on collective reflection and rules, it highlights two aspects of leadership in SMO that have been widely ignored in discourses, but turn out as important means of dealing with challenges of autonomous leadership."


=Contextual Quote=

"What is rejected, in fact, by all interviewees are leadership positions whose
holder´s influence on decisions is only based on the position. Nevertheless,
leadership positions held by individuals are accepted, as long as they fulfill
the following conditions: The position must serve the collective, and it must
be based on permanent legitimization by the other members. Usually, this
implies the temporary holding of leadership-positions by individuals (for
instance, the facilitator of a meeting). Only exceptionally, more stable
positions arise (for instance, the long-time spokesperson of the nation-wide
organization against evictions). This ideal of autonomous leadership implies
certain difficulties in practice. While activists emphasize many aspects of
success, they also are aware of the challenges. Issues that arise when groups
seek to renounce the role of a single leader while at the same time
acknowledging the importance of leadership, are informal hierarchies and
inefficiencies. Not surprisingly, the emergence of informal hierarchies and implicit
leadership positions is mentioned as a problem. Besides differences in
communicative skills and charisma, also different individual time-resources
contribute to informal hierarchies." 

- Ruth Simsa and Marion Trotter [http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4SimsaTotter.pdf]

=Excerpts=

==[[Critical Leadership Studies]]==

By Ruth Simsa and Marion Totter:

"Critical leadership studies are a particularly apt theoretical basis for studying
leadership practices in SMO (social movement organizations). They have a radically different understanding of
leadership than the mainstream management literature. In classic models,
the assumption persists that leadership is the result of designated leaders and
their acting. Therefore, an organization is perceived as shaped by its leader’s
decisions, style and personality. Leadership is ascribed to a person with
certain qualities, a formal position within a hierarchy and the exercise of
authority. Different approaches of dominant models focus on the leadership
style (Bass and Riggio, 2005; Burns, 1978; Lewin et al., 1939; Wunderer, 2009),
on the innate characteristics of the leader (Avolio and Gardner, 2005; Bolden
and Gosling, 2006), on the relationship between leaders and followers
(Stippler and Dörffer, 2011), or on a combination of the organizational
context and specific styles of leadership (Fiedler et al., 1975; Hersey et al.,
1988). The common feature of these approaches is the emphasis on a clear
top-down hierarchy, a distinction between leaders and followers (Collinson,
2011) and the neglect of the contribution of followers to leadership (Western,
2013). 

With critical leadership studies, there has been a shift in the focus of
leadership research; ‘to understanding the emergent, informal, and dynamic
“leadership” brought about by the members of the collective itself’
(Contractor et al., 2012: 994). Critical leadership studies have theoretically
decentered the leader (Wood, 2005).They interpret leadership as a process,
which is a relational, socially-constructed phenomenon realized through the
interaction of diverse actors (Bolden, 2011; Gronn, 2002). Critical leadership
studies distinguish clearly between leaders and leadership. The effects of
leadership are not only seen as resulting from individual persons, but from
the dynamics within the respective system; this ‘complementary perspective
approaches leadership as a social process that engages everyone in the
community’ (Day, 2001: 583). In line with this perspective, Lichtenstein and
Plowman (2009) argue that dynamic interactions between individuals lead to
emergent outcomes, and that conceptions of leadership thus should be
reframed.

As critical leadership studies interpret leadership as a socially constructed and
culturally specific phenomenon, different forms and practices come into view.
Alternative forms of leadership are described with different terms, such as
‘shared’ (Pearce and Conger, 2002), ‘collective’ (Contractor et al., 2012),
‘collaborative’ (Chrislip, 2002), or ‘distributed’ leadership (Binci et al., 2016;
Bolden, 2011; Gronn, 2002; Spillane, 2012; Spillane et al., 2004). They all
understand leadership ‘as a dynamic, interactive influence process among
individuals in groups for which the objective is to lead one another to the
achievement of group or organizational goals or both’ (Pearce and Conger,
2002: 1), with fluid processes of taking leadership roles according to
contextual conditions (Pearce and Sims Jr, 2002), and outcomes understood
as co-constructed by leaders and followers, thus ‘recognizing leadership as
inherently a collaborative act’ (Ruben and Gigliotti, 2016: 469). This
interactive perspective characterizes leadership as a complex process, which
is open to for innovative organizing practices (Lichtenstein and Plowman,
2009; Lichtenstein et al., 2006).

Autonomist Leadership, which comprises ‘non-hierarchical, informal and
distributed forms of leadership’ (Western, 2014: 673), is also a noteworthy
framework within the critical leadership studies to analyse organizational 
dynamics in new social movements. The prefix ‘autonomist’ shall resolve ‘the
paradox of leadership being enacted in leaderless movements’ by breaking
‘the emotionally binding ties that link leadership with hierarchy, elitism,
authoritarianism and coercion’ (ibid.: 676). Autonomist Leadership
encompasses the five principles of autonomy, spontaneity, mutualism,
networks and affect that drive and guide the leadership in emancipatory social
movements.

Consequently, Fairhurst and Connaughton (2014) conceptualize leadership
actors as the plurality of individuals who may be involved in acts of leadership,
including formal or informal leaders, followers, or other stakeholders; they
distinguish between leadership positions and leadership acting. Bendell et al.
(2017) depict leadership as relationally co-constructed; as a behavior instead
of a position or the inherent quality of an individual.

While the concepts of critical leadership studies are convincing, they still have
two pitfalls. First, it is criticized that even alternative approaches often
emphasize exceptionalism, ‘an individual locus of action and a generalised
other that is the object of leadership’ (Bendell et al., 2017: 419). Second, there
is a temptation to just change words from leaders to facilitators,
spokespersons or simply members, which covers up more than it clarifies, as
simply excluding individual leaders per definition prevents one from seeing
differences in the leadership roles assumed that might exist in practice. Thus,
‘by refusing to acknowledge any kind of leadership, organizations may be at
risk of re-creating the same hierarchical relations they seek to abolish as
informal hierarchies rooted in power are likely to emerge’ (Sutherland et al.,
2014: 763). 


To avoid these traps, we will intensively draw on our empirical
material, guided by the following definitions:

Following Crevani (2018), we suggest a focus on the phenomenon rather than
on individuals, and conceptualize leadership as an ongoing social process, in
which leadership work contributes to the production of direction in
organizing. Leadership work is enacted in interactions and refers to the cocreation of relationships (Crevani, 2018; Fairhurst and Uhl-Bien, 2012).
Drawing on Sutherland et al. (2014), we assume that it consists of individual
acts of agency, which manage meaning, define reality and provide a basis for 
organizational action. Leadership work is done by specific actors but not
necessarily by people holding leadership positions.

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4SimsaTotter.pdf)


==Practices to deal with the challenges – collective reflection and rules==


===Reflection===

"Regarding the question of how actors strive to overcome the described
tensions, our data showed two recurrent practices, namely collective
reflection and rules. Both are frequently referred to by activists as the
organizations’ methodology, and as a means to deal with the difficulties of
implementing ideal concepts of leadership.

Reflection is the review, interpretation, and understanding of experiences to
guide present and future behavior (Boud et al., 2013). It is characterized as
crucial for transformative learning (Mezirow, 2006). Activists stress the
necessity of collective reflection to understand organizational dynamics, and
to learn to ensure efficient organization without hierarchies. In this context,
they often state: ‘We move slowly, because we have a long way to go’. Activists
are highly reflexive about the power of organizational structures, and
specifically about leadership structures. Many interviewees emphasize the
need to invest time in internal organizing, collective learning, and the
development of tools and practices. Often, this is framed as using collective
intelligence to empower the organization and as collective learning.

- One of the things we realized, is the power of collective intelligence. The
moment you put so many people together to think, things came out all the time,
very powerful things. Then, we realized that we really have a capacity. (I59). It
sometimes is still a bit chaotic. Still, I think that we have been learning a lot in
these years. (I67)

Reflection goes along with experimentation. Activists engage in theorizing
and experimenting with alternative forms of organizing, like participatory
democracy, decentralization and horizontal decision-making. They
emphasize the need for the creation of secure spaces in assemblies, where
rules, organizing skills and proceedings are tested, evaluated and revises.

- It worked by assembly, in a democratic manner… we wanted the politicization
of everyday life, we understood that democracy had to be a fundamental thing.
That's very difficult. Democracy is very laborious. It is very necessary, but very
laborious. (I61)


In the SMO investigated, the collective reflection of leadership is a core
underlying principle of what is believed to be good leadership. People who
engage in leadership practices have to be open to permanent vigilance,
comments, discussion, and learning. Reflecting on internal processes is part
of daily activities. In many SMO, for example, the moderator role rotates, and
at the end of each meeting, the group gives feedback and discusses which
interventions had been helpful and what could be improved. Cases of absence
of reflection, such as unwillingness to take part or un-reflected dominance,
are heavily criticized.

===Rules===

The second important means of overcoming tensions are rules. They are often
mentioned regarding their purpose of impeding formal or informal
hierarchical structures and consequently fixed leadership positions. Besides
very general rules, for example, that nobody should be able to impose their
will on everyone else, a number of concrete rules are mentioned that
guarantee participatory decision-making, mutual respect, and a productive
way of dealing with conflicts. One group, for example, worked out explicit and
detailed guidelines to guarantee ‘good’ communication. Many rules are
dedicated to gender equality, such as a zipper system for speakers at meetings
or for the nomination of delegates, or the techniques to secure equal speaking
time. 


Often, these rules are accompanied by specific techniques: 

- We are learning to implement mechanisms that allow everybody to speak, with
limited time. There are certain techniques … Everybody who comes to an
assembly gets a pink and a yellow card. The pink one means three minutes
talking in the first part of the debate, the yellow, one or two minutes in the
concluding part… Or, for example, we do closed rounds. Like, only seven
persons may speak, then we close the round. Then we open a new round and
five persons may speak (…). This works. It seems magic. (I85)

- Methodologies of transparency … were necessary because they allowed for
trust …also between people who did not know each other personally. (I59)


Other activists describe implicit rules – mainly regarding communication –
that have been established without any explicit guidelines.

- What we like most is that we do not have a document that explains our
discursive strategies; it is not necessary because we – for some reason or the
other – have internalized a specific language … we are not monolithic, but from
outside, a certain cohesion appears. That results from daily work. (I40)


The high importance of rules is remarkable, as movements and their
organizations are usually characterized as specifically spontaneous. The
organizations investigated share the goal of spontaneity only in the context
of the goal to avoid fixed leadership positions. Nevertheless, our analysis
shows that rules are a highly contentious issue; very controversial discussions
are held on the extent to which existing rules are sufficient."

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Articles]]