;URL = http://www.goodiybio.org/#categories

=Description=

"All around the world in old warehouses, garages and even spare bedrooms groups of so called biohackers are revolutionizing biotechnology. This high tech discipline, long regarded as the exclusive playing field of universities and big corporations, is now made accessible by a new generation of amateur scientists. Although still modestly named “Do It Yourself (DIY) Bio”, the adopted open co-development approach catalyzes its progresses and reach. Results are shared in community labs, hackerspaces and online discussion groups, contributing to a growing need for a real life forum.

The GOODIY Bio Competition will now fill this gap by bringing together biohackers at this annual event. Groups of DIY Biologists are encouraged to pull together, agree on a project, with a set deadline, and then work towards making their project a reality. Most importantly, participants must share your work and encourage as many others to reproduce it. Finally, the best teams get a chance to meet up, present their results, learn new tricks and most importantly: have fun.

...

he GOODIY Bio Competition will be launched during the PICNIC Festival on September 17th, 2012 in Amsterdam.

Over the course of 6 months teams will design, build and launch their project. The best teams will meetup in April at the Global Offical Open DIY Bio Championship. The location of this event remains to be determined."[http://www.goodiybio.org/#categories]


=More Information=
 
* What is [[DIY Bio]]?


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Science]]