
=Description=

The Gordian system is all about user agency & security. It's intended to support the self-sovereign control of digital assets in a way that's safe, secure, and private by enabling responsible key management, cutting through a traditionally knotty problem in Bitcoin development.. The Gordian system is built on a foundation of Principles that have been fulfilled in an Architecture that is embodied in Reference Apps and supported by Reference Libraries.

(It consists of:)

* Gordian Principles. A mission statement of four core principles that support self-sovereign control of digital assets.

* Gordian Architecture. The design for both the overall architecture and the individual specifications that make it possible.

* Gordian Reference Apps. A set of applications that demonstrate the Gordian Architecture, its Principles, its specifications, and its Libraries.

* Gordian Reference Libraries. A set of libraries that allow developers to incorporate Gordian specifications and expand the Gordian ecosystem.

* #SmartCustody. Educational programs meant to support the Gordian Principles.


The ultimate goal of the Gordian System is to create a community of developers who have followed the examples of the Gordian Reference Apps and used the Gordian Reference Libraries to build their own applications that embody the Gordian Architecture and fulfill the Gordian Principles.

This repo contains a table of contents for various the Gordian system projects and features. Please see individual repos and pages for more information.

You can also join our Signal Group, GitHub Discussions, or low-volume announcement list for Gordian Developers."


=Principles=

The Gordian Principles:

"Blockchain Commons' interoperable specifications are meant to support four core principles that put the user first and that enable responsible key management:

* Independence. Gordian improves user freedom from involuntary oversight or external control.

* Privacy. Gordian protects against coercion with non-correlation, privacy, and pseudonymity.

* Resilience. Gordian protects users to decrease the likelihood of them losing their funds via any means.

* Openness. Gordian supports open infrastructure that allows developers to create their own applications."

(https://github.com/BlockchainCommons/Gordian#gordian-principles)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Social Charters]]

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]