

=Text=

Gordon Cook:

"Unless we all go back to dial-up USENET or FidoNet of the 1980s, the
Internet of 2011 in reality is far more fragile than most people realize.
Sending and receiving information rely on the availability of an IPV 4
number. The last remaining five blocks of IP 4 were assigned to the
respective registries I believe on February 3.. There is something called
IPv6, it is "being rolled out" but Internet content has for example the P2P
foundation that wiki that we all love so much is right now I believe
available in IPV4 alone. If this is the case and six months to a year from
now you are a newcomer to the Internet and you have only IPv6 as an
endpoint, you will not be able to see any content that is their only in IPV
four. I expect it will be the end of this year before any serious
consequences become readily apparent but I would predict that 2012 is going
to be rough very rough. If these issues are not handled well the Internet
will fragment into groups reachable through v4 versus v6. and furthermore
the way the Internet routes its packets may become quite messed up.
 
We all know and love peer-to-peer insofar peer to peer has been very
difficult to choke. But it is not at all impossible to do so. Remember that
Comcast several years ago tried to choke peer-to-peer and got into some
serious trouble. But it is quite chokable. there are things called flow
routers that can identify the flows of different protocols of which peer to
peer is only one but if you route by one of these boxes you can effectively
deny peer-to-peer transmission. And then there is something called Naurus.
this can be used to do deep packet inspection and identify traffic that you
might not want to have identified.
 
You need to be well aware that thanks to the Bush regimes deregulatory
fervor which Obama has done nothing to contradict while local dial-up phone
service is still regulated virtually no other means of communication in
United States is regulated. That means if AT&T or Verizon or federal
government agency or Comcast or any other multiple system operator decides
that he doesn't like you, he does not have to serve you. He can charge you
whatever he wants. And again if he decides to he can refuse to carry your
traffic.
 
Before talking about a new Internet and again I say this respectfully, you
really need to understand how Internet service providers work and are linked
together. Before George Bush came to power and deregulated everything there
were 6 to 7000 independent Internet service providers in the United States
now I would hazard a guess that the number of significant Internet service
providers is down to about twenty. All of these are deregulated and they
don't have to do anything to please the customer. Be they a service provider
the size of Comcast with more than 6 million customers or be they some
wireless service provider in Wyoming they all have to have assigned to them
blocks of IP v4 numbers. To become a customer who can send and receive data
they have to be able to give you on a temporary basis at least your own
personal IPV4 number.
 
Now any entity such as for example Verizon or Boeing operation or the FBI or
a university that wishes to be able to exchange traffic directly with any
other such entity in the global Internet must have what is known as an
autonomous systems number ASN. globally I believe there are somewhere
between 30 and 40,000 such numbers and they are just about used up. But
let's say you have one and you have a business plan that you are able to go
to your routing registry which in North America is ARIN, in Europe and
middle east is RIPE, Asia pacific APNIC, Latin America LacNic and Africa
Arfrinic. Fill out the proper paperwork that can show the proper bank
accounts andshow business plan as to why you need X number of IPV four
numbers and you're in business.
 
If you want company like Boeing you run a huge global largely optical
network with likely several thousand separate locations in 30 or 40 or 50
separate countries. This in effect is your rival network and you can use a
device called network address translation to route as much as you want
within the boeingnetwork. However if you want to send to the outside world
you need to run something called the border Gateway protocol. This enables
you to send packet-based communications to perhaps as many as 1 billion IPV
four addresses elsewhere in the world. Now there is much technical
discussion of what size network is appropriate to advertise by means of
border Gateway protocol to the core global Internet. The total number of
globally independently routed networks is right now about 340,000. This
number can grow but as it gets larger the cost of routers capable of
handling the full routing table can reach several hundred thousand dollars
each- with some more than a million
 
Remember when Egypt dropped out of the Internet? Mubarak's police entered
the Egyptian network providers and told him in the fact to turn off border
Gateway protocol. That drops the Iron Curtain down. Egypt became a with out
internationally routed addresses. If one is extremely geeky, one can use IPV
four tunneling and if I understand it correctly one has to be able to do it
virtually in real time in conjunction with a colleague at some other network
on some other place in the globe.
 
you have a functioning gray market in IPV four addresses right now and the
IPV four addresses that become valuable will be those that are guaranteed to
be routable via the border Gateway protocol on the global Internet. You have
some fierce division in the technical community with the one side
libertarians who take the position that the market can solve everything and
never mind. And on the other they take the position if it goes to the market
then the ownership and routability conditions of an IP before number will
become uncertain.
 
There is such a thing as a who-is directory., with this you can go by ASN
number and look up the owner and contact information of the operators of all
globally routable networks in the world. If a network routes and IP before
number belonging to another network which routes the same number in a
different way you get a real follow-up. The packets loop they drop
connection is lost all hell breaks loose. I know people far wiser than I
who are deeply worried that we are headed toward a situation where we no
longer have a globally uniform ASN registry also known as who is and that
without this the Internet will indeed will enter into segments that cannot
be bridged from one to the other.
 
Now you talk about different architectures which is fine. You're not the
only ones doing this.. Van Jacobson has been at Xerox Parc for five or six
years working on a content delivery architecture. And a couple of years ago
he gave an outstanding 90 min. long lecture on this at Google that can be
listened to. The National Science Foundation has given I think at least $100
million in grants to a new architecture called GENI, one of the chief
grantees is a Chinese woman and I apologize I can't remember her name at the
moment but she is on my mail list almost never says anything. I had a
conversation with her maybe nine months ago in which I asked her to try to
explain what she was doing and I'm sorry to say that I didn't get it.
 
But if you're going to talk about new architectures and there is a man
named I believe John Day who even has something to replace TCP/IP you are
going to run headlong into a multi-hundred billion dollar embedded base.
 
So what's possible? One thing that might be possible is understanding the
significance of the optical research networks and eight just being built
Obama spinoff called United States community anchor institution network that
is designed to connect some 200,000 libraries hospitals K-12 schools junior
colleges city governments museums and performing arts institutions. This
network will I'm sure run a TCP/IP layer on top of the optical paths. But it
is the emergence of dynamic lightpaths from PC to PC that are possible and
are beginning to fall into place. These are circuit-switched from
point-to-point unbelievable bandwidth 100 Mb here is considered puny and
indeed most lightpaths have to be a Gigabit or they can be considered to be
curcuit switchable.

...

So for me right now the bottom line is that sadly the Internet is held
together much more by chewing gum and bailing wire than people realize. Will
it collapse anytime soon? Oh you better believe that the commercial sites
reached by Verizon AT&T Comcast and the other cable goes will still be there
and you'll still be able to shop there but it made get to be a great deal
more difficult to reach the ordinary Egyptian or Tunisian.
 
Does that mean that we cannot build our own networks? No. But folks need to
understand that wireless mesh networks although I'd sure rather have them
than nothing are not going to be anything like the global Internet that we
have now. You're not going to go wireless over and over an option but to get
to the rest of the world you had better if you really want to do that be
able to reach an exchange point in New York Washington Atlanta Miami Chicago
Denver Houston Salt Lake City Seattle Portland San Francisco Los Angeles and
San Diego and similar places to that in particular for international
FiberNet works the two most important exchanges in the US are in New York
City and Chicago and in Europe Amsterdam
 
NTIA has given recovery act grants to Internet to and to a group of 20 to 30
state and regional networks to lay fallow's and this thousands of miles of
so-called middle mile fiber in those fibers are to be interconnected to the
United States community action community anchor network backbone which is
been allocated 100 Gb of bandwidth. We are talking about approximately 1 1/2
billion dollars being spent over the next 2 to 3 to 4 years primarily over
the next two years delay this new infrastructure that my friends is the
opportunity because if we can't help fthings get built right in the only
choice will be community by community over years many years I'm afraid tried
to build our own networks and even should we do that without the guarantees
proper interconnection the dividends paid back to us will not be what we'd
like."
(building-a-distributed-decentralized-internet mailing list, 3/2011)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]