URL = https://www.ce4g.org.au/projects.php

=Description=

"In the town of Goulburn in southern New South Wales (Australia), an energy revolution is brewing. The community has come together to build its own 4,000-panel solar farm – everyday citizens are invited to buy shares in the venture and reap the rewards.

Goulburn is not alone: community-owned energy is an idea whose time has come. About 100 community energy groups operate across Australia – their projects at various levels of development – up from 25 groups in 2015.

The concept is gaining political attention, too. Independent MP for the federal Victorian seat of Indi, Helen Haines, in August moved a motion in parliament, calling on the Morrison government to support community energy, including establishing a new government agency. The bill is backed by fellow independent Zali Steggall.

At its core, community energy rests on the belief that everyday people should have power over how their energy is generated – including its environmental and social impacts. Big corporations should not control our energy systems, nor should they reap all the profits. "
(https://theconversation.com/people-power-everyday-australians-are-building-their-own-renewables-projects-and-you-can-too-146885?)

=More information=

* "Australia’s first community-owned renewable energy project, Hepburn Wind, started generating power in June 2011." [https://www.hepburnwind.com.au/]

[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Australia]]
[[Category:Community]]