'''* Article: The [[Common Factory]]: Governance and Incentive Systems of Blockchain-based Social Networks. By Felix Fritsch. Conference Paper, June 2019'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks

CSC 2019 – 15th International Conference on Sociocybernetics Urbino, Italy – 25-29 June 2019 ; “Dark Ages 2.0”: Social Media And Their Impact Paper No. #43


=Contextual Quote=

"Blockchain is inconceivable without commodification – its very architecture rests on economic incentives coordinating independent actors,
and its raison d’etre is the dis-intermediation of digital asset transfer. But their unique features not
only allow blockchains to dis-intermediate and reorganize existing markets, but also to create new
markets under previously unfavorable conditions. They thus constitute a crucial element in looming
processes of formal subsumption, pushing the frontiers of capitalism ever further into the sphere of
social relations previously unattainable to commodification. What’s more, through incentive systems
rewarding specific interactions and punishing others, these technologies open the door for what Marx 
referred to as real subsumption – the systematic restructuration of commodified relations along the
needs of capitalist profit maximization – of hitherto not or only formally subsumed social spheres."

- Felix Fritsch [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks]


=Abstract:=

"Blockchain architecture provides robust institutional infrastructure for distributed networks that
fundamentally changes the ways groups organize online. Its applications go beyond existing digital
commerce to commodify and transform social relations through tokenization, incentivization and
rationalization. Crypto Social Networks promising to reward users financially for valuable
contributions constitute a paragon of such subsumption through blockchain. These platforms organize
value distribution among users along affective metrics and introduce various mechanisms that
facilitate autonomous group governance. Their emergence both acknowledges the critique issued by
digital labour scholars of hitherto exploitative platform-user relations and challenges their uncritical
appliance of time-based labour theory of value to the digital realm.

Beyond simple commodification, blockchains and the code they operate are discussed as emerging
public infrastructure for the transaction of private assets and the decentralized organization of groups
– as digital commons facilitating the total subsumption of sociality under abstract capital. While
blockchain is inherently commodified and constitutes the capstone of a digital ‚social factory‘, the
specific alignment of token design, incentive systems and other governance mechanisms can lead to
vastly different outcomes in power and revenue distribution. The empirical section is devoted to
highlighting these differences through analysis of three emerging platforms Minds, Steem and
HyperSpace along their token, incentive and governance systems. While the findings underline the
devil in the details especially of tokenomics, they also show the immatureness of existing platforms,
which finds expression in different blind spots depending on the distinct means and aims of each
project."


=Discussion=

Felix Fritsch:

"Referred to as foundation of the ‘Internet of value’, blockchain is inconceivable without
commodification – its very architecture rests on economic incentives coordinating independent actors,
and its raison d’etre is the dis-intermediation of digital asset transfer. But their unique features not
only allow blockchains to dis-intermediate and reorganize existing markets, but also to create new
markets under previously unfavorable conditions. They thus constitute a crucial element in looming
processes of formal subsumption, pushing the frontiers of capitalism ever further into the sphere of
social relations previously unattainable to commodification. What’s more, through incentive systems
rewarding specific interactions and punishing others, these technologies open the door for what Marx 
referred to as real subsumption – the systematic restructuration of commodified relations along the
needs of capitalist profit maximization – of hitherto not or only formally subsumed social spheres.
Its closest advocates, by and large critical of monopolist power but not of commodification itself,
rather point at the liberating aspects encryption and decentralized markets entail for the individual.
Beyond these, they forecast potentially extensive impact of blockchain-based governance on the
organization of social and economic relations. They hold that fully distributed, automated governance
mechanisms embodied by (combinations of) smart contracts are not dependent on the continued
goodwill of any benevolent dictator acting as central guarantor of rights and agreements, but become
self-executing entities, insusceptible to corruption by external powers. Public blockchains further
provide permission-less access to transactional data and open source code of both base protocol and
decentralized applications, which fundamentally challenges ownership of these technologies. These
qualities, so its proponents, position blockchain as foundational to an emerging structure of digital
commons that come into being as new technological reality.

Blockchain-based applications are not confined to digital commerce in terms of peer-to-peer and
multi-sided markets, but also cover collaborative social media platforms and with them their nonprofessional users (Glaser 2017). Already, a multitude of blockchain-based projects explicitly seek to
challenge social media behemoths with decentralized platforms that leave users more control and
reward them financially for their interactions. Such Crypto Social Networks (CSNs) make a
particularly good case for the study of the effects of blockchain on society as they allow observation
both of the subsumption of social relations under the reign of capital and of the constitution of selfsustained digital communities in a new digital commons."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)


'''From the Conclusion:'''

"This paper has highlighted the twist CSNs add to the prominent discussion over who produces the
value social media platforms realize. Scrutinizing incentive systems along the forms and accounted
units of activities recognized as valuable has shown limitations of the orthodox LTV in the realm of
social media prosumption, and has affirmed the relevance of an affect-based reformulation of the LTV
under conditions of immaterial production. The increasing importance of subjective valuation as
opposed to ‘objective’ measures likewise shows in the speculative value of cryptographic tokens,
which in the absence of market fundamentals is by and large based on affective brand value.

While acknowledging Marxist scholars’ point that prosumption constitutes digital labour that should
be rewarded, the Crypto Social Networks under scrutiny all embrace commodification as their
preferred means to overcome exploitation. Their promise to dissolve corporate platform ownership
to the benefit of its users thus comes at the cost of total subsumption of sociality under the regime of
an ever more omniferous social factory, as conceptualized and loathed by Italian Autonomists Mario
Tronti (1966), Antonio Negri (1989), Nick Dyer-Witheford (1999) or Paolo Virno (2004). The
resulting ‘common factory’, collectively controlled by its users, may overcome central modes of
accumulation through exploitation, but it remains organized according to logics of productivity that
pursue a totalitarian vision of Homo Economicus (Atzori 2015). At the same time as it cedes
centralized control, the prerogative of capital becomes inscribed into a platforms’ very foundations,
the blockchain infrastructure. And yet, the platforms built on top employ considerably different
approaches to digitally engineering sociality (van Dijck 2012 and 2013; Atzori 2015; Atzori and
Ulieru 2017) that result in specific constellations of power and revenue distribution. While not
overcoming commodification as such, these differences are worth researching both for their impact
on such constellations and for their wider transformative potential vis-a-vis centralized incumbents.

In light of these considerations, this paper may also be seen as the starting point of both a theoretical
exercise to conceptualize ‘common factory’ as synthesis of social factory and digital commons and
an empirical exploration of commonalities and differences of its implementation in dApps."


==[[Does the Labor Theory of Value Function in Social Media]] ?==

Felix Fritsch:

"The literature review provides an overview of the main lines of contention among critical scholarship
over the persistence of Marx’ Labour Theory of Value (LTV) and the increasing relevance of rentseeking strategies in contemporary capitalism. In a prelude to empirical analysis, I assess the potential
of different blockchain-based governance features for social media. Following this, three emerging
CSNs are scrutinized in terms of their token economics, incentive systems and governance structures
as instances of a phenomenon drastically changing relations among digital users and between them
and the underlying platforms. In the discussion, the findings are summarized and interpreted in terms
of their relevance for the theoretical approaches sketched out in the literature review. The conclusion
highlights the twist CSNs add to contemporary debates on prosumption as they seemingly overcome
exploitation at the price of total commodification. It closes with an introduction of a theoretical
endeavor to conceptualize the conflation of social factory and digital commons in what I term
‘common factory’.


'''The Free Labour Debate'''

The emergence of interactive, or social, online media in the early 2000s came with celebratory
accounts of the ‘electronic agora’ (Barbrook and Andy 2015) that activates citizens to participate in a
horizontal, egalitarian digital public space free of censorship (critically reflected by Srnicek 2016;
Fisher 2012; Fuchs and Sevignani 2013; Bengtsson 2013). Soon, however, materialist critique of the
economic role of users started to form around Tiziana Terranova’s notion of ‘free labour’ (2000) to
shed light on the exploitative relationship between users providing unpaid labour online and platforms
accumulating surplus value. In an early contribution, Cote and Pybus analyze these new forms of
immaterial labour as revolving around the biopolitical production of users’ subjectivity and highlight
the role of affect “as the binding, dynamic force which both animates those subjectivities and provides
coherence to the networked relations” (2007:90). They configure their work as a coeval supplantation
of Dallas Smythe’s concept of ‘audience commodity’ that more explicitly takes an Autonomist stance
and better accounts for the “qualitative shift in which culture, subjectivity, and capital come together
in new networks of ICT” (Cote and Pybus 2007:98). This text is particularly crucial as it becomes a
point of reference both for the emerging ‘free labour orthodoxy’, seeking to revive Smythe and
combine the production of ‘audience commodity’ with ‘prosumer labour’ producing content and user
data, and for scholars highlighting the role of affect as replacing labour-power as measure of value.
The ‘free labour orthodoxy’ starts consolidating in the early 2010s with a comprehensive
conceptualization of paid and unpaid digital labour as base for augmenting Marx’ theory of value to
the digital realm. Scholars such as Fisher (2012, 2015), Fuchs (2010, 2011, 2012a, 2012b, 2014),
Manzerolle (2010), Olsson (2013) and Ritzer and Jurgenson (2010) appropriate Alvin Toffler’s notion
of ‘prosumption’ (1980) as combination of production and consumption, but use it in critical terms as
“outsourcing work to users and consumers, who work without payment” (Fuchs 2011:297).

Constituting an essential refinement to the product of audience labour, prosumer labour draws on
creativity and social relations of users that provide use value for other users and, in combination with
“constant, total and algorithmic” (Fuchs 2015:54) surveillance, produce a rich data source for
personalized advertising. In effect, prosumer labour, combined with audience labour, produces a
targeted audience commodity, which is algorithmically auctioned to advertisers every time a user
views or clicks on an advertisement. Considerable disagreement over the drivers and particularities
of contemporary capitalism, the economic sphere advertising activities are located in, or the extent to
which exploitation and coercion are applicable has been by and large resolved through continuous
debate and refinement of conceptualization over the last years (e.g. Beverungen et al. 2015). The
essence of the free labour orthodoxy is that Marx’ labour theory of value (LTV) also holds in the
digital age, with the addendum that social media platforms appropriate significant amounts of surplus
value from their users providing digital labour for free.
Contentions based on Affect and Rents
There are two main contentions with this convention. The first one builds on Antonio Negri and
Michael Hardt’s (1999) considerations regarding the transformation of the LTV in postmodernity.
Facing the increasingly ineffectual measure of labour-value in either use-value or money, they
suggested to replace it with affect as ‘power to act’. Following their lead, Christina Morini and Andrea 
Fumagalli (2010) seek to adapt the LTV to new modes of accumulation under ‘bio-capitalism’. Going
beyond notions of the knowledge-based economy, bio-capitalism incorporates “the entirety of human
faculties, from relational-linguistic to affective-sensorial” (2010:235). Likewise, they identify
multiple forms of ‘bio-labour’, named after their most significant, effective and difficult task:
relational, cognitive, symbolic and affective labour. Analyzing the centrality of difference,
subjectivity and contextualized knowledge, the two authors establish an inextricable link between
cognitive capabilities and relational activities as “basic elements of the general intellect” (2010:238).
Bio-capitalism outgrows Marx’ LTV as it dissolves the separations between work- and life-time,
work- and life-space, and between production, reproduction, circulation and consumption – in other
words, the walls of the factory: If all of life is labour, there is no outside to measure it against. Instead,
Morini and Fumagalli propose a ‘life theory of value’ that acknowledges the multiplicity of new
labour-forms as well as their differential, substantial exploitation in immaterial production. With
regards to measurement of value, they hold that “the quota of added value (…) is dependent on supply,
circulation and diffusion of immaterial commodities (by definition impossible to be numerically
measured)” (2010:247f).

Adam Arvidsson and Eleanor Colleoni (2012), in a critical assessment and rebuttal of Fuchs’ (2010)
argument on the relevance of Marx’ LTV for prosumption, likewise argue that value creation in
informational capitalism is poorly related to time, especially in the newly commodified spheres of
social life that are subject to prosumption. Instead, they hold that “value is ever more related to the
ability to create and reaffirm affective bonds” (Arvidsson and Colleoni 2012:136). This also
implicates to go beyond assessment of Facebook’s business model in terms of production and
circulation of advertisement space and understand it first and foremost as financial venture that
appropriates rent in the stock market. This is taken as instance of “an extended, society-wide process
of finance-centered accumulation, where the link between reputational (or affective) value and access
to financial rent becomes fundamental” (2012:136). Facebook is both subject to this general process
and takes a special role as it serves the expression, objectivization and quantification of affect in the
form of ‘likes’ as a new convention on the financial evaluation of stocks. Daniel Cockayne (2016)
likewise locates the value of social media-generated big data in indicating user affinity for a platform
itself. Especially early-stage platforms use these data vis-a-vis potential investors to demonstrate “the
affective attachment prosumers show toward” (2016:8) them as base for future revenue generation.
In more abstract terms, they present themselves “as an affective apparatus of capture” (2016:2) upon
which future coercion into provision of free audience labour may build.

The second main contention disputes the qualification of prosumption as labour – both in a colloquial
sense, as it belittles experiences of ‘real’ exploitation, and in terms of scientific Marxism (e.g.
Arvidsson 2011). Its adherents uphold that users give their data deliberately and receive free services
as a remuneration in kind and that raw data require skilled work to become valuable (Comor 2015;
Srnicek 2016). The vast profits leading social media platforms generate in relation to their total
expenditure for wages disqualify explanations that solely rely on direct exploitation of paid labour.
Alternatively, some point to the market power of the largest advertising platforms as enabling the
extraction of monopoly rent from customers who compete over market share through online
marketing (Huws 2014). As the increased competitive pressure is at least partly forwarded to
employees, some scholars also argue that their exploitation increases to allow for redirection of
surplus value to advertising platforms (Rigi and Prey 2015). This argument tends to consider the
advertisement sector part of the sphere of circulation and therefore per se not productive, but rather 
parasitically nourishing on the surplus produced in other spheres (Foley 2013; Huws 2014;
Pasquinelli 2010). Other scholars have put more emphasis on big data flows gathered by platforms
that they see as constituting a new, quasi-natural resource, which in Marxist terms generate rent when
exploited. Platforms create the infrastructure to extract the data being created on them and refine them
to build valuable data stock over time (Comor 2015). This stock is not sold itself but becomes the
source of information that is sold as analysis to advertising customers (Srnicek 2016:31). Industry
leaders have a monopoly insofar as their surveillance architecture is extremely detailed and, due to
plug-ins on third-party homepages, almost omnipresent."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)


==The [[Political Economy of Crypto Social Networks]]==

Felix Fritsch:

"The explicit acknowledgment of hitherto exploitative platform-user relations makes a strong case for
the critique raised by the free labour orthodoxy and against rents approaches explicitly rejecting
notions of labour and exploitation. Given CSNs’ rejection of data stock accumulation through
excessive surveillance practices, approaches focusing on data as a new resource likewise lose ground.
What remains is the market power of dominant web 2.0 platforms, which for emerging web 3
platforms may constitute a restraining factor – if they base their business model on participation in
that market. Rent may further be located in the interest (delegated) Proof-of-Stake consensus
mechanisms offer; however, these are located on the protocol level of blockchains and, with exception
of Steem, are indifferent to the kind of dApp running on them. Other than that, rents approaches do
not seem to bear much relevance for the analysis of CSNs.

While CSNs acknowledge the free labour orthodoxy’s critique of exploitation, they refute its
insistence on time as base of measurement. Incentive systems reward specific actions and reactions –
they do not measure input in time but in instances. Their metrics relate to different forms of bio-labour
– the cognitive, symbolic and affective labour enshrined in user-created content, the cognitive and
emotional labour users apply when curating content, or the relational labour of sharing. The role of
social media metrics in the evaluation of financial assets highlighted by Arvidsson and Colleoni (2012)
shows in the prominent position leading CSN platform Steem has for circulating crypto market
analysis. Their focus on increasingly finance-centered accumulation likewise reflects in the business
model of the companies developing CSNs as autonomous entities, which predominantly relies on
token value appreciation as source of profit. Cockayne’s depiction of platforms as “affective
apparatus of capture” (2016:2) then opens the question how token value relates to a CSN’s ability to
capture user affect towards advertisements. Given these cross connections, affect-centered
approaches, particularly ones that acknowledge the exploitative dimension of prosumption, appear as
promising advancement of the free labour orthodoxy in the age of blockchain.

The open source nature of public blockchains and thus of Smart Contracts deployed on them
commands that copying and modifying these emerging institutional frameworks (Hayes 2019) comes
at negligible cost. Competitive pressure towards their optimization (at least theoretically) forecloses
any long-term rent-seeking strategies based on ownership or central control of this infrastructure.
Institutions come to exist as dApps which cannot be enclosed and thus constitute new forms of digital
commons. On the other hand, decentralized structures that possess internal capital – decentralized
organizations, decentralized autonomous organizations and decentralized autonomous corporations
(Buterin 2014) – potentially constitute “the enabling framework for the digital rule of capital: the total
commodification of global society” (Garrod 2016:71). Atzori and Ulieru concede the former by 
referring to “the advent of blockchain-based digital platforms running on commons principles via
self-enforcing contracts” (2017:2). However, they also acknowledge the latter as they warrant that
under capitalist conditions, “digital platforms and the Internet at large cannot cease to be a medium
of insatiable commercial appetites” (Ibd.:3) ingraining themselves in new organizational forms. They
thus propose to scrutinize the specific architectural design of individual platforms in terms of decision
rights, token issuance and value distribution through incentive systems to determine their relation
towards contemporary capitalism. In an inquiry of the dApp ‘Swarm City’, Beck et al. (2018)
likewise use decision rights, accountability and incentives as central analytical dimensions derived
from IT governance literature and principal-agent theory.

Accordingly, this empirical investigation of CSNs as more or less owned, or at least to some degree
controlled, by its users will focus on three governance mechanisms: Permission-less token issuance
allowing the creation of post-corporate economies; Binding decision making tools giving network
members power over rules and financial flows; and rewards schemes based on micro-transactions
realigning incentives to support a common goal. The former not only allows project developers to
raise initial funding and bind a core community, but also to construct such projects as fully
decentralized economies not under their control nor generating permanent income flows for them,
while still generating them profit from appreciating token prices. Decision rights depend on their
distribution and can be differentiated into management rights to propose, execute, or implement
decisions and control rights to ratify and monitor. Incentives encounter monetary and non-monetary
rewards that motivate agents to act in predetermined and observable ways to obtain incentive
alignment (Beck et al. 2018). In this regard, Atzori and Ulieru highlight the alignment of long-term
interests through reputation games and inscription of “rights and privileges in social organizations
through cooperative currency designs” (2017:7) as key to blockchain cooperatives that embody a
‘real’ sharing economy beyond platform capitalism. However, even in their ideal configuration, they
warrant, the reliance of such platforms on incentive systems to shape human behaviour results in its
rationalization and robotization and voids human interaction of spontaneity and much of its depth.
What remains, even under conditions of post-capitalist collaborative exchange, is “the hyperrational,
positivist mentality of the Homo Economicus – an “anthropological monster”” (Atzori and Ulieru
2017:12; see also Atzori 2015)."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347390602_The_Common_Factory_Governance_and_Incentive_Systems_of_Blockchain-based_Social_Networks)


==Comparative Analysis of Three [[Crypto Social Networks]]==

Felix Fritsch:

"The three platforms scrutinized above are distinct in the labour they reward, their openness to capital,
the services their token stands for as well as size and origins of their rewards pool. While Minds
focuses on the affective labour content producers provide, Steem and HyperSpace additionally
reward curation as emotional labour of consumers. Affect towards content is formalized as discrete
unit of account in all cases, however HyperSpace goes further in allowing users to determine the
quantity of affect specific content solicits. Temporal measures only play minor roles: Minds rewards
daily log in, HyperSpace restricts its daily token issuance to active users, and Steem likewise limits
users’ voting capacity in temporal terms.

The interest rate Steem grants financial capital is rooted in its architecture as blockchain and thus
cannot be compared with the other dApps. The central role it grants financial capital to leverage
curation power and rewards, however, goes far beyond its competitors and makes Steem an attention
plutocracy par excellence. HyperSpace’s design is most interesting in this regard, as its egalitarian
distribution of voting rights seeks to actively counterbalance financial power. The lack of information
regarding envisaged tokenomics and use value of tokens beyond currency, however, warrants against
too optimistic appraisal of this model – its resolution could come with significant limitations to
egalitarianism. Minds is clearly oriented towards professional content producers and advertisers,
which reflects in their tokens being redeemable for guaranteed views. The platform directly relates
the size of its token pool to the total expressed affect – in tokens but also in monetary value given
their fixed price in USD. Contrarily, Steem issues a fixed number of tokens, whose exchange value,
if discounted by speculative fluctuation, should reflect its capacity as “affective apparatus of capture”
(Cockayne 2016:2). HyperSpace’s token pool size depends on both number of users and exchange
value of tokens, which remains underdetermined.

In terms of governance, Steem’s quality as public, permissionless blockchain already shows in its
general openness towards external developers. While Minds and HyperSpace predetermine the
governance functions made available to their users and only decentralize decisions over their
configuration and area of application, Steem leaves it to users to create all kinds of smart contracts,
dApps and frontends and merely seeks to provide the foundational infrastructure for an emerging
CSN. Its approach to enable users to develop unforeseen social media applications resembles second
order prosumption that entails significantly more degrees of freedom than its competitors.
The early stage of the platforms compared here does not allow detailed analysis of the power
distribution each envisaged governance mechanism entails. However, noticeable tendencies are that
Minds focuses on two-sided mechanisms while leaving aside group and community governance;
HyperSpace focuses on group governance ultimately directed towards revenue distribution; and
Steem is inclined towards equating capital with stake in decision-making. Each platform represents a
distinct take on blockchain-based social media platforms that comes with up- and downsides: Minds
as continuation of conventional Web 2.0 platforms enhances the possibilities of content producers to
attract attention, but lacks attention to (groups of) consumers; Steem as anarcho-capitalist
environment harnesses the productive potential of creative chaos but disproportionately empowers
capital and suffers from a tragedy of the commons; and HyperSpace realigns incentives to gear
interaction towards a collaborative outcome but lacks a business model giving its token value. 
The projects under scrutiny could easily suffer the fate of many other early attempts to build
blockchain-based platforms – face unforeseen technical hurdles, run out of funding, be rejected by
users, or become victim to criminal activity. The open-source infrastructure they build and the
solutions they design for distributed governance may nevertheless become crucial elements of a new
digital commons. This analysis has shown that outcomes for users in terms of autonomy, power and
revenue distribution can vary significantly depending on discrete decisions over the design and
alignment of tokenomics, governance and incentive mechanisms. It has also highlighted the
continuous dependency on advertisements and other campaigns seeking attention and affect as
sources of external demand for tokenized services. Interestingly, none of the platforms addresses this
dependency on user attention by directly rewarding users for their audience labour. A tentative
explanation that remains to be systematically scrutinized may be that user affect towards
advertisements as economic driver of social media platforms itself must remain in the dark precisely
because of its central role: While sociality as side product may be engineered and rationalized through
incentive systems, genuine affect towards advertisements is the economically relevant product and as
such may not be adulterated."

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]