
'''* Report: Governance Structures for Social Movements. A Strategy Brief for Harnessing Grassroots Capacity. [[Cognitive Policy Works]] [http://www.cognitivepolicyworks.com], November 9, 2012'''

URL = http://empathysurplus.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/governance-structures-for-social-movements1.pdf


=Excerpt=

==Introduction to [[Organizational Frames]]==

Joe Brewer:

"Social movements throughout history have achieved lasting success by altering
institutional structures and cultural norms to reflect their core values and beliefs. Their
achievements can be seen in 

(1) the emergence of new social practices like interracial
marriage or the honoring of indigenous traditions; 

(2) adoption and enforcement of policy
frameworks like the Bill of Rights or the Endangered Species Act; and — in some circumstances —

(3) as novel organizational forms that alter the institutional landscape like
the new hybrid for-profit/non-profit legal charter for the benefit corporation or the
crowdsourced archive of information known as Wikipedia.

In this strategy brief, we will consider the
organizational frames that bolster (and restrict)
how an organization can be deployed to achieve goals for a social movement. An
organizational frame is the structured web of rules, relationships, and values that comprise
an idealized cognitive model
for understanding and acting within a particular institutional context."
(http://empathysurplus.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/governance-structures-for-social-movements1.pdf)


==Aligning Structure with Strategic Purpose==

"The essential question that needs to be asked is
“What are the strategic objectives that
you seek to achieve with your organization?”

These may be cultural — shifts in social
norms, community practices, or expressed values. Or they may be institutional—as
increased capacity to achieve goals that come with enhancements in technology and
infrastructure. They can also be material in achieving concrete outcomes that improve the
quality of life for people. Regardless, it is a truism that
form leads function
and so the formal structure for your organization must be compatible with the functions necessary to
achieve its strategic goals.

With this in mind, it is helpful to begin by introspecting about the potential relationships that
may be encouraged to arise between your organization and the social movements you
hope to impact. If your objectives are primarily cultural, how will your organization offer
support to the cultivation and spread of ideas? Are you positioning yourself to be a
connector who brings diverse communities together and weaves networks that can be
activated by the movement later on? Questions like these will help rule out some
organizational frames or elevate others as more likely candidates.

Similarly, if your objectives are primarily organizational, how will your organization build
capacity for the movement? Do you aggregate information and package it in a usable
form? Or are you a communication hub or media outlet through which others’ ideas can
be propagated? These considerations will shape how you think about your position in the
institutional landscape and clarify whether you are filling any unmet needs of the larger
movement.

And ultimately, there is consideration of how you measure success. Will your objectives be
met by winning elections? Passing key legislation? Or perhaps a shift in culture that
elevates different ideals to the default position in public discourse? In each case, it is vital
that care be given to the construction of metrics that resonate both with your organizational form and the larger mission for which you have begun to mobilize resources."


==Example: the failure of Occupy==

"As a case study, consider again the example of the
Occupy Movement. Which strategic objectives
were met by its organizational frames and which
remain unresolved that could be advanced with
new organizational frames?

As mentioned above, Occupy chose the General Assembly
and Activation Network frames to
advance its objectives. 


These forms were well suited to 

(a) elevate the norms and values
associated with a functioning democracy; and 

(b) help their message about a rigged
financial system to spread far and wide. With respect to these goals, we can assert with
confidence that Occupy was successful.


And yet few structural changes, if any, have been advanced to alter the political and
economic systems that perpetuate inequality in the United States and around the world.
Measured with respect to this observation, Occupy has been an unqualified failure. This
can be explained with respect to the
organizational frames that were absent
from Occupy which would have been needed to achieve material outcomes in the policy arena.

Specifically, there was no way to direct the swarm of protestors toward a ballot box or to
elevate representatives for candidacy to high office. The general assembly proved
susceptible to hijackings by anarchist individuals that were able to disrupt an otherwise
productive dialogue about systemic change. And the network of Occupy outposts in cities
around the world were disconnected from levers of power capable of producing structural
reforms.

Imagine instead if the Occupy Movement deployed the Convention Frame or set up a
People’s Congress to establish policy frameworks that could then be enacted. Existing
structures could then be utilized by representatives of the movement to convene a
Constitutional Convention to introduce and seek popular vote on constitutional
amendments, for example. Structures such as these could then be used to deploy the
experience of democracy cultivated within general assemblies to advance amendments for
public financing of elections or revocation of corporate personhood from the legal
structures of the US government.

One reason why the Occupy Movement did not take such a structuralist approach is that
there is an absence of
citizen sovereignty in US culture. By this I mean that “being a
citizen” in the United States is often narrowly confined to the voting booth. People do not
feel in their bones the idea that our government is “of the People, by the People, and for
the People.” Our founding documents — the US Constitution and the Declaration of
Independence—grant sovereignty to the citizens as the root source of authority in our
country. And yet we do not experience it as real and so do not think to act upon it in order
to alter the structure of our government.

Cultivating a cultural appreciation for citizen sovereignty will require effective civics
education, something that is lacking in our public education system and marginalized by
the prominence of consumer culture. Grassroots groups need to nurture the experiences
of citizen sovereignty through their selection of organizational frames as a key part of adult
civics education. In this way, the
cultural capacity to enact institutional reform
can be increased and movement objectives become more tractable."


==Conclusion==

"The materials presented throughout this strategy brief build on the vital insight that
organizational structure is as much cultural as it is institutional. Key design
considerations pertaining to strategic objectives, community processes, and social values
are all contingent on the selection of organizational frames — thus constituting
modes of thought and types of interaction
that naturally resonate with a particular institutional form.

The goal of this short strategy brief is simply to make you aware of these considerations in
the hope that this will help you build more effective organizations that help the social
movements you most want to impact with your efforts. It should be clear by now that
constraints arise for what is possible, likely, or excluded by any particular organizational
form. And so care must be taken to consider the strategic implications of one
organizational frame versus another."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Movements]]