
Research papers on the topic:


#Dahlander, L. and Magnusson, M. G. (2005) Relationships between open source software companies and communities: observations from Nordic firms. Research Policy 34:(4) , pp. 481-493.
#Fleming, L. and Waguespack, D. M. (2007) Brokerage, boundary spanning, and leadership in open innovation communities. Organization Science 18 , pp. 165-180. 
#Jeppesen, L. B. and Frederiksen, L. (2006) Why do users contribute to firm-hosted user communities? The case of computer-controlled music instruments. Organization Science 17:(1) , pp. 45-63.
#Kogut, B. and Metiu, A. (2001) Open-source software development and distributed innovation. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 14:(2) , pp. 248-264. 
#Lee, G. K. and Cole, R. E. (2003) From a firm-based to a community-based model of knowledge creation: the case of the Linux kernel development. Organization Science 14:(6) , pp. 633-649. 
#Markus, M. L. (2007) The governance of free/open source software projects: monolithic, multidimensional, or configurational?. Journal of Management Governance 11 , pp. 151-163.
#O'Mahony, S. (2003) Guarding the commons: how community managed software projects protect their work. Research Policy 32 , pp. 1179-1198. 
#O'Mahony, S. and Ferraro, F. (2007) Governance in production communities. Academy of Management Journal 50:5 , pp. 1079-1106.
#Shah, S. (2006) Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in open source software development. Management Science 52:(7) , pp. 1000-1014.


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]