This typology applies in particular to [[Gated Source Communities]], i.e. hybrid forms of open source software developments under the control of a firm.

See also the extensive typology of participation in the entry on [[Participation Architecture]]

=Source=

'''Article: Motivation, Governance, and the [[Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development]].''' MANAGEMENT SCIENCE, Vol. 52, No. 7, July 2006, pp. 1000–1014. By Sonali K. Shah, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, sonali@uiuc.edu

URL = http://mansci.journal.informs.org/content/vol52/issue7/ 

Available via http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=898247


=Description=

"For firms, community development
offers the possibility to gain developmental assistance
in noncritical areas and increase adoption (West 2003).
Value appropriation requires the firm to define and
control property rights. Unfortunately, activities that
permit value appropriation by the firm are sometimes
detrimental to value creation within the community."


=Typology of Governance Rights in Gated Source Communities=

==Decision Rights==

"'''Code Control'''. In the gated source community, only
the corporate sponsor is allowed to alter the source
code. This strict control over the code affects both
need-driven and hobbyist participants. Need-driven
participants worry that their voices will be drowned
out by the needs of the firm and its customers when
software-related decisions are made. Such control limits
the ability of hobbyists to work and contribute in
self-defined ways. In addition, the volume of feedback
and overall activity is likely to decline due to
both decreased participation and tighter control over
what is committed to the source code and, therefore,
used by others.

'''Domination of Mailing List Interaction.''' Firms may
inadvertently dominate mailing lists through a desire
to influence the direction of the project or because
firm employees represent a substantial portion of the
participant pool, as might be the case when a firmsponsored
community is newly created. This may
act to inhibit developers from voicing heterogeneous
views, resulting in decreased volunteer participation.
This relationship was not directly observed in this
study, however developers’ distaste of tightly controlled
open source projects was observed.


==Property Rights==

"'''Private Ownership of Source Code.''' Private ownership
of the code acts to dismantle the collective development
process in a variety of ways. Most noticeably,
ownership by the firm creates the possibility that the
developer will not have access to the code at a later
date. Participants value the results of their efforts and
expect to continue using the software well into the
future. The open source project gave them this right,
but the gated source project did not make this guarantee.

Private ownership also appears to inhibit reciprocity:
if the firm is not donating the code to the
community, why should the developer take additional
time and effort to donate code to the firm?

'''Restrictions on Use, Modification, and Distribution.'''

The restrictions placed on the gated code with respect
to commercial use, modification, and distribution all
act to reduce the degrees of freedom that an individual
can exercise when using and creating the code,
particularly when compared to open source licensing
arrangements. These restrictions can be thought of as
limiting the value available to the individual developer,
i.e., the developer can only use the code for
certain purposes, modifications made and deployed
must meet community standards (rather than his own
preferences), and the code may only be shared with
others willing to abide by the community’s governance
arrangements, thereby decreasing the volume
of subsequent improvements and feedback that many
developers relish. On the other hand, these restrictions
might create value for the company.

Restrictions on commercial use in the gated source
community created additional problems because
licensing terms were negotiated with the firm on an
individual basis. This decreased trust dramatically
by creating the possibility of ex post hold-up problems.
Restrictions on commercial use with terms set
in advance and applicable to everyone may be less
problematic.

'''Proprietary Modifications.''' A large part of the longstanding
debate between free and open source
software advocates concerns proprietary modifications.
Software derived from free software cannot
be made proprietary."


=Discussion=

==Modularity and Decision Rights==

Langlois and Garzarelli:

“The rights assignment problem
(determining who should exercise a decision right), and the control or agency
problem (how to ensure that self-interested decision agents exercise their rights
in a way that contributes to the organizational objective).” All other things
equal, efficiency demands that the appropriate knowledge find its way into the
hands of those making decisions. There are basically two ways to ensure such a
“collocation” of knowledge and decision-making: “One is by moving the
knowledge to those with the decision rights; the other is by moving the decision
rights to those with the knowledge” (Jensen and Meckling 1992, p. 253). These
two choices – as well as possible variants and hybrids – are “constitutions” that
set out the assignment of decision rights. Such assignments can take place within
firms or within wider networks of independent collaborators.

 
In what follows, we distinguish three models: corporate, hybrid, and spontaneous.
In the case of the Prony Project, and of fordist production generally,
decision rights remain centralized. This is because there is very little knowledge
that needs to be transmitted; tasks have been made exceedingly simple, and the
important knowledge – that involving design – is already at the center. The
agency problem can be addressed either through investments in monitoring or
by aligning incentives using a suitable piece rate. Even when the subdivided
tasks are far more complicated – and require far more skill and creativity – it is
still possible to organize the intellectual division of labor in more-or-less the
same way, what we will call the corporate model. In this model, the ultimate
decision rights remain centralized, even as many de facto decision rights are
parceled out to employees at various levels of the hierarchy. Clearly, such an
arrangement complicates the agency problem, since keeping everyone on the
same page is no longer a simple matter of monitoring or incentive alignment in a
narrow pecuniary sense.

Many would argue that, even within the corporate context, effective
management of high-human-capital projects requires recourse to more
“participatory” or collaborative models (Minkler 1993). Does this mean that
there is really no difference between the corporate model and the hybrid or
voluntary ones? The answer is no, for two reasons. First, as we have seen, even
a large organization is bounded in the capabilities on which it can draw, and this
limitation may be important in many cases. Second, the location of the ultimate
decision right matters. For any division of intellectual labor we choose, behavior
and performance will be different if we assign decision rights to some central
authority rather than to the individual collaborators.

The opposite of a corporate model would a fully decentralized one in
which the collaborators retain the ultimate decision rights. But just as the central
holder of decision rights in a corporation must in practice cede de facto decision
rights to others, so in a decentralized system the collaborators must give up some
pieces of their rights in order to collaborate.”
(http://web.uconn.edu/ciom/Open1C.pdf)

[[Category:Governance]]