
'''* Article: Nabben, K. (2023). Governance by Algorithms, Governance of Algorithms: Human-Machine Politics in Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs). PuntOorg International Journal, 8(1), 36–54. https://doi.org/10.19245/25.05.pij.8.1.3'''

URL = https://www.puntoorginternationaljournal.org/index.php/PIJ/article/view/136


=Abstract=

"This paper situates Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) in organisational theory as an expression of ‘organising outside organisations’ through algorithmic governance. Digital networks, such as the internet, make organising outside of traditional organisational structures possible (Shirky, 2008). DAOs are an attempt at decentralised organisation towards independence from external political influence. DAOs aim for self-governance using algorithms grounded in public blockchain technology, ‘smart’ contracts, and public key cryptography in complement to the traditional rule of law to enforce behaviours. As a relatively recent phenomenon, DAOs remain under-theorised in the field of organisational studies. This paper locates DAOs as organisations in relation to the ‘organisational elements’ proposed by Ahrne and Brunsson (2011) to respond to the research question, ‘can algorithms, as a centralising process, be governed in a decentralised manner?’. I employ qualitative, digital ethnographic methods to trace the relations between human and non-human actors in decentralised networks to investigate algorithmic governance in the case of a DAO called “Gitcoin”. DAO constituents are engaged in both the governance of algorithms, and governance by algorithms. I argue that algorithmic governance in DAOs constitutes a novel form of ‘machine politics’ that elevates algorithms to the position of new political actors who shape and determine how humans behave as well as organisational outcomes, while simultaneously needing to draw on the organisational structure to govern them. This piece contributes to a research agenda on the social implications of algorithmic governance and decentralised modes of organising."


=More information=

== References ==


Aligica PD, and Tarko, Vlad. “Polycentricity: From Polanyi to Ostrom, and Beyond.” Governance 25, no. 2 (2012): 237–262. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0491.2011.01550.x.

Allen, D.W.E., Berg, C., Lane, A.M. “Cryptodemocracy and its institutional possibilities”. Rev Austrian Econ 33, 363–374 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11138-018-0423-6.

Aneesh, A. Virtual Migration: The Programming of Globalization. Durham: Duke University Press, 2006.

Ahrne, G., & Brunsson, N. Organization outside organizations: The significance of partial organization. Organization, 18, 1 (2011): 83–104. https://doi.org/10.1177/1350508410376256

Beltramini, E. Against technocratic authoritarianism. A short intellectual history of the cypherpunk movement. Internet Histories, 5, 2 (2020), 101–118. https://doi.org/10.1080/24701475.2020.1731249.

Berg, C., Davidson, S., & Potts, J. Understanding the Blockchain Economy: An Introduction to Institutional Cryptoeconomics. (Edward Elgar Publishing: 2019).

BlockScience. “Evaluating the Anti-Fraud Results for Gitcoin Round 10.” Medium (blog). Published July 7, 2021. Available online: https://medium.com/block-science/evaluating-the-anti-fraud-results-for-gitcoin-round-10-cec9277ce5b2. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Brekke, JK. “Hacker-Engineers and Their Economies: The Political Economy of Decentralised Networks and ‘Cryptoeconomics’.” New Political Economy 26, no. 4 (2021): 646-659. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13563467.2020.1806223.

Brummer, C J., and R Seira. “Legal Wrappers and DAOs”. SSRN. (2022). Accessed 2 June, 2022. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4123737.

Buterin, V. “Ethereum: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application Platform”. Ethereum.org (blog). 2014a. Available online: https://ethereum.org/669c9e2e2027310b6b3cdce6e1c52962/Ethereum_Whitepaper_-_Buterin_2014.pdf. Accessed September, 2022.

Buterin, V. “DAOs, DACs, DAs and More: An Incomplete Terminology Guide.” Ethereum (blog). Published May 6, 2014b. Available online: https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide/. Accessed September, 2022.

Buterin, V. “DAOs as a concept existed long before Ethereum”. Medium (blog). 2016. Available online: https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/i-invented-the-term-in-2013-and-daniel-larimer-came-up-with-dacs-s-organization-corporation-a-ef86db1524d5. Accessed September, 2022.

Buterin, V. “The Meaning of Decentralization”. Medium (blog). 2017. Available online: https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-a0c92b76a274. Accessed September, 2022.

Buterin, V. “Gitcoin Grants Round 9: The Next Phase of Growth.” Vitalik.ca (blog). Published April 2, 2021. Available online: https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/02/round9.html. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Chitra, T. “Automated Governance: Defi’s Scientific Evolution.” Medium (blog). Published September 25, 2020. Available online: https://medium.com/gauntlet-networks/automated-governance-defis-scientific-evolution-feea0284fa99. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Crawford, K. Atlas of AI. Yale University Press, 2021. Available online: https://www.amazon.com/Atlas-AI-Kate-Crawford/dp/0300209576

Davidson, S., De Filippi, P., and Potts, J. “Disrupting Governance: The New Institutional Economics of Distributed Ledger Technology.” Published July 19, 2016. Available online: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2811995.

Davidson, S., and Potts, J. “Corporate Governance in a Crypto-World”. SSRN. (2022). Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4099906. Accessed September, 2022.

De Filippi, P. “Blockchain Technology and Decentralized Governance: The Pitfalls of a Trustless Dream. Decentralized Thriving: Governance and Community on the Web 3.0.” Published 2019. Available online: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3524354. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

De Filippi, P. and Hassan, S. “Blockchain Technology as a Regulatory Technology: From Code is Law to Law is Code.” Published 2018. Available online: ArXiv:1801.02507 [Cs] or http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.02507.

De Filippi, P. and Loveluck, B. “The Invisible Politics of Bitcoin: Governance Crisis of a Decentralized Infrastructure”. Internet Policy Review, Vol. 5, Issue 3 (2016). https://doi.org/10.14763/2016.3.427

Dilger, W. “Decentralized Autonomous Organization of the Intelligent Home According to the Principle of the Immune System.” 1997 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. Computational Cybernetics and Simulation 1, (1997): 351–356. Available online: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.1997.625775.

Disruption, J. “Token Engineering Open Program: A Multidisciplinary Study of Gitcoin Grants.” Gitcoin. Published 2021. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/blog/token-engineering-open-science-program-a-multidisciplinary-study-of-gitcoin-grants/. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Emmett, J., Nabben, K., Bernadineli, DL., and Zargham, M. “Deterring Adversarial Behavior at Scale in Gitcoin Grants: A Framework for Community-Based Algorithmic Policy Making.” Medium. Published March 27, 2021. Available online: https://medium.com/block-science/deterring-adversarial-behavior-at-scale-in-gitcoin-grants-a8a5cd7899ff. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Faqir-Rhazoui, Y., Gallardo, JA., and Hassan, S. "A Comparative Analysis of the Adoption of Decentralized Governance in the Blockchain Through DAOs." Published 2021. Available online: deepdao.io/. Accessed 8 November, 2021.

Fineman, S., Gabriel, Y., & Sims, D. Organizing & Organizations. (SAGE: 2009).

Gitcoin.co. “Gitcoin is the Community of Builders, Creators, and Protocols at the Centre of Open Web Ecosystems.” (n.d.a). Gitcoin. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/about. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Gitcoin.co. “WTF is Quadratic Funding.” (n.d.b). Available online: https://qf.gitcoin.co/?grant=&grant=&grant=&grant=&match=1000. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Gitcoin.com. “Gitcoin Terms of Use.” Published 2021. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/legal/terms. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Gitcoin Disputes, @GitcoinDisputes, Twitter, (n.d.), Available online: https://twitter.com/GitcoinDisputes. Accessed November 19, 2021.

Gritsenko, D., and M. Wood. “Algorithmic Governance: A Modes of Governance Approach.” Regulation & Governance, (November 10, 2020): 1-18. Available online: https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12367. Accessed November 19, 2021.

Hassan, S., and P. De Filippi. "Decentralized Autonomous Organization." Internet Policy Review 10, no. 2 (2021): 1-10.

Hasinoff, A., and N. Schneider, “From Scalability to Subsidiarity in Addressing Online Harm.” 4 November, 2021. https://osf.io/wbd89/?view_only=971e265a24d64731a3a6f47a1aabbfd6.

Ho, D.E., and DF Engstrom. “Artificially Intelligent Government: A Review and an Agenda.” In Research Handbook on Big Data Law, edited by Roland Vogl. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021.

Hodder, I. Entangled: An Archaeology of the Relationships between Humans and Things. (Wiley-Blackwell, 2012).

Hughes, E. “A Cypherpunk’s Manifesto.” In The Electronic Privacy Papers: Documents on the Battle for Privacy in the Age of Surveillance, edited by Bruce Schneier and David Banisar, 285–287. USA: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.

Jiajia. Hackmd.io. “New Bots or New Users? Toward a Crowd – Sourcing Mechanism Design of Optimality Gap.” (n.d). Available online: https://hackmd.io/@Jiajia20/ryOGXi1mt. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Katzenbach, C., and Ulbricht, L.. “Algorithmic governance.” Internet Policy Review 8, no. 4 (2019): 1-18. http://dx.doi.org/10.14763/2019.4.1424.

Kimbwala, G., “How do you Prevent Sybil Attacks.” Published July 11, 2021. Available online: https://support.gitcoin.co/kb/article/66-how-do-you-prevent-sybil-attacks/. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Larimer, D. “Overpaying for Security: The Hidden Costs of Bitcoin.” Published 2013. Available online: https://letstalkbitcoin.com/is-bitcoin-overpaying-for-false-security#.UjtiUt9xy0w. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Latour, B. “Where are the missing masses, sociology of a few mundane artefacts?”. In Shaping Technology-Building Society. Studies in Sociotechnical Change, W. Bijker and J. Law (eds/), MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. 1992. pp. 225-259.

Latour, B. Reassembling the Social – An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory. (Oxford University Press, Oxford: 2007).

Latour, B. An Inquiry into Modes of Existence. Cambridge, MA. (Harvard University Press, 2013).

Latzer, M., and N. Festic. “A Guideline for Understanding and Measuring Algorithmic Governance in Everyday Life.” Internet Policy Review 8, no. 2 (2019): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.14763/2019.2.1415.

Leadbeater, C. The Civic Long Tail. London: Demos, 2011. Available online: https://demos.co.uk/project/the-civic-long-tail/. Accessed 2 December, 2021.

Lessa, D. “[Cancelled/Superceded S14 Proposal] FDD Season 14 Budget Request— Budget Proposals”. Gitcoin Governance (forum). (2022). Available online: https://gov.gitcoin.co/t/cancelled-superceded-s14-proposal-fdd-season-14-budget-request/10448/50. Accessed September, 2022.

May, T. ‘The Crypto Anarchist Manifesto’. 1988. Available online: https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/crypto-anarchy.html. Accessed 15 Aug. 2020.

Mittelstadt, B. "Auditing for Transparency in Content Personalization Systems." International Journal of Communication 10, (2016): 4991-5002.

Müller-Birn, C., L. Dobusch, and JD. Herbsleb. “Work-to-Rule: The Emergence of Algorithmic Governance in Wikipedia,” 80-89. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Communities and Technologies (C&T '13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, USA, 2013. Available online: DOI:https://doiorg.ezproxy.lib.rmit.edu.au/10.1145/2482991.2482999. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Nakamoto S. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” Bitcoin. Published 2009. Available online: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. Accessed 20 February, 2019.

Nabben, K. “Is a ‘Decentralized Autonomous Organization’ a Panopticon? Algorithmic Governance as Creating and Mitigating Vulnerabilities in DAOs.” (2021). In Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Workshop on (de) Centralization in the Internet (IWCI'21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 2021. Available online: doi.acm.org?doi=3488663.3493791. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Nabben, K. “A Political History of DAOs”. Friends With Benefits Works In Progress. (2022a). Available online: https://www.fwb.help/wip/cypherpunks-to-social-daos. Accessed Sep. 2022.

Nabben, K. “The Ethnography of a DAO”. Mirror.xyz. (2022b). Available online: https://kelsiemvn.mirror.xyz/cMqYnA0avO3XV11XPct-XkRG8trgnP0Gf_LTgDbqS20. Accessed September, 2022.

Owocki, K. “ Gitcoin Grants Round 9 Governance Brief.” Gitcoin. Published 2021. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/blog/gitcoin-grants-round-9-governance-brief/.

Owocki, K. “Introducing GTC – Gitcoin’s Governance Token.” Gitcoin. Published May 25, 2021. Available online: https://gitcoin.co/blog/introducing-gtc-gitcoins-governance-token/.

Perrow, C. Complex organizations. (New York: Random House). 1986.

Posner, EA., and Weyl, G. Radical Markets. (Princeton University Press: 2018).

Pink, S., Horst, H., Postill, J., Hjorth, L., Lewis., T., Tacchi, J. Digital Ethnography. (SAGE Publications Ltd: 2015).

Rennie, E., Zargham, M., Tan, J., Miller, L., Abbott, J., Nabben, K., and De Filippi, P. “Towards a participatory digital ethnography of blockchain governance” (2022). Qualitative Inquiry. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4078259.

Richardson, R. “Defining and Demystifying Automated Decision Systems.” Maryland Law Review. (Forthcoming, 2022).

Ronfeldt, D. Cyberocracy, Cyberspace, and Cyberology: Political Effects of the Information Revolution. California: RAND Corporation, 1991.

Ronfeldt, D. "Cyberocracy is Coming." The information Society 8, no. 4 (1992): 243-296.

Shirky, C. Here comes everybody: The power of organizing without organizations. London. Allen Lane. (2008).

The Commons Stack (n.d). “Realigning Incentives Around Public Goods.” Available online: https://commonsstack.org/. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Voshmgir, S. and M. Zargham. “Foundations of Cryptoeconomic Systems.” Cryptoeconomics Working Paper Series 1, no. 1 (2019): 18. Vienna University of Economics-1. https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Foundations-of-Cryptoeconomic-Systems-Voshmgir-Zargham/8ea45c6b86d702db129a32d2c50caf37c7b86cd3.

Warwick, K. “DAO First Capital Formation.” Synthetix. Published July 1, 2021. Available online: https://blog.synthetix.io/dao-first-capital-formation/.

Weiss, K. “Code of Conduct.” Published May 25, 2021. Available online: https://support.gitcoin.co/kb/article/42-code-of-conduct/. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

Wright, A. “The Rise of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations: Opportunities and Challenges”. Stanford Journal of Blockchain Law & Policy. (2021). [online]. Retrieved from https://stanford-jblp.pubpub.org/pub/rise-of-daos. Accessed September, 2022.

Zargham, M. and Nabben, K. “Algorithms as Policy: How Can Algorithm Design be Reconceptualized as Policy-Making to Create Safer Digital Infrastructures?” Substack. Published 2020. Available online: https://kelsienabben.substack.com/p/algorithms-as-policy. Accessed 9 November, 2021.

Zartler, J. D.L. Bernardineli, N Hirannet, M. Zargham, J. Emmett and C. Rice. “Gitcoin Grants Round 11 Anti-Fraud Evaluation Results.” Medium. Published September 30, 2021. Available online: https://medium.com/block-science/gitcoin-grants-round-11-anti-fraud-evaluation-results-50f4b0f15125. Accessed 1 December, 2021.

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]