
'''* Working paper: Fuster Morell, M. (2013). [[Governance of Online Creation Communities for the Building of Digital Commons]]: Viewed through the framework of the institutional analysis and development. Madison, M. J.,  Strandburg, K., & Frischmann, B. Convening Cultural Commons. Oxford University Press. (Forthcoming)'''

URL = http://www.onlinecreation.info/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/MFM_WorkingPaper_IAD_OCC.pdf

=Abstract=

"This chapter addresses the governance of a specific type of constructed common-pool resource, online creation communities (OCCs).OCCs are communities of individuals that mainly interact via a platform of online participation, with the goal of building and sharing a common-pool resource resulting from collaboratively systematizing and integrating dispersed information and knowledge resources. Previous research of the governance of OCCs has been based on analyzing specific aspects of the governance. However, there has been a gap in the literature, one of lacking a comprehensive and holistic view of what governance means in collective action online. This chapter provides a set of dimensions that define the governance of OCCs. Particularly, most previous work did not consider infrastructure provision in their analysis. This chapter challenges previous literature by questioning the neutrality of infrastructure for collective action. The governance of OCCs is here analyzed through the institutional analysis and development (IAD) framework, building on Madison, Frischmann & Strandburg’s (2010) adaptation of this framework to constructing commons in the cultural environment. References to Schweik and English’s adaptation of IAD to free and open source communities will also be made. The empirical data are drawn from a statistical analysis of 50 cases and four case studies on OCCs (Wikipedia, Flickr, Wikihow& Openesf). The empirical analysis results in a set of models of OCCs governance. The conclusions provide an assessment of the utility of IAD in the analysis of OCCs, and Madison, Frischmann & Strandburg’s adaptation. Additionally, it ends by addressing the defining characteristics of digital commons."


=Excerpts=

==Previous work on the governance of OCCs==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"One of the more lively debates in contemporary organizational research concerns how 
the coordination and governance of distributed knowledge in globally dispersed settings – such 
as the case of OCCs – takes place, and how it can be accounted for. Unlike   other   types   of   online   communities, OCCs must integrate individual contributions into a common pool, which can heighten interdependencies and the 
need for coordination and governance. Yet little is known about how OCCs which organize  around production govern themselves. 

The scant empirical research on OCCs governance is mainly concentrated on the case of 
Free and Open Software Projects (FLOSS),  and more  recently  on 
Wikipedia.  

These analyses  focus on  the community, particularly in terms of policy­making in the community, its decentralized character, and  forms of 
conflict resolution.  The nature 
of authority has also been analyzed, 
together with studies on modes of selection of administrators, their roles, (Burke and Kraut 
2008) and leadership. Fuster Morell (2010) considered the institutional frame 
or, more specifically, the role of the Wikimedia Foundation as platform provider. 
Although the number of articles on community governance has increased, their range of 
topics remains limited. Previous research has mostly focused on analyzing the polic-y­making 
processes developed by the participants to govern their interaction. However, there was a gap 
in  the literature, lacking  a comprehensive and holistic view of what governance means in 
collective action online. 

This chapter aims to move beyond the analysis of specific aspects of the governance of 
OCCs, to provide a comprehensive understanding of the diverse aspects that drive governance 
of OCCs. This chapter provides a set of dimensions that define the governance of OCCs. In 
particular, most previous work did not consider infrastructure provision in their analysis. In 
this   regard,   the   chapter   challenges   previous   literature   by   questioning   the   neutrality   of  infrastructure for collective action."

==Resource characteristics of OCCs==

"The pooled resources in OCCs are not given resources that need to be “preserved” as in 
natural  commons­pool  resources. Rather,  they  are  resources  that  need  to  be  built.  OCCs, 
indeed, arise from the collective goal of building a specific resource. The building process is 
characterized  by  the  pooling  of  dispersed information  and  cognitive  capacities  in evolving 
bodies of shared knowledge. The resource tends to be conceived of as a permanent work in 
progress, and in most of the cases, without a specific moment of definitive conclusion. 

The OCCs are immaterial in nature, consisting of information and knowledge. As public 
goods,   they  are   non­rivalrous   and   non­excludable.  Madison,  Frischmann,   and   Strandburg 
(2010) classify constructed commons goals as existing in a milieu of Intellectual Property (IP) 
6Fuster Morell, M. Governance of online creation communities for the building of digital commons: Viewed through the framework of the institutional analysis and development. Working paper (Nov 2013). Madison, M. J., Strandburg, K., & Frischmann, B. Convening Cultural Commons. Oxford University Press. (Forthcoming)
rights, that is existing only because of the IP rights, or mediating among communities with 
different default norms. Most OCCs, including the four case studies considered here, fall into 
the first category, as they exist as part of IP rights. 

According   to   Madison,   Frischmann,   and   Strandburg   (2010)   cultural   commons   are 
diverse in terms of the level at which their pooled resources are most easily identifiable or 
recognized. OCCs form a case where pooled resources are easily identifiable – an archive that 
gathers   and   coherently   systematizes   the   contributions.   Indeed,   the   construction   of   an 
integrated and identifiable piece of knowledge is what distinguishes OCCs from other online 
communities   such   as   networking   sites   or   communities   of   support   or   shared   interest.   

An encyclopedia is the main common resource in the case of Wikipedia, a picture repository in the 
case of Flickr, how to manuals in the case of Wikihow, and organizational information linked to 
a  forum in  the  case  of Openesf. However,  beyond  their  principal  resources,  all  the  cases 
agglutinate   other   secondary   “pooled   resources”   which   deepen   one   another.   For   example, 
Wikipedia is not only an encyclopedia, but also hosts a repository of audio­visual sources as a 
commons. Additionally, even if the knowledge resource is the central goal around which OCCs 
interact,   OCCs   also   depend   on   an   infrastructure   to   support   interaction,   and   so   an 
infrastructure architecture also results from the process. However, this is considered in deep, 
“infrastructure,”, meaning something that sustains the main goal, but is not itself the central 
goal of the process.  
  
Schweik and English (2012) have previously attempted to apply IAD to OCCs in the 
specific case of FLOSS. Regarding resources characteristics, our approaches differ in two ways 
to Schweik and English. On the one hand, Schweik and English do not specify the  type of 
resource. However, when analyzing diverse OCCs as is the case in this chapter, specifying the 
type of resource is appropriate. On the other hand, Schweik and English present as resources 
characteristics aspects, such as the participation platform design, that are integrated as part of 
governance, not as resources characteristics, in the present work."


==Community attributes of OCCs==


It was pointed out above that pooled resources in OCCs are easily identifiable but that 
the same cannot be said of their communities. In terms of communities of constituents, OCCs 
are complex. OCCs are open to participation, and it is difficult to identify their boundaries. For 
none of the four case studies or in the sample of fifty cases of OCCs looked at herein, were 
clear  boundaries  or membership  established.  The  communities  of  OCCs may include  any 
person potentially willing to contribute to the common­-pool resource or to use it. 

Community size OCCs are generally open to participation, but such openness does not necessarily result 
in actual participation. The size of the community of participants depends substantially on the 
goal of each OCC, ranging from more broad to more restricted sets of interests. One rightly 
expects   that   an   encyclopedia   attracts   more   participants   than   a   site   organized   around 
visualization techniques. 

In terms of the participation in the four case studies, Wikipedia achieves a high level of 
participation. Almost 18 million registered users were part of Wikipedia in November 2012. 
Flickr   also   draws   a   large   amount   of   participation.   In   2007,   one   estimate   put   the   Flickr  community at 7.7 million users. (Negoescu and Gatica­Perez 2008) Wikihow has substantially 
fewer  participants.  As  of  April  2010,  the  number  of  registered Wikihow  participants  was 
around 213,204. The levels of participation at openesf.net are low, with less than 1200 people 
registered at their highest point.

'''Voluntary engagement'''

Participants in OCCs are volunteers. They do not have a contractual labor relationship 
with the community, even if some participants may make their contributions as part of their 
work outside the community. All four cases share this characteristic of voluntary participation. 
Notably, however, professional photographers who use Flickr  as part of  their work  form  a 
significant part of the Flickr population. (Burgess 2007)

As  a consequence of  the voluntary character of OCCs, each participant assumes  the 
costs of participation. The participants are able to contribute according to their own resources 
of time, skills or money.  According to the civic voluntarism model, (Verba, Schlozman, and 
Brady 1995) resources are a key factor in understanding why some people participate whereas 
others do not. Resource-­rich participants with  free  time, connectivity, skills and money can 
contribute more easily than those without such resources. And so the resource­rich tend to be 
disproportionately represented among participants. However, a lack of resources may not be 
the   only   explanatory   variable   behind   non­participation.  Even   people   with   the   necessary 
resources may decide not to participate for a variety of reasons such as questions of identity or 
personality. People who identify themselves as creative, for example, and/or are more used to 
public exposure may be more likely to participate. This is the case for younger generations. 
According   to   Preece,   Nonnecke   and   Andrews   (2004),   other   reasons   why   people   do   not 
participate in OCCs are as  follows:   thinking  that  they were being helpful by not posting; 
wanting  to learn more  about  the  community  before  diving in;  not  being  able  to  use  the 
software because of poor usability;  not liking  the dynamics  that  they observed within  the 
group; or feeling represented in what was said by other participants. 


'''Community heterogeneity'''

Several authors have pointed out that OCCs are very diverse in terms of the motivations 
and interest that drive their participation. (e.g., Benkler 2006; Weber 2004) However, Schweik 
and English (2012) point out that their surveys of participants in FLOSS show a high level of 
homogeneity in terms of social composition, in concrete, in terms of gender (predominantly 
male), age (predominantly young) and geographical origin (predominantly Europe and USA). 
Our own analysis of gender distribution at openesf.net also shows that the predominance of 
male   participation   was   also   repeated   in   the   case   of  openesf.net,   where   36%   of   active  participants are women according to their name or/and presentation in their user page. In the 
case of Wikipedia, previous research has concluded that women accounted for around 12% of 
the  editor  community.  (Glott,  Schmidt,  and Ghosh  2009)  According  to Wikihow  Inc,  the 
Wikihow  community  has  a  higher  women’s  participation  rate  of  around  40%.  (Interview, 
Wikihow founder, 2008)  


'''External relationships'''

Madison,   Frischmann,   and   Strandburg   (2010)   suggest,   with   respect   to   community 
attributes,   analyzing   external   relationships   of   community   and   common­pool   resources 
regarding markets, industries or  firms. For  the specific case of FLOSS, several studies have 
pointed out how corporations and foundations engage with the common­pool resource, which 
Schweik and English (2012, 15) refer to with the label “open­source ecosystem”. The external 
relationships of OCCs may explain their capacity to mobilize participation. However, research 
in  this area is very limited, and  there is not a unique pattern of interaction with markets, 
industries  or  firms.  In  the  cases  presented  here we  can  observe  the  development  of  “net 
districts” similar to an industrial district. OCCs that are part of a “net district” and cooperate 
with each other. This is the case of Wikipedia and Wikihow that adopt the same license or 
protocols to facilitate the flow of content and participation between their platforms."


==Rules ­in ­use or governance of OCCs==

Ostrom (2005: 3) defines institutions (referred to herein as bodies with governance or 
rules­in­use) as  “the prescriptions  that humans use  to organize  all  forms of  repetitive  and 
structured interactions.” Institutions raise and channel interaction among participants. They 
provide  direction,  control  and coordination  of  the collective  action.  Institutions  are  set by 
social norms and formalized rules, together with the forms in which those rules are created 
and enforced. (Ostrom 2005)

The governance, or the direction, control and coordination of a process, is embedded or 
operates though aspects or points/sources of power. '''According to the analysis reported here, 
there   are   eight   main   aspects'''   that   are   in   a   complex   juxtaposition   or   interaction   which  determine and drive governance in OCCs. The eight dimensions (that operate at the different 
operational, collective choice and constitutional levels) that give OCCs direction, control and 
coordination are: 

i) Collective mission or goal of the process.

ii) Cultural principles/Social norms. 

iii) Design of the platform of participation (where regulation is embedded in the code).

iv) Self­management of contributions: autonomous condition of participants in allocating 
their contribution to the building process. 

v) Formal rules or policies applied to community interaction.

vi) License. 

vii)Decision­making and conflict resolution systems with regard to community interaction.

viii) Infrastructure provision.


The   eight   dimensions   are   interrelated   rather   than   narrowly   discrete.   Additionally, 
governance is not “static”, but dynamic and might evolve over time. It might not be linear in its 
evolution, with “incoherent” moves in the diverse aspects on occasion. 

Governance is very much shaped on the basis of how and who decides and manages 
these dimensions. Each of the dimensions might be managed in a more open to participation 
or inclusive way or not. They may encourage involvement or consideration of the views and 
interests of  the participants as individuals and/or community as a whole. Or  they may be 
contrasted by the infrastructure provider. Another important dimension is whether it is more 
decentralized / fragmented / ad hoc or more centralized and established.

Some of these aspects are similarly present in other forms of collective action, while 
others  are  specific  to  the OCCs. This might  be  connected  to  the  background environment 
within which OCCs operate, particularly the functioning of the digital environment. OCCs take 
place in an environment  that shapes  them in  terms of  technical and legal constraints. The 
emerging governance of OCCs in this environment cannot be qualified as simple. Indeed it is a 
highly complex system."

=More Information=

* this working paper is an update and re-articulation of the 2010 PhD Thesis: [[Governance_of_Online_Creation_Communities]]


==Bibliography of the Author==

Fuster Morell, M. (2011, October). [[Rethinking Government in the Light of the Emerging Organisational Principles of Online Collective Action]]. In E. Aibar (Ed.) European Journal of ePractice. No 12. ISSN: 1988-625X. (pp. 81-93) Retrieved from http://tinyurl.com/bslp3o7

Fuster Morell, M (2010). [[Participation in Online Creation Communities]]: [[Ecosystemic Participation]]?. Conference Proceedings of JITP 2010: The Politics of Open Source (p. 270). Retrieved from http://scholarworks.umass.edu/jitpc2010/1

Fuster Morell, M. (2011). The [[Wikimedia Foundation and the Governance of Wikipedia’s Infrastructure]]: Historical Trajectories and its Hybrid Character. In Lovink, G., Tkacz, N. & Roberts, I. (eds). Critical Point of View Reader, Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2011. Retrieved from http://www.networkcultures.org/_uploads/%237reader_Wikipedia.pdf

Fuster Morell, M. (2012). [[Emerging Conception of Participation and Democracy in Online Settings: Lessons and challenges for digital democracy experiences. (p. 129-188). In E. Campos and I. Ramos (Ed.). 3D Citizen. Madrid: Fundación IDEAS.


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Articles]]