'''Article: Robinson, David, Yu, Harlan, Zeller, William P and Felten, Edward W, “Government Data and the Invisible Hand” (2008). Yale Journal of Law & Technology, Vol. 11, 2008'''

URL = http://ssrn.com/abstract=1138083


=Description=

The guys over at Princeton’s new Center for Information Technology
Policy wrote a really great paper for the Yale Journal of Law &
Technology on the role data should have, compared to websites, in
government. It articulates a point that I think many of us
subconsciously have had in mind:

“The new administration should specify that the federal government's
primary objective as an online publisher is to provide data that is
easy for others to reuse, rather than to help citizens use the data in
one particular way or another.”

And they suggest an interesting way to push that forward:

“The policy route to realizing this principle is to require that
federal government websites retrieve the underlying data using the
same infrastructure that they have made available to the public. Such
a rule incentivizes government bodies to keep this infrastructure in
good working order, and ensures that private parties will have no less
an opportunity to use public data than the government itself does. The
rule prevents the situation, sadly typical of government websites
today, in which governmental interest in presenting data in a
particular fashion distracts from, and thereby impedes, the provision
of data to users for their own purposes.”

I think this is a worthwhile addition to the opengovdata and
publicmarkup.org policy documents — if not as a direct recommendation
(because I think it may be too much to ask for in a grand form) then
noted as a long-term goal or (in terms of the second paragraph I quoted)
as a benchmark, a concrete way to tell whether data is open.

The full citation is: Robinson, David, Yu, Harlan, Zeller, William P and
Felten, Edward W, “Government Data and the Invisible Hand” (2008). Yale
Journal of Law & Technology, Vol. 11, 2008
(http://www.dowire.org/notes/?p=411)


=More Information=

#[[Open Data]]
#[[Open Government Data]]

See also the similar essay: [[Crowdsourcing Government Transparency]]. By Jerry Brito.

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Politics]]