'''* Book: Grassroots Economics Field Guide. Will Ruddick.'''

URL = https://monneta.org/en/will-ruddick-grassroots-economics/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Grassroots Economics unveils a revolutionary economic model rooted in nature and ancestral wisdom. Drawing from real-world community resilience, it explores how resource pooling—mirroring mycorrhizal and human social networks—creates sustainable abundance. A transformative guide for activists, ecosystem stewards, technologists, economists, and changemakers seeking decentralized, cooperative, and regenerative resource coordination for a thriving future. This book is not an answer, but an invitation by the author—an invitation to explore new (and old) ways of coordinating resources, restoring trust, and creating economies that serve the well-being of all."


'''2. Monneta:'''

"In his new book Will Ruddick describes different forms of resource coordination.

His Field Guide begins by looking at how fungal networks and social systems naturally coordinate resources in ways that are symbiotic and resilient. Will Ruddick explored e.g. in Kenya how “pools of commitments” can replace or complement money, uniting people around shared purpose. He recognized that each of us holds seeds of abundance that only bloom when placed in a common-pool—an open space that thrives on reciprocity and trust. He wants his book to be not an answer, but an invitation - an invitation to explore new (and old) ways of coordinating resources, restoring trust, and creating economies that serve the well-being of all."


=Contents=

01_Introduction_GrassrootsEconomics

02_Reflection_1-Ecosystems_GrassrootsEconomics

03_Reflection_2-Ancestral_Wisdom_GrassrootsEconomics

04_Reflection_3-Base_Protocols_GrassrootsEconomics

05_Reflection_4-Protocol_Expressions_GrassrootsEconomics

06_Reflection_5-Digital_Ecosystems_GrassrootsEconomics

07_Reflection_6-A_Path_Forward_GrassrootsEconomics

08_Part_2_Becoming_a_Grassroots_Economist_GrassrootsEconomics

09_Phase_A-Developing_a_Common_Vision_GrassrootsEconomics

10_Phase_B-Assessing_the_Current_Reality_GrassrootsEconomics

11_Phase_C-Develop_Strategies_and_Action_Plans_GrassrootsEconomics

12_Phase_D-Implement_and_Adjust_GrassrootsEconomics

13_Weaving_it_all_Back_Together_GrassrootsEconomics

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Books]]