
= part of the [[ECSA Stack]] for disintermediated value creation and distribution, being constructed by the [[Economic Space Agency]]


=Description=

Gravity is a resilient distributed application runtime that empowers/induces safe computational semantics, cryptographically secure protocols and orthogonally persistent state.

The Gravity protocol is a language based on lambda calculus, prototypes, object capabilities and message passing to create distributed applications. 


Gravity nodes are isolated runtime processes connected through cryptographic capabilities. They jointly create a distributed runtime and implement the following protocols:

* A distributed ordered message queue to share an event loop and timeline.
* A distributed relative address space / scope, to refer to and access objects in the network securely.
* A distributed development environment, to collaboratively create, debug and share objects.


=Applications=

Gravity Applications are executed on top of this runtime, and selectively share protocols, state and computation. Gravity applications are:

* Persistent: The state of the node and its data structures are durable. The state of the node can be recovered after failure, reboot of the Gravity node or moving across nodes.
* Private: Gravity nodes can create an isolated shared state and event timeline.
* Verifiable: The integrity of the state, protocol, and execution of a Gravity node is verifiable.
* Transactional: State transitions are isolated and atomically consistent across Gravity nodes.
* Distributed: Application state is selectively stored across multiple nodes and doesn’t rely on single global mutable state. Applications are networked and only optionally share state, making them inherently scalable.
* Secure: A Gravity node can keep secrets. All state is stored and transmitted in an encrypted form.
* Safe: Gravity applications follow a secure computation model based on object capabilities and the principle of least authority.
* Redundant: Gravity applications may use multiple nodes to execute/verify code, to send messages through, or to store state. Gravity provides constructs that enable high availability and fault recovery.
* Portable: Gravity applications and data structures may move across gravity nodes, further improving resilience and adaptability.
* Reflective: Protocols, state, and computation may be defined, accessed, analyzed and updated from within Gravity itself.

Gravity is an Economic Space Agency project."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yTrjXWTxPINogBRJyWjAfHVmrDW16W5ReLwSrGm3D4I/edit])


[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]