'''* Article: Shoshitaishvili, B. (2021). From Anthropocene to Noosphere: The Great Acceleration. Earth's Future, 9, e2020EF001917. [https://doi.org/10.1029/2020EF001917]'''

URL = https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2020EF001917

"A balanced global understanding of ongoing anthropogenic change requires the integration of insights from both paradigms."


=Abstract=

"The complex set of human-driven global, social, technological, and environmental changes
intensifying dramatically since 1950 has been identified as the “Great Acceleration.” This period of time
represents a radical shift in our collective relationship to each other as well as to the Earth system as a
whole. In this article I consider two major paradigms now taking shape to offer different perspectives
on the Great Acceleration: The Anthropocene and the Noosphere. I explore the scientific-intellectual
traditions from which each paradigm derives and contrast their nearly opposite normative evaluations
of global transformation. The Anthropocene has emerged as the paradigm of rupture, materiality, and
warning; the Noosphere as the paradigm of development, mind/culture, and hope. I also highlight
preliminary attempts at bringing the two divergent paradigms closer together into a more unified and
balanced vision of planetary change.

'''Plain Language Summary:''' Since 1950, humanity has accelerated its population growth,
energy use, and release of greenhouse gases, along with a variety of other environmentally and socioeconomically significant trends. Taken together, this set of accelerated human-driven trends has been
called the “Great Acceleration,” and its occurrence helps explain recent climate change and ecological
disturbance. In this article, I explore two dominant but divergent paradigms for what is happening to our
species as it becomes globalized and continues in the Great Acceleration. One of the paradigms is related
to the newly proposed geological epoch of the “Anthropocene” (the Age of the Human Being), which sees
the Great Acceleration as a rupture in our relationship to the Earth System. The other paradigm centers
on the concept of a “Noosphere” (a sphere of thought) and proposes that human beings are forming a
planetary awareness through these interlocking and accelerating trends. I argue that we need to learn
from both paradigms to achieve a balanced understanding of the Great Acceleration.


'''Key Points:'''

• The Anthropocene and the
Noosphere are divergent paradigms
for understanding the anthropogenic
changes of the Great Acceleration

• The Anthropocene envisions the
Great Acceleration as material-energetic rupture; the Noosphere as
an increase in global awareness

• A balanced global understanding
of ongoing anthropogenic change
requires the integration of insights
from both paradigms "

(https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2020EF001917)

[[Category:Noosphere]]

[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Articles]]