
=Concept=

==Conceptual Quote==

'''= "that the long trajectory of human societies that solve problems by adding more energy will reverse this century. ''More energy allows for more complexity, less energy implies a simplification of processes, lifestyles and expectations''".''' 

- Nate Hagens [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xo2qQhD5_wszSOfx7BqNul1W0j-FijEg/view])


=Podcast Series=

"The Great Simplification with [[Nate Hagens]] is a podcast that explores the systems science underpinning the human predicament. Conversation topics will span human behavior, monetary/economic systems, energy, ecology, geopolitics and the environment.  The goal of the show is to inform more humans about the path ahead and inspire people to play a role in our collective future. Guests will be from a wide range of scientists, leaders, activists, thinkers, and doers.

We have spent the last century harnessing enormous amounts of fossil energy to build a world of complexity like nothing seen before. In the coming century, humanity will experience A Great Simplification, beginning with the onset of financial and economic turbulence, followed by contraction. The ensuing simplification will be among the most significant events ever experienced by our species. 

Those who look through a systems lens can serve as early visionaries of a simpler life with new ways of relating to technology, to consumption, to each other and to Earth’s ecosystems. 

Our system -  and the components, processes and interactions that comprise it  - is incredibly complex. On this podcast we will try to ‘simplify’ the ‘great’ issues of our time to expand the number of people making sense of our reality."

(https://www.thegreatsimplification.com/about)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]