
* Book: Bill Tomlinson, Greening Through IT: Information Technology for Environmental Sustainability. 2010. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 210 pp.,


=Review=

Jorge L. Zapico:

"The relationship between information and communication technologies
and environmental sustainability is complex and still little understood. Will
ICT help us move toward a more efªcient and sustainable society, or will it
increase resource consumption and emissions? Recent books by Bill
Tomlinson and Robert Rattle present two opposing answers to these questions. Each details the negative environmental impacts of computers, such
as energy consumption, resource depletion, and e-waste, and they both
put more weight on the second order effects of using ICT. But while
Tomlinson focuses mostly on the positive potential of ICTs for sustainability
education and behavioral change, Rattle focuses mostly on the negative
effects and rebound effects. A rebound effect (sometimes also referred as
Jevon’s paradox) occurs when the increase in efªciency of how a resource
is used increases the total use, instead of decreasing it (Alcott, 2005).

Bill Tomlinson’s book Greening Though IT is one of the ªrst books on
ICT for sustainability published for a broad and nontechnical audience.

The book’s central discourse is that environmental problems are caused
because there is a gap in time, space, and complexity. While environmental problems are broad, big, and slow, we humans have a narrow, fast,
and small perception of them. Tomlinson suggests that ICT presents an
opportunity to bridge this gap, since it compresses time, space, and complexity. With this opportunity as the central theme, the book explores a
variety of potential positive impacts of ICT on the environment, with
examples from agriculture, food, energy, manufacturing, transportation,
buildings, and IT manufacturing itself. Three areas are developed in depth,
connected with some of the author’s own projects: education (with focus
on the informal acquiring of environmental skills), personal behavioral
change, and organization of collective action.

Greening Through IT is thus a good introduction to the emerging field
of ICT for environmental sustainability. As a survey, its main weakness may
be a relative lack of broad references. Most cited projects and texts come
from computer science, human-computer interaction, and other technical
fields, and the text misses references to much of the interesting work
coming from such fields as sustainability, future studies, or ecological economics."


=More Information=

* Book: Robert Rattle, Computing Our Way to Paradise? The [[Role of Internet and Communication Technologies in Sustainable Consumption and Globalization]]. 2010. Globalization and the environment series. Berkeley, CA: Altamira Press, 246 pp., $


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Books]]