
'''Sam Pizzigatti, Greed and Good: Understanding and Overcomng the Inequality That Limits Our Lives, New York, Apex Press, Council on International & Public Affairs, 2005.'''

This extraordinary book begins with a '''detailed demolition of the trickle-down case for inequality'''. Pizzigati, a labor economist, also makes the case that vast accumulations of wealth neither create effective incentives to work harder nor ensure that the appropriate level of savings will be forthcoming. The author continues in the second part by arguing that inequality encourages inefficiency and has tremendous social costs. He compellingly asserts that a less unequal society would benefit the very rich as well as the poor. The final section begins with a historical analysis of the debates over inequality in the US from the early days of the republic to the present. The book ends with a short discussion about the possibility of creating a more equitable society. No brief description can adequately describe the mass of valuable insight and information contained within this volume. The footnotes alone run more than 80 pages. References come from the popular press as well as professional journals. Pizzigati tells his story well and on a level easily accessible to undergraduates, while still providing material that advanced researchers will find valuable. This book deserves the highest possible recommendation. Summing Up: Essential. Public, academic, and professional library collections.  (from a review in the March 2005 issue of the American Library Association journal, Choice, by economist Michael Perelman).
(source: Social Capital newsletter)

[[Category:Books]]