
'''= "an editorially independent publication of the Green European Foundation based in Brussels, Belgium".'''

URL: http://www.greeneuropeanjournal.eu/

=Description=

"The Green European Journal is an editorially independent publication of the Green European Foundation based in Brussels, Belgium. Its printed editions, released three times a year, take an in-depth look at topics from a range of different perspectives. The Journal also publishes analysis, debates, and interviews on its website year round, linked to current affairs and general topics of significance to the European green movement.

The Green European Journal is an editorially independent publication of the Green European Foundation. Its printed editions, released three times a year, take an in-depth look at topics from a range of different perspectives. The Journal also publishes analysis, debates, and interviews on its website year round, linked to current affairs and general topics of significance to the European green movement. The Journal seeks to provide a venue for European-level debate among Greens. To this end, the Journal collaborates with partner publications and individual contributors across Europe. We also organise regular events in connection to the themes explored in the publication, such as workshops, debates, and seminars. As issues of inclusivity and diversity lie at the heart of the project, the Journal publishes articles from a wide range of different voices and sources and in over 17 different languages."




[[Category: Belgium]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Europe]]