'''* Book: Trialectics, or a Green Theory of History; Interactive Degradative and Sustainable Patterns in World History. By [[Mark Whitaker]], 2021'''

URL =

== Definition ==

Mark Douglas Whitaker:

"The eighth … chapter explains in more detail what will be called a ‘green theory of history’ in comparative retrospect. As a common
theme influencing all chosen jurisdictional changes, this ‘green theory of history’ is the interaction of unrepresentative jurisdictions that encourage degradation, inequality, and violence versus more representative ones that encourage more sustainable relations, shared ethics, and more peace, in particular places over time."


== Source ==

Unpublished manuscript: Whitaker, Mark. D. 2021. “Introduction, Ch. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 (Excerpt)," in Trialectics, or a Green Theory of History. Manuscript. Quote as draft. Mark.whitaker@sunykorea.ac.kr ; First Presented at Norbert Elias and Figurational Sociology: Prospects for the Future, Copenhagen, Denmark, April 2-4, 2012 

Subtitle: How to Research Plural Intercompetitive Jurisdictions in Space and Strategy in an Open Present, and from This, What We Can Learn About Our Past and Our Future Trends: How and Why Civilizations Shift in Jurisdictional Transformations; A Study Based on 3,000 Years of the Comparative History of China, Japan, and Europe.


== Contextual Quote ==


"The ends of civilizations are crime scenes instead of
natural, and like a crime scene you should investigate why it happened to understand and to
prepare for the future against similar issues you can learn about. Are there perpetrators that keep
killing civilizations, and keep getting away with it? Do they have patterns by which we can
recognize their modus operandi? Are there other heroes that keep attempting to save
civilizations, and sometimes are successful in rescuing them? Do they have patterns which we
can recognize and learn from as well, perhaps even to improve upon their attempt to avoid the
suffering outcomes? What can we learn from both?"

- Mark Douglas Whitaker 

=== Full title ===

*Trialectics, or a [[Green Theory of History]]; Interactive Degradative and Sustainable Patterns in World History/ How to Research Plural Intercompetitive Jurisdictions in Space and Strategy in an Open Present, and from This, What We Can Learn About Our Past and Our Future Trends: How and Why Civilizations Shift in Jurisdictional Transformations; A Study Based on 3,000 Years of the Comparative History of China, Japan, and Europe. By Mark D. Whitaker 

== Excerpt ==

Mark Whitaker:

"Both trends—of tragic degradative and unrepresentative jurisdictional trends versus more
triumphant sustainable and representative jurisdictional trends—are ongoing choices happening
simultaneously in history in the same cases toward an unpredictable future. Look around you and
see the ongoing actions of both. This innately open and unpredictable historical dynamics,
ironically in comparative retrospect, gives us much we can learn about toward its opposite for
yielding useful past regularities about choices and implications of choices (instead of yielding
generalities or future predictions). In comparative retrospect, these useful past regularities are the
more regular choices and regular implications in the past—within an unpredictable present
history toward an open future. That is the penultimate chapter’s point about a ‘green theory of
history’ in the conclusion, after many other inductive points.

So the following eight chapters first summarize the phenomenology for a sociology of
jurisdictions. The first six chapters build toward an understanding of the many empirical points
why trialectical patterns in jurisdictional activities exist both in history and in geographic space.
The last two chapters summarize the chosen patterns in jurisdictional change (trends and
processes) that can be noted in comparative retrospect. Third, in the conclusion, a novel
philosophy of history labeled as a ‘green theory of history’ is shown as clearly and unavoidably
involved in these trialectical dynamics.

== More information ==
* [[Mark Whitaker]]
* Towards a [[Sociology of Plural Jurisdictions]], by Mark Douglas Whitaker

See also:

* [[Sociology of Plural Jurisdictions]]
* [[Interactive Degradative and Sustainable Patterns in World History]]
* [[Trialectics]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Books]]