

=Discussion=

By Pat Conaty, Alex Bird and Cilla Ross:

"The Green Taxi Coop in Denver, is a co‐op that is fully unionised. Founded in
response to the "Uberisation" of the taxi market in Denver, Green Taxi is the biggest
taxi company in the city with 800 drivers, from 37 different nationalities, and 37 per
cent of the market. It is now the second largest worker co‐operative in the United
States.  

“These monopolies [Metro, Colorado Springs shuttle and Dashabout Roadrunner
shuttle] rig the game for their own benefit. On the other hand, the choice between
a monopoly and Uber, who has very little interest in securing the passenger or
sustainably supporting the driver, between that is a huge opportunity and that’s
where Green Taxi fits in,” said Jason Wiener, lawyer for Green Taxi.

Worker‐owned taxi co‐operatives already had a foothold in Colorado. Union Taxi23
of Denver, founded in 2008, had 264 drivers. But as they looked for ways to reach a
scale that can compete with Uber and Lyft (there are approximately seven times
more Uber drivers in Denver than regulated taxis), they ran up against
transportation licensing laws in Colorado, which made it easier to form a new firm
than expanding Union Taxi.

With the support of Communications Workers of America Local 7777 (CWA)24,
which even included offering members rent‐free accommodation in the union
offices, the new Green Taxi Coop was formed in the summer of 2014.
Michael Peck of the ‘1Worker1Vote’ campaign in the USA has confirmed that
further work on replicating the Green Taxi model is also underway in Philadelphia,
Boston, Baltimore, New York and San Francisco.

Green Taxi Co‐operative uses a tailored app. There is a thriving market in these
tailored apps, and examples include Cordic, used by both Central Taxis and City Cabs
in Edinburgh, Cabgo which has been developed by Paul McCormack of Phoenix Taxi
Co‐op in Liverpool, AutoCab used by Green Taxi Co‐op in Denver, whilst Union Taxi
Co‐op in Denver have developed their own.

Our understanding, talking to app developers, is that it would be technically very
easy for a co‐op or trade union to licence an off‐the‐shelf app like the ones listed,
and set it up to work across the entire UK, thus undermining the advantage that
Uber and Lyft have in the taxi market – their geographic reach.  

All it needs is for the co‐ops or unions to work together to broker a contract for such
a system across the co‐ops/companies, and by licensing in this way, the upfront
costs would be modest."
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Trade_Union_and_Cooperative_Strategies_for_Organising_Precarious_Workers)

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Transportation]]