

'''= GFOSS is the Greek Free / Open Source Software Society''' 

URL = http://www.ellak.gr/greek-free-open-source-software-societygfoss/


=Description=

"The Greek Free / Open Source Software Society (GFOSS) is a non-profit organization, which was founded in 2008 by Universities and Research Centers, today it consists of 29 Universities and Research Centers.. Our major goal is to promote the use and development of Open Technologies in Education, Public Administration and Business in Greece. We, therefore, aspire to become a hub and a platform for Free Software, Open Content & Open Hardware and their benefits. The major Greek Universities and Research Centers are members of the GFOSS, while leading members of the Greek community of Open Technologies users and developers play a major role in the implementation of our actions, through mutual cooperation and active participation.  GFOSS is affiliated with Creative Commons, a founding member of COMMUNIA and FAB LAB ATHENS (http://fablabathens.gr/)  and member of the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Network.  GFOSS also cooperates with the Enterprise Europe Network – Hellas in the ICT sector, with the aim to assist companies that  provide Open Technology services in the exchange of expertise. Nine members of GFOSS participate in the creation of FOSS Centers of Excellence which will organize and deliver training activities for developing and promoting FOSS software in ten subject areas.  GFOSS experts share extensive multidisciplinary experience in the development and operation of major transparency and public engagement projects in Greece. These include the projects on electronic deliberation for participatory decision making and open innovation and collaboration contests. To better coordinate and promote our projects we have established eight working groups , with more than 200 participants, each group drafts its own action plan using our WIKI, each action plan is updated quarterly."

[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Free Software]]