
=Discussion=

Suzanne Moser (interviewed by Laurie Mazur) :

"I've come to the conclusion we have very little hope literacy in this country, and in the world, actually. There are many different flavors of hope.

One is sometimes called grounded hope, active hope, or authentic hope. That’s where you are not at all convinced that there is a positive outcome at the end of your labors. It’s not like you're working towards winning something grand. You don’t know that you'll able to achieve that. But you do know that you cannot live with yourself if you do not do everything toward a positive outcome.

And then there's ‘radical hope,’ a term coined by a man named Jonathan Lear, an anthropologist. With radical hope, you don’t know at all whether the outcome is positive or negative. Neither the means nor the ends are clear, and you have to reinvent yourself completely to come to peace with whatever that new future is. Between grounded hope and radical hope, that’s what we’re going to need for climate change.

'''Interviewer: It sounds like radical hope is useful in times of great uncertainty.'''

Oh, absolutely. Lear came up with that term in the context of studying a Native American tribe that had lost everything: their land, their livelihoods, their culture, their freedom — they had to completely remake themselves in order to survive.

They had a great leader in helping them make that transformation. We don’t currently have anyone in this country or in this world that I see who understands what radical cultural transformation requires in terms of leadership."
(http://www.earthisland.org/journal/index.php/articles/entry/despairing-about-climate-crisis?)



[[Category:Politics]]