
'''* Article: New Grounds for a Re-Union Between Science and Spirituality. By ERVIN LASZLO. World Futures The Journal of General Evolution 62 (1-2 / January-March 2006):3-5 .(DOI: 10.1080/02604020500406172)'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233513934_New_Grounds_for_a_Re-Union_Between_Science_and_Spirituality


=Abstract=

"Science is recovering its basic mission of making sense of the world. As a search for meaning it is similar to spirituality. The difference between science and spirituality is not in the end they seek, but in the way they seek it. Science uses rational thinking in analyzing and interpreting what experience and experiment discloses, whereas spirituality combines experience with the immediacy of an intuition that speaks to a reality that underlies the world conveyed by the senses. In our day science and spirituality, the great streams of human endeavor, are on a converging course. They share the realization that the cosmos is not a domain of unconscious matter moving about in passive space; it is a dynamic, self-evolving whole, integral at all scales and in all domains. This convergence is important in itself, and it is also important in regard to its consequences. On the one hand it tells us that our intuitive insights about the nature of life and reality are not illusory: they are confirmed in their essence by cutting-edge science. On the other, it offers motivation for entering on a positive path to our common future because wholeness is a defining characteristic of the kind of civilization that could overcome the problems created by the mechanistic manipulative rationality of today's dominant civilization."

[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]