'''* Book: Growing a New Economy. by Roar Bjonnes and Caroline Hargreaves – beyond crisis capitalism and environmental destruction, Innerworld Publications, 2016.'''

URL =

''"Bjonnes and Hargreaves not only rejected the tenets of neoliberalism (free markets, free trade, privatization, small government, and the primacy of finance), they also demonstrated how Prout principles mesh with those of the NEM".'' [https://systemschangealliance.org/the-new-economy-movement-comes-of-age/]

=Discussion=

Michael Towsley:

"The publication of Growing a New Economy by Roar Bjonnes and Caroline Hargreaves was a milestone in the history of Proutist literature because it was the first comprehensive introduction to Prout economics that firmly situated the Proutist agenda within the emerging New Economy Movement. The term New Economy Movement (NEM) is a rather loose description of a growing literature that rejects not just neo-liberalism but also its neoclassical foundations. Neoclassical economics is the orthodox economics taught in virtually all universities since the 1950s and informs most social and economic policy around the world. The NEM, by contrast, reconstructs the very foundations of economic theory, drawing on ecological, feminist and humanist principles, and incorporating proposals such as the guaranteed minimum requirements of life, alternative production models (for example, cooperatives), complementary currencies and a radical overhaul of global trade and finance.

Before publication of Growing a New Economy, Proutists, including myself, were inclined to accept the absolute foundations of economics to be the intersecting supply and demand curves in microeconomics and the circular-flow-of-income model in macroeconomics. Afterall, the diagrams of these in Paul Samuelson’s famous textbook have been the basis of Economics 101 since the second world war. They were, and continue to be, deeply ingrained in the mindset of generations of economists and even Proutists have been constrained by them when attempting to illustrate what a Prout economy might look like.

Growing a New Economy instead embraced the image of three concentric circles, the economy ensconced inside a society, which is in turn ensconced inside the biosphere of planet Earth."

(https://systemschangealliance.org/the-new-economy-movement-comes-of-age/)


=More information=

* [[Progressive Utilization Theory]]

* [[New Economy Movement]]


==More books==

* Kate Raworth, [[Doughnut Economics]] – Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist, Random House UK, 2018. ISBN: 9781847941398

* Mariana Mazzucato, [[Mission Economy]] – A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism, Penguin UK, 2021. ISBN: 9780141991689

* Stephanie Kelton, The Deficit Myth – [[Modern Monetary Theory and How to Build a Better Economy]], Publisher: John Murray, 2021. ISBN: 9781529352566




[[Economics]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Movements]]