
'''* How-To Booklet: Grow Your Own Media Lab. Access-Space.org'''

URL = https://www.dropbox.com/s/6tp6tqqwvytdvif/growyourownmedialab.pdf

=Introduction=

"In the year 2000 a Sheffield arts organisation opened
an experimental internet lab. It provided a free
opportunity for local people to pursue their own
creative projects.

That lab, Access Space, is now the longest running
open access internet learning centre in the UK. It's
helped its participants publish thousands of web pages
on hundreds of servers and produce scores of
exhibitions, workshops and events.

Access Space breaks some basic rules of received
wisdom about how a community computer project should work.

● To help people learn more, teach them less.

● To use the newest technology, don't buy new
technology.

● To develop work skills, invite people to play.

● To get professional support, fix it yourself.


These ideas are counter-intuitive - and Access Space
has faced an uphill battle to convince strategic agencies
that its model works better. Meanwhile Access Space's
community has grown and thrived while commercial
cybercafes and supposedly strategic "digital inclusion"
networks have run out of money, energy or interest.

Access Space moves beyond the digital inclusion
agenda, proposing that networked technologies only
truly empower when they enable people to create. To
do this without boundaries people may need to repair,
re-engineer and re-imagine technology, so Access
Space helps its participants to see how it works not just
how to work it.


In 2005 the Arts Council (a key long-term supporter)
funded a project to work with other community
organisations across the UK to investigate how they
might adopt some of Access Space's successful tactics.
That project was called "Grow Your Own Media Lab".

This publication is the final action of that project. It
aims to help communities to understand and adopt
some of Access Space's approaches. It also aims to
inform strategic agencies, and challenges them to re-
evaluate their ideas. Is the enduring value of
"investment in technology" about hardware and
software, or about people and skills? We hope that this
publication will encourage funding bodies and grant-
givers to value this kind of community action and
support similar activities in future.

There's also one more key audience for this publication
- people who are thinking about starting an open
access community technology project. People like us. To
you, artists, community activists, educators, hackers,
regeneration workers, we say, "Do it!". We can't
guarantee success, but whatever happens, the tough
process of doing I.T. yourself will make you, and your
community, stronger. But beware of the quick and easy
path: pay with cash and you end up poorer; pay with
time and effort and you end up smarter.

Originally, this publication was going to have the
character of a "How To" or instruction manual. But
"How To" documents quickly become obsolete as new
technologies become available. With Google and
Wikipedia you can work out "How To" on your own.

(You'll note there isn't a glossary with this book.)

The key here is not How, but What and, most
importantly, Why."


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Articles]]