

'''* Article: The Need for, and the Growing Importance of, BioPhysical Economics. By Charles Hall, and Kent Klitgaard.  Current Analysis on Economics & Finance| 1:2019 | 75-87'''

URL = http://mesfordpublisher.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/The-Need-for-and-the-Growing-Importance-of-BioPhysical-Economics.pdf? 


=Abstract=

"Actual '''economies are based upon a variety of processes whereby humans interact with nature: Extraction; production; distribution; consumption; and waste production. Material goods and energy-requiring services originate not in markets but in the Earth. But for the past 150 years, economics has been treated primarily as a social science. The conceptual model upon which mainstream (neoclassical) economics bases its analyses consist of a circular flow of income between producers and consumers, mediated by means of markets. In this "perpetual motion" of interactions between firms that produce and households that consume, little or no accounting is given to the flow of energy and materials from the environment and back again, and little account given to human interactions that take place outside of market processes.''' Analyses by natural scientists (and others) find that the conventional model is simply not credible. In this paper we bring to the attention of the readership of this new journal the approach of BioPhysical Economics, an important but not widely understood development in economic theory. We review these criticisms and offer the basic concepts to construct a completely new approach to economics, one that will probably be essential in our future that is likely to be highly constrained by climatic, other environmental, resource depletion and other BioPhysical issues."


=Excerpts=

==The Argument==

"Since the 1980s productivity has
grown six times faster than wages, and the rewards have been
captured by those at the top of the income distribution.

These new criticisms upon which we focus are
aimed at the logical basis of the discipline, its residency within
social sciences, and the misrepresentation of the real
biophysical underpinnings of actual economies. 

They continue and
build upon earlier criticisms leveled by economists themselves,
including especially Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1975),
Kenneth Boulding (1961) and Nobel Laureate in economics
Wassily Leontief (1982).

Those trained in the natural sciences look at the
assumptions and procedures of conventional economics with
something bordering on disbelief.

The criticisms of economics as a discipline by natural scientists
tend to focus on the fact that conventional (i.e. neoclassical)
economics does not qualify as real science because (among
many other things) its basic tenets and models: 

1) break the
laws of thermodynamics and conservation of materials, 

2) uses
inappropriate boundaries for its analysis and 

3) presents its
basic tenets as logical givens, or maintained hypotheses, not
testable/tested hypotheses.


We call for an integration of economics with natural science.
Why should economics be (only) a social science when it is
basically about stuff and physical services?

Why should economists be allowed to
disregard the fundamental laws of nature and procedures of
natural science when all other scientists know that if they did
that they would be drummed out of their disciplinary club?
This sleight of hand was accomplished in the years following
the 1870s, when the focus of political economy changed from
the idea that value was produced by the transformation of the
materials of nature into exchangeable commodities using
human labor, to that of value as the production of
psychological, and unmeasurable, human utilities. 

One considers economic production a work process,
requiring energy, which indeed it is.

The increase in economic production (i.e. GDP) is highly
correlated with the increase in our use of fossil fuels and other
energy resources.

The availability of fossil fuels and the technologies to use them has
meant an enormous increase in labor productivity.

Neoclassical economics gives low value to
energy because of its low price, normally only 5-10 percent of
GDP. But energy is critically important to economies because of
its low price, and because we can do so much work on so little
money. ... Hence energy availability is a critical issue in economics.


Real economies include: 

(1) energy sources (principally, the sun) that
are essential for any economy; 

(2) the material that circulates upon the earth’s surface through natural and semi-natural ecosystems; and 

(3) the human-dominated steps of exploitation, processing, manufacturing and consumption. Black and white arrows show the transfer of materials and
energy through the economy.


There are two critical aspects of
energy availability: first, the ability of humans to wrest energy
from the Earth and second, the energy (and hence financial)
cost of obtaining that energy. ...  The mainstream view holds that
if money is available, energy will be forthcoming. ... 

The countervailing view, held by, for
example, many geologists, is that the Earth has finite energy
supplies, and that as time passes energy resources, like all other
mined materials, will be depleted.

For Hubbert the
issue was not ―when will we run out of oil‖ but rather ―when
can we no longer count on the production of oil to continue to
increase year after year. 

According to geologist Colin
Campbell we have entered the ―Second half of the age of oil‖,
where oil production no longer increases and will soon start
declining.

Hubbert famously predicted in 1955 that oil production in the
United States would peak in 1970, which it did. U.S. Oil
production dropped steadily year after year from 1970 until
2007, when the new technologies of horizontal drilling and
hydraulic fracturing generated a renaissance of oil production
up to a new peak in 2019. ... Oil companies will soon exhaust
the sweet spots available.

The production of conventional oil globaly seems to have reached an
undulating plateau since 2005.

The second concern about energy availability centers around
the concept of the quality of energy.

All these
factors affect the energy required to get that oil to the surface,
usually expressed as the Energy Return on Investment or
EROI.

The idea of the energy cost of
energy and its importance to human culture had previously
been expressed earlier by Anthropologist Leslie White (1943),
Sociologist Fred Cottrell (1955), and Ecologist Howard Odum
(1971).


The EROI of our most important fuels is declining and most
renewable and non-conventional energy alternatives tend to
have substantially lower EROI.

At the societal level, declining EROI means
that an increasing proportion of energy output and all
economic activity must be diverted to attaining the energy
needed to run an economy, leaving less discretionary funds
available for ―non-essential‖ purchases which often drive
growth.

There is a lot of oil left in the ground, but not
a lot of high-quality oil that can be extracted at large energy
profit. Meanwhile oil use continues to climb, although much
more slowly than in the past. The growth of OECD economies
too is also declining.

We are also concerned that several of the
probably most important economic issues in our future are
basically biophysical issues.


==The Data==

"Two recent climate reports, the Fourth National Climate
Assessment (a report of thirteen agencies of the U.S.
government) and the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) analyze
the current state of the climate and future threats of the
Business as Usual Scenario. 

The IPCC report’s high estimate
for warming of the planet is an astounding 6 Celsius, compared
to the 1986-2005 baseline. 

The report asserted, and backed with evidence, that an increase
in greenhouse gases (GHGs), especially carbon dioxide from
burning fossil fuels, (but also water vapor), was the source of
the disruption of the planetary systems.

Biodiversity loss is another issue that is poorly handled by
conventional economics. We are learning about our
comprehensive dependence on nature  ...  as well as more comprehensive
but diffuse actions generally known as ecosystem services
(Daly 2005). Sometimes a dollar value is attempted for these
services, and they tend to be on the same order of magnitude
as the total GDP of the planet.

In 2009
a team of scientists headed by Johan Rockström of the
Stockholm Resilience Centre published an article in Nature
delineating nine ―planetary boundaries‖ of human activity.
They conducted painstaking statistical work to compare
current levels of environmental impact of human society such
as atmospheric carbon dioxide, biodiversity loss, chemical
pollution, disruption of biogeochemical cycles, freshwater use,
and land-use changes. They concluded that three of these
boundaries have already been exceeded.

The new Anthropocene epoch is likely to be
significantly different, and more chaotic, than anything our
species has ever seen."


==The Pre-History==

"More generally nearly all early economists, as reviewed below,
had at least some understanding that wealth came originally
from nature.

It was not until the age of
fossil fuels and the industrial revolution that the idea of the
self-regulating economy emerged.

The first group of classical political economists, called the
Physiocrats, believed that the source of value and wealth was in
the land and the agricultural labor that transformed it. 

Adam Smith ...  held that the origins of
wealth could be found in the number of productive laborers
and the individual productivity of each worker.

In the 1890s, neoclassical
economist Alfred Marshall would argue that when capital was
the primary factor, production would exhibit increasing, rather
than diminishing, returns. BioPhysical economists attribute this
increase in output to the harnessing of fossil fuels (i.e. a
biophysical issue) instead of some miraculous property of the
abstract, and difficult to measure, concept of capital.

Marx realized, and expressed in the
first volume of Capital, that human labor, on its own, could
create nothing (Marx, 1976). Human labor could only 
transform the products of nature.

Marx also realized
that humans cannot perform labor without being supplied with
(food) energy and rest. Machines can also degrade with either
overuse or disuse (i.e. rust). This makes Marx’s theories of
value consistent with both the first and second laws of
thermodynamics. 

Instead of a steady state Marx emphasized
periodic crises grounded in the dynamics of capital
accumulation.

Within four years of the
publication of the first volume of Marx’s Capital there appeared
a new approach to the theory of price and value. The labor
theory of value, which depended upon an objective counting of
the costs of production, most importantly human labor, was
replaced by a subjective theory of utility. 

This approach, originally called
marginalism, became the basis of what we now know as
neoclassical economics.

All believed that
one could understand the economy simply by concentrating on
the process of exchange. 

For these
theorists, value and price were determined by subject desires of
consumers, and value, like beauty, was in the eye of the
beholder. ... 

Price was determined by
marginal utility, or the extra satisfaction achieved by
consuming one more unit of goods or services. ... Walras referred to it as
rareté. 

Marginalist economists had to make several abstract
assumptions in order to constrain human behavior to that
which could be analyzed by means of differential calculus.

People were declared rational and self-interested with selfregarding preferences. Utility was endemic to each individual and one could not compare interpersonal utility. Humans were
also considered insatiable in their desires.

Marginalist economists had to make several abstract
assumptions in order to constrain human behavior to that
which could be analyzed by means of differential calculus.
People were declared rational and self-interested with selfregarding preferences. Utility was endemic to each individual
and one could not compare interpersonal utility. Humans were
also considered insatiable in their desires. The theory of
production and the theory of distribution became one and the
same. 

Now price was determined in the sphere of exchange
by the interaction of supply and demand and price competition
among competitive firms. 

From a BioPhysical perspective, economics became analytically
divorced from its material base. The absolute scarcity of energy
and resources was relegated to the peripheries of economic
theory, to be replaced by the relative scarcity resulting from the
insatiable desires of humans. 

'''If humans are truly insatiable, how can we possibly live within
nature’s limits''', especially since a system in overshoot cannot
grow its way into sustainability.

Here we must add another myth: that equilibrium prices
are determined by the interaction of supply and demand in
impersonal and competitive markets. 

Those familiar with the world of
corporate decision making are likely to understand that prices
are most often set administratively. Corporations with enough
market power determine their prime costs (energy, materials,
labor), then figure out what profit rate they must achieve in
order to acquire enough access to finance, then set prices
accordingly. 

Keynes considered himself a moderate
conservative who wanted to save capitalism from its own worst
nightmare, unsustainable levels of unemployment and poverty.

Keynesian economics lost favor when it
could not explain stagflation, which, incidentally, BioPhysical
economics had less trouble in doing.

We believe it is time for a new theory grounded in the unity of
natural and social sciences. We call this theory BioPhysical
Economics."

==The Origins and Development of BioPhysical Economics==

"In a 1984
paper by Cutler Cleveland, Robert Costanza, Charles Hall, and
Robert Kaufmann in the respected journal Science ...  the authors argued that the goals of stable prices, full employment, and economic growth were not met after the
1970s because of a decline in resource quantity and quality. In
the initial paper the authors presented strong econometric
evidence (R2=0.98) that output is linked to fuel use, and that
the increase in labor productivity was due to an increase in
energy use.

Their analysis was based in part on the concept of
a general and continuous decline in Energy Return on
Investment (EROI), and they concluded that the lack of
alternative high-EROI energy resources will limit future
economic growth. 

In 2001 Charles Hall and colleagues published a paper in
BioScience titled ―The Need to Reintegrate the Natural
Sciences with Economics‖ (Hall et al. 2001). They argued that
wealth is not created in markets, but in the natural world and
the energy-requiring processes that upgrade matter.

They also found that
energy was more important than labor and perhaps capital.

'''Economic analysis should include the important role of energy -- as well as other resources, more explicitly.'''

Murphy and Charles Hall presented evidence that the longterm economic slowdown and the financial crisis of 2008-2009 could be attributed to changes in energy supply and fuel prices.
Myriad papers refining the measurement of Energy Returns on
Investment appeared in a special issue of Sustainability, edited
by Charles Hall. Kent Klitgaard and Lisi Krall began to explore
the internal dynamics of the processes of growth and
accumulation in a capitalist economy. They argued that the
inner essence of a capitalist economy is based on economic
growth, and that a steady-state economy would result in
prolonged to permanent depression if society’s institutional
structure were not changed. 

In 2018 Hall and Klitgaard published
the second edition of Energy and the Wealth of Nations. It is our
most comprehensive effort at integrating the analyses of
biophysical sciences with institutional and heterodox political
economy. The authors argued that economics must be
consistent with how nature works and with how actual
economies work. They proposed that the end of the fossil fuel
era will not be an easy one.

Of particular interest
among many investigators is the determination of the degree to
which renewable technologies, such as photovoltaics and wind
turbines, can take over from more carbon-intensive fossil fuels."







[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Economics]]