
Article: '''Guarding the commons: how community managed software projects protect their work'''. Research Policy 32 '''(2003)''' 1179–1198. By Siobhán O’Mahony.

(obtain article via [http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V77-48PM412-1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=01c04c86c26aab94b8b1d3fa0e57aeaf])


(author affiliation: Negotiations, Organization and Markets group, Harvard Business School, Baker Library West 186,
Soldiers Field, Boston, MA 02163, USA)


=Abstract=

"Theorists often speculate why open source and free software project contributors give theirwork away. Although contributors
make their work publicly available, they do not forfeit their rights to it. Community managed software projects protect their
work by using several legal and normative tactics, which should not be conflated with a disregard for or neglect of intellectual
property rights. These tactics allow a project’s intellectual property to be publicly and freely available and yet, governable.
Exploration of this seemingly contradictory state may provide new insight into governance models for the management of
digital intellectual property."

From the introduction:

"the types of threats
that they defend against differ from the threats typically
targeted with these legal techniques.
First, I explicate attributes that open source software
shares with public good and common pool resource
models. Next, I discuss the research methods
and mechanisms used to protect six community managed
software projects. Analysis of these mechanisms
motivates a discussion of the practices used to manage
common pool resources. A conceptualization of
open source software that more explicitly recognizes
its collective governance is advanced. I conclude by
exploring ways in which this conception might challenge
existing assumptions about the nature of community
managed software and inform future research."


=Conclusions=

"'''Findings: tactics to prevent proprietary appropriation'''

How do community managed software projects protect
against the threat of proprietary appropriation? 

I identified seven primary tactics: 

(1) adopt software licenses
with distribution terms that restrict proprietary
appropriation; 

(2) encourage compliance with licensing
terms through normative and legal sanctions; 

(3) incorporate to hold assets and protect individual contributors
from liability; 

(4) transfer individual property
rights to collectively managed non-profit corporations;

(5) trademark the brands and logos designed to represent
their work; 

(6) assign trademarks to a foundation; and 

(7) actively protect the project’s brand.

From the discussion:

"This research shows that contributors to community
managed projects have interests and rights over their
work, and that they are interested in protecting their
intellectual property. The assumption that open source
contributors give their work away must be modified
in order to account for the ways in which community
managed projects protect their work.

Moglen (1999), among others (e.g. Tuomi, 2000),
have argued that Section (2)(b) of the GNU GPL creates
a commons “to which anyone may add but from
which no one may subtract.” Without the legal tactics
identified in this study, open source and free software
might be in danger of becoming a subtractable good.
While the availability of open source software will not
diminish with greater use, those who do not comply
with the norms of the community could diminish its
future value and its availability to others."


=Discussion=

==Between public goods and common goods==

"Contributors to the community managed projects
in this study envisioned a long future working with
the software to which they contributed. For example
the Debian Linux Distribution project has been in operation
for over nine years, has withstood six different
leaders, and continues to grow with over 1000
registered contributing members. It is also clear from
the tactics used, that contributors highly value the results
of their efforts. Informants spoke of their contributions
as investments in their future tools: they are
creating code that they will never have to pay someone
to use again. Because of the rights community
managed projects exercise, it can be said that contributors
pool their efforts to create collectively owned
and managed resources. Furthermore, because the context
of community is primarily on-line public forums,
contributors’ efforts are highly visible, which facilitates
the communication of norms and information that
enables monitoring and co-ordination. These factors
suggest that this is an environment that is conducive
to developing mechanisms to help manage common
pool resource problems.

These principles also point to some fundamental
differences between common pool resources and open
source software. Unlike common pool resources,
open source software is always publicly available.
Resources do not need to be redistributed or limited
on any scheduled basis. What this analysis has established
is that open source and free software is not
quite a public good and not quite a common pool
resource, at least, in the way these types of goods
have been previously defined. The problem with classifying
open source software as a pure public good
is that this conception glosses over some of the more
interesting features of community managed software
projects. In neglecting to critically examine how old
terms are applied to new phenomena, we risk misunderstanding
the very mechanisms that may support
its resiliency. Before despairing the introduction of
murkier levels of complexity, consider von Hippel
and von Krogh’s charge that “efforts to offer clean
and simple models [of private and public goods] for
research have excluded from consideration a very rich
and fertile middle ground where incentives for private
investment and collective action can coexist and
a private-collective innovation model can flourish”
(2002, p. 11).

In the case of open source and free software, this
rich and fertile middle ground can be further explored
by rethinking how the law is used to manage rights
to digital intellectual property. von Hippel and von
Krogh acknowledge a long understood tension in legal
theory: the rights of innovators must be balanced
with the rights of the public. Copyright protections
are granted to allow investors to earn a return on their
investment while also providing an incentive for innovators
to disclose their works so that the public can
benefit from them. This study suggests that the efficacy
of copyright law in balancing public and private
interests may be called into question when applications
of the law are inverted in order to achieve its
founding intent. An alternative interpretation is that,
in an era of digital intellectual property, copyright law
has untapped elasticity in facilitating new possibilities
in unbundling and re-bundling rights and re-balancing
public and private interests. If this is the case, it is
paradoxical that explorations into the elasticity of
copyright law have been most thoroughly explored by
those least interested in restricting access to protected
works.

Digital intellectual property and the creative application
of traditional legal mechanisms enable community
managed projects to decouple the ability to govern
their work from its circulation and possession. This
redistribution of rights has been difficult to conceptualize,
as these rights are directed towards goals to
which the commercial sector is unaccustomed. However,
these mechanisms should not be under valued
because of their ideological underpinnings. If we leave
the world of political science and turn to computer science,
the tactics used by community managed projects
form what Stefik (1997a) might call a trusted system.
A trusted system has rules governing the terms, conditions
and fees for using digital works. In a trusted
system, property rights are respected, but transport
rights (rights to copy), rendering rights (rights for playing
and printing) and derivative works rights (extracting,
editing, and embedding protected works in other
works) can be disaggregated and managed under different
terms (Stefik, 1997b). Stefik argues that while
publishers often think that digital technology automatically
transfers more power to users, trusted systems
can also be used to shift the balance and put more
power in the hands of the publishers. Stefik thinks
that one reason why this has not happened is because
the social framework to support trusted systems is underdeveloped
(Stefik, 1997a). While Stefik argues that
technology is what can change the balance between
publishers and users, it is perhaps ironic that those,
who are among the most sophisticated users of technology,
are using a combination of legal and normative
sanctions to do just that."


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]