
“GUARANTEED INCOME: Theories and practices of workplace remuneration and resistance in the age of cognitive capitalism”

If you wish to attend the conference, or wish to present a paper, please write to ed.emery [@] thefreeuniversity.net

It will be held in the Palmerston Room of St John’s College Cambridge, from 10.00am to 5.00pm on Saturday 28 April 2007.

The concept of the wage as we knew it under Fordism and Keynesianism has been surpassed. Guaranteed income is viewed as the framework for the payment of society’s labour in the era of immaterial labour and cognitive capitalism. A new conceptual formulation of the wage needs to be arrived at, as the founding basis of a revolutionary concept of movement. This, in
order to match the revolution taking place in capital’s productive capacities. The conference will look at the theory of Guaranteed Income as developed by various authors. We shall also look at the history of social movements built around demands for Guaranteed Income. And we shall look at practical propositions for campaigning in the here and now.

The conference will draw on the work being done in Italy and France by authors such as Toni Negri, Carlo Vercellone, Antonella Corsani, Andrea Fumagalli, Stefano Lucarelli and Yann Moulier-Boutang.

Translated texts will be presented at the conference. Registration is free, but MUST BE BOOKED IN ADVANCE. Places are limited, so you are recommended to write sooner rather than later.


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Money]]