
'''* Booklet: Community Microgrids. A Guide for Mayors and City Leaders Seeking Clean, Reliable and Locally Controlled Energy. Microgrid Knowledge, 2015'''

URL = http://bezdomny.org/pdf/MGKCommunityMicrogrids.pdf


=Description=

"While towns and cities show increasing interest
in microgrids—and several have projects under
development—little easily accessible guidance
exists for municipal leaders who are exploring
the concept. To help these communities get
started, MicrogridKnowledge.com has produced
this report, “Community Microgrids: A Guide for
Mayors and City Leaders Seeking Clean, Reliable
and Locally Controlled Energy,” the third in our
Think Microgrid series.

In this guide, we describe how microgrids
serve communities and explain why states
like California, Massachusetts and New York
promote their development, and offer substantial
incentives to boost the industry.

We also detail the key features of a microgrid,
how they work, the value of incorporating both
electricity and heat into a project, and why
microgrids foster development of renewable energy.

We identify steps for cities and towns to take as they
begin to develop a project, and discuss various finance
options and incentives. Finally, we provide examples of
communities that are already benefitting from community
microgrids, and others well on their way.

As city and town leaders are well aware, electricity is
essential to a functioning society, more so now than ever
before as almost all aspects of our economy become
Internet-based. We invite you to read on to learn more
about how microgrids can protect vital energy supply to
your community."

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]