
'''= now called: Guide to the Open Access Movement'''

URL = http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/guide.htm


=Description=

"This is a guide to the terminology, acronyms, initiatives, standards, technologies, and players in the open-access or free online scholarship (FOS) movement —the movement to publish scholarly literature on the internet and make it available to readers free of charge and free of unnecessary licensing restrictions.

If you're new to the concept of open access, then see my Open Access Overview. It's designed to be an introduction. This guide, by contrast, is more like a reference work.

The guide has many purposes. It should help you find background on unexplained terms or names you encounter in research on any related topic. For the same reason, it will allow me to use terms and names in my newsletter and blog without explaining each one every time. Above all, it should make it easier for specialists from one sector (such as research, libraries, publishing) to understand the contributions to this movement made by specialists from other sectors. This movement isn't only multi-disciplinary, encompassing all the academic disciplines, but also multi-industrial, drawing on libraries and universities and such varied economic sectors beyond the academy as publishing, telecommunications, software engineering, philanthropy, and government. It is also multi-national, building on the work of individuals and organizations from around the world. Without special study one cannot appreciate the contributions of all these players to the open-access movement. I hope this guide brings recognition to the contributors and understanding to those hoping to see the big picture."
(http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/guide.htm)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Movements]]