
'''* Report: Guide to Crypto and Web3. By the 'Making Sense of Web3' Project. Life Itself Labs,'''

URL = https://web3.lifeitself.org/guide


=Description=

"Big claims are being made for the potential of crypto and web3. We have engaged in a multi-month project of research and analysis to "make sense" of crypto and web3 and to evaluate the various claims being made for and against.

We have spoken with technologists, economists, computer scientists, crypto skeptics and crypto enthusiasts. Much of the resulting material is published on this site. The culmination of our efforts is this guide."


=Contents=

'''Full analyses''' provide comprehensive and authoritative analyses of the biggest claims being made in the space. We analyse the following claims:

# Bitcoin will (and should) become the new gold standard
# Crypto will provide better payment and remittance services
# Crypto can help solve the public goods problem
# Web3 can help revolutionize cooperation
# Crypto can provide better means of financializing non-financial value


'''Deep dive notes''' are detailed analysis notes from our deep dive conversations, which have not yet been formatted and expanded into full analyses. You can help! We've undertaken deep dives on the following claims:

# Blockchain can (and should) be used to create “networked states” to replace existing nation states
# Crypto can act as an anti-authoritarian force
# The crypto space is just an unfettered market, and there’s nothing wrong with that
# Crypto is just the latest evolution of fintech, and is leading us towards a better financial system
# Crypto should remain outside of securities regulation


[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]