
'''= Hackitat - A film about political hacking, world wide: Are the hackers winning the battle to keep technology and the Internet free?'''

URL = http://hackitat.com/

Crowdfunding trailer via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-7K0qbSB3OM&feature=player_embedded#!


=Description=

"What compels some people to spend a lot of time and energy on setting up servers, creating programs and even committing crimes to help people in a dictatorship in another country to communicate freely?

Who are the people building a nation on the Internet and why are they doing it? How are the hackers in Bolivia working to integrate indigenous languages into computer software so that all people can access the technology?

Who are the hackers in the middle east that some call terrorists and some call freedom activists. What drives this activism and does anonymous in Bahrain share a common ideology with anonymous in Brazil?

Around the world there is a network of hackerspaces that explore, hack and create new ways of expressing themselves with technology. Hackerspaces that by some are seen as a threat to our digital society.

What is it that drives these people? What are their purpose and their reasons for what they do? How do they live their lives? These are some of the questions we will seek to answer with this movie as we meet hackers and visit their hackerspaces."
(http://www.indiegogo.com/hackitat-a-film-about-political-hacking-world-wide)

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]