
* Book: The Heretic's Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the Future of Money. Brett Scott.

URL = http://suitpossum.blogspot.co.uk/p/the-heretics-guide.html


=Description=

Brett Scott:

"The Heretic's Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the Future of Money is a friendly guide to taking on the world's most powerful system. It sets up a framework to illuminate the financial sector based on anthropology, gonzo exploration, and the hacker ethos, and helps the reader develop a diverse DIY toolbox to undertake their own adventures in guerilla finance and activist entrepreneurialism.

Part 1 (Exploring) covers the major financial players, concepts and instruments. Part 2 (Jamming) explores innovative forms of financial activism, from disrupting investment into fossil fuels to building your own hedge funds of dissent. Part 3 (Building) showcases the growing alternative finance movement - including peer-to-peer systems, alternative currencies, and co-operative economies - and shows how you can get involved in building a democratic financial system. It's published by the fantastic Pluto Press, and you can order below.

As for me, I'm a campaigner, former derivatives broker, and general economic explorer. I’ve been involved in various financial campaigns (for groups such as MoveYourMoneyUK, World Development Movement & ActionAid) and I’m a Fellow of the Finance Innovation Lab. I’ve written for publications like The Guardian, The New Internationalist, The Ecologist, and openDemocracy, and I’ve been on channels like the BBC, Arte TV & the Keiser Report. I'm currently in the process of setting up the London School for Financial Activism. For more about me, see my G+ profile here, and my LinkedIn profile here."
(http://suitpossum.blogspot.co.uk/p/the-heretics-guide.html)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Economics]]