
'''= to build much-needed collaborative relationships between those involved in knowledge production'''

URL = https://hackyourphd.wordpress.com/


=Description=

Célya Gruson-Daniel:

'''1.'''

"Hack your Phd"  launched in October 2012. Brings together a diverse community of doctoral researchers, designers and social entrepreneurs around the issues of [[Open Science]] and [[Open Knowledge]].

The goal here is to set up workshops (or "hackatons") to experiment with different initiatives of open Science while educating the public on this issue. The central idea is to use the collective intelligence of the community coming from different horizons using the new tools from science and open education. HackYourPhd wants to show that new ways of doing research exist, and can only benefit research itself as well as the relationship between science and society."


'''2.'''

"HackYourPhD is a multi-scale project whom impact spans from society, the community itself and the individuals who are part of it. This community aims to raise awareness and act in favor a more open science. Its cohesion depends directly on the motivation and benefit of each member. Whether researchers, hackers or entrepreneurs, the members of HackYourPhD meet, learn from each other, and mutually accelerate their projects around open science. Each one can make progress on its own reflections, share them and confronts them with different perspectives. For example, HackYourPhD helps PhD students to be open to other points of view, and thus escaping the usual isolation of Academia. They can be put into perspective their research topics with a citizen point of view, in accordance to current issues of society. For the researchers, the community gives a contemporary look at the new practices of research at the age of Internet; they can better understand the recent online tools, learn how to share their results with open data, or their work with open access. For all citizens, HackYourPhD is also a way to interact with the scientific community, to question it and give a new vision on common issues. Thus, everyone brings his own approach in a complementary manner for the group. What makes the identity of HackYourPhd is therefore all these interactions and exchanges which profit to both individuals and the community. More generally, all the reflections emerging from HackYourPhD have the potential to give a new perspective on society. Indeed, bringing together scientists and citizens around the issue of knowledge as a public common, can create opportunities that go way beyond the scope of the scientific sphere."

=Discussion=

'The HackYourPhD community was born out of an acknowledgement that current ways of performing research frequently generate frustration, conflits, and isolation. The crisis in research is sometimes covered in the media: job insecurity, rush to publication creating pressure and dishonest practices, privatization of knowledge through the grip of scientific publishing houses. This is a vision from the inside – that of research practitioners. This lack of trust is amplified by the numerous scandals that have occurred in the world of research, for instance through connections with private corporations whose goal is to generate profit, creating conflicts of interest.

This picture may appear rather negative to society at large, which often does not understand how research works. Research is a « black box » for the majority of the population. There is a divide. Citizens often hold researchers in high esteem, but the crisis of trust is deepening, because of the lack of dialogue across the divide. However, there is hope: today’s knowledge society makes the emergence of citizen researchers both desirable and possible.

HackYourPhD brings together students, young researchers, engaged citizens, hacktivists, tinkerers from all horizons, entrepreneurs, and everyone who is interested in the production and the sharing of knowledge in the wider sense. This collective aims to bring concrete solutions to complex issues and to build much-needed collaborative relationships between those involved in knowledge production. This is required for collective intelligence to come into existence and bring answers to urgent issues of society.

We wish, through common activities carried out by members of the community, to create healthy dynamics among researchers and to open the « black box » so that research may serve society rather than entrenched interests."
(https://hackyourphd.wordpress.com/about-2/)


=More Information=

For futher information :

-Our vision : Science and access to knowledge as a common good [https://hackyourphd.wordpress.com/about-2/]

-Join us on Facebook [https://www.facebook.com/groups/499463776745202/]  and Google+ [https://plus.google.com/u/0/communities/102873663040022224913]

-Quick presentation of HyPhd during the social media week in Paris. [http://prezi.com/iz298oenxsgc/hackyourphd-smwouishare-19-fevrier-2013/]

-[[Hack Your PhD Open Science Interviews]]


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Research]]