=About HackdeOverheid 2010=
HackdeOverheid 2010 occurred on May 29, 2010 at the beautiful Postjesweg 1 location of the R.O.C., the Regional University for Noord-Holland and Amsterdam.

For background information on [[HackdeOverheid]] visit the [[HackdeOverheid]] page.

This event is HackdeOverheid #2. 

=HackdeOverheid 2010 Session Notes=

* 10.00 Great startup session from Richard Pope 
** Presentation [http://docs.google.com/present/edit?id=0Ac33wSCVA6QOYWZoNmc1bWR0Z3Q4XzY1NWdqZGJxOGQ0&hl=en online here]


10.30 Political data track

The political data track is a track where political investigative journalists, citizens, developers, politicians and scientists should feel right at home.

20 min Inspiration. There will be a speaker short examples of useful data driven journalism from abroad shows.

10 min. Data pitching. The track will be a moderator of a political opening datasets below highlight these data owners to let their data demo'en.

Demand for pitchers is that they offer their documentation somewhere, and that they have a link from the site over here HackdeOverheid offer.

Interested in data pitching? Sign up via the contact page!

11.30 Barcamp. Barcampstyle The moderator will track a program to further develop aanwegzigen where groups can work on ideas / concepts / visuals / WOB requests and prototypes.

10.30 Public service track

The public service track is designed for free-thinkers, programmers and officials who believe that government can better with open dates.

1920 mins Inspiration. The kick is made by a speaker provided useful public services based on open data

10 mins. Data pitching. The track will be a moderator of a political opening datasets below highlight these data owners to let their data demo'en.
Demand for pitchers is that they provide documentation somewhere, and that she linked from one site HackdeOverheid here to offer.

Interested in data pitching? Sign up via the contact page!

Barcamp. Barcampstyle The moderator will track a more elaborate program with the audience where groups can work on ideas / concepts / visuals / WOB requests and prototypes. There is a session already known:

"Data.overheid.nl '- identify requirements / desires preconditions for setting up an open data catalog for the Dutch government (90 mins). This session is accompanied by Ton Zijlstra at the request of the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations.

=Additional Pages=
* Parent Page [[HackdeOverheid]]

=External Links=
* Main Url http://www.hackdeoverheid.nl/
* Twitter [http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23hackdeoverheid #hackdeoverheid]
* Twitter [http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23hdo2010 #hdo2010]


[[Category:Open Data]]
[[Category:Netherlands]]