
'''= youth club for "Maker" ahd "Hacking" activities'''

URL = http://hacker-scouts.org/


=Description=

"Why "Hacker" instead of "Maker"? The term "hacking" has a bad rap. Unfortunately, there are some who associate the term with illegal activity. '''Hacking is simply taking something- like an object or idea- and changing it to fit one's own need. Hacking is the improvement and modification of technology. Hacking is how we progress. At Hacker Scouts, making isn't enough. We are hacking what education can look like. We are hacking activities so that families get the most information and skills out of them.''' We are hacking new thing out old things because it not only changes the way kids see the process of how things are built and used, but it changes their world view towards conservation and sustainability. We are taking back the word "Hacking"! 

What ages do you serve? While most of our activities are targeted at the 8-14 year old range, all ages are welcome at Hacker Scouts Open Lab. Because Open Lab is not a drop off program, parents and mentors are available to help modify projects for younger makers. The Guild has a lower age limit of 8. This is because the very first project they do is an Arduino Shield (circuit board) that requires soldering, learning circuitry vocabulary, designing enclosures, and more. The under 8 set tend to not have the focus or fine motor skills for this task quite yet!


Do you charge for your program? No, we do not charge to attend Hacker Scouts. We do, however, charge material fees. These are based on the amount it cost us to create or buy and activity or kit, often as a substantial discount, which we pass along to you.


Can anyone attend Hacker Scouts Open Lab and Guild? Yes! Open Lab is a drop-in all ages program. No RSVP is needed. Guild is open to membership only, which is based on available openings and order of registration. Hacker Scouts is committed to a policy of equal opportunity for all persons and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, disability, or religion in our educational programs and activities."
(http://hacker-scouts.org/node/40)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Movements]]