

=Discussion=

Concept from Jeff Vail, as summarized by Kevin Carson:

"Jeff Vail's "Hamlet Economy." This is a system of networked villages based on an idealized
version of the historical "lattice network of Tuscan hill towns" numbering in the hundreds (which
became the basis of a modern regional economy based largely on networked production). The
individual communities in Vail's network must be large enough to achieve self-sufficiency by
leveraging division of labor, as well as providing sufficient redundancy to absorb systemic shock.

When larger-scale division of labor is required to support some industry, Vail writes, this is not to be
achieved through hierarchy, with larger regional towns becoming centers of large industry. Rather, it is
to be achieved by towns of roughly similar size specializing in producing specialized surplus goods for
exchange, via fairs and other horizontal exchange relationships.

The Hamlet relies on a “design imperative,” in an age of [[Peak Oil]], for extracting the maximum
quality of life from reduced energy inputs. The Tuscan hill towns Vail points to as a model are
decentralized, open source and vernacular.

How is the Tuscan village decentralized? Production is localized. Admittedly, everything isn’t local. Not
by a long shot. But compared to American suburbia, a great percentage of food and building materials are
produced and consumed in a highly local network. A high percentage of people garden and shop at local
farmer’s markets.

How is the Tuscan village open source? Tuscan culture historically taps into a shared community pool of
technics in recognition that a sustainable society is a non-zero-sum game. Most farming communities are
this way—advice, knowledge, and innovation is shared, not guarded. Beyond a certain threshold of size and
centralization, the motivation to protect and exploit intellectual property seems to take over (another
argument for decentralization). There is no reason why we cannot share innovation in technics globally,
while acting locally—in fact, the internet now truly makes this possible, leveraging our opportunity to use
technics to improve quality of life.

How is the Tuscan village vernacular? You don’t see many “Colonial-Style” houses in Tuscany. Yet
strangely, in Denver I’m surrounded by them. Why? They make no more sense in Denver than in Tuscany.
The difference is that the Tuscans recognize (mostly) that locally-appropriate, locally-sourced architecture
improves quality of life. The architecture is suited to their climate and culture, and the materials are available
locally. Same thing with their food—they celebrate what is available locally, and what is in season. Nearly
every Tuscan with the space has a vegetable garden. And finally (though the pressures of globalization are
challenging this), their culture is vernacular. They celebrate local festivals, local harvests, and don’t rely on
manufactured, mass-marketed, and global trends for their culture nearly as much as disassociated
suburbanites—their strong sense of community gives prominence to whatever “their” celebration is over
what the global economy tells them it should be."
(http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/11/C4SS-Resilient-Communities-and-Local-Economies.pdf)

=Source=

* Jeff Vail, "Re-Post: Hamlet Economy," Rhizome, July 28, 2008 <http://www.jeffvail.net/2008/07/re-post-hamleteconomy.
html>.


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Villages]]