
'''= HandWave is a small, wireless, networked skin conductance sensor for affective computing applications.''' 

URL = http://affect.media.mit.edu/projectpages/handwave/HandWave_Users_Guide.pdf


=Description=

"It is used to detect informationrelated to
emotional, cognitive, and physical arousal of mobile users. The
HandWave collects Electrodermal Activity (EDA) data by measuring skin
conductance over a pair of electrodes. The EDA data signal is used to
infer the excitement level of the subject. The injection-molded
housing is affixed to the wrist of the subject, and the electrodes are
positioned on the fingers and/or palm. "
 

=Discussion= 
 
From MIT's media lab page:
 
"Q: How can I build a Handwave skin conductance sensor?
 
"A: The primary work involved in constructing a Handwave device is in
constructing a printed circuit board (PCB). A set of design files for
the Handwave device may be downloaded and unzipped. This contains
OrCad design files, a bill of materials, schematic, Gerber files,
firmware source code, sample drivers, and design files for a
programming jib. These files are most useful to those who are
experienced computer or electrical engineers and are offered without
any support or warranty.
Further information can be found in the publications we wrote: The
HandWave Bluetooth Skin Conductance Sensor, HandWave: Design and
Manufacture of a Wearable Wireless Skin Conductance Sensor and Housing
and The HandWave User's Guide. "
 
 
=More Information=

See: [[Product Hacking]]

#http://affect.media.mit.edu/pdfs/05.strauss-etal.pdf
#http://affect.media.mit.edu/pdfs/05.strauss.pdf
 
[[Category:Science]]