
'''* Book: Handbook of the Sharing Economy. Edited by Russell W. Belk, Giana M. Eckhardt and Fleura Bardhi. Elgar, 2019'''

URL = https://www.elgaronline.com/view/edcoll/9781788110532/9781788110532.xml

"With the radical growth in the ubiquity of digital platforms, the sharing economy is here to stay. This Handbook explores the nature and direction of the sharing economy, interrogating its key dynamics and evolution over the past decade and critiquing its effect on society."


=Contents=

* Situating the sharing economy: between markets, commons and capital. By Adam Arvidsson. Chapter 2 of the Handbook of the Sharing Economy, Pages:10–26. Edited by Russell W. Belk, Giana M. Eckhardt and Fleura Bardhi. Elgar, September 2019 [https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788110549.00007]. See: [[Articulating an Empirically Grounded Model of the Relation Between Markets and Commons]]

* Reputation: the fictitious commodity of the sharing economy? By Alessandro Gandini. Chapter 29 of the Handbook of the Sharing Economy. Edited by Russell W. Belk, Giana M. Eckhardt and Fleura Bardhi. Elgar, September 2019 [https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788110549.00040]. See: [[Reputation as the Fictitious Commodity of the Sharing Economy]]

=Excerpt=

Full editor's intro at https://www.elgaronline.com/downloadpdf/edcoll/9781788110532/9781788110532.00005.xml

"The sharing economy, defined as a social and economic system of transactions in which
individuals use third-party technology platforms that match providers and users to
exchange goods, services, or ideas in a manner that does not transfer ownership (Eckhardt
et al. forthcoming), is coming of age. It has been more than a decade since the advent of
exemplar platforms such as Airbnb and Uber came into existence, and since pioneering
academic thought began exploring sharing (e.g., Belk 2007). Besides the big players such
as TransferWise in the fintech space and Grubhub Seamless in the food delivery space,
there are also many smaller players that are leading innovations in the sharing economy,
such as OpenBazaar, able to compete against the big players because of blockchain
technology (De Filippi 2017). This Handbook aims to explicate what the phenomenon
of the sharing economy is, as it can be treated in wildly different ways in different
literatures; how this economy has evolved over the past 15 years (for example, its growth
and sectors); and what the key dynamics are as we move into the next decade. We do this
from an interdisciplinary perspective, examining aspects such as labor and governance
in addition to consumption. In this introductory chapter, we seek to examine how the
sharing economy has developed, what its future might be, and what the consequences of
the sharing economy are to businesses, consumers, and society.

A key issue that many of the chapters in this Handbook of the Sharing Economy address
is the paradoxical character of its two components. “Sharing” implies a moral economy
of “sharing in” within a small community of close others (Belk 2010), while “economy”
implies a market economy where access-based consumption takes place within a potentially large community of distant others (Bardhi and Eckhardt 2012).

...


While these perspectives reflect a variety of ways of dealing with the paradox of the sharing economy, they all agree that the sharing economy is something new and significant, even if it draws on millennia of the coexisting, but largely separate, moral and market
economies (Eckhardt and Bardhi 2016; Fontaine 2014; see also Chapter 8 by Gruen
and Mimoun, and Chapter 10 by Dalli and Fortezza, in this volume). What is new is the
marketization of sharing, which has greatly upset the status quo in several markets.

The chapters in this Handbook broaden the spatial and conceptual scope and understanding of the sharing economy beyond the North American context that has dominated
prior research. Current chapters include cases and studies from regions such as Southern
Europe, the Nordic countries, and the Arabian Gulf. For example, Baz Radwan et al.
(Chapter 6) examine the emergence of the sharing economy in Arab countries with their
distinct histories and traditions of ownership, religious sharing, and communal property
rights. These authors trace the history of sharing practices to the nomad Bedouin tribes
who had to rely on alternative forms of exchange and shared consumption among themselves as well as with other, non-kin travelers in order to cope with the dire natural settings.

Islamic religion also had an influence, through the practice of zakat that structures formal
sharing, informal sadaqah sharing, and the hospitality traditions of the region (Sobh et
al. 2013).

The Handbook chapters also advance our understanding of the exchange practices
that have proliferated via the sharing economy. Widlok (Chapter 3), for example, argues
that practices associated with the sharing economy represent a “crowd-based capitalism” that goes beyond the duality of non-commercial gift-exchange versus commercial
capitalist transactions. He conceptualizes such practices as forms of communal redistribution, pooling, and sharing that are neither mainstream market transactions nor instances of gift-exchange relationships. He argues that when cultural practices are transferred
into digital environments, they rely on social practices that are already established but are
constantly in danger of being undermined.

Dalli and Fortezza (Chapter 10) examine moneyless market exchanges of bartering and
swapping that have proliferated via digital platforms in Italy. They argue that bartering
represents a hybrid practice integrating market transactions with social exchange (see
also Humphrey and Hugh-Jones 1992). Valor and Papaoikonomou (Chapter 11) study
another moneyless practice: of timebanks, where time becomes an alternative currency
for the exchange of services in Spain and Greece. However, they find that timebanks are
not successful because they fail to institutionalize the hybrid logics of social and market
exchange, as well as to move their participants away from the balanced or negative market
reciprocity they are socialized in (Sahlins 1972). This hybrid logic can also be construed
as reflecting the liminal nature of the market economy, caught halfway between market
and moral economies (Scaraboto 2015).

A further treatment of the liminal nature of the sharing economy is found in Chapter
8 by Gruen and Mimoun who examine how the access-based workplace and the gig
economy are transforming the practice of work. Their chapter is based on ethnographies
of two new emerging workspaces: the contexts of coworking and cohoming in Paris and
London. They find that the collaborative and informal design of such workplaces fosters
intimate and informal relationships that often lead to personal friendships as well as
professional collaborations. Further, they find that the logic of hospitality, that shapes
cohoming (in which strangers pay to work in someone’s home), does not inhibit but
rather supports personal interactions and relationships. Through the study of a variety
of practices and contexts, these chapters show the diversity of sharing economy practices
and interactions."

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Sharing]]