
'''* Handing Back the Social Commons. A REPORT TO THE NEW ZEALAND PRODUCTIVITY COMMISSION. James Mansell, April 2015'''

URL = http://www.productivity.govt.nz/sites/default/files/social-services-draft-james-mansell.pdf


=Summary=

"Hand back the business of policy, service design and innovation to the NGOs,
philanthropists, citizens, innovators and researchers within the sector. A sector-owned
data commons and peer-to-peer mobilisation enable the sector to be
organised as a Social Commons. One that is orientated and aligned to value, is self-learning
and is highly enabled to be adaptive and innovative to constantly improve
outcomes.

The	transformative	influence	of	big	data	can	be	used	to	improve	effectiveness	
and	innovation	within	the	social	sector.
It	 is	 possible	 today	 to	 enable	 the	 social	 sector to	 be	 better	 focused	 on	delivering	 value,	 more	 easily	 learn	 what	 works,	 and	 better	 mobilise	 a	
community	of	common	interests	within	 the	sector	who	will	better	adapt	and	
introduce	innovative	new	services	to	improve	outcomes.

Safe,	high-trust	data	sharing	forms	the	foundation	for	the	sector	to	become	a	
shared	 “Social	 Commons”. It	 would	 mean	 building	 a	 sector	 that	 is	 managed	
peer-to-peer	 (P2P)	 by	 the	 key	 actors	 within	 the	 sector;	 non-government	
organisations	(NGOs),	innovators,	researchers,	service	providers,	and	citizens;	
where	 visibility	and	 interest	and	alignment	 in	 social	 values and	 the	ability	 of	 actors	within	the	system	to	own	and	change	the	system	are	all	held	in	common.

Handing	back	ownership	of	a	Social	Commons	to	the	actors	within	the	sector	
will	 deliver	 a	 step	 change	 in social,	 fiscal	 and	 economic	 return	 on	
New Zealand’s	investment	in	social	services.

This	report shows	how	that	is	possible	and	what	needs	to	be	done	to	achieve	it"

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:New Zealand]]

[[Category:Policy]]