
'''* Book: Tessy Britton. Hand Made. Make Books, 2010'''


URL = http://www.blurb.com/bookstore/detail/1541053

This book is a result of two years research into new types of community projects. The twenty-eight authors have contributed perspectives and stories on how ideas of participating and initiating within communities is changing. 


=Review=

"Inspired is the perfect word for this book actually: a collection of hand-picked stories from all manner of collaborative and creative projects the world over, which collectively represent an “emergent new community culture”. From more familiar examples like The Big Lunch, to lesser-known gems like Maurice Small’s Community Gardens project, and one of my favourite projects ever, Jerry Stein’s Learning Dreams  (disclosure: Mindapples is also included), Tessy has unearthed an amazing set of stories of creative, positive projects that are bringing people together and building connection and community in startlingly effective new ways.

Seen collectively, the projects tell a story of a new model for community-development – or perhaps an old one that we have somehow forgotten. They are all positive, constructive and creative, based on people designing and building the world they want to live in, and finding others to join them in this work. They route around existing systems and do it themselves, using the assets they find in their communities to build and strengthen their communities. And most importantly, they all start from individuals taking immediate action to shape the world around them and change things for the better. Hand Made is a book that reminds us we have far more control than we think over the world around us, and shows us that the best way to engage people is to help them do what they want, and build what they need."
(http://sociability.org.uk/2010/09/25/hand-made-communities/)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Movements]]