=Description=

'''1. Chris Beanland:'''

"By their nature cities along coasts and rivers developed so they could be open to trade with each other. From the middle of the 13th century, and for some 300 years after, many settlements dotted along this route formed the prosperous Hanseatic League, a European trading confederation of market towns, before the rise of the nation state led to its dissolution.

The Hanseatic League is not well known, and today it lives on most prominently in the name of the German national airline Lufthansa, literally the 'Hansa of the skies', whose planes you can look out of – and down towards the Hanseatic cities – on the short journeys between mainland Europe and Britain. The letters HH on the number plates of cars in Hamburg stand for Hansestadt Hamburg: another proud little memory of this hidden history.

The League is most easily understood as a loose federation of cities that acted together in self-interest to promote trade. The Hanseatic cities developed their own legal system, and their armies came to one another's aid. Merchants who wanted to buy and sell and travel were taking the lead at a time when nation states were not fit for purpose: in the case of England or Denmark, leadership was too centralised and authoritarian, while in German-speaking lands a nation had yet to be formed. 

We think of nations today as elemental almost, immovable. Yet look at any city of Mitteleuropa and you'll see the many different names it has had as borders and regimes have shifted with the sands of time. Nations come and go. Cities endure. 

"It is often said that great cities survived great empires," says Cristina Ampatzidou, editor-in-chief of the Rotterdam-based online publishing platform Amateur Cities. "So it is not unrealistic to think of cities as discrete entities that compete and collaborate with each other, independently from the states to which they belong."

The cities involved in the Hanseatic League are found along the Baltic and North Sea coasts, and slightly inland too. The League stretched from Novgorod in the east – in what is now Russia – to London in the west. Tallinn, Riga, Gdańsk, Visby, Berlin, Cologne, Antwerp, Stockholm, Bergen, Kiel, Rostock, Dinant, Bruges, Turku, Groningen, Hanover, Wroclaw, Kaliningrad: all were involved at different stages in the Hanse's history, which ran on into the 1500s. 

The League covered lands that today find themselves a part of the modern nations of Finland, Sweden, Poland, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Norway, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia. It was a huge – and hugely ambitious – undertaking in the days when communications consisted of ink and paper and the only viable method of travel was by ship. Wood, fur, wool, silver, herring, cod and salt were the main items traded. But what was also exchanged was knowledge. In some ways it was an exercise in what we today call 'soft diplomacy'. There was no maniacal ruler overseeing things – merchants met and talked. They raised armies and waged war against kings who threatened their businesses and their freedoms and their peace.

There was a kind of proto-democracy at work. Professor Rainer Postel, of the Bundeswehr Universität (Germany's equivalent of Sandhurst military academy), has described the Hanse as "a community of interests without power politics". As David Abulafia, Professor of Mediterranean History at Cambridge points out, "The lack of an elaborate superstructure was one of the things that made the Hanse work. Having said that, one should recognise that Lübeck in particular dominated the League for long periods." 

Lübeck was where the merchants most often met; and where renewed recent interest in the Hanse eventually led to Angela Merkel cutting the ribbon at the brand new European Hansemuseum in the city last year."

(http://thelongandshort.org/cities/the-resurgence-of-the-city-state)


'''2. From the Wikipedia:'''

"The Hanseatic League[a] was a medieval commercial and defensive network of merchant guilds and market towns in Central and Northern Europe. Growing from a few North German towns in the late 12th century, the League expanded between the 13th and 15th centuries and ultimately encompassed nearly 200 settlements across eight modern-day countries, ranging from Estonia in the north and east, to the Netherlands in the west, and extended inland as far as Cologne, the Prussian regions and Kraków, Poland.

The League began as a collection of loosely associated groups of German traders and towns aiming to expand their commercial interests, including protection against robbery. Over time, these arrangements evolved into the League, offering traders toll privileges and protection on affiliated territory and trade routes. Economic interdependence and familial connections among merchant families led to deeper political integration and the reduction of trade barriers. This gradual process involved standardizing trade regulations among Hanseatic Cities.

During its time, the Hanseatic League dominated maritime trade in the North and Baltic Seas. It established a network of trading posts in numerous towns and cities, notably the Kontors in London (known as the Steelyard), Bruges, Bergen, and Novgorod, which became extraterritorial entities that enjoyed considerable legal autonomy. Hanseatic merchants, commonly referred to as Hansards, operated private companies and were known for their access to commodities, and enjoyed privileges and protections abroad. The League's economic power enabled it to impose blockades and even wage war against kingdoms and principalities.

Even at its peak, the Hanseatic League remained a loosely aligned confederation of city-states. It lacked a permanent administrative body, a treasury, and a standing military force. In the 14th century, the Hanseatic League instated an irregular negotiating diet that operated based on deliberation and consensus. By the mid-16th century, these weak connections left the Hanseatic League vulnerable, and it gradually unraveled as members merged into other realms or departed, ultimately disintegrating in 1669.

The League used a variety of vessel types for shipping across the seas and navigating rivers. The most emblematic type was the cog. Expressing diversity in construction, it was depicted on Hanseatic seals and coats of arms. By the end of the Middle Ages, the cog was replaced by types like the hulk, which later gave way to larger carvel ships."

(https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanseatic_League)


=History=

Excerpted from Mark Frazier:

==Origins and Growth of the Hanseatic League==

Threats abounded in the Baltic and the North Sea during the 
twelfth  century.  Merchants  attempting  to  travel  on  sea  or  land 
regularly  came  under  threat  from  robbers,  pirates,  feudal  lords, 
and  tribal  monarchs.  Local  rulers  across  Northern  Europe  often 
were  bent  on  confiscating  goods  or  exacting  tributes.  Merchants 
who tried to travel alone were fair game.

In response, they began to organize convoys or troops—“Hanse” 
in  Middle  Low  German—on  trade  routes  across  the  region.  As 
losses  to  robbers  and  pirates  fell,  merchants  grew  more 
prosperous.  Negotiated  agreements  with  local  rulers  also 
conferred  a  measure  of  security  for  storage  and  movements  of 
goods.  One  local  lord  in  Northern  Germany,  Henry  the  Lion, 
exempted the merchants in Lübeck—a recently-established town 
with excellent access to the Baltic—from paying taxes throughout 
his  realm.4  Another  boost  came  in  1181,  when  the  Holy  Roman 
Emperor,  Barbarossa,  designated  the  new  town  as  a  free  and 
Imperial  City.  This  interim  legal  standing  was  reaffirmed  by 
Emperor Frederick II in 1226, giving Lübeck an enduring shield 
to  ward  off  the  attentions  of  revenue-seeking  nobles,  and  to 
effectively  become  a  self-governing  community.  Merchants  of 
Lübeck  used  the municipality’s  status  as  a  free  city  to  negotiate 
trade  agreements  with  the  autonomous  counterpart  cities  of 
Hamburg and Bremen, whose policies were also largely shaped by 
merchant  guilds.  Their  agreements  to  remove  barriers  to  trade 
and  to  standardize  weights  and  measures,  including  precious 
metal content in coinage, gave a boost to profits and helped spread 
Hanseatic trade across the Baltic and beyond. 

In the largely Slavic-populated regions to the East, merchants 
from  Hanseatic  cities  established  new  trade  centers  open  to  all 
guild  members  in  good  standing  from  their  respective 
communities. These commercial outposts were often set up in the 
wake  of  conquests  by  Teutonic  Knights  determined  to  extend 
Christianity at swords’ point. Yet for the larger areas surrounding 
the  Baltic,  as  well  as  for  those  with  ports  on  the  North  Sea, 
Hanseatic merchants spread a network of low-tax or tax-free trade 
zones  through  negotiated  agreements  with  local  authorities, 
rather  than  through  military  means.  The  appeal  of  trade 
relationships,  and  the  negotiating  skills  and  gifts  of  Hanseatic 
merchants,  convinced  many  local  rulers  to  designate  areas  for 
Hanseatic guild members to do business without imposing onerous 
taxes  or  arbitrary  regulations.  From  the  thirteenth  to  fifteenth 
centuries,  the  network  of  Hanseatic  trade  outposts  grew  to  as 
many  as  170  communities,  ranging  from  Novgorod  in  Russia,  to 
London in England, and Bruges in Belgium.  

These  zones enabled  Hanseatic  merchants  to readily  import 
grains, wax, fish, metal ores, and other raw materials from areas 
around  the  Baltic,  and  exchange  them  for  textiles,  apparel,  and 
manufactured  items  produced  in  the  Western  European  cities 
affiliated  with  the  League.8  Their  success  in  long  distance  trade 
prompted new communities to join. It also inspired youths to enter 
into  years  of  challenging  apprenticeships  to  absorb  Hanseatic 
skills and culture and earn their way into full-fledged membership
in  the  guilds  of their respective  cities. Once  accepted,  they were 
free to independently do business with other members and become 
co-owners of cargos and vessels.  

Town-based  merchant  guilds  were  at  the  center  of  Hanseatic 
economic  and  social  activity.  Historian  Justyna  Wubs-Mrozewicz 
has summarized them as “non-hierarchical, bottom-up organizations 
of  traders  .  .  .  [where]  membership  was  voluntary,  based  on 
equality  among  all  members  and  sealed  by  an  oath.”9  The  basic 
rule  for  guild  members  was  to  “help  each  other  in  plight.”10 
Members  strove  to  stay  in  good  standing  with  their  peers  by 
exchanging  useful  information,  keeping  promises  and  fostering 
relationships based on honest trade, and using informal systems 
to resolve internal tensions and conflicts. 

Hanseatic scholar Margrit Schulte Beerbühl has described the 
Hanseatic League as a: 

- [L]ate-medieval  network  of  economically  largely  independent  long-
distance  trade  merchants  which  was  based  on  trust,  reputation  and 
reciprocal relations. The informal cooperation among its members kept 
transactional, informational and organizational costs low, allowing the 
Hanse  merchants  to  make  good  profits  from  the  long-distance  trade 
between the Baltic and the North Seas.
  
Another German economic historian, Alexander Fink, has argued 
that  the  Hanse,  overall,  can  be  understood  as  a  confluence  of 
functionally  overlapping  and  competing  jurisdictions,  whose 
fluidity enabled members to interact and adapt to circumstances 
faster than hierarchical political structures.
 
Legal  advances  contributed  to  the  growth  of  Hanseatic 
commerce. The town of Lübeck, whose governing council remained 
dominated by merchants, set new standards for procedural laws 
regarding trade, contracts, and dispute resolution. “Lübeck Law” 
grew to be widely admired and was adopted in whole or in part by 
other Hanseatic communities.13 Over time, merchant customs as 
practiced in Lübeck and other Hanseatic cities came to be codified 
as elements within the branch of private international law known
as Lex Mercatoria, or merchant law.14 The impartiality of Lübeck’s 
arbitration services also contributed to the city’s enduring place as 
the de facto leader of the Hanseatic League. 

To expand their markets, the Hanseatic League cities honed 
diplomatic  skills  over  four  centuries.  Their  tactics  included 
making gifts and strategically timed loans to rulers in return for 
tax-free  trading  privileges.  Loans  from  Hanseatic  merchants 
were  vital  to  the  success  of  various  English  monarchs.  In  1317, 
King  Edward  II  reaffirmed  that  Hanseatic  merchants  would  be 
free of taxes, trade regulations, and travel restrictions applied to 
other foreign traders. As historian T.H. Lloyd noted, “[n]ot only 
did Edward II confirm the grants of his predecessors and his own 
award of immunity from arrest but, for the first time, he conceded 
that neither he nor his heirs would place new impositions on the 
Hanse without its consent.” (English merchants, by contrast, had 
to pay certain taxes from which their Hanseatic competitors were 
exempt.) Trade monopolies negotiated by the League with many 
rulers in Scandinavia went even further by securing agreements 
that  denied  or  severely  limited  their  competitors’  access  to  key 
markets. In Norway, Sweden, and other areas, local rulers acceded 
to the League’s demand to ban or restrict other foreign merchants 
from doing business in highly profitable commodities.
 
Boycotts  were  the  League’s  means  of  choice  for  punishing 
countries  and  cities  that  moved  to  break  agreements  with 
Hanseatic merchants. When negotiated trade concessions came 
under  threat  or  merchant  cargos  were  confiscated  without 
cause,  the  League  called  meetings  of  member  cities  to  vote  on 
imposing  trade  sanctions  upon  the  offenders.19  Throughout 
much  of  the  League’s  history,  such  measures  proved  highly 
effective  in  reaffirming  the  trade  privileges  and  securing 
restitution for damages. 
Participation  in  boycotts  was  voluntary  on  the  part  of 
Hanseatic  communities.  No  political  authority  existed  in  the 
League  to force member  cities  to  abide  by  the majority  decision. 
 
However,  the  majority  could  and  often  did  punish  communities 
that  took  action  contrary  to  the  League’s  decisions,  through 
expulsion  (or  “unhansing”).20  In  this  case,  merchants  of  the 
ostracized  community  lost  access  to  the  favorable  commercial 
agreements  and  trade outposts  negotiated  by the  League,  to the 
benefit of the League’s protective services, and to any right to do 
business  with  Hanseatic  merchants  in  good  standing.  In  cases 
where  individual  members  of  Hanseatic  guilds  abrogated  an 
agreement, hearings would be held by guild appointed arbitrators, 
or by local courts in the Hanseatic cities. Any members who were 
found  in  breach  of  the  local  guild’s  code  were  expelled  from  the 
guild—and similarly unhansed across the League.

These  measures  were  sustained  despite  the  exceptionally 
ambiguous legal and political character of the Hanseatic League. 
England’s  King  Edward  IV,  under  pressure  from  English 
merchants who chafed at the concessions given by his predecessors 
to  the  Hanseatic  traders,  imprisoned  Hanseatic  merchants  and 
expropriated their goods in retaliation for the League’s suspected 
collusion with Danish privateers to stop English attempts to trade 
in  the  Baltic.22  As  summarized  by  Professor  Rainer  Postel  of 
Bundeswehr  University,  King  Edward  IV  justified  his  action  on 
the  ground  that  the  League  was  “a  society,  cooperative  or 
corporation,  originating  from  a  joint  agreement  and  alliance  of 
several towns and villages, being able to form contracts and being 
liable as joint debtors for the offences of single members.”23 Lübeck 
sharply  disagreed.  In  Postel’s  account,  Lübeck  maintained  that 
the Hansa was neither a society nor a corporation on the grounds 
that it: 
[O]wned  no  joint  property,  no  joint  till,  no  executive  officials  of  their 
own; it was a tight alliance of many towns and communities to pursue 
their  respective  own  trading  interests  securely  and  profitably.  The 
Hansa was not ruled by merchants, every town having its own ruler. It 
also had no seal of its own, as sealing was done by the respective issuing 
town. The Hansa had no common council, but discussions were held by 
representatives of each town. There even was no obligation to take part 
in  the  Hansa meetings  and there  were  no  means  of  coercion  to  carry 
through their decisions. So, according to the Lübeck syndic [advocate], 
the Hansa could not be defined by Roman law and was not liable as a body. This was in fact correct and deliberately ambiguous; the Hansa 
was  frequently  urged  to  give  a  self-definition  as  well  as  the  exact 
number of its members and deliberately left all this unclear.
 
When Edward IV refused to free the Hanseatic merchants he 
had imprisoned and declined to restore their property, the League 
launched a boycott and assembled a powerful naval force in the 
Anglo-Hanseatic  War.25  The  war  ended  in  1474  with  a  decisive 
victory  by  the  League,  which  had  crippled  English  commercial 
shipping.  The  Treaty  of  Utrecht  confirmed  restoration  of  the 
London  Steelyard  as  a  tax-free  base  for  Hanseatic  merchant 
guilds  and  brought  about  a  virtual  halt  to  English  trade  in  the 
Baltic region.


==Reasons for the League’s Demise==

Although  the  Hanseatic  League  had  done  much  to  create 
policies for its member merchants to prosper, challenges worsened 
as  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  unfolded.  Some  of 
these  were  self-inflicted.  Agreements  among  members  of 
Hanseatic  guilds—originally  focused  on  setting  standards  for 
weights and measures, on the precious metal content of coinage, 
and  on  the  quality  of  traded  goods—mutated  into  complex 
requirements  to  restrict  entry  into  the  guilds,  to  fix  prices,  and 
limit supply of monopolized goods to drive up prices.27 While such 
moves benefited incumbent merchants in the short term, they also 
discouraged, over time, the entry of new members into Hanseatic 
merchant guilds. 

A  larger  reason  for  the  erosion  of  the  League  was  a  rising 
resentment  of  one-sided  tax  and  trade  concessions.  Hanseatic 
guilds  were  unwilling  to  open  their  membership  to  foreign 
merchants, or to allow open trade by foreign merchants with the 
League’s  member  cities.28  With  the  exception  of  Dinant,  a  small 
town  with strong  economic ties  to  Cologne,  the  League  excluded 
all non-German speaking guilds from joining. Hanseatic insistence 
on exclusionary entry policies blocked merchants of non-German 
origins from access to a network of highly profitable tax-free trade 
concessions.  The  discrimination  was  also  often  backed  by 
municipal  ordinances  in  towns  where  Hanseatic  merchants 
dominated  town  councils.29  As  economic  historian  Erik  Lindberg 
has  written  of  two  leading  Hanseatic  communities  (Lübeck 
and Danzig): 

The infamous ‘guest-rights’ legislation in the Hansa towns prohibited 
trade  between  non-Hanseatic  merchants  in  the  Hansa  towns. 
Restrictions on the periods when foreigners were allowed to stay in the 
towns  represented  another  cornerstone  in  the  prohibitive  legislation 
that  characterized  Hansa  mercantile  practices . . . .  The  long-term 
results  for  the  two  cities  under  scrutiny  were  stagnation  and  an 
increasingly marginal position in the European urban network.

Foreign  rivals  in  response  stepped  up  their  forays  into  the 
North Sea and the Baltic. Merchants from Holland and England, 
who long had been shut out of trading opportunities with cities in 
the Hanseatic trade network, grew especially bold as the Treaty of 
Utrecht fell into disregard. They did so by forging commercial links 
to  communities  that  had  left  the  League  or  were  tenuously 
associated with it, by encouraging privateering and piracy against 
Hanseatic ships, and by deepening relationships with increasingly 
powerful  monarchs  across  the  region  who  had  grown  weary  of 
Hanseatic trade monopolies.

Holland  dealt  a  further  blow  to  the  privileges  of  Hanseatic 
merchants. Instead of negotiating trade agreements that favored 
one foreign partner over another, Dutch cities began to experiment 
with  introducing  more  open  systems.  Rulers  of  these  cities,  as 
described  by  Cambridge  historian  Sheilagh  Ogilvie,  discovered 
that  wealth  grew  far  faster  by  establishing  generally  welcoming 
environments  for  businesses,  rather  than  setting  rules  that 
favored particular blocs of foreign merchants.32 The rising Dutch 
cities of Amsterdam and Antwerp, in particular, became known for 
their embrace of open trade and immigration policies, as well as 
religious pluralism.33 Their openness to free trade drew an influx 
of  entrepreneurial  talent,  investors,  and  traders  that  eclipsed 
those of the leading Hanseatic cities, including Lübeck, Hamburg, 
and Bremen.

As  Dutch  cities  were  confirming  the  value  of  open  trade 
policies,  English  rulers  again  moved  to  overturn  long-standing 
agreements  that  privileged  merchants  of  the  Hanseatic  League. 
Queen  Elizabeth  of  England, in  1598,  ended  all  Hanseatic  trade 
preferences  and  closed  the  Steelyard  in  London,  where  German 
merchants had owned and operated a tax-free zone for centuries.35 
Although  the  Steelyard  site  was  returned  several  years  later  to 
Hanseatic guilds, merchants operating there henceforth no longer 
enjoyed  special  freedoms  from  taxation.36  A  further  setback 
followed  a  few  decades  later  with  the  signing  of  the  Treaty  of 
Westphalia in 1648.37 The Treaty brought to an end the religious 
wars that had consumed much of Europe, affirmed the boundaries 
of  newly  powerful  nation  states,  and  enshrined  their  respective 
rights  to  control  communities  and  economic  activity  within 
their borders. 

The  commercial  ascendency  of  free  and  highly  autonomous 
Hanseatic cities was coming to a close. By the mid 1600s, only a 
small number of Hanseatic cities actively identified as members of 
the League. They held their last general meeting in 1687. Over the 
course  of  the  following  centuries,  although  they  continued  to 
identify as Hanseatic cities, the League’s flagship communities of 
Lübeck, Bremen, and Hamburg were politically absorbed as states 
of Bismarck’s Germany.

Europe’s  newly  sovereign  nation  states,  meanwhile,  were 
growing  eager  for  overseas  territorial  and  commercial  gains. 

Merchant  guilds  of  England—beginning  with  the  Merchants 
Adventurers,  which  had  originally  been  formed  to  counter 
Hanseatic League successes, and its successors, including the East 
India  Company—established  foreign  trade  outposts  and 
consolidated colonies overseas.39 Applying the free trade concepts 
advanced by Adam Smith, British trading companies and colonial 
administrators  planted  seeds  in  the  1800s  for  prosperous  new 
freeports and tax-free trade zones in Singapore, Hong Kong, and 
Aden in the Middle East. These, like the Dutch open cities before 
them, became flourishing havens for commerce."

(https://digitalcommons.chapman.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1412&context=chapman-law-review)


=More information=

Bibliography:

* J.D. COLVIN, THE GERMANS IN ENGLAND: 1066-1598  (1971); 

* PHILIPPE DOLLINGER, THE GERMAN HANSA (1970); 

* GEOFFREY PARKER, SOVEREIGN  CITY (2004); 

* T.H. LLOYD, ENGLAND AND THE GERMAN HANSE (1991); 

* HELEN ZIMMERN,  THE HANSA TOWNS (2016).

[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:Germany]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]