
URL = http://www.hashtags.org/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Hashtags are a community-driven convention for adding additional context and metadata to your tweets. They're like tags on Flickr, only added inline to your post. You create a hashtag simply by prefixing a word with a hash symbol: #hashtag.

Hashtags were developed as a means to create "groupings" on Twitter, without having to change the basic service. The hash symbol is a convention borrowed primarily from IRC channels, and later from Jaiku's channels.

hashtags.org now provides real-time tracking of Twitter hashtags. Opt-in by following @hashtags to have your hashtags tracked."
(http://twitter.pbwiki.com/Hashtags)


'''2. Ahmand Suian Bayram:'''

"A hashtag is a pound sign (#), but it’s also used to categorize messages, keywords and topics. A hashtag provides a means of grouping; since one can search for the hashtag and get the set of messages that it connotes.

These hashtags allow you to assign a topic or a trend to your post which others - who are talking about the same topic - can easily find and respond to. You can easily have an access to activities and updates from people and organizations that you are interested in. Most social networking sites are in real-time so you can be assured that everything is up-to-date.

The hashtag phenomenon has been very important especially considering how these tags can be used to organize content and debates between larger groups of people. Moreover; it allows people to hold an open conversational session about a specific topic. Hashtags are distinguished for their click-to-go feature in the sense that they redirect you to a new page which displays all the tags related to that particular topic with a click."
(http://sufianbayram.blogspot.com/2013/02/hashtag-and-third-level-of-communication.html)


=Discussion=

==The Three Levels of Communication==

Ahmand Suian Bayram:

"The first level of communication was powered by the old web; via which you could only observe the information, but you are not able to modify or respond to them.

The second level is about the communities, participation, and peering. Easy-to-use tools are consistently proliferating the internet and are evolving into a global, living, and networked web. These tools have become the basis that paved the way for the emergence of the social media and the platform.

This social form is still largely operated by centralized weak links. Users connect to each other to share their own or others’ creative expression, but are not producing anything collectively.

The third level would be built on the same second level tools but it would be open and decentralized stronger links where the hashtag can play a key role, and we need to consider that the missing jigsaw here is not just in increasing the audience, but in increasing the communication transactions between them."
(http://sufianbayram.blogspot.com/2013/02/hashtag-and-third-level-of-communication.html)



=More Information=

# http://wthashtag.com/wiki/Main_Page tracked nearly 800 in March 2009

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]