
=Description=

"Networks can spring up under a variety of conditions.
Sometimes they are desperately needed when a crisis has knocked out both physical
systems and social connections. In other cases, they are a more organic
response to an unpredictable combination of opportunity, coincidence and timing.
There are a few things that we take as givens: complexity and uncertainty call for
the capacity to collaborate in the absence of authority, and we will be most effective
if we build the competence for this type of interaction before the need arises."
(http://www.heartlandcenters.slu.edu/kmoli/assignments/Hastily.pdf)

Peter Denning:

"The first priority after the precipitating event is for the responders to communicate. They
want to pool their knowledge and interpretations of the situation, understand what resources
are available, assess options, plan responses, decide, commit, act, and coordinate. Without
communication, none of these things can happen: The responders cannot respond. Thus the
heart of the network is the communication system its members use and the ways they interact
within it. We call this the “conversation space” of the HFN.

An HFN has five elements. It is a network of people who:

• Come together rapidly
• Must work together to fulfill a large, urgent mission
• Represent different communities
• Work in a shared conversation space
• Plan, commit to, and execute actions together.


An HFN is thus much more than a set of organizations using advanced
networking technology. To be effective in action, HFN participants must be skilled at:

• Setting up mobile communications and sensor systems
• Conducting interagency operations, sometimes called “civil-military boundary” operations
• Collaborating on action plans and coordinating their execution
• Improvising
• Leading a social network, where communication and decision making
are decentralized, and there is no hierarchical chain of command or
ex officio leader."


=Special Issue of 'Reflections' Journal=

* '''Hastily Formed Networks: [[Collaboration in the Absence of Authority]], Peter Denning'''

URL = http://www.heartlandcenters.slu.edu/kmoli/assignments/Hastily.pdf

"Disasters, such as the 2004 tsunami or Hurricane Katrina, give rise to hastily formed networks. He focuses on the results of research,
some of it action learning by NPS, at the scene of these disasters, and notes that the quality of response
was not related to disaster planning or equipment, but on the quality of the network that came together
to provide relief. He highlights a set of research-based guidelines for effective emergency response networks
that have broader applications for all of us."


[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Governance]]