
= the HDP is being compared to Syriza and Podemos

=Description=

Omer Tekdemir:

"The election taking place in Turkey on June 7 is an important turning
point for the country’s political system. A central issue in this
contest is whether more power should be transferred from the Turkish
parliament to the president – as is hoped by incumbent Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan.

Standing against Erdoğan’s ruling AKP (Justice and Development Party)
is a new party called the HDP (People’s Democracy Party). This was
formed out of a collection of 36 once independent members of
parliament.

The HDP has emerged as a radical democratic project, built on the
foundations laid by pro-Kurdish political parties (from HEP to the
BDP). It seeks to challenge the established order, aiming to radically
transform the AKP’s neo-liberal and conservative understanding of
democracy with a so-called passive revolution. For many, it is
Turkey’s equivalent to Greece’s Syriza and Spain’s Podemos political
parties and social movements.

The HDP manifesto for the parliamentary election calls for bringing
humanity back into politics. There is a strong emphasis on equal
rights for women, LGBT people and workers and on social security for
all. There are plans to increase the minimum wage, tackle youth
unemployment and provide everyone with a basic package of free water
and electricity. The party also emphasises free healthcare and
education as well as peace – including by ending trade embargoes
against Armenia.

When it comes to the EU, the HDP says it would pursue full membership
“within the scope of our principles” – suggesting that like Syriza in
Greece, the party has some scepticism about neo-liberal aspects of the
union by offering an alternative EU project.

Significantly, the party would also shift the state away from religion
and promote freedom of belief, ending the requirement for all children
to have a religious education and abolishing the government’s
Directorate of Religious Affairs – the body the oversees the practice
of Islam in Turkey.

The HDP also has bold ideas about Kurdistan. Turkish politics has, for
30 years, been characterised by the battle between the PKK (Kurdistan
Worker’s Party) and the Turkish armed forces. Over this time, 40,000
people have died and three million have been displaced as the PKK
fought for a separate, “free” Kurdistan.

The HDP’s view is that Kurdish rights are more likely to be achieved
by radically reforming Turkish democracy. It wants to decentralise
Turkish politics, setting up regional assemblies to ensure that all
“ethnic identities” have the right to self governance."
(http://scroll.in/article/732412/turkey-gets-a-taste-for-european-style-radicalism-ahead-of-election)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Turkey]]


=Discussion=