
'''* Book: The Heart of Altruism. Kristen Monroe.'''

URL =

=Description=

Jay Weinstein:

"Political psychologist Kristen Monroe has provided a significant contribution to the literature on altruism. In The
Heart of Altruism: Perceptions of a [[Common Humanity]], she defines altruism as "behavior
intended to benefit another, even when this
risks possible sacrifice to the welfare of the
actor." Monroe examines the
possible influences that encourage altruism and
highlights the importance of separating this discussion from a rational choice perspective. As a
staunch advocate of the plausibility of altruism
as part of human nature, Monroe succinctly
argues against the limitations provided by
rational choice theorists. (As noted above, the
key to their argument is that egoism is normal
behavior, even in the performance of apparently
other-directed acts.)

Monroe's work is based on an in-depth
study of individuals whose behavior can be
placed along a continuum from altruistic to egoistic and which includes several points in
between. As in the work of Fogelman (1994)
and Oliner and Oliner (1988), Monroe argues
that the most altruistic individuals are rescuers
of Jews during the Holocaust. In addition to the
rescuers, along the continuum from more-toless altruistic are heroes, philanthropists, and
entrepreneurs. For Monroe, entrepreneurs display the least altruistic behavior. Using these
categories, she contrasts research findings with
theoretical assumptions based on both rational
choice and altruistic theories. Her conclusion is
that rational choice theories cannot account for
the behavior of altruists.

Monroe originally believed that the roots
of altruism might be traced to factors such as
parental modeling, education, and religion; but
her findings did not support this. Rather, she
discovered that what sets the more altruistic
subjects apart from the others is a shared general perspective, a "cognitive orientation." She
concluded that the perspective itself, and not
the specific factors, consistently accounted for
altruism.

For Monroe, the altruistic perspective is
best understood in philosophical and psychological terms, although she uses principles from
other social sciences as well. In fact, the perspective is quite complex and consists of several
components: cognition and cognitive processes, expectations, worldviews, empathy, and
views of self."

(https://jfsdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/05.pdf)

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Books]]