
=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Heresthetic is an approach to understanding how political actors manipulate the decision-making process so they can win. Heresthetic is a positive political theory, including aspects of game theory, public choice theory, rational choice theory, and social choice theory to political science. Political scientist William H. Riker is considered the creator and one of the most prominent supports of theory.

Riker argues that herestheticians win because they compel or persuade others to join them in voting or political coalitions. Heresthetic focuses both on the use of rhetoric and political strategy. Riker argues that there are three vital components to heresthetic.

* Agenda control: political agents may structure debate in ways that highlight favorable or eliminate undesirable policy alternatives. Depending upon the order that policy options are discussed, debate can produce different outcomes, including outcomes that are not preferred by the heresthetician. The order of choice matters. Riker's concept of agenda control differs from conventional accounts of agenda-setting involving policy-makers, which focus on how policy-makers’ agendas are influenced by exogenous factors, such as the media and public opinion. Riker's focus is on how policy-makers affect the ordering of items on the political agenda, and how that ordering can be manipulated.


* Strategic voting: in deliberative settings herestheticians can take advantage of voting procedures to influence outcomes. For example, agents may vote against their own interest in the short-term to secure a better long-term position. Another element of strategic voting is vote trading.[10] Policy-makers may informally trade votes with others in exchange for future votes or benefits. Strategic voting is common in legislative settings because of open rules and sequential voting procedures.

* Dimension manipulation: herestheticians can manipulate the dimensionality of political decision-making by introducing new dimensions or modifying existing framing. Dimension manipulation can either expand a decision-making space by reconfiguring acceptable topics of debate and policy alternatives, or shrink dimensions by eliminating certain topics or alternatives. The manipulation of dimensions is important because once an agent manipulates framing, it cannot be removed from debate.

These components allow herestheticians to manipulate political outcomes by structuring debate, rhetorically or structurally, to be more advantageous to their preferred position."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heresthetic)

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Media]]