
'''* Article / INTERVIEW: The importance of ecological economics: An interview with Herman Daly. By Jamie Morgan. real-world economics review, issue no. 90'''

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue90/DalyMorgan90.pdf

=Description=

"Professor Herman Daly is, in his field, amongst the best known and influential economists of
the twentieth century and early twenty-first century. After the fashion of Keynes’s comments
regarding what makes a great carrier of the title, he is more than rather than merely an
economist (Keynes, 1924, pp. 321-322). Since the late 1960s he has been a consistent and
high-profile critic of the lack of attention paid in mainstream economics to the environmental
consequences of economic activity and the real limits to economic growth (see for an early
example of the contrast: Solow, 1974; Daly, 1974 and then collected Daly, 1999, 2007).
Beginning with a set of selected works by contributing thinkers (Daly, 1973; updated 1980,
and Daly and Townsend, 1993), Herman is closely associated with the idea of a “steadystate” economy systemic alternative (Daly, 1977 [1991]; 1996; 2014). 

After working at Louisiana State University for twenty years he moved on to become a Senior Economist in
the Environment Department for the World Bank, before working at and finally becoming
Emeritus from the School of Public Policy, University of Maryland. Herman has made
significant contributions in research, teaching and to social and economic policy and activism
(see, for example, Daly and Cobb, 1989 [1994]; Daly and Farley, 2003 [2011]). He has been
the recipient of numerous awards, visiting professorships and honorary positions, and is cofounder of the journal Ecological Economics (for example, Daly, 1992).

He is interviewed by Jamie Morgan for RWER …. "

=More information=

Herman’s Essays Against Growthism (2015) is published by the World Economics Association.

For information on and access to Herman’s work and related activity visit:

https://publicpolicy.umd.edu/faculty/herman-daly




[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]