=Typology=

Jennifer Gidley distinguishes two main strands in Hermeneutics:

"Hermeneutics as a research methodology in the social sciences has developed over several iterations, from its original roots in Biblical exegesis. There has been much debate in recent decades about the different versions of hermeneutics. The most notable debate was that between Gadamer (1986a) and Habermas (1986). Gadamer’s more traditional, philosophical hermeneutics—by his own admission—draws on the early Romantic phase of hermeneutics. Habermas’ critical hermeneutics arose from critical theory. French philosopher, Ricoeur called it the hermeneutics of suspicion , linking it with the rationalist stream coming from the European Enlightenment (Ricoeur, 1986). Ricoeur has attempted to find reconciliation between these two opposing camps. This research draws strongly on the hermeneutic approach of Ricoeur. Ricoeur (1986)identified two major approaches to hermeneutics, in the sense that it is about understanding symbolic texts, which have multiple meanings. He refers to one as the hermeneutics of suspicion ,which seeks to destroy the symbol as the representation of a false reality, destroying “masks and illusions in a relentless rational effort at “demystification” (Palmer, 1969, p. 44). The other approach—  demythologizing   —“deals lovingly with the symbol in an effort to recover meaning hidden in it” (Palmer, 1969, p. 44). 

(https://www.academia.edu/197841/The_Evolution_of_Consciousness_as_a_Planetary_Imperative_An_Integration_of_Integral_Views)


==Panikkar==

Excerpted from Gaetano Sabetta:

"Panikkar distinguishes three “kairological moments in the hermeneutical  enterprise,” three hermeneutics: morphological , diachronic and diatopical .  

* Morphological hermeneutics mediates understanding within the same  culture and within the same historical context of the interpreter (no historical  and cultural gap).

* Diachronical hermeneutics, so well expressed by the historical critical  method, presupposes the historical gap in a given tradition, therefore the  problem of the knowledge of the context in order to understand the text. The  context in which the original text arose has disappeared; the task of the  interpreter is to reconstruct the original context to know the original meaning  and mediate the text in the present context to give to the text renewed  meaning.

* Diatopical hermeneutics, neglected so far, is required: 

“I call it diatopical because the distance to be overcome is not merely  temporal, within one tradition, but the gap existing between two topoi ,  ‘places’ of understanding [...] between two cultures that have not  developed their patterns of intelligibility or their basic assumptions out of  a common historical tradition or through mutual influence. [...] Diatopical  hermeneutics stands for the thematic consideration of understanding the  other without assuming that the other has the same basic self-  understanding and understanding as I have. The ultimate human horizon  (myth), and not only different context, is a stake here.”  The diatopical hermeneutics is able to disclose a horizon of encounter  rather than a horizon of indifference and exclusion."

(https://academia.edu/9828052/Panikkars_Intercultural_and_Inter-religious_Challenge)


See also: [[Raimon Panikkar on the Problem of Pluralism of Religions and the Plurality of the World]]

=Example=

==The hermeneutics of inter-religious dialogue==

Gaetano Sabetta:

"A Methodology for a Theology of Religions 

It is precisely in the context of pluralism, whence no world-view can claim 
monopoly over others because by definition it is only a particular 
perspective of the world, that we must situate Panikkar’s hermeneutics, as an 
attempt to interpret the varied understanding of reality cross-culturally and 
bring them to dialogue and mutual fecundation. 


We can summarize Panikkar’s methodology for religious and cultural 
encounter in seven steps :

 
1. The starting point is a faithful and critical understanding of one’s own 
tradition. 

2. An understanding of another tradition is required. 

3. From understanding to conviction: genuine conversion . 

4. An internal, intra religious, dialogue begins between the two convictions. 

5. From intra to inter religious dialogue, as the way of expressing before 
representatives of other traditions your experience with a new 
interpretation. 

6. All partners in dialogue are supposed to experience the steps from 1 to 5. 

7. New interpretations pass the acid test of the golden rule of hermeneutics, 
namely they must be accepted by the representatives of the other 
tradition. If they are not accepted as ‘orthodox’ one must return to the 
level of intra religious dialogue and start again."

(https://academia.edu/9828052/Panikkars_Intercultural_and_Inter-religious_Challenge)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]