
'''= "a "political enterprise” focused on a critical approach to the political economy, analyzing the collisions and relations between urban powers and urban commons".'''

URL = http://www.lahidra.net


=Description=

"La Hidra Cooperativa is a "political enterprise” (that’s the way we call our economic nodes) focused on a critical approach to the political economy, analyzing the collisions and relations between urban powers and urban commons. La Hidra is part of the [[Fundación de los Comunes]] http://www.fundaciondeloscomunes.net/en The Fundación de los Comunes is a project driven by various experiences of autonomous research, education, publishing and political intervention practiced in social movements in Spain (Barcelona, Madrid, Málaga, Terrassa, Donosti..). Our aim is to think through models of a commons based institutionality that would be able to guarantee the ongoing development of radical critical production. Inside this frame, common goods and the social commoning movements to defend social rights, are a central sphere of our action and critical production."
(Commonswatch mailing list, November 2016)


=Directory of Members=

[[Mauro Castro]] is a member of La Hidra Cooperativa and of Fundación de los Comunes. Economist and Doctor of Philosophy in Political Science, with a research history on the topic of the urban commons and other related lines (territorial segregation, urban movements, processes of participation and democratic innovation at the local level, etc.). He has participated in the Organization of scientific events and research projects as well as done some scientific publications, both Latin American and Spanish magazines.

[[Rubén Martínez]] is a member of La Hidra Cooperativa and of Fundación de los Comunes. Masters degree in Political Science and Social Transformation at the Autonomous University of Barcelona. FPI Fellowship Grant linked with TRANSGOB research https://transgob.net he is currently doing his PhD at the IGOP http://igop.uab.cat/en His research focuses on the analysis of public policies that foster social innovation, its articulation with community based processes and changes in the social power relations. He had published several articles and books about cultural economy, participatory governance, critical approach to social innovation and community based economies. 

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]