 
'''= mailing list for discussions on neurotheological hacking, moderated by Remi Sussan'''

URL = http://groups.google.fr/group/hierohacking


=Description=

Remi Sussan:

"I have just created a google group about hierohacking: the goal of this 
group will be to discuss applied neurotheology, see how we can "hack the 
sacred", use intelligently and rationally religious thinking and practices 
for personal purposes; discussion will be of course about various ASC 
(altered states of consciousness), technologies, BCI, etc. But also about 
the creation of symbolic architectures and mythologies. I am indeed 
convinced that "the sacred" finds itself at the convergence of at least 
three psychological characteristics: ASCs being perhaps the least important 
or the more discreet (discovering their role may be an interesting task for 
the list) , the second being imagination, and the third being specific 
manipulation of some kind of linguistic abilities, such as use of semantics 
networks of associations, maybe even some specific kind of epistemology or 
logic. Of course I don't ask anybody to approve this, I just say that to 
show the perimeter of the possible discussions and explain that it will not 
be just a list about ASCs (there are already a lot of forums about it). 

Myself, I intend here to explore my concept of "religion as-game", 
game-as-religion", but it will be my own pet theory as an individual, not 
the main angle of the list (but of course, I would love to have some 
feedback!.) 

Here a few things that I would like to see emerge from discussions: 

-good analysis of self experiments with various practices. 

-theoretical models of mythology creation; analysis of traditional religion 
but from a practical point of view. works on epistemology of religion; 

-various works on BCI or physiological sensors for testing experiences, or 
obtain results: works with Neurosky or EPOC helmets, openEEG, etc. computer 
code is highly welcomed; 

-new and original forms of ritual or meditative practices, implying for 
instance virtual worlds, etc (yes, games, yes..) 

This list is not about creating future religions, transhumanist or other, or 
to discuss the future of spirituality; although it may help those who are 
pursuing these goals. It's really about creating a team of "technicians of 
the sacred", to use Mircea Eliade's expression."
(September 2010, via email)


=More Information=

People interested, here is the address: 
http://groups.google.fr/group/hierohacking 









[[Category:Spirituality]]