
=Bibliography=

Bondarenko,D.M., and Sledzevsky,I.V. (eds.) 2000. Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations. International Conference (Moscow, June 15-18, 2000). Abstracts. Moscow: Center for Civilizational and Regional Studies, Russian Academy of Sciences.

Bondarenko,D.M., and Frantsouzoff,S.A. (eds.) 2002. Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations. Additional Issue. Moscow: Center for Civilizational and Regional Studies, Institute for African Studies, Russian Academy of Sciences.

Beliaev,D.D., Bondarenko,D.M., and Frantsouzoff,S.A. (eds.) 2002. Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations. Abstracts. Moscow: Institute for African Studies, Russian Academy of Sciences.

Alexeev,I.L., Beliaev,D.D., and Bondarenko,D.M. (eds.) 2004. Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations. Abstracts of the 3rd International Conference (Moscow, June 18-21, 2004). Moscow: Center for Civilizational and Regional Studies, Institute for African Studies, Russian Academy of Sciences.

Beliaev,D.D., and Bondarenko,D.M. (eds.) 2006. Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations. Abstracts of the 4th International Conference (Moscow, June 13-16, 2006). Moscow: Center for Civilizational and Regional Studies, Institute for African Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

Bondarenko,D.M., and Nemirovskiy,A.A. (eds.) 2007. Third International Conference 'Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations' June 18-21, 2004, Moscow. Selected Papers I. Alternativity in Cultural History: Heterarchy and Homoarchy as Evolutionary Trajectories (pp. 167-183). Moscow: Center for Civilizational and Regional Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]