

'''= The goal of the cooperative is to spread the practice of planting habitats in suburban landscapes.'''

URL =

=Description=

"The goal of the cooperative is to spread the practice of planting habitats in suburban landscapes.  By arranging plants that work together into guilds we create beautiful landscapes that feature long term fertility, low maintenance, flowers for bees and fruit for people.  Many of you have heard of the concept of a food forest but, since we are on the high plains, it is best to think of these as forest islands.  The cooperative will work in support of the Bee Safe Neighborhood project which is creating groups of neighbors working together to improve the habitat in their neighborhood.
 
The core of the cooperative is a group of people who plant and grow out the plant species that fit into these islands.

Other roles we encourage are:

* Designers - When a customer selects a particular arrangement of plants as the template for their garden the designer of that arrangement receives a royalty.

* Contractors - When a customer decides to install a forest island they will hire a contractor who will price out the materials, arrange for deliveries and labor, and supervise installation.

* Laborers - Coop members with experience building deep mulch gardens and planting in the deep mulch.

* Sales - Coop members who receive a commission for bringing new customers to the coop.

* Plant Propagators - People who grow the plants.

* Land Owners - People can contribute land they own to host the plants the Propagators are growing out.  

Perhaps a flat rate per plant sold would be an appropriate compensation.
 
A forest island is the ideal solution to many suburban landscaping issues.  We use a deep mulch of logs and wood chips, up to 24" deep that will create its own soil, requires no fertilizers, no weeding . . .
 
3155 LayoutThe coop is being started as a project of the Living Systems Institute which will handle the funds to start."
(http://livingsystemsinst.org/content/high-plains-plant-propagation-cooperative)

[[Category:Agrifood] 

[[Category:Cooperatives]]