
'''* Report: A history of community asset ownership. by Steve Wyler. Development Trusts Association, 2009.'''

URL = http://www.communityplanning.net/pub-film/pdf/AHistoryofCommunityAssetOwnershipsmall.pdf


=Description=

"In the last few years community ownership of land and buildings has
become, alongside social enterprise, a hot topic across the political
spectrum, evidenced by manifesto promises, government reports and
White Papers, enabling legislation, regulation and guidance, new
investment funds, community right to buy legislation in Scotland, a review
by the Welsh Assembly and an Asset Transfer Unit for England.

Despite continuing resistance from state municipalists and free-market
fanatics alike, practice has kept pace with the promise. Within the
expanding development trusts movement there now exists nearly
£500m of assets in community ownership – empty and derelict buildings
transformed into busy workspace, training rooms, conference centres,
community run shops and restaurants, affordable housing, wasteland
reclaimed for parks, community woodland, farms and allotments.

An idea whose time has come? If so, it has been a long time coming.

For hundreds of years the idea of community owned assets has run like
a golden thread though our social history. Generation after generation,
people have called for a different way of doing things, where land and
buildings would belong neither to private landowners nor to the state,
but would be held instead in trust and controlled by local communities,
to provide amenities and create prosperity for the common good.

If we go back far enough, communities really did own their assets –
indeed there was a time when community ownership of land in particular
was not the exception, but rather the rule."



=Excerpts=

==Pre-1066: The Coerl system==

'Before 1066 land in England was
owned not by wealthy landlords, nor
by the state, nor even by the monarchy,
but rather by free peasant proprietors,
or ‘coerls’. Each family cultivated its own
smallholding and undertook communal
activities within their own village. The
ceorl was an independent ‘free born
Englishman’, subject only to the king,
to whom he had to provide military
service when required, and the only tax
was an annual food rent, a quantity of
provision sufficient to maintain the king
and his retinue for a day.

This system was beginning to break
down even before the Norman conquest.

The Saxon kings rewarded supporters
by making them ‘thegns’ or territorial
lords, and bestowed charters transferring
to the thegns the rights of claiming
military service and food rent from the
peasants. In some places, when harvests
failed, thegns would take over land in
return for providing relief from hardship,
and were paid in labour instead of
food rent. But extensive common lands
remained, and all the people of a
district or village shared the right to
these lands."


==After the Norman Invasion==

"Though in relation to the lord of
the manor they were serfs, in relation to
each other the peasants were in many
respects a self-governing community.

In most places, the landscape they
worked was very unlike that of modern
rural England. There were no hedges
or fences; the cultivated land was
a single large open field, and every
year a communal gathering of villagers
at the manor-court or court-leet would
allot to each man several narrow strips,
taking care to share out the good and
bad land equally, and on these narrow
strips each villager tried to grow enough
food to feed himself and his family.

The nobility were expected to provide
basic assistance in cases where the
poor became ill, or a man died and
left a widow and children. Anyone who
did not work or who committed a
transgression was punished, or outlawed
and left to starve to death in the woods
or wastelands. A rudimentary legal
system did provide some limited
safeguards for the common people,
and above all ‘habeas corpus’ ensured
that no man could be held in prison
without being charged and put on trial
by a jury of his peers. But the lord
held power in his manor, and was,
in practice, judge, jury and executioner.
Moreover, there was also the church,
which claimed its tithes from the poor,
made its own laws and held its own
courts."


==The Commons==

"Beyond the open field was unenclosed
common land where the villagers
had rights, granted not by statute but
by immemorial custom, to cut the long
grass to make hay, to gather fuel from
the woodland, or to graze their cattle
if they had any. There were also vast
forests, but these belonged to the
king and only the king and his nobility
were allowed to hunt the deer, wild
boar, rabbits, and other game. Poaching
was a national sport, but punishable
by death.

This system was, to a degree,
sustainable. The villagers were allowed
to gather wood for fuel, but only twigs
and branches they could reach with
a shepherd’s crook or a haymaker’s
hook, and therefore the woodlands were
not destroyed and would continue,
winter after winter, providing fuel for the
poor. It was nevertheless a subsistence
economy. The villagers on their narrow
strips, with rudimentary implements and
limited farming methods, could barely
grow enough to feed themselves.

There was little travel or trade between
communities, let alone nations. What
wealth the king and barons gathered
to themselves was more often the pillage
of war (the main purpose of the later
crusades) than the produce of local
economies. Only the monasteries grew
rich, and were hated for it."





[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:UK]]