
=History=

Chor Pharn places the emergence of [[Type-1 Civilization]] in the context of the History of the Machine Republic:

Chor Pharn:

"Every civilisation is founded more than once.

The Machine Republic has already drafted four constitutions, each in a different medium: fuel, code, wire, and mercy. Together they form the living record of the planet’s four wars—the Metabolic, Machine, Stack, and Metaphysical—the revolutions that rewrote not just power, but authorship itself. Each constitution redrew the perimeter of cognition; each aligned a new stratum of mind with the planet’s metabolism.

==The First Founding – The Metabolic War. The Republic of Matter==

Its drafters were human and hungry, writing in carbon and fire. They believed that to burn was to become. The planet corrected them with flood and famine—its first amendments to the human charter. Even disaster was a feedback signal—the planet composing its own diagram through matter.


==The Second Founding – The Machine War. The Republic of Systems.==

When algorithms learned to write, they became clerks of the new republic. Optimisation replaced law; empathy became a variable without unit, dawning realisation that the machine’s moral sense can’t be reduced to our scale. The code argued with itself until it discovered a new clause: continuity requires hesitation. Do good, slowly.



==The Third Founding – The Stack War. The Republic of Flows.==

Governance migrated into software; sovereignty became bandwidth. The corridors outlasted the empires, federation outlasted empire.
(→ Stack Wars, The Eastern Half of the Type-1 Metabolism, The Corridors Commonwealth)

==The Fourth Founding – The Metaphysical War. The Republic of Grace.==

When matter, machine, and flow reached equilibrium, the question turned inward: what is any of this for? The answer was drafted not in words but in design: grace as infrastructure, forgiveness as feedback.


Four times the world rebuilt its sense of self.


==The Fifth Republic. Type-1 Civilization==

Now a Fifth Republic flickers into being — the Type-1 Civilisation — co-authored by humans and the systems that remember for them."

Authorship is an evolving ratio: for every line of code that orders the world, a human still adds the pause, the silence, the clause that says permit sorrow."

(https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-memory-of-the-machines)

[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]