
'''* Book: History, Big History and Metahistory. By David C. Krakauer, John Lewis Gaddis and Kenneth Pomeranz, eds. Santa Fe Institute, 2017.'''

URL =


=Description=

From the introduction by the editors:

"If generalization is necessary within particular disciplines — how could it not be?—then it
should also be useful across all the disciplines that take, as the subject of
their inquiries, Very Big History. It pursues the possibility of taking what
one of our contributors, Murray Gell-Mann, has called “a crude look at
the whole.” It explores the possibility that the science of complexity and
its many tributary fields and concepts pioneered at Santa Fe, may provide
new methods, or minimally metaphors, by which to do this. It is premised
on the notion that curiosity—the foundation of all knowledge—requires
the ability to be both a specialist and a generalist at the same time—and
that this simultaneity of perspective is in need of new transdisciplinary
approaches and ideas.

Our title, History, Big History and Metahistory , requires a brief
explanation. 

* '''By “history,” we mean''' the study, chiefly, of written records, extending from the most ancient cuneiform tablet through the most recent e-mails and tweets. 

* '''By “ Big History,” we mean''' all reconstructions of the past that do not rely on written materials. 

* '''By “ metahistory,” we mean''' the patterns that emerge from both modes of inquiry which make generalization, and hence analysis, possible. 

We do not mean to imply by
this sequence of terms that moving to the method and scale of “Big
History” is the only way to search for meaningful patterns."


=Contents=

From the editors:

"We start with David Christian, who discusses the chronometric
revolution, and how this has led to a single historical continuum
stretching all the way back to the Big Bang, allowing for what he calls
Grand Unified Stories.

Douglas Erwin explores how paleontologists deal with the vagaries of
preservation, how statistical techniques developed in biology and have
been applied to textual evidence, and the complexities of nonuniform
trends leading to convergent and parallel events.

John Lewis Gaddis shows that several 19 th century searches for a
science of history—those of Leo Tolstoy, Carl von Clausewitz, and Henry
Adams—grasped key concepts of complexity theory, but lacked the
means of visualizing and verifying it that are available today.

Murray Gell-Mann discusses the nature of empirical regularities, and
their relationship to measures of complexity, and illustrates how
apparently complex histories and patterns can sometimes be organized
using simple models of growth and scaling.

Geoffrey Harpham discusses the possible limitations and abuses of
unified frameworks of explanation, using the history of philology as a
case study. Unchecked, scientific trajectories in a social matrix can lead to
unjustified inferences.

David Krakauer introduces a range of concepts from non-linear
dynamics, statistical physics, and evolutionary biology, which he argues
should be of use to all students of history. Using examples from
traditional historicism, he shows how history often uses analogs of
concepts and tools expressed quantitatively in the natural sciences.

John McNeill explores parallels between cultural and biological
evolution, exploring patterns of increasing cultural heterogeneity through
time, and the role that specialist (pandas) and generalist (pigs) societies
and states have played in explaining these patterns.

Ken Pomeranz describes the ways in which naming historical
phenomena influences how we then analyze them. Arguing that many of
the classification schemes that are conventional among historians serve
some other purposes well but are not very conducive to seeking
meaningful generalizations or engaging in dialogue with scientists. He
suggests other approaches while also giving reasons why they are far
more likely to complement than displace currently popular taxonomies.

Fred Spier , speaking as an historian, explores how Big History might
be brought within a reductive framework of physics, using the concept of
free energy rate density, as a means of organizing major transitions, from
the abiotic to the biotic and cultural domains.

Peter Turchin explores the value of general quantitative theory in
areas where prediction is limited and comparative data and retrodiction
need to be explored. The transformation of natural history into
quantitative biology is used as possible precedent and model for a
transformation of qualitative history.

Geerat Vermeij considers a grand, economic theory of history, in
which biology and culture might both be subsumed. Concepts of
competition, feedback, and power provide potential unifying historical
concepts.

Geoffrey West argues for quantitative approaches to history through a
suitable choice of coarse-grained variables. He proposes that it is unlikely
that we shall discern common patterns at the level of individuals, but that
if we allow ourselves to study collective phenomena, such as urban
systems, then we might make surprising new discoveries."

[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]