




=Text=

Excerpted from Chapter 1 of the book [[New Currency]], by Jordan McLeod:

"During the Great Depression, the esteemed Yale economist Irving Fisher
came to a stark realization. In the midst of this grave economic crisis he observed
that not only were the majority of Americans su!ering as a consequence
of poor monetary policies, but also in large part they were su!ering
needlessly. In the a"ermath of Black Tuesday, October 29, 1929, millions
were left unemployed and in severe financial hardship. Within three
years, industrial production had dropped by almost 50%, and 5,000
banks in America alone had gone under.

Black Tuesday may have started on Wall Street but its impact was
deeply felt globally. Whole industries came to a standstill and the
consequent social distress gave rise to regressive political movements
around the world that capitalized on the anger, fear and confusion of
the times.

By 1933, Fisher had come to understand that millions were experiencing
intensified financial pain because they did not have access to a
sufficient money supply. Indeed, in retrospect, many prominent economists
including current Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and
economist Milton Friedman later agreed with Fisher’s on the ground
observation that the Great Depression was severely exacerbated by a
contracted money supply that was unduly restricted from expanding
to the levels of demand. 

In plain language, the US Federal Reserve was not printing enough
money to meet the needs of the people. Their inability to increase the
money supply was in large part due to regulations that bound them to
backing their currency with gold and by reaching credit ceilings that
were in place. The money supply then further contracted because of
the declining confidence in the banking system. As a consequence,
hoarding money became a widespread pandemic. This left people with
things to sell and others with things to buy but an insufficient supply
of money to effectively enable the exchanges. Therefore, more than one
million Americans were reduced to the slow and difficult process of
barter while tens of millions of others had insufficient and sporadic
access to cash. The overall impact of hoarding was severely amplifying
the financial pain throughout the country and the rest of the world.


==The Miracle of Wörgl==

With this grave problem in mind, Fisher wrote the book Stamp
Scrip in the midst of the Great Depression to disseminate an effective
solution as quickly as possible. It was basically an instruction manual
for local towns and cities to create their own temporary local currency
to compensate for the contracted money supply and the inability to
increase it at the Federal level.

First, he instructed towns, municipalities and cities to issue notes
(scrip) on their own, and to guarantee their value with the promise to
pay it back in US currency within one year. This, he believed, would
increase the confidence in the market and help ensure they could be
used interchangeably with legal tender. By producing their own scrip,
local municipalities could effectively act as surrogate printing presses
for the Federal Reserve as they were constrained from creating new
money on their own.

The ‘stamp’ in ‘stamp scrip’ was something far more novel and
innovative a proposal for boosting the economy out of the Depression.
Fisher designed the money to have 52 boxes on their reverse side.
Each week on a Wednesday, the money holder would be required to
buy a stamp to validate the value of the note for the following week. In
Fisher’s design, for each $1, one had to pay 2¢ to buy the weekly stamp
to keep it valid (or 2% weekly). This provided the money holder with
significant new incentive for using their currency before the expiry
date on Wednesday. This bold and creative idea came to America from
Europe where it had successfully been implemented. The most notable of
its applications came in the town of Wörgl, Austria.

In 1932, the town of Wörgl was suffering from a 35% unemployment
rate. The town’s mayor had a long list of projects and only 40,000 Austrian
schillings in the bank to pay for them. Rather than simply spend the money
on what would amount to only a fraction of the work that needed to be
done, he used the schillings to back the creation of local stamp scrip. The
mayor then used the stamp scrip to begin paying for public projects and
thereby introduced the currency into the town’s circulation. Yet, it was only
after this money was spent that the dramatic effects began to take hold.56
In less than two years from the start of using the stamp scrip it became
the first town in Austria to reach full employment. With the equivalent of a
modest number of Austrian shillings in circulation, reports money expert
Bernard Lietaer, “Water distribution was generalized throughout … the
town was repaved, most houses were repaired and repainted, taxes were
being paid early, and forests around the city were replanted.”

Clearly when a town begins to experience full employment during a
depression and even voluntarily deciding to pay their taxes early, people
will talk. In this short period of time the success of the town had garnered
international attention and was branded the ‘miracle of Wörgl.’ Even the
French Prime Minister, Édouard Dalladier, came for a special visit to evaluate
the dramatic economic renaissance of a depressed community.


==The Science behind the Miracle==

While a part of this marked turnaround came from the town’s revenues
in collecting stamp scrip fees, this was not the most significant force behind
the dramatic revitalization. Of greater importance were the extraordinary
contributions from its increasingly engaged citizens. These citizens
were enabled to transform their community and do what was previously
impossible and economically unfeasible when the average velocity of money
throughout the town increased fourteen fold because of the stamp scrip’s
monthly expiration date.

In other words, with the introduction of stamp scrip, money changed
hands fourteen times more frequently in the same period of time than
with the national currency, the Austrian shilling. The sudden increase in
trade and activity of this magnitude represents a dramatic rise in economic
activity and confidence that simply cannot be replicated by central governments
through spending programs or tax cuts.


Between July 5, 1932 and November 21, 1933, an average of only 5,500
units of the stamp scrip were outstanding (its value was on par with the
Austrian schilling). These units circulated throughout the community 415
times over 13.5 months. Each unit therefore changed hands on average
approximately every single day. As a consequence only 5,500 schillings of
stamp scrip in circulation produced the extraordinary equivalent of more
than 2.5 million Austrian schillings in economic activity during this period
(this is the equivalent of about 64 million Austrian schillings or US $7.5
million in 2001 terms). Net investment in productive assets also increased
by more than 200% compared to the previous year prior to stamp scrip
coming into circulation.

Fourteen times the number of economic transactions is an extraordinary
leap in activity by anyone’s standards. In traditional economic thinking
it is generally assumed that such an increase in the velocity of money
can occur through innovative technical advances or during unfortunate
times of hyperinflation when people cannot give their money away fast
enough because of its falling value.

New technologies, ranging from faster transportation, to new economic
tools, to new communication devices have enabled economies to
increase the velocity of economic activity and the span and breadth of their
trade. When money is able to move from one transaction to another at a
faster rate, economic output can grow because the speed of business increases.
Enhanced potential for greater wealth creation, efficiencies and
societal interconnectivity also emerge.

The general exception to this case is the occurrence of hyperinflation,
which emerges when the purchasing power of money rapidly devalues. This
phenomenon tends to occur when the money supply far exceeds demand.
For example, in the Weimar Republic in 1923, hyperinflation was so severe
that prices doubled every two days. In other words by holding on to money
for two days, the price of a loaf of bread would double. Holding onto it for
four days, it would double again, and so on. In such dire circumstances it is
in the money holder’s interest to spend the money as quickly as possible to
avoid the devaluation, which can accelerate the velocity of money.

In the case of Wörgl, the town certainly did not experience the negative
e!ects of hyperinflation when the velocity of money and economic activity
skyrocketed. At first glance, one might hardly think that placing an expiry
date on money would constitute a techno-economic advance. Nevertheless,
the town succeeded in transforming massive unemployment and stagnation
into full employment and community revitalization during the Great
Depression. All of this came directly as a consequence of implementing stamp
scrip. This achievement truly was a miracle, yet backed by the innovation
of solid, grounded economic means.

The primary source of renewal and revitalization did not come from
the town’s spending on public projects but from the creative enterprises
and projects taken on by its citizens. Rather than rely on municipal governments
or centralized powers, the people of Wörgl had created the means to
take power into their own hands and directly get things done without the
meddling of relatively arbitrary and inefficient centralized bureaucracies.

...

For better or worse, it would appear that the success of the stamp scrip
and the subsequent emergence of decentralized power structures and economic
activity have been broadly interpreted as a threat to the power and
control of national governments and their central banks.
By the time the German stamp scrip “Wara” had successfully spread
throughout Germany in 1931, it had attracted the attention of the German
Central Bank. Subsequently it was prohibited from further operations
because of the Central Bank’s monopoly on currency creation. Thee process
was similar in Austria. When 200 communities launched projects to copy
Wörgl’s success, they were also blocked by the Austrian Central Bank. In
1934 after the town’s stamp scrip was banned Wörgl quickly fell from full
employment back into a painful rate of 30% unemployment. 

In the United States, Irving Fisher and his colleagues helped introduce
the stamp scrip idea into 400 cities and thousands of smaller communities.
To adopt even broader implementation Fisher brought the stamp
scrip concept to the attention of the US Treasury Department. According
to Lietaer, Dean Acheson, the Undersecretary of the Treasury at the time
met with Fisher and subsequently sought out other expert opinions on
whether stamp scrip would work. Lietaer relates that Acheson was advised,
“…it would work but that it would imply strongly decentralized decision
making, which he should check out with the President.”  Soon thereafter,
President Roosevelt prohibited any use of “emergency currency” and announced
one of the most ambitious and controversial series of centralized
government projects in American history: the New Deal."



[[Category:Money]]