

=Discussion=

==The History of the Cybernetisation of Production==

Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab:

"The introduction of scientific management to the assembly line in the early
twentieth century focused initially on the production of a greater mass of
products in the same or smaller amount of time by calculating the number of
products produced within the labour process. Scientific management
physically restricted options for deviating practices on the side of the workers
and was therefore often quoted as the prime example for technical control
(Edwards, 1979). At about the same time, large industrial companies began to
introduce differentiated rules and procedures, fostering a top-down
hierarchical order that was described as bureaucratic control (ibid.). Both
technical and bureaucratic control became the basis for scientific
management, which developed in the Fordist era as a result of the division of
manual labour of production from the cognitive labour of management and
planning (Braverman, 1974). The replication of this division of labour in turn
further divided social development of the technical aspects of manual and
cognitive labour.

Grids, graphs, and other informational tools for measuring the labour process
provided management the means of objectifying, and thus representing,
various aspects of the labour process in data. Scientific management included
measurements of the labour process such as Taylor’s ‘time studies’. These
measures would become coupled with the motion studies of Gilbreth when
managers calculated the physical motion of the labour process in relation to
the number of products produced in a given amount of time for the purpose
of identifying inefficient activity (Gilbreth and Kent, 1921; Taylor, 1913).
These forms of analyses were used for the systematic measurement of
productivity in the labour process in order to physically alter it for the purpose
of increasing productivity, and therefore, total output. The forms of
managerial action taken as a result of these measures were therefore an early
form of data-driven feedback. Hence, scientific management’s systematic and
detailed collection of data from the labour process foreshadowed the logic of
cybernetic control in industrial production, but in a form more heavily reliant
on human managers. Central hierarchical order, however, was still personified
at its core by the figure of the manager, inspiring Edwards (1979: 132) to write
about a ‘managerial revolution’. In this respect, industrial capital developed 
its own human means of control over the labour process through the division,
reorganisation, and thus, development of the productive forces of labour in
the historical stage of capital’s real subsumption of the labour process. This
meant that managers functioned as capital’s means of control over the direct
labour process through the open-loop of managerial feedback. Thus, we
suggest that the development of managerial labour is capital’s historical
development of the means of enforcing the technical requirements of
valorisation within the production process.

As Noble (2011) noted, the history of the ‘automatic factory’ began with the
development of the process industries in the early twentieth century. These
were developed on the principles of process control that were objectified in
the development of industrial automation technologies that replicated,
extended and/or replaced the labour-power of the direct production process.

As Noble (2011: 59) described it, ‘all continuous process production
demanded unprecedented devices-sensors and effectors (actuators) for
carefully monitoring and adjusting direct production operations too complex
for complete human oversight and manual control’. However, early
computerisation meant that process manufacturing still relied on the
decisions of human operators to monitor and respond to the production
process based on the information produced by computers, which is
understood as an open-loop form of feedback. Hence, early process control
was neither about physically restricting options – as in technical control – nor
about bureaucratic top-down order. Rather, its primary goal was the
development of computer monitoring combined with human control in the
direct production process. With the development of closed-loop automation
in the process industries, automation technologies that were produced and
used as the means of control of the direct production process were developed
to replicate, extend and/or replace the labour-power of managerial feedback.
The principles of control were later formalised with the development of
cybernetics, an interdisciplinary science that was shaped by neurophysiology,
information theory, statistical mechanics, psychiatry, physics, biology,
anthropology and other sub-disciplines in the natural and social sciences
(Kline, 2015). Cybernetics was conceived and promoted during the well publicised Macy conferences in the post-wartime era of the late 1940s and 
1950s by natural and social scientists such as Norbert Wiener, Claude
Shannon, Ross Ashby, Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson who had
aspirations to develop it as a universal science of control and communication
(Wiener, 1948). Early cybernetic theory was initially derived from
observations on the self-organisation of biological systems that
‘automatically’ adapt to changes in the environment instead of first making a
cognitive plan or hierarchical instruction. Its epistemology relied on models,
analogies and other abstract representations of complex systems for the
purpose of interdisciplinary comparison, including, for example, modelling
the human nervous system as an electronic machine and vice versa.

At its core, cybernetics used prediction and filtering to combine
communications and control engineering (Kline, 2015: 22). Feedback loops
were designed to bring a given system to a state that cyberneticists call
homeostasis. For this, at least two entities influence each other through
mutual feedback until they reach a state of equilibrium. Homeostasis,
however, was not conceptualised as a static optimum. Rather, homeostasis
was considered a dynamic process of optimisation through adaptation,
referred to as the Viable System Model (Beer, 1959). With the development of
management cybernetics, industrial managers adapted cybernetic principles
to the design and management of human communication in organisations,
while engineers objectified the general principles of cybernetic control in the
production of machines designed to replicate, extend and/or replace both the
productive forces of labour and managerial feedback in industrial production."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf)

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:P2P History]]