
'''* Book: Cybernetics: from Past to Future. Dmitry A. Novikov. Springer, 2015'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287319297_Cybernetics_from_Past_to_Future


=Description=

"This book is a brief “navigator” across the history of cybernetics, its state-of-the-art and prospects. The evolution of cybernetics (from N. Wiener to the present day) and the reasons of its ups and downs are considered. The correlation of cybernetics with the philosophy and methodology of control, as well as with system theory and systems analysis is established. A detailed analysis focuses on the modern trends of research in cybernetics. A new development stage of cybernetics (the so-called cybernetics 2.0) is dis-cussed as a science on general regularities of systems organization and control. The author substantiates the topicality of elaborating a new branch of cybernetics, i.e., organization theory (O3) which studies an organization as a property, process and system."


=Contents=

"The book possesses the following structure. First, we consider the evolution of cybernetics (from N. Wiener to the present day), see Sections1.1 and 1.2. A detailed analysis focuses on the reasons of its ups and downs in Section 1.3. Next, we study the interrelation of cybernetics with control philosophy and control methodology (Chapter 2), as well as with systems theory and systems analysis (Chapter 4). Chapter 3 discusses the basic laws, regularities and principles of control. Chapter 5 identifies some modern development trends of cybernetics. In the Conclusion, we introduce the new stage of cybernetics development–the so-called Cybernetics 2.0 as the science of systems organization and control. Appendices contain a list of basic terms and topics for self-study."

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287319297_Cybernetics_from_Past_to_Future)


=More information=

Internet resources on cybernetics:

– http://www.asc-cybernetics.org/

– http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/

– http://wosc.co/

– http://neocybernetics.com/wp/links


==Bibliography:==

books about the [[History of Cybernetics]]

* N. Katherine Hayles, How we became posthuman. Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics, Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1999. 

* Jean-Pierre Dupuy, The Mechanization of the Mind, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2000. A revised paperback edition is about to be published by the MIT Press under the title  On the Origins of Cognitive Science: The Mechanization of the Mind (2008).

* Rise of the Machines: A [[Cybernetics History]]. Thomas Rid.


In French:

* Jean-Pierre Dupuy, L’essor de la première cybernétique (1943-1953), Paris, Ecole Polytechnique, Cahiers du CREA, 7, 1985. 

* Jean-Pierre Dupuy, Aux origines des sciences cognitives, Paris, La Découverte, 1994.

[[Category:Complexity]]