'''= "awakens us to our interconnectedness, igniting a critical mass of collaborative action serving the good of the whole".''' [https://www.holomovement.net/]

URL = https://www.holomovement.net/


=Contextual Quote=

"A global movement guided by the emerging principles of what has been called the new paradigm is gaining momentum. This transformative shift represents the emergent norm of our highest human values, representing the altruistic nature of our species at its best. It encompasses hundreds of thousands, possibly millions, of individuals, nonprofits, small community groups and organizations all in motion working to change the fundamental nature of society.

To achieve this transformative shift will require a movement with a unifying worldview outlined by defining principles that give us hope, meaning and evolutionary direction. Poised at the bifurcation point of our species’ breakdown or breakthrough, it is critical our global family finds consensus in shifting our cultural values from “me,” to “we,” to “all.” A transformative movement of this magnitude needs a name to rally around, one I propose calling the Holomovement."

-  Emanuel Kuntzelman and Jill Robinson [https://www.kosmosjournal.org/kj_article/the-holomovement/]


=Description=

SecondRenaissance.net:

"The Holomovement is "a social movement that awakens us to our interconnectedness, igniting a critical mass of collaborative action serving the good of the whole."

"Guided by science and spirituality, this unifying movement is catalyzing a massive shift in human consciousness."

(https://secondrenaissance.net/publications/overview-ecosystem-names)


=Principles=

Emanuel Kuntzelman and Jill Robinson:

"'''Holomovement 8 Core Principles''':

* Interconnected Wholeness. Although dazzlingly complex and multidimensional, the cosmos is a single, living process, profoundly interconnected and sacred in its Oneness.  

* A Conscious Living Universe. Dynamic and alive, the universe arises from a source of consciousness, offering each of us meaning within our interconnected wholeness. 

* Purposeful Evolution. The Interconnected Whole is evolutionary in its conscious awareness of existence, engaging in a purposeful evolution of its own nature. Over time, the cosmos, the earth and all living things develop increasing levels of complexity, interconnectedness, coherence, cooperation and consciousness.  

* Wholesomeness as Our Natural State of Being. All of reality, including individual beings and social and cultural systems tend to be attracted to health, wholeness and the mutual flourishing of life and consciousness. Seemingly “evil” motives and behaviors are not fundamental to human nature, but rather an unbalanced state dominated by materialism and a sense of separation. 

* A Self-Healing Cosmos. Our existential civilizational Meta-Crisis (of climate, culture, society, economics, and more) is naturally coinciding with a widespread awakening of virtuous social projects, analogous to an immune response. These contrasting forces, or levels of consciousness, although challenging, offer the necessary impulse to propel our ongoing evolution.  

* Embodying the Holomovement. David Bohm coined the term “holomovement” to describe how undivided wholeness is expressed in every seemingly separate entity, event and action. 

“The Holomovement” is an apt name representing the diverse sociocultural movement toward a just, fulfilling and sustainable human presence on Earth and within the cosmos.  
Prior Unity in Action. The Holomovement is not a project to unite diverse efforts, but an inherent expression of the nature of reality and its collaborative coherence converging into unity while simultaneously respecting the autonomy of individual and group endeavors. 

* Cosmological, Individual and Sociological Dimensions. The Holomovement is a name for the action of the undivided cosmos working to reassert health and wholeness in the face of the crises of fragmentation. This cosmological process becomes conscious and is enacted at the level of individual human beings, first through psychological and spiritual transformation, and then as transformed behavior that can scale to transform human groups, organizations, systems and societies. Both individuals and groups can awaken to and choose to participate more consciously and effectively in the inherent activity of the Holomovement."

(https://www.kosmosjournal.org/kj_article/the-holomovement/)

[[Category:Integral_Theory]]
[[Category:Movements]]