
'''* Article: Integrating Holochain, Mattereum and OVN: A Framework for Peer Production. Sensorica, 2025.'''

URL = https://soushi888.github.io/alternef-digital-garden/blog/ovn-hrea-mattereum


=Description=

"In this paper we explore a short list of p2p technologies carefully chosen to satisfy our needs in a specific material peer production context. We contribute to the p2p movement by bringing our 15 years of experience in open-source, Do-It-Yourself (DIY) hardware development, using an organizational model that we call Open Value Network (OVN).

The integration of Holochain (agent-centric p2p framework) and Cardano (data-centric blockchain), with the complementarity of hREA/Valueflows and ADAM, maps our needs for a groundbreaking hybrid infrastructure to support distributed fabrication and regulatory compliance for the PEP Master project, the context of our work.

[[Open Value Networks]] (OVNs) are decentralized, collaborative frameworks that facilitate peer production, where individuals and groups co-create value through shared resources and open processes. OVNs leverage p2p technologies to manage complex workflows, fairly reward contributors, and operate without reliance on traditional hierarchical structures, making them ideal for innovative, community-driven projects like PEP Master.

[[Holochain]] is an agent-centric p2p framework that empowers participants with self-sovereignty and fosters direct collaboration. Unlike traditional blockchains, Holochain uses a distributed hash table (DHT) to enable scalable, serverless digital environments where each participant maintains their own data and interactions, aligning perfectly with the decentralized ethos of OVNs.
hREA/ValueFlows provides a standardized vocabulary and framework for modeling economic and production activities within peer production networks. By capturing contributions, resource flows, and economic events, hREA/ValueFlows ensures transparency and auditability, allowing OVNs to track and reward individual efforts in a fair and verifiable manner.

ADAM offers a meta-ontology that bridges diverse decentralized systems, enabling seamless interoperability while preserving the unique strengths of each technology. In the context of OVNs, ADAM facilitates integration between Holochain’s collaborative environments and 
Cardano’s blockchain, ensuring cohesive workflows across platforms.

Cardano is a secure, data-centric blockchain platform that supports tokenization, smart contracts, and certification. It provides a robust layer for managing transactions, ownership models, and incentives, ensuring global accessibility and regulatory compliance for distributed production processes in OVNs.

This synergy enables OVNs to steward complex distributed workflows, reward contributors fairly, and ensure compliance with regulatory standards—a critical requirement for projects like PEP Master."


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Articles]]