
'''= Holonic urban community planning using AI: "The platform facilitates the participatory design of AI systems to ensure they reflect community values."'''

URL = https://holoncity.org/


=Description=

Holon City:

"We live in an era of accelerating change. New tools are required to empower communities to create sustainable economies, become stewards of their shared future, and unlock their collective potential.

Holon City aims to meet this need through the responsible alignment of AI models. The platform facilitates the participatory design of AI systems to ensure they reflect community values. Residents are engaged in providing data and feedback to optimize algorithms for local contexts.

The goal is to link knowledge across fields, enabling innovative solutions to social, economic, and environmental challenges. The platform facilitates the shift toward localized, equitable models of production and consumption that amplify community creativity. With thoughtful implementation, AI can be a tool for communities to co-create their desired future.

In the 1960s, Buckminster Fuller proposed the “World Game” - a simulation to find solutions to global problems. Now, AI and modern technology can take this vision further.

AI can analyze complex systems and data to generate insights for addressing global challenges like climate change, inequality, and sustainability. Machine learning algorithms can rapidly model and simulate scenarios to predict the impacts of different policies and interventions. And AI can enable more engaging, adaptive games that harness collective intelligence across cultures."

(https://holoncity.org/)


[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Community]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]