
=Description=

Lawrence Strydom: (Lawrence Qholloi fb name):

"An open source software design to the Biomimicry Global Food Systems Design Challenge and we made it to the finals. Even though it is a food systems challenge, the design is applicable to any kind of commons based peer production model. It is essentially a holonic resource planner for open value networks using the blockchain to account for value exchange and participatory, community based governance."


=Discussion=

Tiberius Brastaviceanu:

"A platform that emerges in use, in response to real problems, within a wide community of users and developers is my best bet. That is because it's not just about the tool, especially in times of paradigm shift. The tool must be tuned with what simultaneously happens at the economical, social, and cultural layers of an organization. In other words, the OVN infrastructure enables new processes and new methodologies, which require understanding and a culture around them, setting in place new relations of production. We're not talking here about replacing an ERP (enterprise resource planning system) designed for corporations with another brand of the same thing, to be implemented in a corporation. We are talking about selling an NRP (network resource planning system) designed for networks to entities that still function hierarchically, filled with people that have incarnated the hierarchical mode of functioning, with no culture for open networks... I am not saying that adoption of the OVN model is impossible. I am saying that it requires a lot more than just a suite of tools, it requires a large and diverse community. 

Those who want to offer consultancy services around the OVN model and its infrastructure would benefit more from a better suite of tools, developed and tested by different communities, in different contexts. They would also benefit from partnering with people who have experience with the new methodologies, procedures, governance, adapted legal structures, and most importantly with the culture required for OVNs to function. "
(FB, October 2015)

=More Information=

* a crowdfunding campaign on Indiegogo and Swarm to raise funds for development and pilot implementation: https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/hips-holonic-integrated-production-swarms/x/12499018#/

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]