'''= "Holo fuel is a mutual-credit crypto-currency and an accounting system put in place as means for payment and settlement of application hosting imbalances".''' [https://rhyzome.github.io/Ceptr-and-Holochain/]

=Description=

'''1. Arthur Brock et al.:'''

"Holo​ lets people use their web browser and existing payment systems to interact with
decentralized crypto-apps and currencies, providing a bridge from Holochain's fully peer-to-peer
world of the future back to the semi-centralized world of today.

Early adopters can use a Holo​ hosting box to host their own apps and data and earn Holo​ ​fuel​ for
sharing extra space and computing power to host apps for others. Instead of burning computation on
mining, Holo​ ​Hosts​ get paid for providing hosting to mainstream users who just use their browser
instead of installing Holochain.

Most crypto projects tout the fulfillment of crypto-anarchist ideals of total decentralization and
automation of agreements, yet fail to provide an easy path for normal people to reach those ideals.

Holo​ is a pragmatic compromise — a bridge for people to transition toward greater and greater
decentralization and autonomy. But since Holo​ must interface with the centralized systems of today,
some parts of it are also centralized. So this is not a typical crypto project or paper. We've already
built a fully distributed platform in Holochain. Now we want to take it to the mainstream. Holo​ is the
bridge to get there."
(https://files.holo.host/2017/12/Holo-Green-Paper.pdf)


'''2. Rhyzom:'''

"Important to keep in mind is that Holochain is just one of the functional building block components of a broader initiative called Ceptr (from receptor, as it employs a bio-inspired, ecosystemic approach to computation and organizing complexity). Though Holochain is separately introduced on its own first with Holo (ticker HOT) as its entry into the mainstream. Holo brings the economic ingredient needed for setting things in motion and forming the basis for a gradually expanding ecosystem around distributed holochain applications (hApps).

Presently an ERC-20 receipt, HOT is to be redeemed for Holo fuel upon launching in the first quarter of 2019. Holo fuel is a mutual-credit crypto-currency and an accounting system put in place as means for payment and settlement of application hosting imbalances. Developers will initially be paying host providers in Holo fuel to host their applications and provide their service to other users (via Holoport devices specifically designed for the purpose, or as configured on any other regular device) without their own running instances of a Holochain node (that way making hApps accessible from any web browser). 


Some of the applications supported within the Holo app ecosystem will include:

* Distributed PKI (Public Key Infrastructure)
* Distributed Directories
* Rating/Tagging/Annotation
* Chat & Social posting
* Distributed Content Delivery Network
 *A crypto-reputation-currency akin to a BitTorrent sharing ratio ."

(https://rhyzome.github.io/Ceptr-and-Holochain/)

=Discussion=

==Four Reasons to support the Holo / [[Holochain]] project==

By Jean Russell:

They are both "Inspired by natural systems and living ecology principles. Biomimicry applied to crypto-technology.

* Holo rewards people for sharing hosting capacity with the most minimal transaction fees because it is designed to serve hosts and those hosted rather than a central office that controls the flow. It solves the challenge of managing minuscule bits of data and tracking the accounting of them without adding to the complexity.

* Holochain is agent-centric not data-centric, meaning that it is putting the participant at the center of control and ownership. I own my data. I control permissions for others to access it. And by starting with the person at the center and then connecting them to a larger system, Holochain manages the dance between identity as something I control and something I am situated in (my reputation and activity engaging with others).

* I can imagine the applications this structural design makes possible, and they excite me. I can imagine applications that honor my lived experience as it truly is. I can imagine markets that help companies address risks by funding nonprofits to address those concerns. I can imagine applications and even currencies that help us make visible the value flowing in our communities, giving dignity to all contributions and contributors."
(https://medium.com/h-o-l-o/thrivabletechnology-3371a6a9ff8b)


=More information=

* [[Holochains]]

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]