
'''* Book: Holonomics: Business Where People and Planet Matter. By  Simon Robinson and Maria Moraes Robinson. Floris Books, 2014'''

URL = https://transitionconsciousness.wordpress.com/holonomics/


=Description=

"This ground-breaking book argues that people in business must adopt a ‘holonomic’ way of thinking, a dynamic and authentic understanding of the relationships within a business system, and an appreciation of the whole. Complexity and chaos are not to be feared, but rather are the foundation of successful business structures and economics.

In January 2015 Holonomics: Business Where People and Planet Matter was selected as one of Sustainable Brands Top 36 Sustainability Books alongside both older, well-known books like Biomimicry, Natural Capitalism and Cradle to Cradle, and more recent influential books including The Responsible Entrepreneur, Flourishing Enterprise, Corporate Diplomacy and The Big Pivot.

If we look at what lies at the heart of our book Holonomics: Business Where People and Planet Matter, it is the practical implementation of deep, profound and lasting transformational change. If we analyse this in relation to organisations, what we often find is that the leadership only focus on the structural aspects of strategy. The behavioural aspects are ignored, therefore resulting in sub-optimal execution.


...


Holonomics presents a new world view where economics and ecology are in harmony. Using real-world case studies and practical exercises, the authors guide the reader in a new, holistic approach to business, towards a more sustainable future where both people and planet matter.

Commenting on how the book can change the mental models of executives, Simon Robinson said “It is not the case that we need to change our methodologies. What we need is a new way of seeing and thinking that allows us to be mindful and truly make sense of complex situations. A new mental operating system is available, and we have termed it holonomic thinking.”

In an early review of Holonomics, Fritjof Capra, author of The Hidden Connections, and coauthor of The Systems View of Life, said “The authors of this remarkable book have distilled the essence of the ideas and values taught at Schumacher College, a unique transformative learning centre based on systemic thinking and grounded in deep ecology, and they show how these teachings can be applied with many case studies of enlightened businesses. Holonomics is a powerful antidote to the fragmentation and materialistic orientation of today’s dominant culture."
(https://transitionconsciousness.wordpress.com/holonomics/)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Business]]