
=Description=

Chon Tee Kan:

"A homestead Commons is a community of value-aligned people homesteading collaboratively to achieve the goals of self-sufficiency, environmental stewardship, and non-exploitative relationship. In the best case scenario, enough people choosing to live like this may help to avert some of the worst climate and social collapse looming very close in our future. In the average case, these communities may serve as oases for surviving the mayhem that ensues after the great collapse. In the worst case, it is a way for us to live in integrity with our deepest values, even when humanity eventually becomes extinct.

In its fullest manifestation, a homestead commons is the same as the fullest manifestation of an eco-village. The difference is that eco-villages usually start from solving the problem of affordable housing and carbon footprint reduction, and work towards self-sufficiency, oftentimes still needing to buy and sell into the capitalist market in order to function. Whereas homestead commons start from regenerative self-sufficiency which also takes care of affordable housing and carbon footprint reduction, and work towards decoupling from capitalism as much as possible. The danger of needing the larger capitalist economy to survive is that when the great collapse comes, you may become another collateral damage. Whereas if you are constantly trying to be less and less reliant on the capitalist economy, you will be less affected when it collapses.

Naturally, no one can be immediately and completely decoupled from the larger capitalist economy right now. But there is nothing stopping us from intelligently weaning ourselves from it, one small step at a time."

(https://tanchongkee.medium.com/what-is-a-homestead-commons-why-does-it-matter-5ff3863a8a8dhttps://tanchongkee.medium.com/what-is-a-homestead-commons-why-does-it-matter-5ff3863a8a8d)

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Community]]