'''* Book: HOMO HACKER: MANAGING COMPLEXITY TO OVERCOME OUR PLANETARY CHALLENGES. by Ernesto Van Peborgh. Kindle edition, 2016'''

URL = [http://www.amazon.com/HOMO-HACKER-COMPLEXITY-PLANETARY-CHALLENGES-ebook/dp/B01EP3KL10/]

=Description=

"Humankind is now facing an exponential increase in complexity at a planetary scale. The development of financial capital –money producing money-– has led to the greatest crisis in the history of capitalism. We produce more products than we can consume, exploiting more natural resources than the planet can replenish. The diagnosis is that the current crisis threatens to drag the market, states, and planet itself down with it. Our system must evolve in order to deal with this complexity and manage it. 

Throughout this book, Ernesto van Peborgh describes the breakdown of our linear, Cartesian logics, and the evolution towards a new state of awareness and commitment. He chronicles the current crisis of capitalism, the prevailing model's exhaustion, and the imperative need for change. And, most importantly, he explains how, faced with an increase in complexity but also in interconnectivity, humankind adjusts by generating new organizational systems and by developing new languages. In this context, and driven by Internet-enabled connectivity, a new, more aware and committed individual arises – homo hacker, who uses the cognitive emergent as a new capital for addressing new challenges."

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Complexity]]