

=Description=

Kevin Carson:

"One-way communication creates opacity from above; two-way communication creates horizontal 
legibility. 

To quote Michel Bauwens:

- The capacity to cooperate is verified in the process of cooperation itself. Thus, projects are open to all 
comers provided they have the necessary skills to contribute to a project. These skills are verified, and 
communally validated, in the process of production itself. This is apparent in open publishing projects such 
as citizen journalism: anyone can post and anyone can verify the veracity of the articles. Reputation 
systems are used for communal validation. The filtering is a posteriori, not a priori. Anti-credentialism is 
therefore to be contrasted to traditional peer review, where credentials are an essential prerequisite to 
participate.

P2P projects are characterized by holoptism. Holoptism is the implied capacity and design of peer to 
[peer] processes that allows participants free access to all the information about the other participants; not in  terms of privacy, but in terms of their existence and contributions (i.e. horizontal information) and access to  the aims, metrics and documentation of the project as a whole (i.e. the vertical dimension).
 
This can be  contrasted to the panoptism which is characteristic of hierarchical projects: processes are designed to reserve  'total' knowledge for an elite, while participants only have access on a 'need to know' basis. However, with  P2P projects, communication is not top-down and based on strictly defined reporting rules, but feedback is systemic, integrated in the protocol of the cooperative system."
(http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/James-Scott.pdf)

Source: 3 Michel Bauwens, “The Political Economy of Peer Production,” Ctheory.net, December 1, 2005 
<http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499>. 


=More Information=

* [[Legibility]]
* [[Holoptism]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Change Theory]]