
'''= "We strive to remove all barriers to entry and membership in the time banking movement so that all may have the opportunity to contibute their time and talents and feel connected to their local community".'''

URL = http://hourworld.org/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"a national nonprofit organization that offers Timebank software and hosting at no cost. It is fairly basic, but easy to use and you don't need tech staff. Their system is similar to and developed by some of the same staff as Hour Exchange Portland, an extremely successful Timebank. They also offer free software trainings and paid trainings on how to organize a Timebank and how to develop cool applications, like coop and microenterprise development. They are developing fundraising application on their software to help fund their Timebanks. Their staff is awesome - caring, knowledgeable and experienced. hOur World is also seeking to interoperate with [[Open Source Currency]]."
(http://shareable.net/blog/just-in-time)      


'''2.''' 

"We are Social Architects who believe that people are the true wealth of the world as their talents gracefully flow out to the benefit of all. We are grounded in the principles of simplicity and abundance and in the the joy of giving and receiving. It is our desire to help in the reclamation of local community prosperity by providing our gifts of time, training and tools in a pay it forward model within the Hour Exchange networks of hOurworld.

We strive to remove all barriers to time banking.We strive to remove all barriers to entry and membership in the time banking movement so that all may have the opportunity to contibute their time and talents and feel connected to their local community. As individuals we each participate in the community currency movement and we honor all the good people who have contibuted to this system of service to others. We pay special tribute to the seven women that originally founded time banking in the United States.

We don't need another movement. We need to move together.hOurworld exists to welcome and connect all varieties of local exchanges under one roof. This allows interaction between member exchanges everywhere, as their interests and needs arise. The hOurworld Train the Trainer program teaches the fundamentals for organizing, building and enriching new and existing time banks. This model provides a recipe for program nurturing and growth towards maturity. As each new exchange develops it can seed another through the sharing of resources. And that exchange will seed another... and another..."
(https://www.hourworld.org/_Answers.htm)

=More Information=

* [[Timebanking Software Platforms]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]