'''* HUMANITY AND THE DISRUPTION OF THE COSMOS: HOW BERDYAEV FORESAW OUR RELIANCE ON MACHINES. By Alexei Anisin. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 17, no. 3, 2021'''

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646


=ABSTRACT=

"'''In  his  final  work,  the  [[Realm  of  Spirit  and  the  Realm  of  Caesar]]  (1952),  [[Nikolai  Berdyaev]]  categorized five historical periods on the relationship between humanity and nature'''. This meta-historical framework was articulated due to his concern about an obstructive imbalance between spirituality, materialism, and modern industrial technology. This essay overviews the framework and considers it with relation to eras subsequent his passing. It finds that '''Berdyaev’s projection was not only theoretically plausible, but turned out to be remarkably accurate in predicting the transition  from  a  technical  industrial  society  to  one  based  around  autonomous  spheres  of  operation including the internet and artificial intelligence'''. ''The final stage of the fourth period, our current era, was predicted by Berdyaev to be marked by a new form of global subjugation – in  the  merging  of  technology  with  the  state  and  our  enslavement  to  our  own  discoveries.  Attention  is  also  given  to  a  future,  eschatological  fifth  period  in  which  Berdyaev  believed  a  spiritual   revolution   would   accompany   widespread   dissolution   of   state   power   and   the   emancipation of labor''."


=Discussion=

==[[Nikolas Berdyaev on the Five Historical Periods of Humanity, as Related to Nature and Technology]]==

By Alexei Anisin:

In  the  final  years  before  his  passing  (the  late  1940s),  Berdyaev  observed that humanity was set to experience a crisis  of  a  new  totality,  a  crisis  that  had  hitherto  never  been  seen.  The  crisis  was  believed  to  be  based  on  the  onset of a profound lack of balance between spirituality with relation to political organization and modern technology (Berdyaev 1952, 48). It would emerge in the latter half of the twentieth and in the specific fourth historical period as classified in his final book. 

In this understudied work, Berdyaev put forward five historical periods  that  illustrate  past  and  future  relationships  that  human  beings  have  to  nature and the cosmos:

* Period one) our submersion to cosmic life in which human life depended on the natural world –   a time when personality was not fully developed and humans did  not  fully  conquer  nature;  

* Period  two) humans  became  freed  from  cosmic forces,  from  spirits  and  demons  attributed  to  nature  – the  emergence  of  elementary forms of economics and serfdom; 

* Period three) humans carried out mechanization  over  nature  through  scientific  and  technical  control  – the development  of  industry,  capitalism,  a  new  necessity  of  selling  one’s  labor  for wages; 

* Period  four)  an  era  marked  by  the  disruption  of  cosmic  order,  the  dissolution  of  organic  forms  of  human  organization  and  the  development  of  various autonomous spheres – where one of them claims totalitarian recognition. An era marked by a terribly augmented power that humans have over nature and their  enslavement  to  their  own  discoveries;  

* Period  five)  an  eschatological  revolution, the decline of the realm of Caesar, the dissolution of state power, labor emancipation, spiritual transmutation (Berdyaev 1952, 47).

The  first  three  periods  precede  the  twentieth  century,  whereas  the  fourth  period begins with the era of WWII and spans into the twenty first century – a time which Berdyaev believed would feature the rise of an all-powerful state that would stake a total claim of objectivity over all of social and natural phenomena. This  was  not  only  the  final  stage  of  realm  of  Caesar,  but  also  the  last  possible  stage of this realm. Berdyaev describes this meta-historical trajectory succinctly:  where  once  man  feared  the  demons  of  nature  and  Christ  freed  him  from  demonolatry, now man is in terror before the world-wide mechanization of nature. The power of technics is the final metamorphosis of the realm of Caesar". (Berdyaev 1952, 48).

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646)

[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]