
'''* Dissertation: Recreating Collective Meaning: Unravelling the Collaborative Economy through the Sensibility of Culture. By Felipe Cunha. Schumacher College, 2014.'''

URL = http://transitionconsciousness.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/felipecunha_recreating-collective-meaning_.pdf

this dissertation Felipe explores the degree to which the emergence of the Collaborative Economy is catalysing a deep cultural reform towards the commons

=Excerpts=

“I believe it is through togetherness that we will overcome many of the challenges we are facing nowadays. In fact, every individual on this planet is constantly sharing meanings, intentions, influences, ideas, values and creativity to become “WE””. (p.6)


'''**'''

“(...) setting the intentions is really important to clarify communication and, therefore, stimulate different patterns of relationship through new meanings. Collaborative Economy is, indeed, making a lot of progress for more collaboration towards the common, contributing to new patterns and behaviours of consumption, production, stewardship and ownership - for example, when it is enabling the creation (spontaneously and no central decision involved) of some mechanisms that have the capacity to generate self-managed resources -, however, there are still some issues to unpack”. (P.69)


'''**'''

(We could say that) “Collaborative Economy is not matured because of every issue that we have seen here as, for example, regulation, safety, work relationships, culture, lack of model, etc. (...)

But, on the other hand, the parameters which we are using to assess it as “not ready” may mean we are not using appropriated lenses; simply because they are based on values that reflect the traditional model. I.e. it has been compared with the foundations and success values from the current mainstream model”. (P.73)


'''**'''



“Collaborative Economy is part of a deep cultural change in process, which is happening right now, and hence we don’t know yet if it’s leading to a reform (or a metamorphosis) in its deeper structures or not. Indeed, Collaborative Economy is provoking changes and new possible social patterns as we saw, i.e. at least clearly demonstrates that there are other ways we can address our needs – without depending so much on middlemen - and that economic transactions based in collaboration are possible with a potential unfolding in different shapes of work and community relationships. (...)

The idea of well defined communities seems to be dissolving and, for this reason, I believe our main challenge will be making the Collaborative Economy a way of collaborating care and affection, beyond the increased access to goods and services. This would, in fact, be a significant cultural shift. The massive scale of connectivity and the idea of a disruption with regulations and the middlemen mean that we will need a stronger mutual support, which demands a deep cultural reform – or on the other hand will boost it – towards a paradigm of the common”. (P.80)


=Review=

Simon:

"I am delighted to be able to introduce this new dissertation Recreating Collective Meaning: An Unravelling of the Collaborative Economy through the Sensibility of Culture. Felipe, who is Brazilian, recently graduated in the Economics for Transition masters degree from Schumacher College, and in this dissertation he describes the essential focus of his enquiry as:

In what degree the emergence of Collaborative Economy is catalysing a deep cultural reform towards the Common(s)? From this, a careful investigation opens the doors of this economic phenomenon through the cultural perspective. Therefore, whilst keeping the common(s) as the beacon of reference, this work is an attempt to explore Collaborative Economy’s shadows and lights and how it is affected and is affecting people’s values, beliefs and meanings.

In this dissertation Felipe explores the degree to which the emergence of the Collaborative Economy is catalysing a deep cultural reform towards the commons. He describes his work is an attempt to explore Collaborative Economy’s “shadows and lights and how it is affected and is affecting people’s values, beliefs and meanings”.

This is a deep dissertation, and for the essence lies in Felipe’s attempts to dig down into the real meaning of the collaborative economy. This journey is not without its pitfalls:

- ''My intention is not just to deliver definitions of the word “culture” (although, in the following chapters, I will present what it does mean for me), rather it is to have it as the magnifying glass to understand contemporary economic phenomena, particularly the “Collaborative Economy''”.

Probably this slippery characteristic is part of this phenomenon: sometimes I fall into denial of its connective profile due to the singularities of some unique examples: and sometimes it is so huge and evident (it is everywhere, every when) that I cannot embrace it. Thus, observing “culture” in its wholeness is a constant movement of contraction and expansion. I believe this is because this background of every social and psychical relationship – culture – is, indeed, full of paradoxes: it distinguishes and unites us at the same time; it is, simultaneously, the net weaver between people’s minds, values and behaviours and the essence of identity.

Taking his inspiration from the work of both Ken Wilbur’s integral theory, and focusing on the nature of holons as described by Wilbur (the inspiration of which came from Arthur Koestler), Felipe recognises that his enquiry will need to move away from an object-orientated perspective to a process-orientated perspective:

Instead of keeping thinking that the universe is a collection of objects, it is important to shift to the understand that in fact is much more like an abundance of subjects in relationship and interaction, where objects are alive and in constant cooperation (or as Gregory Bateson affirms, every organism on the planet can be recognized as “mind”, with self-organisation, intention for life and awareness, permanently involved in communication). Therefore, we need a science with deeper intentions, including wisdom and awareness of a larger whole, i.e. a meaningful science open to different kinds of knowing and not ego-oriented ambitions (“science for the sake of science”).

Lest this all sound too philosophical, for those who disparage of the notion of philosophy (and I of course do not), Felipe grounds his enquiry using the methodology of deep listening, inspired by Otto Scharmer’s U process, interviewing a number of Brazilian pioneers in the collaborative economy."
(http://transitionconsciousness.wordpress.com/2014/10/06/recreating-collective-meaning-unravelling-the-collaborative-economy-a-dissertation-by-felipe-cunha/)


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Culture]]