'''* Report: Nicole, S., Vance-Law, S., Spelliscy, C., Bell, J. (2025, January). Towards Data Cooperatives for a Sustainable Digital Economy. [[Project Liberty Institute]] & [[Decentralization Research Center]].'''

URL = https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/PL_Practical_Data_Governance_Solutions_Report_v4.pdf


=Description=

"This report is based on a series of interviews that took place between
November 2024 and January 2025. It summarises the key issues vis a vis
data cooperative development and deployment and sets the directions
for the final outcome of this initiative. While every effort has been made
to faithfully reflect all input received, it should be noted that the views
expressed herein are those of the Project Liberty Institute and the
Decentralization Research Center, and they may not necessarily align
with the individual positions of the expert contributors listed below or the
organizations with which participants of the first consultation are affiliated.

...

This initial report sets the agenda for an in-depth exploration of data
cooperatives as scalable business models. In drafting the report, we
interviewed 16 experts with a wealth of knowledge and experience
related to the design and implementation of cooperatives, the evolving
nature of data-driven businesses and questions of data rights in the
21st century. Their contributions highlight both the challenges and
opportunities inherent in translating cooperative business models to the
digital realm.

The initiative’s end result will be twofold: a “roadmap” marking possible
paths – and pitfalls – to applying cooperative models in a digital context
and an action network of like-minded individuals and institutions
dedicated to advancing individual data agency, economic fairness and
shared progress in the digital age.

...

This initial report establishes an agenda for critically examining the
potential for cooperatives to help transform today’s digital economy. It
draws on interviews with 16 key experts in the field of data cooperatives,
digital rights, data governance, and the digital economy. Their diverse
backgrounds as lawyers, economists, academics, and technical experts
offer a nuanced perspective for those seeking to understand both the
potential and the challenges of this emerging model. While the concept
of data cooperatives has gained traction in recent years, real-world
examples of successful, large-scale initiatives remain limited. The
interviews highlight the need for distilling lessons-learned e and charting a
realistic path forward.

It should be noted that this initial report focuses on cooperatives that are
formed around the governance of data, and not traditional cooperatives
per se. Many cooperatives across different sectors manage and use
their members’ data as a growing part of their operations. The learnings
inherent in those processes are not included in this initial report and
require further research."


=Excerpts=

==Comparing [[Data Coops]], [[Data Trusts]], and [[Data Commons]]==

S. Nicole et al. :

"Data co-ops empower individuals by giving them voice, choice, and
stake in their digital lives, distinguishing them from data trusts and
data commons. In a data co-op, members can actively participate in
democratic governance, voting on how their data is used, managed,
and monetized, or delegate those responsibilities to others. This
contrasts with data trusts, where trustees make decisions on behalf of
contributors in a more top-down structure, and data commons, which,
while participatory, often lack structured individual rights.² By centering
decision-making with members, data co-ops ensure individuals have a
direct say in shaping their digital futures.

Additionally, data co-ops offer strong privacy and economic benefits.
Members decide how their data is shared, opting in or out of agreements,
and can also determine whether and how their data is monetized. 

This level of control surpasses the protective but less flexible frameworks
of data trusts and the open-sharing nature of data commons, which
may not fully consider personal preferences. Additionally, data co-ops
give individuals a financial stake, distributing economic returns directly
to members. Unlike data trusts and data commons, which focus on
protection or collective access, co-ops uniquely prioritize member
ownership, autonomy, and shared prosperity.

However, there are possibilities for data co-ops, data trusts, and data
commons models to complement each other by combining individual
control, legal protection, and collective access, providing a balanced
approach to data governance. This hybrid model will be analyzed further
as the initiative proceeds."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/PL_Practical_Data_Governance_Solutions_Report_v4.pdf)


=Discussion=


==Navigating the Future of Data Agency in a Fair Data Economy==

'''From the Conclusion''', S. Vance-Law et al. :

"Exploring what the cooperative model can offer will remain a vital
component in enabling equitable agency and governance of data.
To further this goal, data co-op experiments must establish clear
metrics for success, involve continuous community feedback, and
prioritize transparency to ensure they genuinely offer alternatives
to current exploitative data models. By embracing a spirit of
experimentation, prioritizing practical solutions, fostering collaboration
across sectors, and advocating for supportive policy changes, we can
contribute to the development of data cooperatives that empower
individuals, strengthen communities, and harness the potential of data
for collective benefit.

As we move forward, the goal is not just to theorize about better
systems but to actively contribute to building them. The Roadmap for a
Sustainable Digital Economy will build on this initial report, delve deeper
into existing research on data co-ops, engage with additional experts
and communities through the Action Network, and examine real-world
use cases to provide entrepreneurs, businesses, with practical guidance
for creating solutions that protect and empower individuals in managing
their data.

This initiative serves as a call to action—an opportunity to experiment,
learn, and refine solutions that prioritize data agency, fairness, and
collective benefit."

(https://www.projectliberty.io/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/PL_Practical_Data_Governance_Solutions_Report_v4.pdf)


=More information=

* Fehlinger, P, Bell, J., McBride, C., Farrell, M. (2024, November). Toward a Fair Data Economy: A Blueprint for Innovation and Growth: Action Recommendations of the Project Liberty FDE Task Force. Project Liberty Institute.

==Bibliography==

Aapti Institute and Open Data Manchester. 2024. How
to Build a Data Cooperative: A Practitioner’s Handbook.
Data2X. https://data2x.org/resource-center/how-tobuild-a-data-cooperative-a-practitioners-handbook/.

Bietti, Elettra, Ander Etxeberria, Morshed Mannan,
and Janis Wong. 2022. Data Cooperatives in Europe: A
Legal and Governance Analysis. Berkman Klein Center
for Internet & Society, Harvard University. https://
cyber.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/2022-02/Data_
Cooperatives_Europe-group2.pdf

Calzada, Igor. 2021. “Data Co-Operatives through Data
Sovereignty” Smart Cities 4, no. 3: 1158-1172. https://doi.
org/10.3390/smartcities4030062

Delacroix, Sylvie, and Neil Lawrence. 2018. “Bottom-Up
Data Trusts: Disturbing the ‘One Size Fits All’ Approach
to Data Governance.” International Data Privacy Law,
forthcoming. DOI: 10.1093/idpl/ipz014. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3265315

Fink, Alexander. 2024. “Data cooperative”. Internet
Policy Review 13 (2). DOI: 10.14763/2024.2.1752. https://
policyreview.info/glossary/data-cooperative.

Ligett, Katrina, and Kobbi Nissim. 2023. “We Need to
Focus on How Our Data Is Used, Not Just How It Is
Shared.” Communications of the ACM 66 (9): 34–36. DOI:
10.1145/3572912.

Mehta, Shalini, Muthukumaran Dawande, and Lin
Mu. 2022. “The Key to Designing Sustainable Data
Cooperatives”. World Economic Forum. https://www.
weforum.org/stories/2022/02/the-key-to-designingsustainable-data-cooperatives/.

Miller, Kathryn. 2021. “Radical Proposal: Data
Cooperatives Could Give Us More Power Over Our Data”.
Stanford HAI. https://hai.stanford.edu/news/radicalproposal-data-cooperatives-could-give-us-morepower-over-our-data.

RadicalxChange Foundation. 2023. “Data Cooperatives
in the Real World: Progress and Challenges”. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7r-X8ZtceQY.

Ruhaak, Anouk. 2020. “Data Commons & Data Trusts:
What They Are and How They Relate”. Medium. https://
medium.com/@anoukruhaak/data-commons-datatrust-63ac64c1c0c2.

van Weyenbergh, Gertjan. 2024. Data Cooperatives.
People Centered Internet. https://peoplecentered.net/
wp-content/uploads/2024/05/10_Data-Cooperatives.pdf.

[[Category:Big_Data]]
[[Category:Data_Commons]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]