
=Discussion=

L.M. Sacasas:

"One way of telling the story of modernity would be to describe how commerce colonized more and more of our world and our experience by overcoming the technical and cultural limits that stood in its way. Aspects of the world now appear to us framed by the implicit challenge: Commercialize this. This is hardly a novel observation, I grant. But it is worth noting how digital technology has shaped and been shaped by this dynamic.

The old blue laws, and the practice of Sabbath that came before them, are just two examples of limits placed on commerce (and labor) that have lost their cultural authority. It’s worth noting that their cultural authority was wrapped up with technical obstacles, which is to say that it was easier to limit commerce when geography and inconvenience did a good bit of the work for you. There is now no time during which it is not possible to engage in commercial activity, and I am hard pressed to think of instances where it is discouraged by the force of custom or principle. Neither, of course, is there a spatial barrier to consumption, we don’t have to be anywhere in particular to engage in commercial activity. Vanity Fair is in our pockets and it is always open for business.

Additionally, even if we are not directly engaged in consumption or labor at any given moment, our experience is often structured so as to promote commerce. It is saturated with ads, however effective they may or may not be, but, more importantly, our experience is increasingly framed as standing reserve for the market. So, for example, as collecting, storing, and analyzing data became easier, data-gathering devices proliferated in our homes to extract this data with a view to generating more commerce.

The point is not that commerce is bad. I buy things. You buy things. We all need to buy things. I’m glad to pay someone for their labor. I’m glad to be paid for mine. The point, and certainly not an original one, is that we should be wary of allowing the logic of the market to colonize all facets of our experience.

10. '''Digital technologies have also blurred the boundaries that kept work confined to certain times and places. The same kind of tools that allows us to engage in commerce anywhere and at any time also make it possible for some of us to work anywhere and at any time.''' In some cases this has been a boon and it has created new opportunities and better outcomes. In others, the experience may be less benign. Often this turns on the question of agency and control. Who exactly sets the terms of this new freedom to work anywhere and at any time?

It is true that the sharp line between work and home is a relatively recent development. For most of human history, where we worked and where we lived were by and large one and the same. So, in historical perspective, the neat separation between work and home that characterized modern, industrialized societies during the past century (although barely that) may ultimately appear as an abberation. It may seem, then, that digital technologies have retrieved an older form of life.

This is an example of a pattern worth noting. Whereas the modernity proceeded by differentiating, fragmenting, and specializing on the model of the machine, the digital age is marked by connection and entanglement. McLuhan opened Understanding Media with observations along these lines. “The restructuring of human work and association was shaped by the technique of fragmentation that is the essence of machine technology,” McLuhan argued. So in the modern, industrial world dominated by print, itself a mechanization of the word and a proto-industrial technology, seemingly neat distinctions and separations were the order of the day.3 Private life was sequestered from public spaces, work was clearly distinguished from home, reason and emotions were distinct, as were mind and body, nature and the human, fact and value, etc. First under the aegis of electronic and then digital media, these sharp lines were harder if not impossible to sustain.

But you never go back. What has happened cannot be undone. Digital media does not make whole what had been broken apart. It’s rather more like having the pieces thrown into a pile together. Work from home is not a return to agrarian modes of relatively autonomous subsistence. For most people, it is a job and a boss that are being introduced into the rhythms of home life, in which children, as has been widely recognized, are not meaningfully integrated but rather appear chiefly as logistical problems to be solved. What will be needed, in my view, is a new way of thinking about work altogether, not merely a migration of old jobs into new settings. And it may be that we get there, and that digital technologies will play a key role in making it happen. But the metaverse as it is presently being packaged is, from this vantage point, a tool that is already obsolete, centered as it is on virtual simulations of traditional office work."

(https://theconvivialsociety.substack.com/p/notes-from-the-metaverse?)

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Media]]
[[Category:Articles]]