
'''Podcasts of the Personal Democracy Forum conference, May 2006'''


URL = http://www.personaldemocracy.com/conference/podcasts


=Directory=

Podcast 1 - Welcome/Intro and Dick Bell

The Personal Democracy Forum conference has begun - and we speak with Dick Bell of Democracy Cell Project on his take of the Opening Plenary - with specific focus on Salem Communications improved TownHall.com


Podcast 2 - The Changing Nature of Political Media

We speak with Chris Nolan of Spot-On.com and Chuck Defeo of Salem Communications (previously with Bush/Cheney 04) on the top take-aways from their plenary and how much clearer the conversation is becoming.


Podcast 3 - The Changing Nature of Political Media w/ Josh Marshall

We follow up with joshua Marshall of TPM Cafe.com on the future direction of online media and the myth of the big media extinction.


Podcast 4 - Keynote Address w/ Eliot Spitzer

Man-on-the-street interview with Ari Melber with CCR on the impact of technology in politics and how AG Eliot Spitzer has a strong understanding of the issues regarding broadband access and where it will add tremendous value to New York as a while.


Podcast 5 - Making Online Work Offline and in the Field

We catch up with Nathaniel Pearlman of NGP Software to discuss the highpoints of his panel and some of the new products coming from NGP, including NGP Field.


Podcast 6 - Regulating Online Politics?

We next speak with Allison Hayward of the blog, The Skeptic's Eye discussing the impact of the FEC and other government regulations on the activism and supporter actions on the Internet for political campaigns. We also hear about Eliot Spitzer's steady support for broadband access across the state of New York and how it can positively impact the New York economy.


Podcast 7 - The Rising Power of Local Political Blogs

We speak with Liza Sabater of The Daily Gotham on the major take-aways from her panel's discussion on the impact local political bloggers can have on political campaigns.


Podcast 8 - How to Win Friends and Influence People in the Blogosphere

We next catch up with Chris Rabb of Afro-Netizen after a raucous plenary with some "shy" bloggers on impacting the blogosphere - both readers and bloggers themselves. We learn the Cliff Notes version of each participant's point-of-view directly from the moderator.


Podcast 9 - How to Win Friends and Influence People in the Blogosphere with Jason Calacanis

Following up on Chris's interview, we speak with the contrarian, Jason Calacanis from Weblogs, Inc on his strong point-of-view and how he feels how political blogs are actually ineffective in impacting political campaigns and what bloggers should be doing instead.


Podcast 10 - The Rising Power of Local Political Blogs with Aldon Hynes

We catch up with Aldon Hynes and the specific take-aways from his panel as well as discuss the impact of the home-made videos on YouTube impacting the Senatorial race in CT.


Podcast 11 - Free, Easy and/or Cheap Tools that Anyone Can Use

We speak with Allison Fine, author of Momentum - Igniting Social Change in the Connected Age on her panel on some new and innovative tools for grassroots activists and political campaigns. We also get a brief discussion on her recent book, which can be found at www.afine.com


Podcast 12 - TxtMessaging and Mobile Politics

We sit down with Jed Alpert of Politxt, Doug Busk of SinglePoint and Justin Oberman of mopocket.com to have a mini-recap of their panel. We learn some of the ins and outs of mobile advocacy and the three important lessons that most campaigns are required to learn.


Podcast 13 - Fundraising Best Practices for Turning Supporters into Donors

We speak with Julie Barko Germany from IPDI on the major points from her panel and try to find out some of those elusive trade secrets from the various fundraisers that spoke. We also learn about IPDI's report on Small Donor Fundraising.


Podcast 14 - How Online Politics Will Affect Who Will Win in 2006 and Beyond

Catching up with Joe Rospars from Blue State Digital on the main topics of his panel including the comparisons of the RNC and the DNC and the specific need for authenticity in online discussions. We chat about some of the organizational improvements within the DNC and how the political process is changing from a broadcast mechanism to an engagement process.


Podcast 15 - "Net Neutrality" or "Hands Off the Internet" with Congressman Anthony Weiner

After an extremely heated debate, we catch up with Congressman Anthony Weiner to discuss the highpoints of his panel and the issues of government involvement in the Internet - balancing the libertarian view of free-market determination and the impact of government regulation to enforce packet neutrality.


Podcast 16 - Mary Katharine Ham from TownHall.com

Toward the end of the conference, we catch up with Mary Katharine Ham of TownHall.com to discuss the upcoming relaunch of their community service and how it will help connect conservative listeners to various actions and campaigns that need their support. Mary Katharine also discusses the issues regarding online activism and the differences between entertainment and true involvement.
Listen

Podcast 17 - Special Podcast about Political Entertainments

We speak with Andrew Stark of WhatWouldDumbledoreDo.com and Late Night Players on the power of the Harry Potter Alliance and also mention Laughing Liberally coming May 19th in NYC as well as the TriBeCa Film Festival launch of the new movie, Land of the Blind.

[[Category:Podcasts]]