
'''Book: How to Bypass Internet Censorship. FLOSS Manuals, 2009'''

URL = http://www.lulu.com/content/4904448

Free download via http://www.flossmanuals.net


=Description=

"A new book released by FLOSS Manuals, How to Bypass Internet Censorship,
describes circumvention tools and explains why you might want to use
them, and honestly describes the risks you must consider before
circumventing blockers or monitors. Blockers and monitors restrict
access to areas of the Internet, and this book describes simple
techniques for bypassing those restrictions. The book can be read or
downloaded for free as a PDF from flossmanuals.net, or you can purchase
a high-quality printed copy of the 200 page book through Lulu, an
on-demand printer, at http://www.lulu.com/content/4904448 for €10.83
($14.00).

The growth of the Internet has been paralleled by attempts to control
how people use it, motivated by a desire to protect children,
businesses, personal information, the capacity of networks, or moral
interests, for example. Some of these concerns involve allowing people
to control their own experience of the Internet (for instance, letting
people use spam-filtering tools to prevent spam from being delivered to
their own e-mail accounts), but others involve restricting how other
people can use the Internet and what those other people can and can't
access. The latter case causes significant conflicts and disagreements
when the people whose access is restricted don't agree that the blocking
is appropriate or in their interest. Problems also arise when blocking
mechanisms and filters reduce access to useful business, health,
educational, and other information.

Because of concerns about the effect of internet blocking mechanisms,
and the implications of censorship, many individuals and groups are
working hard to ensure that the Internet, and the information on it, are
freely available to everyone who wants it. There is a vast amount of
energy, from commercial, non-profit and volunteer groups, devoted to
creating tools and techniques to bypass Internet censorship. Some
techniques require no special software, just a knowledge of where to
look for the same information. Programmers have developed a variety of
more capable tools, which address different types of filtering and
blocking. These tools, often called "circumvention tools" help Internet
users access information that they might not otherwise be able to see.
This book documents simple circumvention techniques such as a cached
file or web proxy, and also describes more complex methods using Tor,
which stands for The Onion Router, involving a sophisticated network of
proxy servers.

How to Bypass Internet Censorship was written by eight writers in a
FLOSS Manuals 'book sprint' - a week-long intensive writing session, and
it also includes content from many different authors' previous works on
the subject.

How to Bypass Internet Censorship will always be available for free from
the FLOSS Manuals Website. Each sale of the book generates $2.50 (USD).
100% of this income goes back into the development of more manuals about
free software."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Technology]]