
'''* Book:  Sustainist Design Guide: How Sharing, Localism, Connectedness, and Proportionality are Creating a New Agenda for Social Design, by Michiel Schwarz and Diana Krabbendam. BIS Publishers, 2014'''

URL = http://www.bispublishers.nl/bookpage.php?id=255


=Description=

1. From the author, Michiel Schwarz:

"A new culture of sharing is emerging. We are increasingly sharing goods, places, services, and information. It is creating social value and community. In this way, shareability is becoming a valued quality that drives new business practices, community cooperatives, and new forms of “collaborative consumption.” The open source movement and the emerging open design practice reflect the same mentality. Centred around collaboration and exchange, sharing schemes are often linked to mobile and Internet technologies.

The sustainist design challenge is as follows: What would happen if “shareability” would be taken as a design criterion? How might we bring shareable assets into the design process for products, services, environments and situations? What might we (re)design to encourage more sharing and open exchange?"
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/design-for-sharing-%E2%80%94-we-are-what-we-share)


'''2. From the publisher:'''

"As the authors say: “It is no longer a matter of designing for society, but within it. ”This exploratory guide travels the new landscape of social design thinking and practice, viewed through the lens of sustainism - a perspective that is seen as a new ethos for design. 

The Sustainist Design Guide presents an agenda for social innovation, based on values such as sharing, connectedness, localism and proportionality, as well as sustainability. It challenges us to transform these and other sustainist qualities into design criteria and include them in our design briefs. 

The Sustainist Design Guide maps out best practices and explores how designers can become more socially and ecologically responsible. It opens the debate on what it means to be “sustainist designers.

Including 12 changemaking cases, ranging from urban farming and crowdsourced public architecture to collaborative crafts."
(http://www.bispublishers.nl/bookpage.php?id=255)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Design]]