

'''* Article/Chapter: Hide a Dagger Behind a Smile: A Review of How Collectivistic Cultures Compete More Than Individualistic Cultures . Kaidi Wu, Thomas Talhelm.''' In the book: . The Oxford Handbook of the Psychology of Competition. Stephen M. Garcia (ed.) et al.  Pages 611–642 [https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190060800.013.26 doi]

URL = https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/37081/chapter-abstract/402464070?


=Description=

“In this chapter, we review cultural differences in people’s attitudes about competition, why cultures differ in competition, and how they compete in different ways. Researchers have long associated collectivistic culture with harmony and cooperation. However, the bulk of the evidence suggests that collectivistic cultures compete more, and more intensely, than individualistic cultures. Collectivists are more likely to see competition as zero-sum, engage in social comparison, and base their self-worth on common standards rather than self-defined goals. This raises a paradox: where does the popular conception of harmony in collectivism come from? In reviewing prior studies, we find that people in collectivistic cultures tend to use indirect, hidden methods to compete against others. This allows for an outward harmony, without negating competition. We ask whether competition in collectivistic cultures is only stronger when competing with outsiders. Studies reject this speculation. Rather, people in collectivistic cultures compete more with in-group members and are more vigilant toward classmates and co-workers. Next, we explore how people from different cultures decide to enter into competition. We find that collectivists’ tendency to enter into prestigious competitive environments might end up harming them. Finally, we discuss whether there can be versions of collectivistic groups without competition or whether this is a utopian dream.”


[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Articles]]