
* Article: How to Achieve a Free Accessible Stable Economic Common Value Representation for All Agents and All Transactions. By Marc Gauvin.


=Text=

"The first step is to recognise that proper stable economic
representation of value is fundamental and imperative for the health
of any society and economy.  The current (de facto) standard for such
value representation, is of course money as it is currently
understood, conceived and subsequently implemented and managed.
However and perhaps more than ever in history the current common core
conceptual model of money has come under fire.  This is not new, but
it has become a hot topic today with a myriad of initiatives and
proposals for monetary reform,  alternative currency,  crypto
currencies etc.

Our work in this area at www.bibocurrency.com, is focussed on how to
specify such value representation as an information system that on the
one hand can satisfy the stringent technical requirements for
stability as dictated by standard control system theory for discrete
Linear Time Invariant systems and on the other hand, be useful to
satisfy the principle function of "liquidity" or "value measure" for
all and any economic agent, necessary to overcome the limitations of
barter  or as I like to say, trade a piece of my house for an ice
cream.

The second more difficult step,  is overcoming the profound and deeply
ingrained logical misconceptions about what money is and does and the
subsequent emotional ties, dependencies and even addictions that keep
it encrusted as a pseudo rational construct in our minds.  Few are
aware that the very definition of money commonly adopted is logically
inconsistent, confused and rationally untenable and fewer even bother
to question it.  Our current common and operative notion of money is
simply assumed or historically adopted without question and then we go
about trying to best manage it as if that definition were dictated or
imposed by some natural phenomenon yet to be understood but
nonetheless obligatory.   However and by applying strict logical
definitions such as those used in formal description logic, we quickly
realise how absurd the common "industry standard" definition is and
how that very definition undermines the very sine qua non function of
measure that money must perform!  In the process,  we also discover
how in strict mathematical and engineering terms we can define money
so that it can funciton as a useful and dependable common standard of
stable measure and record of value.   So the principle hurdle,  is
anchoring the science of money in a realm of well established,
sophisticated and mature control and IT practice and theory and then
communicating the results in spite of the current absurd and generally
unquestioned notion of money.   The key to success in this step,  is
maintaining rigour in a scientific discourse within the context of
well established control theory and practice as a common objective
back drop and presently not being exploited in current finance and
economic theory.   This is good news because discussion can be
objective but it is also vulnerable because although simple, control
theory is nonetheless a subtle domain,  for example to he uninitiated
it is not intuitive to to distinguish between a stable system,  a
stabilised system,  controllable and uncontrollable systems and most
importantly the functional scope of a system i.e. what domain is a
particular system logically relevant.  With respect to this last
observation the following step three below is an example,  where it
becomes clear that it makes little sense to limit the scope of social
governance to the operation of value measure function the latter
becoming auxiliary to the former, confusing these two functions
undermines both.

The third step is reforming social governance,  which seems
overwhelming but really is not so much so, if the previous step has
been successful.  The reason being that it already exists in a useful
form and its present dysfunction is precisely due to how our current
illogical notion of money tends to skew and corrupt everything.  Thus,
 replacing that erred notion of money with a truly coherent one and
making money auxiliary to social governance,  can only improve and
enable these governance structures as well as distribute them as
required.   But the challenge is still significant because when
"money" has been reduced to its mere and mundane function of measure,
no longer a prize or artifice of power,  it no longer becomes the
simplistic and reductionist tool for decision making that we have
become accustomed to, far more options are possible and a far more
profound notion of social responsibility and awareness is required
from all agents in all domains, note I refrain form using the word
"levels"  because most of the hierarchies we take for granted today I
expect would disappear (without need of impoverishing anyone).   This
means that where before, an individual's notion of what is and isn't
possible and hence how one is to live one's life,  was largely hacked
by standard finance "control" and thus artificially delimited and
simplified,  now free of such artificial restraints, one's idea of
what is possible would become predicated on a far more sophisticated,
autonomous and integral relationship with one's environment and social
context requiring far greater levels of responsibility,  awareness and
true practical knowledge than before.   The challenge of course is two
fold,  on the one hand there is the fear of loss of a familiar and
habitual sense of "control" and on the other hand resistance generated
in anticipation of such evolution on the part of those who have
learned how to gain personal benefit from hierarchies within the
status quo and thus may feel threatened by the prospect of any change
in perceived privilege, social status etc.  Since many such
individuals are powerful in today's world,  occupy key functional
roles in government, industry, judiciary, academia and finance, this
step is impossible without first succeeding in step two and having the
results of that step well disseminated and assimiliated throughout
society.

In any event this issue cannot be ignored as it is evident to all that
the current state of affairs regarding the institution of money is
simply not sustainable making imminent change imperative and whatever
proposals made will undergo the scrutiny of the type of knowledge
already distributed throughout the world's intelligentsia that is far
broader than the apparent beneficiaries of the current status quo.
So although correct change is a tall task for sure, it is doable and
what is more important it would seem to be imperative as we cannot in
good conscience,  pretend to not know what we already know and where
just use of that knowledge can leads us, in this case away from
tyranny and misery towards a more enriched,  enlightened and
meaningful existence for all."

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]