
'''* PhD Thesis: Making Sustainability. How Fab Labs Address Environmental Issues. Cindy Kohtala. 2016'''

URL = https://shop.aalto.fi/p/872-making-sustainability/

=Description=

"Citizens are increasingly involved in the design and production of their own products. Forerunner groups are exploring new ways of doing things with digital fabrication tools, a phenomenon known as the maker movement. Especially communities who work together in dedicated spaces, makerspaces, are rapidly proliferating. They are of research interest, as they are now experimenting with new practices and organizations that indicate the possible impacts of a digitalizing society. They carry potential to do away with the negative environmental impacts associated with mass production and consumption (and decouple them from socio-economic prosperity), but there may also be new, unforeseen environmental consequences of such prosumption.

This dissertation reviews the environmental issues in the maker movement, and it examines how environmental sustainability is taken up in Fab Labs (fabrication laboratories) or remains invisible and unaddressed, based on longitudinal analysis. The thesis sheds light on our possible futures, as these niche activities move towards the mainstream. It clearly demonstrates how communities attempt to enact ideology: how we shape technologies and technologies shape us."


=Abstract=

"Digital manufacturing technologies are proliferating and can enable socially
significant, innovative new forms of production and consumption. This
thesis examines the environmental sustainability issues in peer production
and how they are addressed in Fab Labs (fabrication laboratories): shared
spaces where users can design and make their own artefacts outside of
conventional mass production channels, using, for example, laser cutters,
3D printers and electronics stations. Fab Labs are open to members of
the general public, who learn to use the equipment themselves and are
encouraged (or required) to document and openly share their projects.
‘Making’ in Fab Labs and the ‘maker movement’ are often endorsed by
proponents as a better alternative to mass consumption and consumerism,
whether through enhancing skills to build and repair, answering one’s own
needs as opposed to ‘satisficing’ through passive consumption, or distributing
production within local networks as opposed to long, transport-intensive
and large-volume supply chains. However, Fab Labs and makerspaces are
contexts rife with paradox and complexity concerning appropriate use of
materials and energy. Little empirical research on material peer production
currently exists, and the environmental impacts, and benefits, of digital
fabrication are largely unknown.

Primarily through ethnographic research methods and Symbolic
Interactionist analysis, the thesis examines daily practices and discourses in
selected Fab Labs and how sustainability is represented in these communities.
The findings articulate how the actors’ interactions, expressed intents and
contextual conditions serve to shape the Fab Lab. The key finding is the
conflict actors encounter between – on the one hand – setting ambitions,
promoting particular ideologies and espousing sustainability-oriented 
values, and – on the other hand – realizing and enacting these values in the
mundane and constraining routines of everyday practice. Even actors with
a clear ecological mandate struggle to engage with emerging sustainability
issues in a rapidly changing sociotechnical environment. Present topics of
concern and everyday tasks overshadow future strategy and vision work
as well as engagement with environmental issues and rapid technology
developments. However, actors who consciously and visibly strive to enact
the espoused Fab Lab ideology, i.e. offering access to empowering, distributed
technologies that enable people to meet their own local needs by design,
appear better able to identify and tackle the environmental sustainability
issues as they arise. Environmental issues are also intertwined with and
embedded in other ideological concerns, but they are rarely promoted in
their own right.

The thesis also details the current landscape of research literature on
distributed production, who is studying these environmental issues and how,
and the potential opportunities and threats in this new mode of production.

The thesis thereby contributes to research on peer production communities,
social shaping of technology and sustainable design. Knowledge of current
maker practices and their sustainability implications have value for the peer
communities studied, but also potentially technology developers and policy
makers. As Fab Labs are experimental spaces for new digital manufacturing
capabilities and activities, the wider implications of the findings may indicate
how increasing digitalization and citizen involvement in production will
transform design and production – and the sustainability implications
therein."
(https://shop.aalto.fi/media/attachments/f8dd3/Kohtala.pdf)


=Excerpts=

From the introduction:

"Increasing numbers of citizens have access to digital fabrication equipment
via devoted spaces known as Fab Labs, makerspaces and hackerspaces,
which are mushrooming globally. Such access enables people to design
and make their own products outside of conventional mass production
and consumption channels, using technologies such as desktop additive
manufacturing equipment (that is, ‘3D printers’), CNC (computer numeric
control) milling machines, laser cutters, vinyl cutters and electronics
stations for circuit prototyping. The technologies themselves, especially 3D
printing, are widely espoused as disruptive technologies that will radically
shift production and consumption patterns (Anderson, 2012; Marsh, 2012;
Hamermesh, 2014).

The technologies are not new, as they have been used in industry,
particularly in rapid prototyping, for decades; what is new is that costs of
the equipment are rapidly decreasing, the machines are increasingly smaller
and ‘desktop’, and the user base as well as use applications are expanding.
Expiry of patents has especially fostered experiments in equipment design
in open source development processes (de Bruijn, 2010; Jones et al., 2011),
and users freely share and adapt designs and instructions for digital
fabrication online (Kuznetsov and Paulos, 2010). Fab Labs, makerspaces and
hackerspaces provide teaching and workshops to learn digital fabrication,
but they also largely expect their users to use the equipment independently;
this encourages peer learning and knowledge sharing. For explicit reasons
such as ‘empowerment’, education and learning, and ‘democratization’ of
production and technologies, Fab Labs are also expected to allow the general
public access to their Labs at least part of the time, a mandate differentiating
them from other makerspaces (Gershenfeld, 2005; 2012; Walter-Herrmann
and Büching, 2013a). For Fab Lab founder Neil Gershenfeld, professor
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ‘makers’ are “high-tech do-ityourselfers
who are democratizing access to the modern means to make
things” (Gershenfeld, 2012, 48).

Disruptive technologies combined with new practices and values
aligned with empowerment and peer learning means the Fab Lab model
could well be a stepping stone to something new and different: more
widespread implementations of distributed production, as an alternative
to mass production. Many actors in the Fab Lab network and the ‘maker
movement’ espouse personal fabrication as a clearly better alternative to
mass consumption and consumerism. In Fab Labs the capacity to answer
one’s own needs locally, individually and as communities, is emphasized
as a benefit (Gershenfeld, 2005), as opposed to being reliant on large
corporate technology providers or ‘satisficing’ through passive consumption.1
Other espoused benefits are the enhanced skills people acquire to build,
disassemble and repair (Mellis and Buechley, 2014). These propositions
have clear environmental implications, from lessened environmental impact
resulting from production only according to need, to more eco-efficient use
of materials and products combatting planned obsolescence, to reduced
negative impacts from transport emissions. However, little empirical
research exists to confirm whether these benefits are coming to fruition or
even on what actually happens in these forerunner makerspaces.
Rifkin (2014), perhaps more than most commentators on Fab Labs
or the maker movement, explicitly connects ‘making’ with environmental
sustainability benefits: “The [Maker] Movement has been driven by four
principles: the open-source sharing of new inventions, the promotion of a
collaborative learning culture, a belief in community self-sufficiency, and
a commitment to sustainable production practices” (Rifkin, 2014, n.p.).

Rifkin’s (2014) vision is of a more sustainable future world, where research
and development (R&D) is distributed and democratized in Fab Labs and
manufacturing is dispersed locally – powered by renewable energy, reducing
transport emissions and eliminating the embodied energy in unneeded mass
production intermediaries. Although stated as ‘fact’, Rifkin’s four principles
(which would help precipitate such a vision) remain propositions and
assumptions. The maker movement itself as a community of communities
is fragmented and does not necessarily sing with the same voice on matters
of self-sufficiency and sustainable production. Moreover, reporting on the
environmental sustainability of 3D printing, personal manufacturing or
the maker movement in non-academic media has tended to be taken on
by enthusiasts and parties with vested interests. As research on makers,
makerspaces and making is only now emerging, our understanding of
everyday practices in makerspaces is also fragmented and largely reliant
on groups’ and individuals’ own narratives. Rhetoric such as Rifkin’s (and
numerous other authors’) may guide action as ideology and manifesto, but
only direct observation of these activities and groups can reveal if makers’
actions truly reflect these “beliefs” and “commitments” – or otherwise.

Identifying when and how makers enact ideology, and when not, can help
articulate opportunities for more responsible practices in makerspaces. As
Fab Labs are experimental spaces for new digital manufacturing capabilities
and activities, and makers the actors practicing a possible future already
now, there is much that can be learned about the potential coming impacts
of ever-increasing digitalization in society and more citizen involvement
in production. Fab Labs and makerspaces are especially spaces where
new practices around open design and open innovation meet new uses of
materials (and new materials) and energy-intensive production methods:
where the espoused equipotentiality (Bauwens, 2005) of citizens globally
for creative making and invention may or may not meet equitable global
access to and use of energy and natural resources. There is clear potential
for participants in the maker movement, such as Fab Lab users and
organizers, to bypass the negative ecological impacts of mass production and
consumption in their collaborative endeavours, but it is not self-evident that
the actors even acknowledge or actively pursue this potential in their quest
to change the present: change production, education and even the economy
(Walter-Herrmann and Büching, 2013b). It can therefore be put forward that
the sustainability analysis of these practices is best done sooner than later.

Among the citizen communities experimenting with digital fabrication,
Fab Labs are a distinct entity and provide a distinguishable identity with
which actors readily and eagerly associate. As will be explained further
in the next chapter, the Fab Lab network is the most organized of maker
communities: having clear communication facilities and channels
networking the Labs; an abstract but widely promoted protocol for
action; platforms for individual mobility, training and support across Labs;
and regularly scheduled meetings for face-to-face interaction. Fab Labs
therefore provide an excellent opportunity for examining peers making
things together: organic enough that Labs differ widely from each other,
while structured enough to enable observations of what commitments
appear to maintain over time and across distance. Most importantly, such
observations lend themselves to a better understanding of these novel spaces
than mere identification of environmental issues in digital fabrication alone.

The opportunities and hindrances to adoption of sustainability-oriented 
values and actions by these communities can be identified and understood
as rooted in the community’s local and geographic conditions, chronology
and history, and interaction among actors: a more profound understanding
involving time and change than can be delivered by quantitative evaluations
(such as Life Cycle Assessments). This methodological advantage has also
recently been acknowledged by other researchers, such as Hielscher and
Smith (2014).

Given this background and the challenges outlined above, and highlighting
the potential of Fab Labs to contribute to new production and consumption
patterns in future, the key question is how (or if ) these actors can co-create a
more sustainable (i.e. environmentally, socially and economically sustainable)
paradigm through collaborative, explorative activities based in Fab Labs
today. In this doctoral research, this question is mainly examined through
the lens of what actors actually do to both establish and use the Lab to fulfil
their objectives: to articulate what current activities in Fab Labs tell us about
the barriers and drivers to recognizing and prioritizing sustainability issues.
The research questions for the dissertation are as follows.

How do actors in the social world of a Fab Lab address environmental
sustainability, in their future-oriented vision and strategy work and
in their everyday operations? What are the environmental (often
socio-environmental) issues in the maker movement and distributed
production, and how are they discussed and tackled in Fab Labs?

The research methodology draws from approaches in Science and
Technology Studies (STS), particularly Symbolic Interactionism and
the social shaping of technology perspectives, and is informed by Design
Research and the field of Design-for-Sustainability. Ontologically the
research therefore takes a constructivist, interpretivist position. The
methodology, methods and the researcher’s standpoint are discussed in
chapter 3.

In geographic scope, the research has focused mainly on the global
North, particularly northern European Fab Labs. In scale, the dissertation
particularly examines the ‘middle range’ of material peer production that is
currently little studied: the actions and interactions of active practitioners
and Lab organizers and the relationship between what they espouse and
what they do. At this scale, as individuals form communities and social
worlds, structural concerns such as existing institutional conditions meet
actor- and material-related aspects, such as developing and learning new
practices with technologies. As a unit (or units) of observation, this research
target falls between the micro-level focus of individual Lab users’ making
actions (what they make, what motivates them, the role of ‘creativity’ and 
so on), a focus that receives more research attention, and higher-level
observations of larger ecosystems (Fab Labs as innovation platforms, as
alternative educational and socio-cultural spaces for neighbourhoods and
municipalities, and so on). This larger body of research will be discussed
further in chapter 2, and the scope of the research topic is discussed in more
detail in section 2.2 and illustrated in Figure 4.

The audience that may benefit from the dissertation findings thus
comprises researchers and practitioners from the fields of design and
sustainable design, peer production, digital fabrication, user innovation,
Sustainable Production and Consumption (SCP), futures studies and
Science and Technology Studies. Also importantly, the findings and
implications should help guide actors in Fab Labs to reflect on their future
options and directions.

The next chapter will discuss the context and background of the
dissertation topic and chapter 3 the theoretical positioning and methodology.
Chapter 4 presents the summary of the research papers. Chapter 5 will
synthesize and articulate the key findings and chapter 6 present their
implications and final conclusions, followed by the original papers. "


==ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES, DISCOURSE AND FRAMINGS==

Cindy Kohtala:

"As an entity encompassing a place, people and practices, Fab Labs court
paradox and complexity regarding appropriate use of materials and energy.

The research focus in this dissertation is therefore first and foremost on
environmental sustainability, which does not intend to disconnect it from the
intertwined social and economic sustainability questions. Rather, as much
attention is already directed to the socio-economic dimensions of distributed
production (or “prosumption”: Toffler, 1980; Ritzer and Jurgenson, 2010),
foregrounding environmental sustainability serves to amplify if or where the
gaps exist between what is espoused and what is practiced. (This is also a
methodological question that will be discussed further in chapter 3.)

Beyond the literature review of paper 1, which examined research on
distributed production and environmental impacts, several recent studies
carry practical implications for current Fab Lab practices. Somewhat
surprisingly, some researchers appear to be targeting the small-scale personal
fabrication audience, in contrast to the industrial additive manufacturing
arenas largely present in the empirical studies summarized in paper 1. A life
cycle assessment exercise, for example, explicitly made fabrication spaces its
target audience: it was carried out so “prototypers and job shop owners can
make an informed decision about which technology to purchase or use, and
so the makers of 3D printers can understand their priorities for improving
environmental impacts” (Faludi et al., 2015, 15). Faludi et al. (2015) concluded
that prototyping with desktop 3D printers (rather than CNC milling
machines) may be less environmental impactful than first thought, but this
is dependent on high utilization of the printer. This conclusion appears
rarely exploited by Fab Labs: by being shared, open, peer-learning spaces,
they boost the potential for eco-efficient use of shared equipment. They
may also remove health, safety and emission problems away from the home
or office, given appropriate health, safety and waste management measures
are adopted in the Lab. Stephens et al. (2013) examined ultrafine particle
emissions from desktop 3D printers and recommended caution in use in 
inadequately ventilated spaces. (Ventilation, filters and careful procedures
are more clearly observed with the use of laser cutters and milling machines
in makerspaces than 3D printers.) This was also the conclusion in Short et
al. (2015) (who examined more 3D printing technologies than Stephens et al.,
2013, and not only in the context of personal, desktop machines); the authors
expressed concern that environmental impacts (and health and safety
issues) of many materials used in additive manufacturing remain unknown,
including when they begin to degrade. These hazardous issues, connected to
process waste, support materials, resins, finished products and so on, impact
not only people in the fabrication space, but also people downstream in the
waste cycle as well as natural ecosystems at final disposal. This issue will
become even more prominent as other types of 3D printers are developed
based on expiring patents. (Desktop 3D printers have up until recently been
solely FDM, fused deposition modelling, printers; low-cost, desktop SLA,
stereolithography, printers are now entering the market whose materials and
processes are less certain to be benign.)

Hunt et al. (2015) identified the challenge of recycling the polymers used
in personal 3D printers, and to that end developed a model for recycling
codes that could be deployed in the United States as well as the design
scripts that could print the codes into the products. The same research
group (Michigan Tech Open Sustainability Technology) also examined
the life cycle benefits of distributed recycling: a scenario where home users
and prosumers would perform their own recycling processes from postconsumer
goods for their own future 3D printing processes (Krieger et al.,
2014). These studies are rather unusual in that they project for a scenario
where small-scale, distributed, open manufacturing exists and then conduct
studies to pre-empt the barriers to the environmental sustainability of such a
system. A similar strategy can be seen in Kostakis et al. (2013), who explored
the viability of a new social production mode oriented to sustainability,
desktop manufacturing and commons-based peer production, via a case
study of an open source wind turbine design.

Fox (2014) also discusses these barriers by examining the opportunities
and limits “mobile production” (as opposed to “fixed production”) and “Third
Wave DIY” face in terms of production, innovation and entrepreneurship.
Environmental benefits include less use of raw materials and energy when
compared to fixed production, but Third Wave DIY requires access to
industrial infrastructure: “reliable electricity supplies, plentiful water
resources, and comprehensive transportation systems” as well as language
and computer skills (Fox, 2014, 26). Moreover, Fox highlights the low
revenues in this mode of production (and relatively high set-up and 
storage costs), which necessitate subsidies. These conditions help explain
why – despite rhetoric – Fab Labs have less take-up in Africa, for instance,
especially outside of universities, and how the circulation of Fab Labbers
educated in Europe and North America have spurred the growth of Fab
Labs and makerspaces in South America, as reported in Sperling et al.’s
(2015) study. This is a fruitful area of future research: how these global
influences and Labber migrations come together with how Fab Labs address
local specificities and regional socio-environmental concerns (Sperling et al.,
2015; see also Smith, 2014).

At the Factory 2.0 scale (Figure 4), Hermann et al. (2014) proposed a
model of future factories that would better accord with all three dimensions
of sustainability, environmental, social and economic. In their prescriptive
model, Fab Labs have a role within the factory supporting prototyping and
personal fabrication, employee learning and regional support. Basmer et al.
(2015) presented a conception of Open Production involving distributed
production via micro-factories, including peer production, that, for these
authors, represents more opportunities for social sustainability than the
present. These studies complement other lines of inquiry now emerging that
discuss the role of Fab Lab in sustainable cities (Diez, 2012; 2014; Guallart,
2014; March and Ribera-Fumaz, 2014). This compelling arena of research
will not be summarized here but will be pursued in future studies.

These recent studies therefore appear to be taking a new direction,
acknowledging a future where manufacturing is distributed and small scale
and peer production has a clear role. They may be placed in the constructs of
‘bespoke fabrication’ and ‘mass fabrication’, little addressed as yet, as depicted
in Figure 5 below (which appeared as Figure 4 in paper 1). They may also
represent small steps to a better understanding of the under-addressed areas
of research in Figure 6 below (which appeared as Figure 1 in paper 2).
Nevertheless, particularly when considering the opportunities and threats
of a new distributed production paradigm, as represented on the right side
of Figure 6, significant challenges remain in deciding how to best study
them. Part of the challenge lies in dealing with complexity and large system
boundaries if one is comparing mass production to distributed production.

A related challenge is the quantification of socio-environmental aspects
that are less amenable to measurement, as Gebler et al. (2014) attempt to
do. Hielscher and Smith (2014, 44) thus point out the limits to methods
such as LCA (life cycle assessment) studies and argue that, “[g]enerating
insights into the contending narratives influential in digital fabrication
developments... might be a more fruitful line of inquiry. Studying the
cultures of production and consumption cultivated in workshops and other 
sites of take up seem to be key, and therefore how technologies are valued
and used”.

In recent literature (the small body of research that it is), there have
been several ways adopted for the study of makers and maker communities
and evaluation of their importance and implications. As introduced in
section 2.2, the notion of the commons, as central to commons-based
peer production (Benkler, 2006), is increasingly used (Troxler, 2013). In
examining makerspaces in Mälmö, Sweden, Seravalli (2014a; 2014b)
employed direct observations and active engagement in the communities
to both articulate the dynamics of the communities and determine how
design can best support such activities, analysis supported by employing
a commons frame (Ostrom, 1990; Hess and Ostrom, 2007). There are
different understandings of the “commons” that need to be articulated in
such analyses. According to Seravalli (2014a), the original conception was
that of natural resources as common-pool resources, whose use and access
must be managed collectively (Ostrom, 1990; Hess and Ostrom, 2007; as
discussed in Seravalli, 2014a, 60-61). Secondly arose concern with the “new
commons”, “open commons” and perceived “public domain” where knowledge,
information, culture and innovation should reside (Lessig, 2002; Hess, 2008;
Benkler, 2013; as discussed in Seravalli, 2014a, 62-63). The third conception
of the commons is that of a new social and economic system, a collective
institution(s) that would manage both types of commons as an alternative
to capitalism (Bollier and Helfrich, 2012; Seravalli, 2014a, 64-65). Given the
recent popularity of commons framing in analysing maker communities,
there appears some danger that, if attempted with any less of the sensitivity
and sustained effort shown by Seravalli, it too adopts the characteristics of
ideology: aggrandizing of strengths and oblivious to weaknesses, and/or
dominated by concerns with the “new commons” and masking the seemingly
more distal problems of the natural resource commons (as Flichy and Turner
found, as discussed in the previous section).

The notion of “publics” has also been employed in the analysis of material
peer production communities, such as Corbett (2012) examining Access
Space in Sheffield according to Habermas’s (1989) concept of public sphere
and Fraser’s (1992) counterpublics. Several researchers (and researcherpractitioners,
particularly in the HCI arena), are turning to Dewey’s ([1927]
2012) notion of “a public”, a group of citizens who form specifically to address
a problem previously seen as out of their control (DiSalvo, 2009; DiSalvo et
al., 2014). The intent of this work is to focus attention on these problematic
issues and how to enhance democratic processes in doing so; objects and
materials (such as technologies) play a particular role in these studies.
One line of enquiry particularly centres on critical discussion via making
activities: generating critical understanding of technologies (for publics
and scholars alike) by tangibly making them, either as designers alone (for,
for example, exhibitions or provocative happenings) or with the publics
in question (DiSalvo et al., 2014). Many have adopted Ratto’s (2011) term
of Critical Making for these endeavours, as discussed in paper 4 (Ratto et
al., 2014; Ratto and Boler, 2014). While environmental sustainability may
or may not come to the forefront of the problems regarded significant in
these publics-oriented explorations (or in studies framed as commons-based
analyses), Marres (2012) has examined the role of materials specifically
with regard to environmental sustainability: how publics coalesce around
environmental topics in everyday practices and how the materials or devices
in question mediate participation.

An explicitly environmentally oriented framing of personal fabrication
is that of Appropriate Technologies (Schumacher, 1973; UNEP, 1978, 44),
as employed by, for instance, Turner (2010) and Pearce et al. (2010). As
befitting the common definition of Appropriate Technology, both studies
are centred on “development” and digital fabrication tools as empowering
communities in the global South. There appears to be an opportunity to
begin to define what and how digital fabrication tools are “appropriate”
technologies in specific contexts in the global North, especially given the
positioning of personal fabrication tools as low overhead and resource
efficient (Carson, 2010) and that the phrase is employed in the Fab Lab
community (Mandavilli, 2006; “Principal Voices: Neil Gershenfeld”, 2008).

Smith and colleagues’ choice of term “grassroots innovation” (Smith et al.,
2013; 2014; Hielscher et al., 2015) serves as a catch-all that can also include
the material peer production communities in the global North. Recent focus
on Fab Labs and makerspaces regards them as “community-based digital
fabrication workshops” and “grassroots digital fabrication”: as the (potential)
setting for environmentally and socially conscious, appropriate technology
development (Hielscher and Smith, 2014; Smith et al., 2015; Charter and
Keiller, 2014).

Recent developments in Europe have seen other researchers and nonprofit
organizations attempting to explore and articulate Fab Labs’ and
makerspaces’ potential role in a more socio-environmentally benign
economic system, to exploit the immense pool of valued, specific knowledge
and competence in Fab Labs on fabrication processes, electronics,
components and materials. Current topics include remanufacturing and 
distributed manufacturing (the Future Makespaces project16) and closing
material loops in a circular economy framework (The Ellen MacArthur
Foundation;17 the RSA’s [The Royal Society for the Encouragement of the
Arts] Great Recovery;18 and the independent, self-organized Open Source
Circular Economy Days19). These organizations’ events in very recent years
have seen enthusiastic Fab Lab participation and contribution.

This chapter has described Fab Labs and the current understanding of
the maker movement. It has summarized relevant studies and trends in
research on making and demonstrated how the environmental discourse has
travelled both through the maker community and the research community
studying material peer production.20 Much research focuses on education
and the social benefits of Fab Labs, and in parallel much discourse in Fab
Labs touches on environmental issues only obliquely. This may be because
environmental concerns appear too distant to be of concern in a small, “thirdspace”
world of its own and/or Labs may feel underequipped to discuss
environmental issues (as might researchers feel underequipped to study this
fast-moving phenomenon). The current doctoral research puts forward that
a better understanding of the activities and interactions in these forerunner
fabrication spaces will help better identify both the socio-environmental
issues of prominent concern and how to best tackle them."


==ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES AND ACTION==

"This chapter will sum up the most important findings and highlight the
main cross-cutting contributions of this dissertation. Practical implications
will also be discussed as they arise, while the final chapter will sum up the
implications and final conclusions.

The first contribution of this dissertation has been to highlight that
there clearly are environmental issues in digital fabrication and distributed
production, as well as opportunities to diverge from the harms of mass
production. Fab Labs appear to need help in identifying and implementing
actions. The second key contribution, related to the first, highlights and
confirms that in these material peer production communities, current
concerns predominate – no matter the espoused ideology and expressed
commitment. Actions taken by different communities appear contradictory
to ideological rhetoric, issues easily remain invisible, and digital fabrication
tools and their community-space ensembles thereby engender controversy
over their meanings and intent.

Building on these two contributions, the third key finding thereby
illustrates how the materials in Fab Labs represent discourse and how they
mediate access and participation. Most crucially, the research shows how
socio-environmental sustainability issues are interwoven among the other
ideologies espoused via material objects. This interweaving is situated and
‘context-dependent’, but its explication helps identify opportunities for and
barriers to more sustainable practices. This contribution to knowledge on
peer production serves the Fab Lab community, but also the wider material
peer production research arena, research on Sustainable Consumption and
Production and research on sustainable innovation. Building on the third key
finding, the fourth contribution focuses on the design-relevant opportunities 
identified in the maker communities researched. This articulation
contributes to a better understanding of how design, designing and designers
can participate in the sustainability discussion and implementations amidst
potentially radically shifting production and consumption patterns. This
sets the stage for further experiments and research foci that can continue to
document this rapidly changing phenomenon.

 
As stated, there are clear practical environmental issues in Fab Labs and the
maker movement that should be addressed, first, for the health and safety
of the people working in these environments and secondly, to be able to
mitigate the negative ecological impacts on an ongoing basis. Two key areas
to address (the ‘low-hanging fruit’) appear to be toxicity and energy (Drizo
and Pegna, 2006; Huang et al., 2013; Olson, 2013; Stephens et al., 2013; De
Decker, 2014; Short et al., 2015). More information is needed in Labs on
material and process toxicity. Material safety and data sheets, MSDS, could
be posted in Labs, for instance, and discussed in training and induction
sessions, along with clearer information on emissions and impacts of
other materials, electronic components and the processes of working with
them. Given the increasing critical attention paid to energy-hungry digital
fabrication tools, Fab Labs could promote the energy-efficient aspect of
shared use, but also pay closer attention to daily electricity consumption:
encouraging better troubleshooting and problem prevention, combining
jobs, powering down, explicitly choosing green energy sources and so on.
In-house solutions for production waste also appear to be spreading, as
more Labs use RecycleBots, FilaBots and other devices for converting 3D
printer waste into new filaments. Such solutions could be shared in the
network to encourage their widespread use, and other in-house inventions
may be applicable in other contexts outside of personal fabrication. These
practical issues and potential solutions relate to the tangible material flows
as presented in Figure 9 (which appeared as Figure 5 in paper 4): conscious
attention to the materials, equipment and components coming into the Lab
and the waste and other tangible outputs.

Other tangible Lab outputs involve what artefacts are produced and
what projects Fab Labs decide to promote. Fab Labs and makerspaces may
prove to be the ideal testing ground for solutions that are best distributed
and localized rather than under centralized control. Low-tech energy
technologies are the most obvious example (Hielscher and Smith, 2014,
44), wherein Fab Labs can be seen as an innovation intermediary (Stewart
and Hyysalo, 2008) facilitating both experiments with renewable energy
solutions as well as discourse on the issue (see Rohracher, 2003; Hyysalo
et al., 2013). Other topics could be explored (such as building materials and
sustainable food production, as seen in Valldaura Self-Sufficiency Lab and
FabLab Amersfoort) and – in so doing – better documented for the benefit
of both practitioner-makers and policymakers. Such shared information,
in the form of manuals and guidelines, could include best practices in
reuse, recycling and energy conservation; the environmental implications
of material choices; and even the environmental and social consequences
of the equipment and components, their manufacture and distribution
(for example, the reality of the labour conditions under which electronics
components are produced as well as disassembled, as indicated by Turner,
2006).

Such solutions, however, face clear implementation barriers that have
also been articulated in the course of this dissertation: Labs may wish to
share eco-relevant information and solutions for themselves and others,
but this does not guarantee the sharing nor the take-up of these solutions
Figure 9: Understanding the situatedness and consequences of Fab Lab activity.

Research on environmental, health and safety
issues is difficult to access and even more difficult to translate into daily
actions and manuals and guidelines. Lab managers lack the time to find
environmental information and may lack the competence to act on it (papers
2 and 4). They may also lack motivation if environmental values are not
prioritized: environmental awareness and responsibility does not appear to
be an explicit or inherent aspect of Fab Lab ideology, when compared to
some other sociotechnical movements (paper 4; section 5.4 below). When
even principles that are clearly espoused in Fab Labs, such as open access,
are compromised in everyday routines, it is clear that individuals aiming to
prioritize environmental concerns will also encounter challenges in enacting
their values, due to funding, people migrations, time constraints and other
similar structural barriers (paper 4; section 5.2 below).

Sustainability is itself a going concern and a moving target, necessitating a
continuous, generative dialogue and reflection on what it means to Fab Labs
in all its dimensions (environmental, social and economic) – especially given
the rapid development of technologies and materials. To benefit from the
high expertise and competence in the Fab Lab network, this understanding
is likely best constructed in ongoing dialogue between the most expert
(in technological terms) makers and eco-committed makers (paper 2).

The challenge to bring these groups together, to engage a diverse range of
participants will remain, as will the lack of time, but regional events and
regional Fab Lab networks offer potential for such meetings of minds. Those
Labs whose vision is most clearly socio-ecological already offer an inspiring
role model to Fab Lab individuals and groups (paper 4). This may mean they
are also best placed to spur on practical activities: co-created manuals and
guidelines, as mentioned, but also promoting more communications inside
and outside the network. To counteract the negative criticism that Fab Labs
in the global North are mere hobbyist spaces for a homogenous elite, there
could be more stories and narratives on how Fab Labs are contributing to a
sustainable distributed economy paradigm: engaging in research and with
researchers, building on our current understanding as illustrated in Figure
10, and articulating how environmental concerns intertwine with the existing
concerns of education and entrepreneurship.

As mentioned, these are recommendations that are simple to suggest and
problematic to implement. Further discussion on the kind of scaffolding
needed in these novel peer-to-peer communities will be discussed in chapter
6 after discussing the other research findings and contributions. 


==FINAL IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS==

The previous chapter has shown how discourse on democratizing
production is enacted in Fab Labs, especially via material artefacts. If Fab
Labs are to offer a meaningful step away from the negative environmental
impacts embedded in mass production, there are practical obstacles that
they, and any organization, face with regard to time constraints and
entropic routines. Nevertheless, given the strength of the Fab Lab ideology,
the Fab Academy and the network itself, Fab Labs are (arguably) the
best actor in the maker movement to communicate its impacts; generate
new knowledge, practices and solutions; and ensure making has meaning.

Achieving this requires reflection and critical discussion: do everyday
actions reflect vision, values and ideology? Environmental sustainability is
but one thread in the sociotechnical fabric of Fab Labs, but it is an integral
thread. The dissertation has demonstrated, through examples from
everyday events observed and heard in Labs, that environmental issues
embed themselves within other issues in the Lab and ideology is not so
easily enacted.

The contingencies, the very situatedness of Fab Labs, mean that every
Lab must be built anew. Even experienced Fab Lab founders and managers,
the “gurus”, as they are known in the network and the Fab Academy, must
take time to understand the local conditions when setting up a new Lab
to stimulate and sustain engagement with the local user and stakeholder
communities – to understand the local needs. There are therefore relatively
few default modes of operation or established routines, no Lab-in-a-kit, that
can be implemented quickly, allowing more time and focus on identifying
strategy and target users nor the most appropriate action plans or partners.
The mundane, setting up the Lab and its procedures, maintaining it,
maintaining inventory, serving users and organizing short-term activities,
easily takes precedence; the what of what needs to be done can dominate the
how things could or should be done, and especially why.

The Lab’s situatedness is therefore its strength, the source of its identity
and mission, which can help sustain it over time and nurture commitment.
It is also its weakness, as this identity and mission must be co-constructed
among a variety of actors, and usually repeatedly. If not, the why of the Fab
Lab dissolves, Labs discover after a certain period of time that they have
become just another printing service (or even a place of no digital fabrication
whatsoever), and they need to firmly establish a new strategic direction and
a clearer identity of what they are for (as seen in paper 4 and as reported by
several Labs in interviews and in the FABx meetings).

There are several messages in this dissertation that Fab Labs can take
away. The aim is not to predict the future trajectory of Labs or the network,
but to highlight critical points of divergence and tension. Both the literature
review in paper 1 and the discussion of the universe of discourses in paper 4
questioned if distributed production and the maker movement will contribute
to consumerism and overconsumption, rather than to serve to abate it. In
paper 4, commodification and commercialization were alternatively seen
as economic benefits for micro-entrepreneurs or as threats to the original
ideology of making as a counter to consumerism. For Fab Labs this translates
into a question of not mere empowerment, but how it should be effected
(and, of course, who should be empowered, but that is an ongoing and salient
question). Making things easier for new makers (via kits, for instance, or easier
user interfaces for software) also tends to remove functions and control from
the hands of the very users intended to be empowered. In fact, given there is
much talk on the need for manuals and guidelines for people who want to
set up Fab Labs, this threat also exists here. Such a manual can pre-empt and
make invisible the very questions a Fab Lab founder should ask him- or herself:
what is this Fab Lab for? Fab Labs and the network will develop and mature,
consolidate and become infrastructure in some ways beyond the existing
state of “ad hoc ashrams” (Hunting, 2009; see pp. 33–34), but the direction
of decentralizing and distributing control to regional bodies and keeping
the remit of Fab Labs open to ensure diversity still appears preferable to an
easily implementable, standardized Lab-in-a-kit. This would also ensure the
new, young Lab understands its role and responsibility (and the sustainability
implications entwined) in its situated local community. In addition, such open
structures need not prevent the development of environmental and safety
guidelines that could be developed for Fab Labs, as recommended in paper 2.
As de Laet and Mol (2000, 250) highlighted, “Sometimes abandoning control
may contribute to spreading what one has been making.”


For Fab Labs there is also a need to engender a balance between becoming
normalized and institutionalized (thereby better ensuring acceptance in the
local community and – most importantly – funding) and maintaining an open
and fluid identity committed to espoused ideology: the democratization of
technologies and offering an alternative to passive consumerism. Open access
is crucial, it appears central to the relative diversity of users that does exist
(according to interviewees and my observations), and it forms the core of
the learning and discovery processes that unfold in Fab Labs. Fab Labs’ rich
diversity is their asset, just as the heterogeneity and ambiguity of the internet,
the vast diversity of interests, is its core strength (Flichy, 2007, 204-205).

With regard to potential Fab Lab ‘projects’, emerging evidence suggests
that citizen engagement in, for instance, environmental technologies can
help in their diffusion and adaptability (Rohracher, 2003; Hyysalo et al.,
2013). Despite this potential, thus far it appears Fab Labs, hackerspaces and
makerspaces have been largely overlooked by policymakers as potential
“innovation intermediaries” (Stewart and Hyysalo, 2008), particularly for
sustainability-directed solutions, inventions and related practices. Based on
the findings in this dissertation, the configuring, facilitating and brokering
of new technologies (Stewart and Hyysalo, 2008) in Fab Labs is not always
as “democratic” as espoused, nor oriented to future visions characterized
by sustainability. Only few Fab Labs are consciously choosing projects led
by sustainability issues or discussing their values in relation to undesired
‘consumerism’. Fab Labs may need outside help, in environmental assessment,
in selecting projects and to enliven the critical debate. As Russell and Williams
(2002, 49, my emphasis) have stressed, “The emergent and unpredictable
nature of sociotechnical transformations points again to the value of flexibility
and constant monitoring, maintaining channels of communication and arenas
of debate, and avoiding disincentives to open appraisal.”

When actors in these sociotechnical dramas fail to pay attention to
politics, or keep their activities out of the realm of public debate, there is the
danger that discourse and vision become “an empty, hollow signifier” (March
and Ribera-Fumaz, 2014), that communities fail to form or fail to sustain,
or that they inflict damage on the very citizens they intended to benefit, by
avoiding discussion on the wider consequences of their actions (Flichy, 2007;
Turner, 2006). Should they succeed, on the other hand, they may prove to
be the gateway to greater citizen participation in material production and
society-making: encouraging self-discovery and collaborative peer learning,
and making ‘making’ – of all kinds – socially acceptable at the very grassroots
(Wüstenhagen et al., 2007). Indeed, Morelli (2003) has suggested that
designers may have the ethical responsibility to assist people to design their 
own conditions of wellbeing, and material peer production is one route to
this goal.

Alongside providing deep and detailed knowledge on particular Fab
Labs, representative and emblematic, and presenting implications for the
network and the maker movement, the dissertation has richly illustrated
how ideology unfolds and imaginaires shape and are shaped, remaining open
and incomplete, in everyday practices in peer-to-peer counter-communities.
These processes are especially evident in material assemblages, which embody
both rhetoric and routine. This research contribution complements other
research on “material participation” (Marres, 2012), but does so by examining
how socio-environmental sustainability is represented in deliberate counterspaces,
physically and ideologically set apart from the mainstream – rather
than how the public currently engages materially with environmental issues
in the realms of politics and everyday practices. In future research, there
is value in both foci and a need for still more empirical research, to better
understand how the present and the mainstream meets the emergent and
the niche in future production patterns.

The focus on countercontexts in this dissertation has thereby
demonstrated how peer-to-peer material production is orchestrated and
improvised in practice, as projects, as communities and as the intermediating
spaces of Fab Labs. Such processes have been presented in this work as
successes or failures, due to the dynamics and conflicts among factors, the
experimental and the designed, the local and virtual or global, and the
immediate and the ideal. Further research on longitudinal peer production
projects is recommended, to contribute valuable knowledge on how the
assemblages of materials, people, spaces and interactions mediate access
and participation. Particularly when the sites of research involve emerging
technologies and have clear sustainability and environmental implications,
as in this dissertation, such studies can tell us more about citizens’ changing
roles in production and the effects and potentials of a rapidly digitalizing
society.

From this standpoint, my intent with this dissertation sympathizes with
Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006, 417)’s position: “Unlike many political
analyses of technologies, however, ours does not warn of a direct threat of
harm. Rather, it warns of a threat of omission. We might miss the chance
to benefit from a distinctive socio-technical system that promotes not only
cultural and intellectual production but constitutes a venue for human
character development.” If the clear environmental issues are also taken into
explicit consideration, in ways alluded to in this dissertation, Fab Labs offer
a promising platform for new prosumption patterns."


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Research]]