

'''Essay: How Should the Economy be Regulated? Richard Rosen'''

URL = http://www.corporation2020.org/corporation2020/documents/Papers/2nd-Summit-Paper-Series.pdf


=Abstract=

"The current economic crisis provides a rare opportunity to re-think how the economy
should be regulated in the coming decades. A key issue usually completely absent in such
debates is how to democratize decisions pertaining to capital investments in basic industrial
and service sectors. Achieving key social goals should be a criterion deeply embedded in
such decisions. Two such goals are climate change mitigation and alignment of investments
with sustainable development in general. Regulatory processes pertaining to capital investments
in basic sectors should empower stakeholders whose lives are affected by such investments.
Beyond capital allocation, future regulation should allow for stakeholder input in
determining what kinds of products should be produced and what their prices should be in
cases where markets are substantively non-competitive. U.S. Public Utility Commissions
illustrate a powerful but underappreciated model of a proven regulatory approach that can
and should be expanded to key sectors of the economy as a means to democratize decisionmaking.
This would help correct the regulatory failures exposed during the economic crisis
and enable a balance of public and private interests in shaping a form of managed capitalism
for the future."
(http://www.corporation2020.org/corporation2020/documents/Papers/2nd-Summit-Paper-Series.pdf)


[[Category:Policy]]