'''= anthropoligical concept and hypothesis by Chris Knight'''

URL = http://www.chrisknight.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2007/10/the-human-revolution-socialist-organiser.pdf


=Contextual Quote=

"We became socially and morally human during the course of a revolution. All my academic life, I have been exploring the idea that human language, consciousness, kinship and morality evolved in a process of gradual evolution which culminated in an immense social and political revolution. My motivation was always to challenge the popular prejudice that socialism is impossible because by nature we humans are selfish and competitive – and ‘not even a revolution could change human nature’.

I would always answer this way. Yes, we are a species of great ape. Yes, like our primate cousins, we have competitive, selfish, aggressive and often violent instincts. But these were not the ones responsible for our success. Everything distinctively human about our nature – our capacity to be brilliant mums and dads, to care for one another’s children and not just our own, to establish moral rules, to see ourselves as others see us and to use music, dance and language to share our dreams – these extraordinary capacities were precisely the products of the greatest revolution in history, the one that worked."

- Chris Knight [https://www.focaalblog.com/2021/12/22/chris-knight-wrong-about-almost-everything/]


=Summary=

Lionel Sims:

"Our hunter-gatherer ancestors
overthrew primate jealousy and
selfishness and established a mode of
production through the revolutionary
creation of matrilineal/matrilocal
clans. The solidarity of classificatory
brothers and sisters, what Morgan
and Engels called ‘the gens’, was the
organisational heart of the first
communist society. Chris Knight, a
professor of anthropology at the
University of East London, and
others, have made this claim
scientifically respectable on the basis
of modern scientific methods."

(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)


=Discussion=

Chris Knight:

"The chief value of the study of human origins is that it nails the myth that ‘no revolution can ever change human nature’. It shows, on the contrary, that everything distinctively human about our nature – our ability to speak, to see ourselves as others see us, to aspire to act on moral principle – has come to prevail in our species thanks precisely to the greatest revolution in history, ‘the revolution which worked’.

Palaeolithic archaeologist Paul Mellars (pictured left at Blombos Cave, South Africa) argues that distinctively human language, mind and society emerged during a revolution – ‘the human revolution’ – accomplished by our ancestors somewhere between 70,000 and 200,000 ago.

Ian Watts is the ochre specialist at Blombos Cave, South Africa, ian-watts2where much of our earliest evidence for symbolic culture has recently been found. Ian (right) was the first archaeologist to point out that ‘the human revolution’ – formerly associated with the European Upper Palaeolithic and attributed to a chance genetic mutation – was in fact the culmination of a Middle Stone Age process of natural and sexual selection associated with the emergence of Homo sapiens in Africa [C. Knight, C. Power & I. Watts, The human symbolic revolution. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 5/1 (1995): 75-114].

The Darwinian component of what seemed at the time Ian’s highly controversial theory is today known as the Female Cosmetic Coalitions model chris-henshilwood-camilla-power1and was developed by Camilla Power (pictured left with Chris Henshilwood in Blombos Cave) while she was researching under the supervision of Leslie Aiello at University College London. Thanks largely to the work of Chris Henshilwood and his team, the ochre crayons, shell ornaments and other cosmetic items found at Middle Stone Age sites such as Blombos are today widely accepted as evidence for some of the world’s earliest symbolic traditions. The Female Cosmetic Coalitions model is currently the only attempt to explain these findings on a Darwinian basis. A point in its favour is that it accurately predicted the archaeological discoveries before they were made [C. Power, 'Sexual selection models of the emergence of symbolic communication: why they should be reversed', in R. Botha & C. Knight (eds), The Cradle of Language (2009), Oxford University Press, pp. 257-280].

But what does it mean to speak of a ‘revolution’ so far back in our evolutionary past, long before history began? The challenges are immense and are exhaustively discussed in Rethinking the Human Revolution, edited by Paul Mellars, Katie Boyle, Ofer Bar-Yosef and Chris Stringer (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2007) and more recently in The Cradle of Language, edited by Rudolf Botha and Chris Knight (Oxford University Press, 2009).

For an introduction to my own current thinking, see my ‘Language and revolutionary consciousness’ [chapter 7 in Alison Wray's edited volume The Transition to Language (Oxford University Press, 2002)], ‘Honest fakes and language origins’ [in C. Whitehead, (ed), The Origin of Consciousness in the Social World, Imprint Academic, 2008, pp. 236-248] and ‘Language, ochre and the rule of law’ (the final chapter in The Cradle of Language volume).

In fairness I should add that by no means all archaeologists believe in the human revolution. One frequently cited dissenting contribution was entitled ‘The revolution that wasn’t’ (Sally McBrearty and Alison Brooks, Journal of Human Evolution 39, 453-563, 2000). As if that wasn’t enough, a more recent update of the same argument defiantly proclaims ‘Down with the revolution’ (chapter 12 in Mellars et al., Rethinking the Human Revolution).

As a Marxist, it seems to me natural to expect slow, quantitative change to culminate from time to time in revolutionary breakthrough. Yet in itself, of course, that’s no reason to accept the scientific validity of this concept in this particular case. While much remains uncertain, there are surely no a priori grounds for restricting the concept of revolution to recent historical times. Archaeologists investigating the origins of farming routinely speak of the ‘Neolithic revolution’. major-transitionsAn event of this kind need not be telescoped into a brief period: what matters is that gradual evolution culminates in revolutionary change. Scientists agree that on a geological timescale, the emergence of language-using Homo sapiens qualifies as a ‘punctuation event’ or ‘major transition’ in the history of life on earth. The classic text here is The Major Transitions in Evolution by John Maynard Smith and Eors Szathmary (W. H. Freeman, 1995).

Alison Brooks is an eminent archaeologist well-known for her opposition to the theory that there was a ‘human revolution’. She has very effectively poured scorn on the naive idea of a cognitive mutation responsible for telescoping the emergence of language and symbolic behaviour into a single dramatic moment. The African archaeological record, she points out, suggests a much more gradual process of behavioural and cognitive change. At the ‘Cradle of Language’ conference held in Stellenbosch in 2006, I asked Alison whether the two opposed camps – for and against the whole idea of a ‘human revolution’ – might settle on a compromise. Setting aside the idea of a sudden mutation, would she agree that on a geological timescale, the emergence of language-using Homo sapiens was a revolutionary event? ‘On that timescale’, Alison replied without hesitation, ‘yes’."

(http://www.chrisknight.co.uk/the-human-revolution/)


==The Three Achievements of the First Human Societies==

Chris Gray:

"I use the term “human revolution” here with the proviso that much of
what it covers applies not just to members of the species homo sapiens sapiens
but also to our cousins of homo sapiens neanderthalensis. (See the article by
Joao Zilhao cited in the Reading). Readers will have noted that the designation
“homo sapiens” applies to both groups.

 The principal equality which this revolution established was between the
male and female sexes, and it revolved around the distribution of food. The
comparison here is with chimpanzees, where the males hunt and then proceed to
eat their prey as soon as they have caught it; the females do not get a look in.
Their best tactic is to offer sex at the kill site, which sometimes allows them
to grab a bite in passing. Female chimps also advertize their being on heat via
“oestrous swellings which appear around the vagina; these attract the males.”
(Chris Knight, “Blood Relations”, p. 201 and pp. 159-62). For the human species
walking on two legs a different biological signal replaces this --menstruation.


As Chris Knight points out, in this area the human pattern is the direct
opposite of the basic primate condition:

''- “Whereas the basic primate pattern is to deliver a periodic ‘yes’ signal
against a background of continuous sexual ‘no’, humans emit a periodic ‘no’
signal against a background of continuous ‘yes.’ This reversal indicates
something of the nature and scale of the sexual revolution central to the
process of becoming human.”'' (“Blood Relations”, p. 210, emphasis in the
original).

 
What exactly happened, then, in the “dark backward and abysm of time” to
warrant the use of the term “revolution”? In respect of the period beginning
around 100,000 years BP (Before the Present) two features stand out: one, a
spectacular increase in brain size and, two, widespread use of ochre among
hunter-gatherers. The latter is still found in hunter-gatherer societies, e.g.
in Australia (“Blood Relations”, pp. 441-48)). Chris Knight in “Blood Relations”
locates the increased brain size in the African Rift Valley (pp. 242-44). 


The article by Ian Watts in the Reading treats extensively of the use of red ochre:
writing of Europe, he states that

- “''Widespread and regular use of red ochre is restricted to incoming Homo
sapiens and those last Neanderthals who were the authors of the Chatelperronian
industry, living in the shadow of the newcomers. Indeed, habitual use of red
ochre seems to be a hallmark of the spread of modern humans across the world''.”
(op. cit.)


Perhaps it is necessary to make two additional points: one, Zilhao places the
Chatel- perronian Neanderthals prior to the incomers and emphasizes their
independent possession of symbolic culture, and, two, yellow and black ochres
are also found.

Why the emphasis on ochre, however? Increased brain size and lengthening
f childhood created serious problems for human females, who needed to ensure
themselves a reliable supply of food --procured by the males predominantly. As
with chimps, sex was the only playable card, but women hit on a very effective
way of playing it. (See “The Science of Solidarity”, pp. 11-12). They had to act
as a disciplined body, since the males would be likely to home in on any
isolated menstruating female. To counter this it was necessary to send out a
collective “no” signal with the argument “wrong sex, wrong species, wrong time”.
Among the Hadza of Tanzania this message is conveyed in the so-called Eland Bull
Dance, in which all the women participate, their bodies daubed with ochre. But
the “no” is in fact conditional: the real message is “Bring us all some meat and
then we will all become available --and a good time will be had by all.”


As Liz Dalton puts it

- ''“The model explains at a single stroke menstrual and incest taboos and
the origins of human kinship systems. Culture --collectively agreed rules and
rituals governing society, something unknown in the animal world, and a unique
breakthrough in evolution-- was born.” (“The Science of Solidarity”, p. 12) (For
more detail see “Blood Relations” and Cam''illa power’s short summary in the
pamphlet entitled “The Human Revolution”).


 
So this early form of human organization was based directly on equality
between the sexes --something that disappeared as class societies later emerged.
Similarly reciprocity is present in the exchange of meat for sex and vice versa.
A balanced relationship with nature was clearly more problematic given the vast
quantities of mega fauna to hand, but the temporary absence of food supply
difficulties helped to maintain the social arrangements intact. Finally we may
note that in both production phases we find workers’ control: the men control
the hunt and the women control the cooking. But production takes place in the
final analysis for the benefit of the consumer, not the producer, just as in
modern societies. (In the transition to socialism the situation is more complex
because of the necessity to socialize investment: hence the Hungarian workers’
councils in 1956 resolved that, while the factories should belong to the
workers, the latter should pay to the workers’ state a levy calculated on the
basis of output and profits --see “1956: The Hungarian Revolution”, Anarchist
Federation in Manchester, 2009, p. 15).

 
We cannot go into the reasons for the breakdown of original communism
here --see Chris Knight’s discussion in “Blood Relations”, pp. 449-52. Suffice
it to say that these times have left behind a cultural legacy that is still very
much with us.


'''Reciprocity'''

A principal legacy of original communism is the notion of reciprocity.
Here I must take issue with David Graeber, who writes that
 “as currently used ‘reciprocity’ can mean almost anything. It is very
close to meaningless.” (“Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value”, p. 217).
 But the idea is not totally devoid of meaning, imprecise though it may be. The
basic notion is “If I do you a favour, I expect you to return it, and vice
versa”. In other words, one good turn deserves another. This attitude is very
deep-seated, but also very positive: Marshall Sahlins comments appositely that
it “sustains the community or community effort, in a material sense”
(“Stone Age Economics” p. 190).


The persistence of such an attitude can be exemplified by a piece of modern-day
political argumentation. Here is Ashley Mote complaining about the ostensible
appropriation of Britain’s oil reserves by the EU:

- ''“North Sea oil sells at a premium, it has a low sulphur content, doesn’t
require expensive desalination, and could be sold anywhere. So why do we export
so much to Europe? Is there a treaty obligation --have the Continentals got
their sticky fingers on this asset without the rest of us knowing it?'' …
 

The UK’s oil reserves are estimated [c2001] to be worth over $400
billion, and that’s before any future discoveries. Yet the Maastricht Treaty,
Preamble 8, Title 2, describes our oil as a ‘shared resource’.
 

This is the law of contract gone mad. Contracts are normally agreements
to exchange assets or benefits. Usually, money from one party is exchanged for
goods from the other. But on this occasion, just signing a piece of paper
magically converted a national asset of the UK [?Scotland] into someone else’s
property, without any counter-balancing transfer of benefits to us. We did not
sell this asset --we simply gave it away. Just as our fish were given away by
the Heath government in 1972.

 
But there is more, and its gets worse. In October 1997 Jacques Delors
claimed that the EU would share all the assets of member states --and all the
liabilities! So, take our fish, our gold and our oil … and then saddle the UK
with part of the EU pension debt of over £1,200 billion (yes, billion!). But we
will deal with that later.” (Ashley Mote, “Vigilance: A Defence of British
Liberty”, Tanner Publishing 2001, pp. 89-90).

 My purpose in quoting this is not to enter into the rights and wrongs of
the topic in question --despite the glosses!-- but to emphasize the notion of
reciprocity on which Ashley Mote bases his argument, i.e. the idea of a contract
as an exchange of mutual benefits. One good turn deserves another.

Understandably there are plenty of examples of exchange in the
anthropological literature which illustrate this idea of reciprocity and
inclusion of partners. A prominent example is the Kula Ring among the Trobriand
islanders as described by Bronislaw Malinowski in “Argonauts of the Western
Pacific”. The ring is a dual circulation of two types of special artefacts
--armshells (mwali) and necklaces (soulava). The armshells circulate anticlockwise and the necklaces circulate clockwise. The goods are purely
decorative, and no person gets to own them permanently: nonetheless they are
highly prized, and circulation of them is continuous --the rule is, for an
object, “once in the Kula, always in the Kula” (“Argonauts of the Western
Pacific”, p. 83).

What I want to stress here is the exact balance in the circulation
process of the two goods --a marked contrast to circulation of money and
commodities under capitalism, where, as we know from Keynes, money can be
withdrawn from circulation and hoarded, resulting in a pile of unsold
commodities. Furthermore, as we know from Marx, there is a tendency for wealth
to accumulate at one pole, with a corresponding growth of misery at the opposite
pole. The challenge of our time is to construct the equivalent of a Kula ring
featuring everyday commodities on an international scale such that no one is
left out of the loop.


'''Sustainability'''

An awareness of greater respect for the natural environment among
indigenous peoples in comparison with ourselves does seem to entered everyday
consciousness to some extent. Rod Shearman’s song, whose opening I quoted at the
beginning of this piece, contains the lines

 “People of the Sky Heroes --how long you’ve lived who knows?
 At one with the land and wise to its ways”.

Actually the achievements of aboriginal Australians in this area are easily
romanticizable but need to be objectively evaluated. Their negative contribution
was the extermination of vast numbers of big game animals. Positively they made
such progress as to be on the verge of developing agriculture:
 “Aboriginal Australians who never reached the stage of farming yams and
seed plants nonetheless anticipated several elements of farming. They managed
the landscape by burning it, to encourage the growth of edible seed plants that
sprouted after fires. In gathering wild yams, they cut off most of the edible
tuber but replaced the stems and tops of the tubers in the ground so that the
tubers would regrow. Their digging to extract the tuber loosened and aerated the
soil and fostered regrowth. All that they would have had to do to meet the
definition of farmers was to carry the stems and remaining attached tubers home
and simply replace them in soil at their camp.” (Jared Diamond, “Guns, Germs and
Steel”, Vintage Books 2005, p. 107)

They also developed elaborate methods of trapping fish:


- “where water levels in marshes fluctuate with seasonal rains, Native
Australians constructed elaborate systems of canals up to a mile and a half
long, in order to enable eels to extend their range from one marsh to another.
Eels were caught by equally elaborate weirs, traps set in dead-end side canals,
and stone walls across canals with a net placed in the opening of the wall.
Traps at different levels in the marsh came into operation as the water level
rose and fell. While the initial construction of these ‘fish farms’ must have
involved a lot of work they then fed many people. Nineteenth-century European
observers found villages of a dozen Aboriginal houses at the eel farms, and
there are archaeological remains of villages of up to 146 stone houses, implying
at least seasonally resident populations of hundreds of people.” (p. 210)
 When it comes to sustainable production and population control, however,
perhaps the prime example is Tikopia in the Solomon Islands, as described by the
New Zealand ethnographer and anthropologist Raymond Firth in a series of works
such as “We, the Tikopia”. Here limited territory posed a food supply problem in
conditions of population growth. Various methods were used to reduce the level
of population, such as celibacy, contraception (coitus interruptus), abortion,
infanticide, sending young men on sea voyages --sometimes they didn’t come
back-- and, as a last resort, warfare. 

On the supply side the chiefs could
impose restrictions on the consumption of certain foods:

- “Exercise of authority by the chief in order to guide the utilization of
economic resources by his people is seen particularly in the imposition of a
tapu. Each of the four chiefs has under control one of the major foodstuffs, the
sanction for this lying in the religious sphere. This allows him from time to
time to institute a ‘close season’ for the product in question, and the
restriction is obeyed not only by his clansmen but by all people who have an
interest in the lands where the tapu operates. About a year before I arrived in
Tikopia the Ariki [chief] Tafua judged that the supply of coconuts was getting
scarce, so put up a mark of tapu in Rofaea. This was removed shortly after I
came, and the occasion was celebrated by a feast. The sons of the Ariki
collected food from his orchards, Pa Saukirima and Pa Fenutapu brought
contributions from Namo, Pa Tekaumata his son-in-law and Pa Motuanji his
sister’s son also assisted, and other people of his clan and his district.
Before the food was prepared, the chief said to the assembled company, ‘the tapu
is lifted’, which gave freedom to all to utilize the coconuts from that area
once again. A period of several years usually elapses before any such largescale Ariki Fanjarere controls the breadfruit in the same way, the Ariki Kafka
the yam, and the Ariki Taumako the taro, though since the latter two crops are
planted seasonally there is little point in attempting to conserve them by
restriction, and these chiefs are concerned with the harvest ritual instead.
 

A conservation tapu is not inviolable. If a man’s orchards happen to be
concentrated in a single area affected by the restriction, then he may take his
coconuts, prepare a portion of food for the chief and go to him. When the chief
has finished eating, the man says ‘I have taken coconuts from … for food.’ The
chief usually then replies, ‘It is good.’ The act of notification does away with
any offence.” (pp. 376-77)."


My submission, then, is that the original communists and their early
successors have a lot to teach us --provided we do not view them uncritically.

The chief defect of these early societies, which also remains as a legacy in the
present age, was that the area of social reference as far as they were concerned
was limited to the kin --anyone else was outside the pale. This attitude can be
seen in some early European tribal names --for example, among the Gauls, the
Bituriges (literally, “the Kings of the World”) or, among the Germans, the
Allemanni (“Alle Manner” , “all People”, there’s nobody else). We are faced with
the need to transcend such limits: as some German socialists wrote to Fenner
Brockway on the eve of the Second World War,"

(http://radicalanthropologygroup.org/wp-content/uploads/SOCIALISM_AND_ANTHROPOLOGY.pdf)


==Chris Boehm’s theory of the human revolution vs. David Graeber's distortions==

Chris Knight:

"Nearly a decade after the appearance of my own book detailing the complexities of this ‘human revolution’ (Knight 1991), the anthropologist Christopher Boehm (1999) published a version of the theory that, despite its insights, played safe in political terms by omitting any mention of the most important element – the dynamics of sex and gender. It is this abstract, unisex version of human revolution theory that G&W consider safe enough to mention explicitly in order to discredit it.

Boehm points out that our earliest ancestors were neither one-sidedly cooperative nor one-sidedly competitive. Instead, they were psychologically disposed to dominate others while forming alliances to resist being dominated in turn. This collective resistance from below eventually culminated in everyone coming together to prevent any would-be leader from dominating the group. Our ancestors’ chimpanzee-style dominance was now turned on its head, culminating in ‘reverse dominance’ – rule by a morally aware community committed to an egalitarian ethos.

G&W go along with the idea that humans ‘do appear to have begun … with a self-conscious aversion to being told what to do’ (p. 133). In this context, they agree that extant hunter-gatherers display ‘a whole panoply of tactics collectively employed to bring would-be braggarts and bullies down to earth – ridicule, shame, shunning …. none of which have any parallel among other primates’ (p. 86). What they’ve no interest in is the idea that such tactics played a crucial role in shaping human nature during our evolutionary past.

Summing up their objection to Boehm’s account, they describe any suggestion that hunter-gatherers consistently preferred egalitarianism as an ‘odd insistence’ that ‘for many tens of thousands of years, nothing happened’. If our hunter-gatherer ancestors were consistently egalitarian, their political lives must have somehow been frozen, stuck in time. G&W conclude with these words: ‘Before about 12,000 years ago, Boehm insists, humans were basically egalitarian . . . according to Boehm, for about 200,000 years [these] political animals all chose to live just one way.’ (p. 87)

The only problem is that this isn’t what Boehm wrote. His actual words are worth quoting:

‘Once one band, somewhere, invented an egalitarian order, this radical change in social ways of doing things would become visible to its neighbors. The advantages would have been evident wherever subordinates were ambivalent about being dominated, particularly in bands with very aggressive bullies…. One would expect a gradual cultural diffusion to take place, with attractive egalitarian traditions replacing despotic ones locally. … Over time, migration patterns over longer distances could have fairly rapidly spread this political invention from one continent to another.’ (Boehm 1999: 195)

This is how successful revolutions work. Plainly, Boehm’s argument was not simply that until 12,000 years ago ‘humans were basically egalitarian.’ Instead, he suggests that early humans developed a variety of different political systems while gradually converging around one particularly successful model – egalitarianism.

Quite unfairly, The Dawn of Everything conflates modern evolutionary theory with social evolutionism – the nineteenth century narrative of a ladder of stages progressing from ‘savagery’ through ‘barbarism’ to ‘civilization’. Darwinism claims to be scientific, we are told, but in reality, is pure myth. Quixotically, G&W expect readers to give serious consideration to a perspective on human origins that does not acknowledge evolutionary theory at all.

The only science these authors do recognize is ‘archaeological science’, and then only if the archaeology doesn’t go too far back. They justify dating ‘the dawn of everything’ to a mere 30,000 years ago on the basis that nothing about politics or social life can be gleaned from archaic human ‘cranial remains and the occasional piece of knapped flint’(p. 81).

This excuse no longer works in the light of recent evidence that our species’ most unique trait – art and symbolic culture – emerged in Africa three or four times earlier than was previously thought. By no means limited to bones and stones, this evidence consists of beads, geometric engravings, burials with grave goods and artefacts such as grindstones and paint pots, all invariably found in association with red ochre (Henshilwood et al. 2009, 2011). G&W do notice one or two of these discoveries (pp. 83-4) but show little interest – despite the fact that when cutting-edge Darwinian theory is applied to the ochre record, the possibilities for generating predictions about social dynamics, patterns of ritual performance and gendered alliances become very real (Power 2009, 2019; Power et al. 2013; Power et al. 2021; Watts 2014).

Unfortunately, these authors won’t go near Darwinism in any shape or form. They concede that someone whom they term a ‘feminist’ (actually the highly respected founding figure in primate and human sociobiology Sarah Hrdy) has come up with a ‘story’ about the critical role of collective childcare in shaping our human instincts and psychology (Hrdy 2009). Commenting that ‘there’s nothing wrong with myths’, they describe this particular myth as ‘important.’ They then immediately cast doubt on it by quipping that ‘such insights can only ever be partial because there was no garden of Eden, and a single Eve never existed’ (p. 82). Tricks of this kind – in this case ignoring the fact that Hrdy’s groundbreaking work is focused on the emergence of the genus Homo some 2 million years before the dating of our common mitochondrial DNA ancestor – are clearly aimed at undermining the very idea that human origins research is worth pursuing at all.

Readers interested in Mesolithic and Neolithic archaeology will find plenty of intriguing speculations in this book. But if you are interested in how we became human – how we developed our unusually revealing eyes, our extraordinarily large brains, our distinctively social emotions, our laughter, our innate capacity for music and language – you won’t find anything at all!"

(https://www.focaalblog.com/2021/12/22/chris-knight-wrong-about-almost-everything/)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]