

'''* Essay: The Human Symbolic Revolution: A Darwinian Account. Chris Knight, Camilla Power & Ian Watts.  Cambridge Archaeological Journal 5:1 (1995), pp. 75-114'''

URL = http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/old/pub_knight_power_watts_big.pdf


=Summary=

"By 50,000 years ago, the effects of a ‘symbolic explosion’ – an efflorescence of human art, song, dance
and ritual – were rippling across the globe. Applied to archaeological evidence, standard neo-Darwinian theory offers new understandings of this improbable event. The present article defines ‘symbolism’, models quasi-ritual behaviour in late archaic Homo sapiens, extends the argument to
the emergence of anatomically modern humans and concludes with preliminary tests against
archaeological, ethnographic and rock art data."


=Excerpt=

"Symbolic culture facilitates co-operation beyond that
explicable directly from kin selection or reciprocal
altruism theory (Chase 1994); it is such uniquely human
co-operation that underwrites the effectiveness of speech
(cf. Carrithers 1990, 202; Bennett 1976; Grice 1969). This
needs stressing because the reverse argument has recently
become current among archaeologists,
palaeoanthropologists and linguists debating human
origins. Bickerton (1990) postulates a ‘neural
macromutation’ thanks to which the descendants of
‘African Eve’ spontaneously produced ‘syntacticized
language’, capable for the first time of reference to
morally authoritative intangibles. ‘The gods’ and those
human co-operative endeavours which depend on their
authority are pictured by Bickerton as products of speech.
Speech as a biological given is then credited with
generating religion, art, myth and symbolic culture as a
whole (cf. Cavalli-Sforza et al. 1988,6006; Mellars 1991).

Such ‘word-magic’ scenarios treat speech as an
independent variable, unconditionally superior to
alternative systems of communication."



[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Articles]]