* Article: [[Human Metasystem Transition Theory]] (HMST). By  Cadell Last. Journal of Evolution and Technology - Vol. 25 Issue 1 – January 2015 - pgs 1-16 

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284157238_Human_metasystem_transition_HMST_theory


=Description=

"This article proposes a theory of human evolution termed Human Metasystem Transition (HMST), suggesting that major transitions in human organization have been facilitated by the (Text sourced from https://www.organism.earth/library/document/human-metasystem-transition-theory) emergence of new information media and energy sources. '''It posits that the current convergence of the Internet and renewable energy could catalyze a fourth metasystem transition, leading to a global superorganism with compressed spatial and temporal dimensions of human interaction.''' "

(https://www.organism.earth/library/document/human-metasystem-transition-theory)


=Abstract=

"The  emergence  of  new levels of organization has occurred within the human system three times, and has resulted in three broadly defined levels  of higher control, producing three broadly defined  levels of group selection (e.g., band/tribe, chiefdom/kingdom, nation-state/international). These are “Human  Metasystem  Transitions”  (HMST). Throughout   these   HMST several common system-level patterns have manifested that are fundamental to understanding the nature  and  evolution  of  the  human  system,  as  well  as  our potential future  development. First, HMST have  been built around the  control of three mostly distinct primary energy sources  (e.g., hunting,  agriculture,  industry). Second,  the control  of  new  energy  sources has  always  been  achieved  and  stabilized  by  utilizing  the  evolutionary  emergence  of a more  powerful information-processing  medium  (e.g.,  language,  writing,  printing  press). Third, new  controls  emerge  with  the  capability  of  organizing  energy  flows  over  larger expanses of space in shorter durations of time: bands/tribes controlled regional space and stabilized  for  hundreds  of  thousand  of  years,  chiefdoms/kingdoms  controlled  semi-continental expanses  of  space  and  stabilized  for  thousands  of  years,  and  nation-states control  continental  expanses  of  space  and  have  stabilized  for  centuries. 

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284157238_Human_metasystem_transition_HMST_theory)


=Excerpts=

Cadell Last:

"From  the  application  of  metasystem  transition  (MST)  theory  to  the  human  system,  '''we  can identify  three  major  system  transitions'''  throughout  the  evolution  of  our  genus Homo. On each occasion a  new level of organization has emerged,  which  has been  stabilized  by higher controls and higher group selection. 

These metasystems broadly include systems commonly referred to as “band/tribe,” “chiefdom/kingdom,” and “nation-state/international” organizations  (see  Figure 2). 

The structures of these organizations have been stabilized by the control of three mostly distinct primary  energy  sources:  hunting, agriculture, and  industry. 

* Band/tribe  organizations  manifested around  the  control  of  hunted  and  cooked animal  meat:  '''the  Pyrian  Regime'''. 

* Chiefdom/kingdom organizations  manifested  around  the  control  of  domesticated  plant  and  animal  resources:  the Agrian Regime. 

* Nation-state/international organizations manifested around the control of ancient biomass (or fossil fuels): '''the Carbian Regime''' (see Niele 2005).   


'''The  control  of  these  energy  sources  was  always  organized  through  the  utilization  of  a  new information medium to connect previously disparate subsystems.''' 

* During the transition to hunting organizations,  ''modern language  emerged  to facilitate the  formation of larger group sizes'', which were capable  of  producing  the  social and  technical  expertise  necessary  for  hunting  to  become  a stable   and   reliable   energy   source   (Dunbar   2003). 

* During   the   transition   to   agricultural organizations,  ''written  language  functioned  to  track'',  collect,  and  stabilize  a  coordinated  large-scale  economy  fundamentally  built  on  domesticated  plants  and  animals  (Cooper  2004). 

* During the transition to industrial organizations, ''the  printing press  emerged''  allowing for the flourishing of scientific and technical expertise necessary for the exploitation and stabilization of fossil fuels, and consequently, the construction of the modern world (Niele 2005).   


All of these human metasystem transitions (HMST) can be characterized by subsystems of lower control becoming integrated under new higher control regimes. 

* In the hunting transitions, ''parties and  groups  became  integrated  into  bands  and  tribes''. 

* In  the  agricultural  transitions, ''bands  and tribes became  integrated or subsumed  into chiefdoms  and  kingdoms''. 

* In the  industrial transition,  ''chiefdoms  and  kingdoms  became  integrated  or  subsumed  into  the  formation  of  the  modern nation-state''.  


'''These  are the  most  basic  example  of  both  the  hierarchical  and  developmentally constrained  nature  of  metasystems'''.    

Metasystems  are  hierarchical  because  they  emerge  from integration  at  lower  levels  and  developmentally  constrained  because  they  manifest  similar organizational  properties  at  each  level.  In  this  framework  of  thinking  about  the  human  system, the  modern  nation-state  sits  atop an  ancient evolutionary HMST  control  hierarchy  of  ever-more diversely integrated subsystems.

Throughout  this process  of  higher  subsystem  integration,  '''the  stabilization  of  a  new HMST appears to compress  spatial  and  temporal  restrictions  on  human  action''',  both  within  the  control system  and  within society as  a  whole. '''The  highest  metasystem  controls  display  an  ever-broader extension  of  control  over  larger  regions  of  space,  and  they  can  accomplish  this  spatial  feat  in shorter durations  of time'''  (i.e.,  physical space-time  barriers to human  action are consistently and progressively reduced). 


Consequently, '''there is a trend toward accelerated metasystem emergence''', as the space-time reach of human action progressively increases. 

* ''The hunting transition occurred over  a  period  of  hundreds  of  thousands  (if  not  millions)  of  years'', 

* ''the  agricultural  transition occurred over a period of thousands of years'', 

* ''and the industrial transition has been occurring over a   period   of   centuries''. 

This   metasystem   process   has   resulted   in more   complex   human organizations  directly  and  coherently  controlling  more  of  the  Earth’s  surface,  faster.  For individuals, the consequence is the emergence of systems that increasingly allow for action that is global  (spatial)  and  instant  (temporal). Therefore, in  regards  to  both  space  and  time, higher metasystem  controls appear  to  facilitate  a  culturally  and  technologically  mediated conquest  of dimensionality.

 Of  course,  it  is  unknown  whether  the  metasystem  conquest  of  dimensionality  will  be  further extended, but there is already evidence that a new information-energy 
 relationship is emerging in the human system between the Internet (information medium) and renewables (energy structure). The  development and  stabilization of a  new 
 information-energy feedback process  could provide the basic architecture for a further metasystem transition, which '''would mean a transition towards higher controls (i.e., 
 global), greater systems complexity (i.e., higher subsystem integration), and further  reduction  of  space-time  restrictions  on  human  control and  action'''. Such  a  
 metasystem transition  would  likely produce a human civilization best described as a “global village” (Last 2014a) with a “global brain” (Heylighen 2014a). ."


==From the Conclusion==

Cadell Last:

"I  have  tried  to  describe  a complex systems  theory  of the  human evolution – human  metasystem transition  (HMST)  theory – based  around  the  emergence  of higher  control organization through the  stabilization  of  feedback  between  emergent  information-energy  systems. Both energy  and information  as phenomena  appear  to  fundamentally  influence human  system  structure  and  also appear  to  build  on  previously established  processes,  allowing higher  controls  to  stabilize new organization and complexity. If this theory accurately maps the territory of human evolution, the emergence  and  establishment  of  new  information  and  energy  systems  should  present  us  with  a signal  that  our  current  control  structures will  be  challenged  and  potentially  superseded this century.   '''From  an  evolutionary cybernetic  perspective, this  theory  has  the  potential  to  better  integrate unique  human  species  processes  within  a  systems-level  evolutionary  model of  all  life'''. Previous biochemical metasystem   transitions   have   followed   very predictable   patterns   related   to organization  and  complexity,  and  it  appears  as  though  the  human  system  is  not  distinct  in  this respect even  though  a  new  and  unique  pathway (that  of  technocultural  evolution) has  emerged and continues to dominate change within our lineage. If simple fundamental mechanisms increase the  probability  of the  establishment  of  higher-level organization within  the  human  system,  this may make our systems behavior easier to understand in relation to other complex systems."


(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284157238_Human_metasystem_transition_HMST_theory)

=More information=

* the [[Information-Energy Metasystem Model]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Network_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Transition]]