Human Ecosystems in São Paulo: the Real Time Museum of the City

***

What: An interactive installation.  A 12 hours workshop on the Human Ecosystems project and the city of San Paulo

Who: Art is Open Source (Salvatore Iaconesi and Oriana Persico) and The Citizens of San Paulo

Why: Understanding, Digital Public Space, Research, Expresssion, Civic Toolkit

When: 23-28th September 2014

Where: SESC Vila Mariana, San Paulo (Brazil)

***

From September 23rd to 28th, as a parallel program of the International Meeting on Culture and New Technologies, the SESC Vila Mariana will hosts the Human Ecosystems project, by the Italian artists Salvatore Iaconesi and Oriana Persico (Art is Open Source).

Human Ecosystems is a global project which captures the real-time public conversations happening on major social networks in cities, to analyse them, to create real-time interactive visualisations, and transform them into a source of open data. “This is a crucial point”, states Iaconesi currently in Yale as a World Fellow 2014 “Social networks are our new Public Spaces: citizens are the only ones who do not have access to all this information. In Human Ecosystems we transform this information into a new digital commons, accessible by everyone”.

The event marks the launch of the project in Brazil, in partnership with the Metodista University of Sao Paulo, under the leadership of Dr. Fabio Josgrilberg and his research group, according to which “It is an innovative and provocative project. Working with Salvatore and Oriana will stimulate research, as well as opportunities for collaboration with civil society”.

In Vila Mariana the Relational Ecosystem of the City will become a work of art in the “Real Time Museum of the City“.

Situated in the beautiful Atrium, visitors will be immersed in the real-time city, exploring the emotions,desires and issues discussed by citizens, understanding the flows of information and knowledge, and how people constantly form networks, and human constellations.

“It directly engages people’s perception and imagination”, points out Persico. When confronted with visualizations, people are surprised to discover that they are close or distant from each other, how people and organizations in the city are connected or distant, and more.  Immediately new set of opportunities becomes possible: to identify communities with similar, dissonant or complementary perspectives; people who are discussing issues of common interest; establishing contacts and forming new relationships. You can even start asking questions to the city: where do people go to have fun? Where do they talk about football, ecology, or punk music? Which roles do they assume in their communities? Possibilities for research and to gain a better understanding of the city’s social dynamics are endless”.

Together with the installation, a two day open workshop completes the experience.

Participants will learn how to use the Human Ecosystems platform to extract and visualize data, and use it to create new scenarios for the city of San Paulo: for culture, business, knowledge, policy making, participation, freedom.

According to Bruno Rondani, chair and founder of Wenovate, “the exhibit, together with the workshop, will allow people to interact with data in a human and artistic perspective. This possibility itself is a great source of new other possibilities. We are very interested in the potential of the Human Ecosystems project to become a source, and even a tool, for people to develop projects and ideas related to the concept of innovative cities.”

Human Ecosystems is a global initiative. It has already started in Rome, Toronto, Montreal, Detroit, Istanbul, Cairo, and it is being used as a tool for planning, cultural policies, art, civic engagement. In 2013 Human Ecosystems has been awarded the “Consequential Outcomes” Grant of the prestigious Eisenhower Fellowships.

Attached, a full description of the exhibit and the workshop program.

***

Links

- Human Ecosystems official website:	
http://human-ecosystems.com/home/

- Art is Open Source:
http://www.artisopensource.net/

- International Meeting on Culture and New Technologies on SESC:
http://www.sescsp.org.br/programacao/42109_ENCONTRO+INTERNACIONAL+CULTURAS+E+TECNOLOGIAS+DIGITAIS#/content=saiba-mais

Info&Contacts

For press, information about the project, the installation and the workshop, email:
oriana.persico@gmail.com

To interact directly with the AOS team and other participants, subscribe the Human Ecosystems Page on FB:
https://www.facebook.com/HumanEcosystems?fref=ts

Credits

Human Ecosystems San Paulo is an event sponsored by:
SESC Vila Mariana

in collaboration with:
Universitade Metodista of San Paulo

supported by:
Wenovate
Concept & Realization:
Salvatore Iaconesi and Oriana Persico  [ AOS - Art Is Open Source ]

Brazilian producer:
Daniel Gonzalez

Technical & Infrastructure supervision:
Caleb Luporini

Storytelling & Communication Team:
Fábio Botelho Josgrilberg
Luiz Fernando Ramalho
Silmara Sgoti