'''* Book: Human Dignity and World Order. The Holistic Foundations of Global Democracy. Glen Martin. One World Renaissance,2024'''

URL = https://oneworldrenaissance.com/human-dignity-and-world-order/

=Description=

"This book goes deeply into the question of what constitutes our common human dignity from which all our human rights are derived. It investigates the reasons why persons are recognized as having limitless value or dignity. It shows that the current world system as dual system of global capitalism and militarized sovereign states systematically ignores and destroys human dignity. The book also shows how and why the Constitution for the Federation of Earth establishes a world system on dignity, with consequences such as ending war, protecting universal human rights, and restoring our planetary environment."


=Review=

"This impressive and inspiring work is a philosophic tour-de-force that demonstrates why achieving democratic global government, and thereby saving our planet from perdition, requires a courageous leap rather than an incremental series of steps. Dr. Martin goes further than previous world federalist thinkers in providing an integrative argument that explicates the systemic and even cosmological and theological foundations for such a planetary transformation. He convincingly shows that the ratification of the Earth Constitution is the proper vehicle for this achievement and that the universal restoration of human dignity is both its premise and goal."

— Byron Belitsos, veteran world federalist activist and co-author of One World Democracy [https://oneworldrenaissance.com/human-dignity-and-world-order/]

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:Integral_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]