

December 2010 special issue of OSBR, via http://www.osbr.ca/ojs/index.php/osbr/issue/view/114


=Contents=

"Humanitarian Open Source is the theme of the December issue of the Open
Source Business Resource, which is now available at osbr.ca. The Guest
Editor is Leslie Hawthorn, Open Source Outreach Manager for Oregon State
University's Open Source Lab.

In this issue, authors in Canada (Ottawa and Toronto), Sri Lanka (Columbo),
and the United States (Brunswick, Hartford, Indianapolis, New York,
Portland, and Seattle), draw upon their experiences to show the role of the
open source approach in meeting humanitarian needs in the past, present, and
future.

Chamindra de Silva, Director and CTO of the Sahana Foundation, explores the
landscape of humanitarian free and open source software and the natural
alignment between the humanitarian and open source domains.

Mark Prutsalis, President and CEO of the Sahana Foundation, describes the
role of the Sahana project in disaster-relief scenarios and the need to
build a service industry based on supporting HFOSS in order to sustain the
ecosystem.

Glenn McKnight and Alfredo Herrera from the Humanitarian Initiatives
Committee describe IEEE Canada's efforts to produce open hardware solutions
that provide reliable sources of electricity to address humanitarian needs
in developing countries.

Adam Feuer, Director of Engineering for the Grameen Foundation’s Mifos
Initiative, discusses how Mifos open source banking software helps alleviate
global poverty through microfinance and serves as a model to address other
humanitarian challenges.

Dawn Smith, Project Coordinator for the OpenMRS medical record system,
examines the role of OpenMRS in the formation of a health information
business ecosystem for resource-poor environments.

Ralph Morelli, Professor of Computer Science at Trinity College, Allen
Tucker, Professor Emeritus at Bowdoin College, and Trishan de Lanerolle,
Project Director for the Humanitarian FOSS Project at Trinity College,
discuss the Humanitarian FOSS Project and its initiatives in undergraduate
education to benefit both global and local communities.


Mike Herrick, Executive Director of the Collaborative Software Foundation,
traces the history of the TriSano project and its business model refinement
to illustrate how collaboration can lead to sustainable software and
communities that benefit global public health."
(http://www.osbr.ca/ojs/index.php/osbr/issue/view/114)

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Technology]]