
'''* Book: Human Impact on Ancient Environments. By Charles Redman. University of Arizona Press, 1999'''

URL = ([https://www.amazon.com/Impact-Ancient-Environments-Charles-Redman/dp/0816519633/ref=sr_1_fkmr1_1?])


=Description=

"Threats to biodiversity, food shortages, urban sprawl . . . lessons for environmental problems that confront us today may well be found in the past. The archaeological record contains hundreds of situations in which societies developed long-term sustainable relationships with their environments—and thousands in which the relationships were destructive. Charles Redman demonstrates that much can be learned from an improved understanding of peoples who, through seemingly rational decisions, degraded their environments and threatened their own survival. By discussing archaeological case studies from around the world—from the deforestation of the Mayan lowlands to soil erosion in ancient Greece to the almost total depletion of resources on Easter Island—Redman reveals the long-range coevolution of culture and environment and clearly shows the impact that ancient peoples had on their world. These case studies focus on four themes: habitat transformation and animal extinctions, agricultural practices, urban growth, and the forces that accompany complex society. They show that humankind's commitment to agriculture has had cultural consequences that have conditioned our perception of the environment and reveal that societies before European contact did not necessarily live the utopian existences that have been popularly supposed. Whereas most books on this topic tend to treat human societies as mere reactors to environmental stimuli, Redman's volume shows them to be active participants in complex and evolving ecological relationships. Human Impact on Ancient Environments demonstrates how archaeological research can provide unique insights into the nature of human stewardship of the Earth and can permanently alter the way we think about humans and the environment."

([https://www.amazon.com/Impact-Ancient-Environments-Charles-Redman/dp/0816519633/ref=sr_1_fkmr1_1?])
 
[[Category:Books]]
 
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
 
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
 
[[Category:Ecology]]