'''* Book: Prabhat Rainjan Sarkar (1967) Human Society, Ananda Marga Publications, 2000.'''

URL = https://anandamargabooks.com/books/human-society/ [https://www.amazon.com/Human-Society-Prabhat-Rainjan-Sarkar/dp/8172521677]

Set of 2 volumes in 1998: [https://www.amazon.com/Human-Society-Set-2-Volumes/dp/8172521294]

=Description=

From the publisher:

"In '''Part 1''' the author demonstrates at the outset that society must be built on a foundation of morality and must move progressively forward in order to establish itself in universal humanism. Then from the vantage point of that universal humanism, the author examines different issues of education, social justice, and the judicial system; and probes the impacts that practitioners of various professions may have, for better or for worse, on the social body as a whole, depending on the expansiveness of their minds. 

In '''Part 2''' the author introduces his theory of history and social change. Economist Ravi Batra has based his best-selling economic books on the Law of the Social Cycle as explained in this book. Historians and futurists are calling this a landmark work in understanding the process of social change. Part 1 the author demonstrates at the outset that society must be built on a foundation of morality and must move progressively forward in order to establish itself in universal humanism. Then from the vantage point of that universal humanism, the author examines different issues of education, social justice, and the judicial system; and probes the impacts that practitioners of various professions may have, for better or for worse, on the social body as a whole, depending on the expansiveness of their minds. In Part 2 the author introduces his theory of history and social change. Economist Ravi Batra has based his best-selling economic books on the Law of the Social Cycle as explained in this book. Historians and futurists are calling this a landmark work in understanding the process of social change."


=Contents=

==Part 01==

#Moralism
#Education
#Social Justice
#Justice
#Various Occupations


==Part 02==

#The Kśatriya Age
#The Vipra Age
#The Vaeshya Age
#Shúdra Revolution and Sadvipra Society



=About the author=

"Between 1955 and 1990 Shrii Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar, whose spiritual name was Shrii Shrii Ánandamúrti, wrote a total of 261 books in English, Bengali and Hindi. He wrote in the name Shrii Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar when treating sociology, economics, philology and various other subjects including children's tales, and in the name Shrii Shrii Ánandamúrti when focusing on spiritual topics. Many of his books he gave as dictations; others were compiled from his discourses, some of them in small inspirational pocket-books."

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]