= could also be called: Humanocentrism


=Description=

Marcelo Gleiser:

"I have suggested elsewhere that modern astronomy offers a new vision for humanity, which I called Humancentrism. This form of human-centric thinking has nothing in the slightest to do with any assumed superiority of the human species, nor does it hold that we are in any way central to the Universe. (For example, Star Wars fans criticize Humanocentrism as the belief that humans are the apex of Galactic sentience.) 

'''In a nutshell, Humancentrism is an inversion of Copernicanism, which states that the more we learn about the Cosmos, the less important we become. Copernicanism is a doctrine of human insignificance in the grand scheme of things. Humancentrism states the opposite. Its central goal is to push humanity to find and embrace a new moral imperative.''' As we scan the skies in search of other Earth-like planets — using vehicles such as the sensational Kepler satellite that has found thousands of exoplanets — and as we understand better the history of life on Earth, we learn something new and essential about our planet, the nature of life, and who we are. 


Indeed, '''Humancentrism is deeply linked to Biocentrism, which defends the central importance of life in the Universe''', and more specifically, on this planet. The link is unavoidable, given that we are deeply codependent with all other forms of life on the planet, and all forms of life are deeply codependent with the planet as a whole. There is a delicate systemic balance based on feedback loops that regulate the dynamics between planet and life, and we attack it relentlessly. Until we embrace a new life-centric perspective, our project of civilization will not be sustainable. So, '''Humancentrism is a branch of Biocentrism focused on what we can do as a species to guarantee our collective future'''.

(https://bigthink.com/13-8/enlightenment-20-new-age-reason/)


=More information=

* [[Posthumanism]]

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Movements]]