
'''= decentralized generation and distribution of electric power through biomass'''

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Chip Ransler is the co-founder of Husk Power Systems (HPS), a for-profit company that cost-effectively converts rice husks into electricity. HPS utilizes a proprietary technology to run 35-100 kilowatt mini power plants, delivering pay-for-use electricity to un-electrified villages in India's "Rice Belt." HPS' five pilot projects have become operationally profitable within six months, delivering sustainable, environmentally-friendly, low-cost energy that is dramatically improving the lives of rural Indians."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/008923.html)


'''2.'''

"We are world leaders in decentralized generation and distribution of electric power.

Husk Power Systems (“HPS”) lighted the first village from its first 100% biomass based power plant that uses discarded rice husks to generate electricity in August 2007 and today it has installed 60 mini-power plants that power ~ 25,000 households in more than 250 villages and hamlets and impact lives of approximately 150,000 people in rural India.

On an average, each power plant serves about 400 households and replaces ~ 42,000 litres of kerosene and 18,000 litres of diesel per year. As of August 2010, HPS has already sequestered 50,000 tons of CO2.

More importantly, HPS has employed and trained more than 300 local people in rural India for running and managing power plants and saved a total $1.25M in cash for all households HPS serves.

By 2014, HPS plans to serve ~ 6,500 villages, save 750,000 tons of CO2, create 7,000 local jobs and save $50M in cash for over 5 million people by replacing kerosene and diesel with its proprietary renewable energy technology.

HPS installs decentralized generation and distribution systems at the cheapest capital cost in the world. At ~$1/W of generation, distribution and installation cost, HPS plants are cheaper than the mega-size Thermal Power Plants."
(http://www.huskpowersystems.com/)


=More Information=

Extensive interview at http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/008923.html


[[Category:Energy]]