

=Source=

*  Paper: [[Productive Paradigms in the Digital Era]]. Ignacio de Castro Arribas. Contribution for the 3rd Free Culture Research Conference, 8 and 9 of October, 2010 

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf 


=Definition=

"Hybridity between peer-production and firms is a collaboration
between two productive entities which provides a “(...)
constructive interface between market and nonmarket-motivated
behaviour, through which actions (…) can reinforce, rather than
undermine, each other” 

(Benkler, 2006, p.102). [http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf]


=Discussion=

Ignacio de Castro Arribas:

"Other possible solutions are hybrid forms involving peerproduction
and firms. Complementarity between the firm and the
peer-production platform and differences on efficiency in the
provision of complementary goods or services is the basis of a
symbiotic relationship (Lerner and Tirole, 2004). Increases in the
incentives to contribute, improvements in the design of the
architecture or funding of some monetary costs of the platform
render efficiency gains and increased production in the peer production
process. Alliances between firms and peer-production
platforms resulting in such a positive effects could be desirable
from the peer-production point of view. Typical examples are Red
Hat and IBM. For an OSS user/developer the probabilities of
obtaining a contract with the firm involved in the open project
increases (indirect appropriation incentives). In one hand
participating in a project with the firm results in greater
visibility (signalling effect), and in the other hand the
technical skills and knowledge (human capital) are precisely those
required by the firm. In such a symbiotic relationship the firm
might benefit from increased peer-production and in order to
encourage it the commercial firm might resort to subsidizing peer production
by allocating some workers to the peer-production
platform (Lerner and Tirole, 2004). In this last case the
commercial firm would benefit from human capital gains by the
workers participating in the peer-production process. For instance
an IBM engineer collaborating in the GNU/Linux invests in her
human capital and both the worker and the firm enjoys the returns
of this investment (Benkler, 2006).

Direct appropriation of production by the firm would be likely to
reduce users motivations to contribute and probably lead to a
desertion of the peer-production process (Benkler, 2002). Firms
can instead benefit in segments of the market complementary to the
peer-production (Lerner and Tirole, 2004) such as marketing or
customer service (west, 2004). In the particular case of OSS and
commercial firms collaborations, such as IBM, Lerner and Tirole
(2004) point to increases in demand due to users gains through
reduced risks of suffering lock in effects if the prices of the
goods/services bought from the firm increases. Users also benefit
from customization capabilities, being hence able to tailor their
software. Another source of benefits for the firm is the
possibility to certify a standard by releasing code and possible
gains in engineering efficiency (west, 2004).

The former reasons follow the logic of giving away the razor to
sell more razor blades (the complementary product) (Lerner and
Tirole, 2004).

In addition to the former reasons, commercial firms might be
induced to collaborate with peer-production processes due to a
certain combination of economical and technical reasons that lead
to unsustainability of fully propietary strategies. These
conditions are related with the market share necessary to
efficiently support propietary research and development and
increasing buyer demands for open standards (West, 2004).


Hybridity between peer-production and firms is a collaboration
between two productive entities which provides a “(...)
constructive interface between market and nonmarket-motivated
behaviour, through which actions (…) can reinforce, rather than
undermine, each other” (Benkler, 2006, p.102). Hybridity between
peer-production and firms is based on the existence of
complementaries and cross group externalities. Firms benefit from
increased peer-production and peer-production platforms are able
to attract more users if there is a successful collaboration with
the for-profit organization. On the top of affecting positively
users´ motivations to contribute, firms might subsidize peer production.

Subsidization is not necessarily through monetary
means, like the IBM engineers collaborating in the GNU/Linux it
does affect cost-relationships in the peer-production
architecture, thereby a affecting efficiency and production.

This collaboration is indeed a two sided market. The necessary and
sufficient condition for two-sidedness proposed by Rochet and
Tirole (2004), non-price neutrality is present in these hybrid
production models. As it should be obvious prices are not
necessarily monetary, and by reducing costs or barriers of entry
(providing maintenance or service support for users or developing
user-friendly interfaces) the for profit firm is able to subsidize
peer-production. In the other hand the firm produces and offers in
the market complementary services and goods whose price can
control. Hence the for profit firm can benefit by subsidizing
peer-production if that increases sales in the other,
complementary market.

Within a peer-production platform two-sidedness is not relevant,
the peer-production model internalizes consumption externalities
more efficiently than a two-sided market and incorporates users as
a factor of production (prosumption effect). However by
eliminating price and property mechanism a barrier is created for
interactions with firms and markets, where money mechanism is the
basis. Because there are cross group effects and prices are nonneutral
there are benefits to be obtained for an intermediary
applying two-sided strategies. Such an intermediation provides a
link between non-monetary and monetary economies.

Hybrid production models monetize peer-production. By using
outputs of the peer-produced processes as inputs of the goods or
services offered in the market, the intermediary effectively
internalizes consumption externalities in such a way that its
production is the function of capital, labour and use. This
explains the success of Google and propietary social media, in
both examples information is peer-ly produced and consumed by the
users: users create the searching engine and users use the
searching engine in Google, similarly users post and users read
the posts in social media. By exploiting this peer-ly generated
information the platform is able to use it with for profit
objectives, Adsense or Adwords and the increasing interest and
presence of advertiser and sellers in Social media is good proof
of this.

Google benefits from increasing number of advertisers and
advertisers benefit from a greater audience. The scheme is similar
for social media. In order to foster cross group externalities and
prosumption effects these firms lower as much as possible the
barriers of entry for new users and even subsidize them by
providing services below their marginal costs, and usually for
free. Increasing number of users attracts more sellers and
advertisers and the increasing amount of data to be exploited
increases the quality of the advertising service, reinforcing
hence two-sidedness."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf)


=Conclusion=

"RELATIVE ADVANTAGES FO DIFFERENT PRODUCTION MODELS

Ignacio de Castro Arribas:

From this reasoning a simple classification follows: market, nonmarket
and hybrid production models. While market based production
models might partly internalize consumption externalities
(network effects), the factors of production are labour and
capital, use affects utility, not production. Conversely peer production
represents a clear case of non-market production. Peer production
does effectively internalize consumption externalities,
both network and prosumption effects, incorporating use as a
factor of production. However since peer-production is not based
in money signals it might face inefficiencies when interacting
with the market to acquire labour and capital if these are needed.
Hybrid models implementing successful two-sided market strategies
create a bridge between market and non-market production systems ,
monetizing (part of) the peer-production and incorporating thus
market based factors of production, labour and capital, and use,
the non-market productive factor.

The efficiency level of each model is dictated by the costs faced
by the productive entity, the existing externalities and the
capacity to internalize them. In presence of prosumption effects
non-market and hybrid models will enjoy a relative advantage over
market production systems, and due to this competence market
production might become unsustainable. Conversely in absence of
prosumption effects incentives to produce and efficiency gains for
peer-production will be reduced and market based production might
face a relative advantage given its greater ability to incorporate
labour and capital to production.

Finally when prosumption effects are present and labour and
capital requirements are sufficiently low peer-production will
hold a relative advantage over both market and hybrid models."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf)


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Business]]