

=Description=

A policy and social organisation proprosal by the 'Standards of Life' project:

"Sustainability is not, and never has been, confined to the achievement of environmental balance. Sustainability is a broad objective encompassing the total society including its economy, and until the solutions and processes that we propose lead to the full achievement of sustainability for the whole society, the environmental component will remain a tangible but unreachable goal.

We have concluded that broad sustainability requires that we restructure the way that we provide for our social security. By replacing social security cash payments with in-kind services, the hygiene portion of activity is removed from the wealth economy. This isolation of wealth activity from hygiene activity invigorates and strengthens commercial enterprise, at the same time as it brings broad sustainability to our societies.

The conversion of social security from a monetary benefit into a “universal service” transforms our social and economic landscape with a stroke. The result is a Hygiene Economy that is concerned with the provision of the basic services that support the citizens’ basic needs without the exchange of monetary payment, and a Wealth Economy that is exclusively concerned with the commercial trade of goods and services. The Hygiene Economy is liberated to focus on the sustainable delivery of real social security, and the Wealth Economy takes its place as a client of the greater society, not its master. The roles are reversed compared to an industrial economy, and a steady state economy becomes possible because the Hygiene Economy defines the basic infrastructure of the society.

An isolated Wealth Economy is dramatically healthier than the current industrial model, which is contorted by its attempts to meet commercial and social needs simultaneously. In a sustainable economy no one is “too big to fail”, wealth destruction can be recognized without endangering social security, and the commercial imperative to manipulate the political process is diminished.


The model for a sustainable economy is a capitalist system with competitive markets, and a separate social security system that absorbs the hygiene portion of total labour costs.

The transition to this sustainable economic model is achieved by providing basic social security services at no charge to everyone universally, financed by income taxes which are only used to provide those services."
(http://www.standardsoflife.org/Sustainable_Economics)

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Policy]]