
=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"Lack of vision is really a failure of imagination,  and the consequences of this were predictable. 

'''Fred Polak (1973) had shown in his study The [[Image of  the Future]]''',  that  the  existence  or  absence  of  inspiring  images  of  the future  largely  determines  the  trajectories  of  societies.  Societies,  pessimistic  about  the  future, decay, while those in which people believe a better future is possible, flourish. 


As he put it:

- ''Any student of the rise and fall of cultures cannot fail to be impressed by the role played in this historical succession by the image of the future. The rise and fall of images of the future precedes or accompanies the rise and fall of cultures. As long as  a  society’s  images  is  positive  and  flourishing,  the  flower  of  cultures  in  in  full  bloom. Once the image begins to decay and lose its vitality, however, the culture does not long survive''. (p.19) 


The fall of an image of the future was evident in the dying days of the Soviet Union.  '''Alexei  Yurchak  in  his  book,  Everything  Was  Forever,  Until  It  Was  No  More:  The   Last   Soviet   Generation   (2006),   coined   the   term   ‘hypernormalization’'''   to   characterize this. He claimed that everyone in the Soviet Union knew the system  was failing, but could not imagine an alternative to the status quo, and politicians and  citizens  alike  were  resigned  to  maintaining  the  pretense  of  a  functioning  society  that  would  eventually  realize  the  ideal  of  communism.  This  delusion  became a self-fulfilling prophecy and the fakeness was accepted by everyone as real.  The  whole  society  collapsed.  

In  2016  the  documentary  Hypernormalization produced by British filmmaker Adam Curtis showed how in the West a similar condition prevails. Financiers and technological utopians have given up on the complex  ‘real  world’  and  built  a  simpler  ‘fake  world’,  run  by  corporations  and  kept  stable  by  politicians.  While  Margaret  Thatcher’s  claim  that  there  are  no  alternatives is accepted across the political spectrum, the problems generated by the neoliberal order are  treated  as  mere  glitches  in  the  system,   or  ignored.  A  pretense  of  a  functioning  democratic  society  is  maintained  and  fakeness  is accepted by almost everyone as real. This  fakeness  is  evident  in  the  image  presented  by  the  global  elite  of  technologically  generated  economic  advances  through the  creation  of  a  global  free  market  along  with  the  export  of  democracy  upholding  the    rights  of  individuals. Little effort is required to see that in reality economic advances are not improving the conditions of most people’s lives, the institutions of democracy have been subverted, rights based in institutions that evolved over centuries, such as  universities,  have  been  undermined,  most  people  have  lost  their  economic  security,  the  basis  of  genuine  liberty,  and  wars  to  extend  democracy  into  developing countries are really the exact opposite of what they purport to be. 


As William Blum argued in America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy (2014), they are wars to  impose  institutions  that  facilitate  control  by  the  US  ruling  elites  of  these  countries in order to plunder their resources and expropriate their wealth, with brutal consequences. Imposing markets has generated what William Robertson characterized  as  The  Global  Police  State  (2020), characterized  by  unprecedented levels of surveillance and social control. The massive concentration of wealth and income associated with the expansion of the financial sector has destabilized the global economy (Hudson, 2022). And efforts to deal with ecological destruction are  failing  miserably.  In  the  West  the  only  effective  response  to  globalized  capitalism   has   come   from   right-wing   populist   movements   and   religious   fundamentalists, neither of which take ecological destruction seriously. This lack of effective response to all this manifests the extent of the paralysis of imagination  on the part of critics of globalized capitalism, even when they do recognize that the dynamics of this system are now a threat to the future of humanity."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691)


[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]