'''= "a counterpoint to transhumanism. Instead of outsourcing our intelligence to machines, hyperhumanism asks us to reclaim the innate capacities of the human body, imagination, and relational field".''' [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mO01BVw1Ls8]


=Description=

Carl Hayden Smith and Filip Lundström:

"Hyperhumanism (HH) represents an affirmation of
the human condition and of our central importance
in the current technological moment. The human
being is not something that we want to move beyond
and be “on the other side of” (transhumanism) or
something that we no longer are (post), but as stated
earlier, the first tenet of HH is that we are not human
yet, making the human being "pre-human.” HH
requires a shift from thinking about human beings as
an essence to a process; a human being is therefore
defined as a being participating in the process of
becoming human. Hyperhumanism is the insight
that a human birth is a jackpot win, “the best of all
possible worlds'' and that one who is lucky enough
to be born a human should not miss the opportunity
to be human; one should seek to thrive in their
human body for the short time it is still here. 


=Characteristics=

Carl Hayden Smith and Filip Lundström:

"We will now explore the definition of Hyperhumanism
through some key concepts:


==The “hyper” prefix in hyperhumanism==

Before outlining the characteristics of
hyperhumanism as a response to transhumanism in
the GenAI question, an explanation of the choice of
the “hyper” prefix is required. There are several
prefixes indicating a state of being “beyond”, “over”,
or “after” a certain concept, such as “post”, “meta”,
“trans'' and "hyper ". While these prefixes have
distinct meanings, the way they are used to
delineate a certain realm of discourse is often
arbitrary and can lead to more confusion than clarity.
Humanism has been combined with all the said
prefixes; “posthumanism” and “transhumanism” are
established and well-known terms in the field; and
“meta-humanism” is also of some significance as
well (del Val 2010).

This leads to the question of why we have chosen
the prefix “hyper'' and what we aim to say with it.
Hyper can mean two distinct but different things, the
first being beyond or above, meaning
hyperhumanism is beyond a "human-centric" view of
life and acknowledges multiple kingdoms and
intelligences that are not human but remain
valuable, such as the fungi kingdom but also
potentially the emerging machine intelligences. The
first premise of hyperhumanism is that ‘human
beings may not be fully human yet’, meaning we are
still very much in our infancy as humans, in a
constant state of becoming. Hyperhumanism is also
“hyper” as the hyperhuman strives to be fully human
and live a life where the intensity of living a transitory
human life is celebrated, sought after and thoroughly
explored. In contrast to transhumanism, the
hyperhuman does not seek to get rid of the
limitations of the physical body but enjoys them and
thrives within those constraints.


==[[Dividual Identity]]==

Carl Hayden Smith and Filip Lundström:

"A foundational assumption of hyperhumanism is that
humans are not coherent individual beings with solid
identities but dividuals in a process of becoming,
participating in several networks and flows
simultaneously, and having no clear-cut boundaries
but using membranes to filter the flows and utilising
multiple identities. This is true of both the physical
body and consciousness itself (Saey 2016)."

(https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf)


==[[Double Consciousness]]==

Carl Hayden Smith and Filip Lundström:

"Double consciousness (DC) (Smith 2020) is another
key concept for hyperhumanism. Double
consciousness is the state of being that gives
access, at one and the same time, to two distinctly
different fields of experience. The basis of DC is that
perception is something that we are actively involved
in, reality itself is under construction and we are (to
a certain extent) agents in constructing our own
reality. The key question therefore is, if we know our
reality primarily through our first-hand experience
then how should we understand the production of
that experience?

The objective is that through understanding the
mechanisms of DC we may be able to explore the
production of exactly that, our own experience. As a
result, DC also relates to the field of Ontological
Design, which is a method of context engineering
the human experience itself. Double Consciousness
(DC) is a framework that is being stress tested
through a number of emerging application areas.
Can adopting these forms of DC help us to see
ourselves from other perspectives and how can a
literacy of pluralism help us to become more
hyperhuman?"

(https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf)


==Interbeing==

Carl Hayden Smith and Filip Lundström:

"The interbeing (Hanh 2020) is a crucial bridge
towards hyperhumanism. Interbeing enriches
interconnectedness, compassion, and mindfulness.
It encourages us to extend our awareness beyond
ourselves in order to foster a greater sense of
responsibility and engagement with the world and all
living beings. Interbeing also refers to the ability of
thriving in the liminal state, the ’liminality of being
human’ but also utilises the liminal states such as
the hypnagogic and hypnopompic for creative
insight (Dumpert 2019). Exploring the notion of
‘sleeping on it’ to ensure the dreaming state can do
its work."

(https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf)


==Umwelt hacking==

Umwelt Hacking is the active questioning of whether
we can sense like a forest, a mycelium network, or
an octopus (Smith and Wakely 2022). Each of these
is their own 'kingdom', so how do we build sensory
bridges between these kingdoms? This emphasises
and affirms the liminality of the human condition, the
ability humans have to shift states of mind. The
hyperhuman seeks to master this ability and use it
as a source of knowledge and wisdom.


==Learning and the creative act==

Another central tenent of hyperhumanism is to learn
and be devoted to lifelong learning and realise that
this learning is dependent on the long-term
mediation of knowledge and integrating experience,
which means working through information
thoroughly and avoiding shortcuts (outsourcing) and
copy-and-paste reasoning. This has implications for
the creative act as well, where "long-term mediation”
is translated to the more poetic concept “the creative
struggle,” meaning that the creative act cannot be
replaced with quick prompts but is dependent on the
careful consideration and attentiveness of the artist.

This is closely linked to the hyperhuman approach
to aim for altered traits rather than altered states.
This means that instead of trying to attain a new
mental state through shortcuts and bypassing, the
way to go is to work through an experience and grow
from it.


==context over content==

"Participation rather than Consumption:

[[Contextology]] (Smith 2016) is the study of context, or
the science of ‘Context Engineering’ (CE). CE
focuses less on engineering content and instead
attempts to manipulate and create context directly.
This is achieved when we are enabled (via CE tools)
to reconfigure our own perception and cognitive
abilities directly. We can now adopt radically
different visual or auditory systems or spend time out
of body (through body swapping or gender
swapping) to achieve novel cognitive and creative
insights. CE gives us new abilities, control over our 
senses, and the corresponding ability to develop
new forms of perception, providing us with a new
type of self and societal exploration."

(https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf)


=More information=

* Video: [[Carl Hayden Smith on Hyperhumanism]]


* "The '''Hyperhuman Institute''' was formed in 2024 by
Carl Hayden Smith as a container for Hyperhuman
research and experimentation to develop
Hyperhumanism further and facilitate physical and
hybrid events in the future. The Institute’s guiding
mantra is: we cannot predict the future, but we can
invent it." [https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf]


'''* Article: Hyperhumanism in the Age of Generative AI: The impact on human creativity and identity. By Carl Hayden Smith  and Filip Lundström.''' 

URL = https://computer-arts-society.com/evaarchive/documents/2024/154_Smith_EVA24.pdf

"Recent developments in generative artificial intelligence have made it once again important to investigate our relationship to emerging and disruptive technologies. A core question being asked is what it now means to be a human being, when we are no longer the sole creators. What is the role of the human when the creative act is being outsourced and externalised to our machines? Hyperhumanism offers an alternative path when conceiving our relationships with these powerful tools, by defining concepts that help us to rethink human-technology interaction. This is a follow-up paper to Techno-Hyperhumanism (Smith and Castaneda 2020) addressing the future work suggested, namely hyperhumanism's impact on human identity, comparing transhumanist and hyperhuman approaches and relationships to modern and future technologies, as well as developing the ethics of human improvement through a hyperhuman lens."

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Futures]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]