

'''Hyperdrome''', Greece-based left-theoretical online journal, an initiative of George Dafermos et al:

"Hyperdrome is an open ended collection of people. is a distributed effort to realise what is unfolding before our own eyes, yet we may be unaware of due to tactics of disinformation employed by corporate-fed media in an epoch resembling a media-saturated inward-looking time bomb.

what is our goal? samizdat.net say: don't hate the media - become the media! while this is certainly a goal worth pursuing, and we mean no disrespect to the brilliant samizdat people (au contraire, we very much like samizdat), we feel the media is something too dirty and damaged; something capable only of presenting a crippled view of reality. we don't seek to become the media. we seek to remain outside mainstream media's sphere of influence. we seek to report on issues that have not received the attention we reckon they deserve by mainstream media or that have been treated in ways favourable to hidden (and not so well hidden) shallow agendas. we seek to publish work that is too radical for the taste of mainstream outlets. we seek to provide writers, activists, programmers, photographers, artists and anyone feeling marginalised by the dehumanising effect commonly associated with the process of traditional top-down media production with a space/place where they can express themselves.

we cover culture, economics, and politics from a radical perspective. for example, the way we see it software enginneering is a powerful form of politics, as well as cultural creation. we believe technology is highly political, reflecting the political beliefs and advancing the political agendas of its creators. we also believe that cultural production is political. having said that, we are independent of any political party, cultural institution, and commercial agenda. we don't take advertising. we're not being paid for what we contribute to hyperdrome. if however, you contribute something to hyperdrome - and you are very encouraged to do so - and someone contacts us and says "we'd like to pay some real money for this", we will make sure all the green tickets flow back to you. if you're still interested in being part of what hyperdrome is, then sit back, fasten your seat belt, and jack-in.

we host a number of projects. we feel strongly about new genres of collectively produced art like flashmobs that would not have been possible without the Internet. we interview people who have something important to say. we push for open standards and free/open source software and hardware. we've put together the journal of hyper(+)drome.manifestation where controversial subjects are explored in greater depth. and we are open to any ideas about projects that should be fostered here. indeed, if you have a project and would like to have it hosted here, be our guest.

last but not least, hyperdrome lays particular emphasis on the geographical area of greece."

[[Category:Resources]]