
= coop lawyer

URL = http://www.iansnaith.com/


=Bio=

"I work on UK and EU Co-operative and Mutuals Law as researcher, writer and consultant. I am a member of the Study Group on European Co-operative Law (SGECOL), a consultant with DWF LLP Solicitors, of Manchester, and author of the Handbook to Industrial and Provident Society Law (Holyoake Books, Manchester) 1996 – the standard work on this area –  revised edition due out early in 2014 as an ebook and by POD to coincide with the new consolidated Co-operative and Community Benefit Societies Act 2013.

I serve on the European Commission Working Group on Co-operative Legislation and was actively involved with the development, drafting and passage, by the UK Parliament, of the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 2002 and the Co-operatives and Community Benefits Societies Acts 2003 and 2010. In 2009-2010 I was the UK national expert and a member of the Scientific Committee in the preparation of a report for the European Commission “Study on the implementation of the Regulation 1435/2003 on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society (SCE)” and the UK National Report (at page 971)

I served as a member of the HM Treasury Working Groups on the reform of both Co-operative and Credit Union Law in the UK in the run up to the enactment of the 2011 LRO which updated aspects of industrial and provident society and credit union law.

In December 2010, I completed a review of Bahrain Co-operative Law for the Co-operative College, Manchester as part of a project financed by DFID.

With colleagues Kevin Jaquiss and Cliff Mills of Cobbetts LLP (now DWF LLP), I was involved in preparing Cobbetts Advice to the FSA of March 2012 on the registration conditions for co-operatives and community benefit societies. I am currently working with the FSA as an independent consultant on the development of Guidance in the light of consultation responses on that Advice.

During 2012 I prepared and submitted the UK Chapter for the forthcoming International Handbook on Co-operative Law due to be published in August 2013 and the WestlawUK Insight article on industrial and provident societies. I was also involved with the organisation of the SGECOL Seminar on Co-operative law in Europe at Co-operatives United in Manchester in November 2012.

During 2013 I shall be leading the governance stage of SGECOL‘s project to develop Principles of European Co-operative Law (PECOL) as a publication.  I shall also be working with colleagues at the Centre for Mutuals and Employee Owned Businesses at Kellogg College Oxford, Mutuo, and Leicester University Law School on various projects."
(http://www.iansnaith.com/"


[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]