
Video via https://www.ted.com/talks/ian_bremmer_the_next_global_superpower_isn_t_who_you_think/c

=Discussion=

Ian Bremmer:
 
"If you’re over 45, like me, you grew up in a world dominated by two
superpowers. The United States and its allies set the rules on one side of
the Berlin Wall, while the Soviet Union called the shots on the other.
 
Nearly every other country had to align its political, economic, and
security systems with one side or the other. That was a *bipolar world*.

 
If you’re under 45, you came of age after the Soviet Union collapsed. The> US became the world’s sole superpower, dictating outcomes both through its
dominant role in international organizations and also by exerting raw
power. That was a *unipolar world*.

About 15 years ago, the world changed again – and it got a lot more
complicated. The United States became less interested in being the world’s
policeman, the architect of global trade, and even the cheerleader of
global values. And lots of other countries grew powerful enough to ignore
rules they didn’t like and, occasionally, to set some themselves. That’s
the G-Zero world order I named my media company after and constantly write
about – a *leaderless world*.

Three things happened to cause this “geopolitical recession” – when the
global architecture no longer lines up with the underlying balance of power.

First, the US didn’t bring Russia into the US-led international order*. *Now
a former great power in serious decline, Russia has become extremely angry
and sees the US as its primary adversary on the global stage. We can argue
about who is most to blame for this, but the fact is we are where we are.

Second, the US did bring China into US-led institutions – but on the
presumption that as the Chinese grew more integrated, wealthy, and
powerful, they would also become American (i.e., a free-market democracy
willing to play by the rules without wanting to change them). As it turns
out, they’re still Chinese – and the US is not ready to accept that.

And third, the US and its allies ignored the tens of millions of their own
citizens who felt left behind by globalization. After decades of benign
neglect, most of these citizens have grown fundamentally mistrustful of
their governments and of democracy itself, in turn making their leaders
less able or willing to lead.

All the geopolitical crises you see in the headlines every day? Over 90% of
them trace back directly or indirectly to these three issues.

Yet for better or worse, geopolitical recessions don’t last forever. After
all, nature abhors a (power) vacuum. And the coming global order is
something very, very different from what we’ve become used to.


==Where we are now==

We no longer live in a unipolar or bipolar or multipolar world. Why?

Because *we no longer have superpowers* – as in, countries that exert
global power in every domain. That’s right, the US and China are not
superpowers today. And no superpowers means no single global order.

Instead, what we have today is multiple world orders, separate but
interconnected.

First, we have a *unipolar security order*. The US is the only country that
can send soldiers, sailors, and military hardware to every corner of the
world. Nobody else comes close. America’s role in the security order today
is more essential – and indeed more dominant – than it was a decade ago.

China is rapidly growing its military capabilities in Asia, but nowhere
else in a significant way. That’s increasingly concerning to America’s
Indo-Pacific allies, who now rely on the US security umbrella more than
before. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has similarly made Europe the most
dependent on US-led NATO it has been in decades. Meanwhile, Russia’s
military has been weakened by the loss of over 200,000 troops and much of
its critical materiel in Ukraine, all of which it’ll find hard to rebuild
in the face of Western sanctions.

Yes, China, Russia, and others have nuclear weapons, but actually using
them is still suicide. The US is the world’s sole security superpower – and
will remain so for at least the next decade.

We also have a *multipolar economic order*. There, global power is more
widely shared. The US has a robust and dynamic economy, still the world’s
largest. But military might doesn’t allow Washington to set the rules for
the global economy.

Despite all the talk about a new cold war, the US and China are far too
economically interdependent to decouple from each other. Bilateral trade
between the two keeps making new highs, and other countries want access to
both American muscle and the Chinese market (soon to become the world’s
largest). You can’t have an economic cold war if there’s no one willing to
fight it.

Meanwhile, the European Union is the world’s largest common market, and
it’s able to set rules and standards that the Americans, Chinese, and
others have to accept as the price of doing business with it. Japan is
still a global economic power, if barely. India’s economy is growing
rapidly, and with it, so is its influence on the global stage.

The relative importance of these and other economies will continue to shift
over the coming decade, but what’s certain is that the global economic
order is and will remain a multipolar order.
 

==Where we’re going==

So far, I’ve written about the two world orders we already see. But there’s
a third, rapidly emerging order where we find the most uncertainty … and the greatest changes to the world we know: the *digital order*. There,
unlike every other geopolitical order past and present, the dominant actors
setting rules and exerting power aren’t governments but technology companies.

You’ve heard how NATO weapons, intelligence, and training have helped
Ukrainians defend their land. But if Western tech companies hadn’t quickly
come to the rescue in the early days of the invasion – fending off Russian
cyberattacks and allowing Ukrainian leaders to communicate with their
soldiers on the front lines – Russia would have knocked Ukraine completely
offline within weeks, effectively ending (and winning) the war. I don’t
think I exaggerate when I say President Zelensky probably wouldn’t be in
power today if not for tech companies and their power in the new digital
order.

Tech companies decide whether Donald Trump can speak without filters and in
real time to hundreds of millions of people as he runs for president again.

Without social media and its ability to mass market conspiracy theories,
there is no January 6 insurrection on Capitol Hill, no trucker riots in
Ottawa, no January 8 revolt in Brazil.

Tech companies even define our identities. We used to wonder whether human
behavior was primarily the result of nature or nurture. No longer – today,
it’s nature, nurture, and algorithm. The digital order is becoming a
critical determinant of how we live, what we believe in, what we want … and
what we’re willing to do to get it.

That’s a staggering amount of power that tech companies have amassed. And
it leads to the biggest question for all of us: How will technology
companies use their power? The answer depends largely on what they want to
be when they grow up. I see three possible scenarios.

If American and Chinese political leaders continue to assert themselves
ever more forcefully in the digital space, and if the tech companies then
line up with their home governments, then we’ll end up in a *technology
cold war* between the US and China. The digital world will be split in two,
other countries will be forced to choose sides, and globalization will
fragment to a degree unprecedented in the last several decades.

If the tech companies stick with global growth strategies, refusing to
align with governments and preserving the existing divide between the
physical and digital fields of competition, then we’ll see a new
globalization – a *globalized digital order*. Tech companies will remain
sovereign in the digital space, competing largely with each other for
profits – and with governments for geopolitical power much in the same way
that major state actors presently jockey for influence in the space where
the economic and security orders overlap.

But if the digital space itself becomes the most important arena of great
power competition, with the power of governments continuing to erode
relative to the power of tech companies, then *the digital order itself
will become the dominant global order*. If that happens, we’ll have a
post-Westphalian world – a *technopolar order* dominated by tech companies
as the central players in 21st-century geopolitics.

All three of these scenarios strike me as wholly plausible. Much depends on
how the explosive nature of artificial intelligence drives changes in
existing power structures, whether or not governments are able and willing
to regulate tech companies, and – most critically – how tech leaders decide
they want to use their newfound power."

(GZero newsletter, June 2023)

[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Existential Risk]]
[[Category:Geopolitics]]