
=Description=

Steven Lawrence:

" '''A recent term applied to the overall movement of “wokeness”:''' identity synthesis. This term  was coined by Yascha Mounk, the founder of Persuasion Magazine. The term identity synthesis deserves an honorable mention as it has a neutral “vibe” to it, which appeals to me as a writer and as a participant in the depolarization movement. 

In the Atlantic article,  Where the New Identity Politics Went Wrong, Mounk introduces the term and provides useful information about the history of the unfolding influence of postmodern philosophers, anti-racist legal scholars, and decolonization activists in the development of this ideology, which, according to Mounk based on his research on postcolonial thinkers (see Gayatri Spivak), relies heavily on the adoption of '''“[[Strategic Essentialism]]”''' to achieve a socially just world. Strategic essentialism means that we intentionally adopt a strong and sturdy identity based on our sociocultural characteristics (or demographic makeup) and to assign traits to the inner lives and outer actions of all people based on their membership in a demographic group. Embracing essentialism means that there are essential characteristics of all Black people, all white people, all women, all genders, all men, and so forth. It is from the foundation of strategic essentialism that scholars have developed the almost metaphysical categories of Blackness and Whiteness, as though there were something deeply true at the core of each metaphysical category — a kind of spirit or vibe that is said to suffuse the entire existence of those who belong to these groups, including thoughts, beliefs, actions, behaviors, and even assumptions about all of reality in all its dimensions.  

As Mounk (and decolonization scholars themselves!) has noted, it doesn’t matter that the “essence” that is spoken of is empirically falsifiable (able to be discovered through objective analysis of facts). What matters is that the strategy of assigning a totalizing essence to entire groups is effective in winning rights for those groups that have been deemed marginalized or oppressed. To put it in oversimplified cartoonish terms, this strategy involves the design of a heuristic (an intentionally simplistic teaching tool or framework) that depicts one demographic group as essentially bad and another demographic group as essentially good, then whatever we do to the bad demographic group becomes justifiable."

(https://groundexperience.substack.com/p/carrying-a-message-further-part-8)

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]