* Book: Ideology and Utopia. By Karl Mannheim. (1929)


=Description=

From the Encyclopedia Brittanica:

"Mannheim is most well known for his study and analysis of ideologies and utopias.[18] One of his main ideas regarding utopias is what he considers the "utopian mentality", which Mannheim describes in four ideals types:

* orgiastic chiliasm
* liberal humanist utopias
* the conservative idea
* modern communism

In Ideology and Utopia, he argued that the application of the term ideology ought to be broadened. He traced the history of the term from what he called a "particular" view. This view saw ideology as the perhaps deliberate obscuring of facts. This view gave way to a "total" conception (most notably in Marx), which argued that a whole social group's thought was formed by its social position (e.g. the proletariat's beliefs were conditioned by their relationship to the means of production). However, he called for a further step, which he called a general total conception of ideology, in which it was recognized that everyone's beliefs—including the social scientist's—were a product of the context they were created in. Thus, to Mannheim, "ideas were products of their times and of the social statuses of their proponents."

Mannheim points out social class, location and generation as the greatest determinants of knowledge. He feared this could lead to relativism but proposed the idea of relationism as an antidote. To uphold the distinction, he maintained that the recognition of different perspectives according to differences in time and social location appears arbitrary only to an abstract and disembodied theory of knowledge.

The list of reviewers of the German Ideology and Utopia includes a remarkable roll call of individuals who became famous in exile, after the rise of Hitler: Hannah Arendt, Max Horkheimer, Herbert Marcuse, Paul Tillich, Hans Speier, Günther Stern (aka Günther Anders), Waldemar Gurian, Siegfried Kracauer, Otto Neurath, Karl August Wittfogel, Béla Fogarasi, and Leo Strauss.In the early 1970s, Erich Fromm and Michael Maccoby would later illustrate scientifically the effects of social class and economic structure on personality in their landmark study Social Character in a Mexican Village.

Out of all of his works, Mannheim's book Ideologie und Utopie was the most widely debated book by a living sociologist in Germany during the Weimar Republic. It was first published in German in 1929, with the English publication, Ideology and Utopia, following in 1936. This work has been a standard in American-style international academic sociology, carried by the interest it aroused in the United States."

(https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Mannheim)


=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"'''What we are experiencing is a world in which the utopian element of culture has been eliminated'''. 

Karl Mannheim through his historical research observed in Ideology  and  Utopia  (1959,  253  &  262),  initially  published  in  German  in  1929,  predicted the effects of this:

- ''Whenever  the  utopia  disappears,  history  ceases  to  be  a  process  leading  to  an  ultimate end. The frame of reference according to which we evaluate facts vanishes and we are left with a series of events all equal as far as their inner significance is concerned.  The  concept  of  historical  time  which  led  to  qualitatively  different  epochs disappears, and history becomes more and more like undifferentiated space. All those elements of thought which are rooted in utopias are now viewed from a sceptical  relativist  point  of  view.  ...  [T]he  complete  elimination  of  reality-transcending  elements  from  our  world  would  lead  us  to  a  "matter-of-factness" which  ultimately  would  mean  the  decay  of  the  human  will.  Herein  lies  the  most  essential difference between these two types of reality-transcendence : whereas the decline  of  ideology  represents  a  crisis  only  for  certain  strata,  and  the  objectivity  which  comes  from  the  unmasking  of  ideologies  always  takes  the  form  of  self-clarification  for  society  as  a  whole,  the  complete  disappearance  of  the  utopian  element  from  human  thought  and  action  would  mean  that  human  nature  and  human development would take on a totally new character. The disappearance of utopia brings about a static state of affairs in which man himself becomes no more than  a  thing.  We  would  be  faced  then  with  the  greatest  paradox  imaginable,  namely,  that  man,  who  has  achieved  the  highest  degree  of  rational  mastery  of  existence, left without any ideals, becomes a mere creature of impulses''.  

These  predictions  have  been  realized  with  the  postmodern  condition,  with  the   depoliticization   of   young   people   and   deconstructive   postmodernists   celebrating  fragmentation  and  intellectual  incoherence  as  liberating.  These postmodernists  have  been  followed  by  posthumanists  who  portray  humans  as  nothing  but  information  processing  cyborgs,  not  essentially  different  from  artificially  created  cyborgs  which,  with  the  advance  of  AI technology,  are  destined to supersede humanity (Gare, 2021). Jacoby summed up the response of intellectuals to this in chapter four of his book, The End of  Utopia: ‘Intellectuals: From Utopia to Myopia’."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691)


=More information=

* [[Utopia]]

[[Category:Utopia]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]