
=Description=

Tom Amarque:

"Ideocritique may be defined as a method of analyzing, evaluating, and opposing ideological and religious systems through the disciplined application of critical thinking. It likewise entails opposition to all forms of critique of these systems that are themselves uncritical—those grounded not in reasoned analysis but in affective bias, resentment, prejudice, or mere opinion.

While critical thinking is a general capacity, Ideocritique constitutes its focused application to the ideological and theological domain. It rests on a four-quadrant analysis (cf. Wilber) of the explicit and implicit costs and benefits of any given belief system and ideology, seeking to arrive at a balanced and dispassionate assessment of its psychological, political, economic, ecological, intra-cultural, and structural effects.

...

Ideocritique transcends both ideological loyalty and reactionary negation. It does not seek to dismantle belief systems but to evaluate their functional truth-value: their capacity to sustain coherent, adaptive, and humane forms of life. The central problem, then, may be stated as follows: How can the virtues of our dominant ideological frameworks be preserved and cultivated, even as their intrinsic vices are identified, contained, and progressively reduced?

In sum, Ideocriticism proposes a disciplined epistemic framework for the analysis of ideology itself. By situating belief systems within the horizon of generational goals and subjecting them to multidimensional evaluation, Ideocritique transforms critique from an act of negation into an act of cultural diagnostics—a science of meaning designed not to destroy our narratives, but to consciously evolve them."

(https://parallax.substack.com/p/on-ideocritique)


[[Category:Integral Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Politics]]