
=Discussion=

Yasuhiko Genku Kimura:

"For the locus of thinking is within the individual. It is not the collective but the individual composing the collective that alone can think and generate ideas. The ideospheric transformation of the kind I speak is a synergetic phenomenon that emerges when individuals in sufficient numbers become authentic, independent thinkers, that is, originators of ideas, producers of dialogues, and contributors to the network of conversations that comprises the world."

    
The configuration of the ideosphere throughout history has remained concentric with external authorities at the center surrounded by circles of believers and followers, where an authority did the thinking for its followers. Even today, in the scientifically and technologically advanced Western world, our educational system is, for the most part, designed to produce well informed, intellectually-adept, and professionally-marketable non-thinking adults. Thus the philosopher Martin Heidegger states: 'The most thought-provoking thing in this most thought provoking time is that we are still not thinking.' For, authentic thinking requires self authorship, which in turn requires authentic self-knowledge about which our education is utterly silent."


In following the evolutionary thrust for optimization that is driving our collective transformation toward an unprecedented height of culture and civilization, the ideospheric configuration we require for the 21st century is omnicentric, having independent yet interconnected centers within the intellectually and spiritually sovereign individuals, living and working as self-authorities in the matter of thinking, knowing, and acting. Then, the thinking, knowing, and acting of these authentic individuals will synergetically co-develop throughout the omnicentric configuration of the evolving ideosphere. The Information Revolution that is underway with the omnipresent Internet is simultaneously the manifestation of, and the apparatus for, this new omnicentric configuration of the ideosphere."


Thus, the transformation of the ideosphere does not mean the propagation of any particular set of ideas. Rather, it is the transformation of the configuration of the ideosphere itself from concentricity to omnicentricity in which every individual will engage in authentic, independent thinking in synergy with others."


We human beings are at our best not when we are engaged in abstract solitary reflection or on our individual transformation for its own sake but when we are engaged together in the act of transforming the world. The act of idea-generation through authentic thinking and the sustained engagement in the conversation of humankind, if conducted in the context of pursuit of truth, beauty, and goodness, will lead to powerful moral action that will engender a New World. To engage in such moral action and to become a co-creator of a New World is to become a world-weaver in the act of weaving the world and a history-maker in the act of making history."


There is no complete individual transformation apart from real world transformation. For the individual is the whole world; for the individual is the whole of humanity."
(http://wakeupdream.blogspot.com/2011/07/kosmic-alignment-principal-of-global.html)


=Source=

* Kosmic Alignment. A Principle of Global Unity. By Yasuhiko Genku Kimura. Reprinted with permission from Kosmos Journal, Spring/Summer 2005, www.kosmosjournal.org.

URL = http://www.via-visioninaction.org/via-li/articles/Kosmic_Alignment.pdf

=More Information=

#http://www.VIA-VisionInAction.org


[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Culture]]