= Senior Scientist at the European Commission DG JRC and at the University of Oxford, specialized in open and big data, smart cities, etc...


=Bio=

"Igor Calzada is a senior scientist at the European Commission, DG Joint Research Centre (JRC), at the Digital Economy Unit and the Centre for Advanced Studies working at AI Watch and DigiTranScope. In addition, since 2012, he is senior researcher at the University of Oxford, Future of Cities and Urban Transformations ESRC programmes at COMPAS. His main research interest draws on how digital transformation processes driven by AI disruption in the post-GDPR current context are altering techno-political and democratic conditions of data governance for the emergence of new algorithmic citizenship regimes in European (smart) cities and regions by paying special attention to the interplay of multistakeholders and the creation of data co-operatives and platform co-operatives schemes from the social innovation perspective. He is the Principal Investigator of H2020-SCC-Replicate Replication WP (www.replicate-project.eu/city2citylearning), European strategy for Urban Transformations ESRC programme, Smart City-Regions project (Marie Curie), and City-Regions Research Programme (www.cityregions.org; funded by Ikerbasque and RSA). He is fellow at the Regional Studies Association (FeRSA). Over the last 20 years, he served as a lecturer at the University of Strathclyde (UK), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Belgium), Aston University (UK), University of Malmö (Sweden), University of Iceland, University of Nevada (USA), University of Helsinki (Finland), and University of Mondragon (Spain). He regularly gives keynotes at conferences in China, Brazil, United States, Latin America, and Europe on smart cities research and policy. He serves as editor of several journals and is the author of almost 100 academic publications. He has an MBA and PhD in Business Administration."
(https://www.elsevier.com/books/smart-city-citizenship/calzada/978-0-12-815300-0)

=More information=

More info: www.igorcalzada.com/publications

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Big Data]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Data Commons]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]