
=Description=

"The ILO SSE Academy is '''an interregional training opportunity gathering practitioners from all around the world, to share their experiences and meet leading Social and Solidarity Economy specialists'''.

The ILO has been supporting the social economy through normative action such as the ILO Recommendation 193 on the promotion of cooperatives; through technical activities (advice on policy and law, access to finance, organizational development, capacity building, international networking, etc.) and in different settings (informal and formal economy, rural and urban communities, a variety of economic sectors and sub-sectors) working with people at the grassroots as well as with decision makers in Government. In addition, the ILO has been establishing strong international partnerships with global social economy stakeholders, such as the International Cooperative Alliance, the Committee for the Promotion and Advancement of Cooperatives, the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, and many others.

The social economy cuts across all four dimensions of the ILO Decent Work Agenda.

A high level capacity building programme on social and solidarity economy was proposed by more than 200 practitioners on the occasion of the ILO Regional Conference on Social Economy held in Johannesburg, in October 2009. This proposal was then further discussed during the ILO task force meeting on social economy in February 2010. The ILO task force members agreed to support an annual “Social Economy Academy” whose first edition would be organized in October 2010 (in Turin, Italy) by the International Training Centre of the ILO (ITC ILO). The second edition has held in Montreal (Canada) in October 2011 and the third edition in Agadir (Morocco) in April 2013. The fourth edition is scheduled to happen in Campinas (Brazil) in July 2014."

=Directory=

Compiled by Fernando Baptista:


Official web site (http://socialeconomy.itcilo.org/): this site explains what the academy is and its background/history.

Distance Learning Platform of the SSE Academy (http://ecampus.itcilo.org/mod/page/view.php?id=21): this platform aims at making the main contents available to participants previously the Academy, in order to minimize the time spent with presentations and maximize the time spent with interactive dynamics and field visits.

Collective Brain of the SSE Academy (http://www.sseacb.net/): the main goal of this multilingual virtual space is to foster the emergence of collective intelligence among the academy participants, former participants and other people involved with the SSE... the idea behind it is increase the connectivity and interactivity among these people.

Meeting Point for South-South Cooperation on the SSE (http://www.sstcsse.net/): this is another multilingual virtual space which aims at encouraging people from different countries to meet, engage, exchange and cooperate on the field of SSE within the framework of power equality, solidarity and non-conditionality.

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Labor]]