

'''* Book: Imag­i­nal Machines by Stevphen Shukaitis. Autono­me­dia (2009).'''

=Review=

Excerpted from Abe Walker:

At every level, Imag­i­nal Machines is a sub­ver­sive text. Against the ris­ing tide of com­pla­cency, Stephven Shukaitis sketches out new pos­si­bil­i­ties for polit­i­cal engage­ment that are at once sedi­tious and savvy. Res­olutely anti-disciplinarian (in both senses of the word), he leaps reck­lessly from phi­los­o­phy to art crit­i­cism to social move­ment stud­ies. In the book’s open­ing pages, Shukaitis promises to “con­nect Sur­re­al­ism with migrant work­ers, the Indus­trial Work­ers of the World with Dadaism, and back again.” Against all odds, he does so, and with great aplomb. From its non-linear orga­ni­za­tion to its whim­si­cal type­face, Imag­i­nal Machines coura­geously defies con­ven­tion. Throw­ing cau­tion to the wind, the book explodes the lim­its of both what can be said and how it might be said.

Styl­is­ti­cally, Imag­i­nal Machines is both enter­tain­ing and ter­rif­i­cally com­plex. The text over­flows with pre­scient metaphors, digres­sions, in-jokes, and par­en­thet­i­cal obser­va­tions. But these quips and asides are not merely adjunct to the pri­mary text but rather rival the “main” nar­ra­tive for atten­tion. The sub­text quickly becomes the sur­face, and in an affront to neo-positivist ways of know­ing, Shukaitis bends his lyri­cal prose side­ways and back­wards, with­out ever com­pro­mis­ing lucid­ity. Reflect­ing the uncer­tainty of post­mod­ern times, nearly every declar­a­tive state­ment comes paired with a qual­i­fier or a caveat. The result is a text that folds in upon itself with mul­ti­ple lev­els of meaning.

The body of the text is cen­tered around a series of case stud­ies (though the notion of a case doesn’t align with the author’s method). Shukaitis takes us on a whirl­wind tour of what oth­ers have called “alter­na­tive insti­tu­tions” (sev­eral of which he was involved in per­son­ally) and offers a prob­ing intro­spec­tive analy­sis. Yet unlike other recent assess­ments of the global Left “scene,” which tend to be opti­mistic to the point of absur­dity (for exam­ple, We Are Every­where, Now­Topia, Real Utopia), Shukaitis main­tains his (self-)critical edge through­out. Indeed, Shukaitis is keenly aware that — by most mea­sures of suc­cess — the Left is los­ing badly. For exam­ple, in a chap­ter on worker self-management (WSM), Shukaitis describes his four-year-long involve­ment with a worker-owned record label in vivid detail. But ulti­mately, he con­cludes that WSM may have lim­ited rad­i­cal poten­tial (though his argu­ment is sig­nif­i­cantly more com­plex), and in the process offers the type of deep self-critique that is painfully absent in most Left circles.

The term Imag­i­nal Machines mer­its some expla­na­tion. As Shukaitis notes, his title is bor­rowed from a term coined by Peter Lam­born Wil­son (aka Hakim Bey), itself a deriv­a­tive of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s desiring-machine. So the imag­i­nal machine is “a par­tic­u­lar arrange­ment or com­po­si­tion of desires and cre­ativ­ity as ter­ri­to­ri­al­ized through and by rela­tions between bod­ies in motion.” The idea of outer space fig­ures promi­nently here. For Shukaitis, the metaphor of space is rela­vant pre­cisely because it rep­re­sents that which can­not be (entirely) known. In sci­ence fic­tion film, the music of Sun-Ra, and the pop­u­lar imag­i­na­tion, space func­tions as a zone of lim­it­less pos­si­bil­ity. Shukaitis sug­gests that a pol­i­tics bounded by the coor­di­nates of the known world is hope­lessly con­strained. Instead, “an imag­i­nal land­scape is a pre­con­di­tion for actu­ally find­ing a north­west pas­sage in the phys­i­cal world.” Whether or not space is oper­at­ing at the level of metaphor here, it is a pow­er­ful heuris­tic device.

Imag­i­nal Machines is often remark­able for what it doesn’t do. Though the con­cept of “rad­i­cal imag­i­na­tion” emerges as a dom­i­nant theme, Shukaitis self-consciously refuses to men­tion C. Wright Mills, whose Soci­o­log­i­cal Imag­i­na­tion is usu­ally con­sid­ered among the most impor­tant con­tri­bu­tions to the con­cept. For a tra­di­tional social sci­en­tist to write a book on the “imag­i­na­tion” with­out explic­itly invok­ing Mills would approach blas­phemy. But Shukaitis is no tra­di­tional social sci­en­tist (though he may be a blas­phe­mer). Like­wise, Karl Marx appears mainly through his metaphors (the archi­tect and the bee, the old mole, “storm­ing heaven”). Yet Marx lurks in the deep crevices of Imag­i­nal Machines’ pages and his influ­ence is never far from the sur­face. Though the book is, in part, a crit­i­cal encounter (ren­con­tre) between auton­o­mist Marx­ism and post­struc­tural­ist the­ory, this is not Shuaki­tis’ main intel­lec­tual project.

While it adheres to some extent to tra­di­tional book-publishing con­ven­tions, Imag­i­nal Machines strives to be a rhi­zomatic text with no begin­ning and no end — only a bound­less mid­dle. Char­ac­ter­is­ti­cally, most of the book’s con­clu­sions arise from the embed­ded case stud­ies, while the book’s final chap­ter (the “actual” con­clu­sion) opens up far more ques­tions than it pro­vides answers to. In the sec­tion on work and self-management, Shukaitis at one point rec­om­mends a pol­i­tics based on “the con­stant imma­nent shap­ing and cre­ativ­ity that will not allow itself to ever be totally bound in a fixed form.” There is a sense here that Shukaitis is com­ment­ing on the very text he is pro­duc­ing — or bet­ter yet, the “work” of book-writing. If there is an enemy in Imag­i­nal Machines, it is the idea of clo­sure—that strug­gle should at some point cease, that the rev­o­lu­tion should be con­tained, that orga­ni­za­tions should seek per­ma­nence."
(http://www.gcadvocate.com/2010/02/radical-imaginings/)


=More Information=

#[[Infrapolitics]]



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]