'''* Book: The Image of the Future. By FRED POLAK. Jossey-Bass / Elsevierf, 1973'''

URL = 

"I have long felt that the original version of The Image of the Future was one of the most significant works of the twentieth century." - Kenneth Boulding (foreword)


=Contextual Citations=

'''1.'''

"The human condition can almost be summed up in the observation
that, whereas all experiences are of the past, all decisions are about
the future. It is the great task of human knowledge to bridge this gap
and to find those patterns in the past which can be projected into the
future as realistic images. The image of the future, therefore, is the
key to all choice-oriented behavior. The general character and quality
of the images of the future which prevail in a society is therefore the
most important clue to its overall dynamics. The individual's image
of the future is likewise the most significant determinant of his
personal behavior."

- Kenneth Boulding (foreword)


'''2.'''

"Polak is very explicit that in this book he is concerned with the
future in Western culture only, and that he is analyzing images of
possible futures on this world. Taking the task of image-making for
the future very seriously, he ruled out fantasies about other worlds as
just that - fantasies. The timeliness of Polak's book today is that it
marks the end of that part of human history in which man could
trace out one part of the global cultural heritage and have it make
sense, and it also marks the end of the time when thought about
human life elsewhere than on earth was only a fantasy. Intellectually
and spiritually, man is hardly ready to face the implications of a
common global heritage on earth, or of cosmic belongingness in the
universe. Polak's Image of the Future can help disoriented Western
man get his bearings, understand the road he has traveled, and thus
help him face the task of image-working for the now-incredible
futures which lie before him.

The pessimistic tone of the second part of The Image of the
Future, as Polak depicts moment-ridden man trapped in a moment-bound culture, never gives way to despair. At every turn, the author
reminds us that there still is a turning possible, that new vistas can
open up. Today we are glimpsing these new vistas, and Polak's work
will help us make both more realistic and more daring use of the new
chances that history is offering man."

- Elise Boulding (Translator's Preface)


==Lack of vision is really a failure of imagination==

"Fred Polak (1973) had shown in his study The Image of  the Future,  that  '''the  existence  or  absence  of  inspiring  images  of  the future  largely  determines  the  trajectories  of  societies'''.  Societies,  pessimistic  about  the  future, decay, while those in which people believe a better future is possible, flourish. As he put it:

- Any student of the rise and fall of cultures cannot fail to be impressed by the role played in this historical succession by the image of the future. The rise and fall of images of the future precedes or accompanies the rise and fall of cultures. As long as  a  society’s  images  is  positive  and  flourishing,  the  flower  of  cultures  in  in  full  bloom. Once the image begins to decay and lose its vitality, however, the culture does not long survive."(p.19)

- Cited by Arran Gare [https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691]

=Contents=

==PART ONE: THE PROMISED LAND==


===I. The Future as a Work of Reconstruction===

1. Basic Concepts: Time, Images, and the Future

2. Image and Actuality


===II. Images of the Future from Western Civilization===

3. Oldest Sources

4. Hellas

5. Persia

6. Israel

7. Christianity

8. The Realm of the Future in the Middle Ages

9. The Renaissance as a Renaissance of Utopism

10. The Image of the Future: Guiding Star of the Age of
Enlightenment

11. The Image of the Future: Primary Source of Socialism and
Marxism

12. The Image of the Future: Conductor of the Age of Progress

13. The Future Becomes Present and Past

===III. Dynamics of the Image of the Future===

14. The Image of History and the Image of the Future 162

15. The Unchanging Historical Task of the Changing Utopia 176


== PART TWO: ICONOCLASM OF THE IMAGES OF THE FUTURE ==

===IV. Devastation of the Image of the Future===

16. De-utopianizing

17. De-eschatologizing


===V. The Breach in Our Time===

18. Timeless Time


===VI. The Broken Future of Western Culture===

19. The Future of the Christian Belief-System

20. Other Cultural Components and Their Future

21. A Modern Depth Psychology: Trigger or Barrier to Rebirth?

22. Art and Culture.

23. Socio-Cultural Dynamics

24. New Perspectives


=Excerpt=


==From Chapter I==

Fred Polak:

'''1.'''

"Every great thinker who has concerned himself with the historical
process has speculated about the meaning of time and its flow in
history. Marx, Hegel, Spengler, Toynbee, and Sorokin, each with his
own variation on the theme of time-flow as mechanically patterned
fluctuation, predict the future but ignore its dynamic interaction
with the past and the present. This book will give an added dimension to our understanding of the historical process by including the
interaction between completed and noncompleted time. Social
change will be viewed as a push-pull process in which a society is at
once pulled forward by its own magnetic images of an idealized
future and pushed from behind by its realized past. Poised on the
dividing line between past and future is man, the unique bearer and
transformer of culture. All of man's thinking involves a conscious
process of dividing his perceptions, feelings, and responses, and
sorting them into categories on the time-continuum. His mental
capacity to categorize and reorder reality within the self (present
reality) and in relation to perceptions of the not-self (the Other)
enable him to be a citizen of two worlds: the present and the
imagined. Out of this antithesis the future is born. Man's dualism is
thus the indispensable prerequisite to the movement of events in
time, and to the dynamics of historical change."


'''2.'''

"The duality of the now and the
Other is a continuous theme in history, but how this dualism
functions in any given period is a more complex question. Of the
many ways in which man has approached the problem of his own
dividedness, 

'''the following five summarize his major orientations to the realm of the Other:'''


1. Life cannot be purely transitory: there must be something more
enduring. Man hopes for future grace.

2. Life cannot simply end in imperfection. There must be an Other
realm into which man can enter.

3. Life should not be transitory and imperfect. Man rebels out of
despair, but without hope.

4. Life is not as it appears to be. This world is an illusion and the
essential reality is veiled from man.

5. Life does not have to be the way it is. Man can reform and
re-create the world after any image he chooses."


'''3.'''

"'''Spatial images of the Other have taken many forms through time'''.

They may be roughly classified in the following seven categories:

* Before this world: Images concerning an original state of nature, a
lost paradise, Eden, Arcady.

* This world: Images of the Promised Land, the New Jerusalem.

* Below this world: Images of Hades or Tartarus, an oceanic or
volcanic kingdom, a land of the dead, a land of shadows, hell.

* Above this world: Images of the beyond, a Kingdom of Heaven,
Olympus, empyrean.

* Outside this world: Images of the isles of the blessed, Atlantis,
never-never land.

* After this world: Images of Elysium, Valhalla, a .hereafter, a
resting place for spirits of the departed.

* Beyond all worlds: Spatial images of a metaphysical-cosmic nature, which are essentially nonspatial and ethereal: The All-One,
infinity, nirvana."


==From Chapter II==

===[[Eidetics]], The Theory of the Image===

Fred Polak:

"In this work we are, in a sense, taking the existence of images of
the future as given and tracing out the effects of their existence on
the course of history. In doing so we are deliberately starting in the
middle of the story, so to speak, and apparently ignoring the beginning, the problem of images in general and how they are formed. We
offer no excuses for this, because it is the business of the mind to
begin work at the point of major insight. The image of the future
does represent such a major insight, and carries within itself its own
intellectual imperatives for a further working out of the idea. This
procedure seems all the more justified since, according to our thesis,
it is the image of the future that forms a dynamic fac;:tor par
excellence and an extremely powerful force contained in the working
of all images as such. Therefore, the dynamics of the images of the
future, which we treat separately in this book, have a special relevance for a theory of the image in general. We cannot and do not
wish to ignore the problem of a systematic theory of the image,
however, and would like to consider this work as a small contribution to general image theory. 

The more general theory of images may be thought of as
"eidetics." This concept, derived from the Greek eidelon, "image,"
has a long history. Plato, Epicurus, and Democritus used the term to
refer to knowledge and the learning process. Francis Bacon made
similar use of it. The term eidetisch appears in the writings of the
German psychologists, especially E. R. Jaensch, who specialized in
research on children between the ages of thirteen and fifteen.
Jaensch related certain types of eidetic endowments to physical
constitution (Korperbau) and to personality type. On the basis of
this he later outlined a theory of the development of culture. The
concept recently appeared in slightly changed form in a book by the
economist Kenneth E. Boulding.


...


In a general theory, attention must be given to the dynamics of
image formation, both in the private and the public mind, and the
function of images in the economy of the individual personality and
the social, national; or cultural group. What do images mean, how are
the meanings transmitted, and how do they affect individual and
social behavior? Under what conditions do images change, and why'?
What can accelerate or retard these changes? How amenable are they
to purposeful manipulation, in both the short and the long run? We
hope that some light is thrown on all these questions by our study of
images of the future.

One of the strongest links between images and the image of the
future is contained in the Book of Genesis, where we are told that
God created man in His image. It would be wrong to suppose,
however, that the use of images to capture the future is limited to
the spheres of religion and mythology. Such images are always
present and operative in all social groups.


...


We have already stated that this work singles out the image of the
future because we are convinced it is the time-dimension of the
future that acts as a pre-eminently dynamic force in the working of
all images. In analyzing how the concept of the future has operated
in the historical process, there are six main aspects that come into
play:

* Images of the future are always aristocratic in origin. The
author of the image invariably belongs to the creative minority of a
society. He moves in the company of Isaiah, Socrates, Rembrandt,
the French philosophes, and nearer to our own day, such men as
Henri Bergson and H. G. Wells. The formation of images of the
future depends upon an awareness of the future that makes possible a
conscious, voluntary, and responsible choice between alternatives.
This means that the development of images of the future and ethics
are intimately related. Human judgments can, to a great extent, be
explained in relation to the striving toward a highly valued future
goal. The development of ethics and moral philosophy is one aspect
of the development of techniques for visualizing and controlling the
future and the image of the future receives much of its driving force
from ethics. Kant's ethics-reduced to his famous categorical imperative the whole field of Sollen, "ought," as distinct from Sein, "is,"
and' Wirklichkeit, "reality," as opposed to Wert, "value,"-are all
based on a time-dimension hitherto never clearly delineated. They
can all be effectively translated into the language of the image of the
future. They all express the underlying philosophy of what we ca~l
influence-optimism. Man, in this process of ethical development, IS
no longer simply "split man," capable of dividing his perceptions
into two realms. He now becomes "moral man," responsible for the
use to which he puts his perceptions and powers for reaching the
Other and better. At this point the positive image of the future in its
classic form becomes one of the main instruments of culture, providing both a vision of civilization and the tools for ~ealizing ~t.

* The propagation of images. The force that drives the Image of
the future is only in part rational and intellectual; a much larger part
is emotional, aesthetic, and spiritual. The appeal of the image lies in
its picture of a radically different world in an Other time. "

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Futures]]