

URL = http://www.imallsglobal.com/corporate.html; http://www.imallsglobal.com/iteam.html



=Description=

Klaus Stoll writes:

"The previous concept of "Telecenters" or whatever you want to call PIAP's
(Public Internet Access Points), was based on connectivity and did not in
a sufficient way address the question of "For What?". The answer to this
questions is simply: "To improve the lives of of individuals and the
communities they live in!".

How?. Here we have to get back to the basic needs and these are: Health,
Communication, Culture, Education, Ecological sustainability and Economy,
(=meaning food on the table).

The question is" How can we use the new technologies to address the basic
needs?". I think we will find that there are many very useful tools and
resources already existing on-line, so why is their impact so limited.

The answer here is because whilst the tools and resources exist they are
not implemented because they are not based on the existing social structures
and support systems. (the are literally hanging in Cyberspace and are not
rooted in something real like a community). Here is where the communities come
in.

The communities need to look at what is out there and take, implement and
use in a sustainable way that what is relevant and sustainable for them.

For example: They can use IMalls as an experience and example for using the
internet to manage trade inside a community and between communities local
regional and global. The hope is that they adapt existing tools and
experiences to their reality and reject everything that is not relevant,
sustainable or even hurtful. The Internet is a new kind of hammer and
communities need to discover how to use it to drive the new nails into the
walls of a new cyber world. But their hammer, their nails, their cyber
world, not anybody else's.

All this means simply instead of creating tools and resources we should
help to create communities that are able to use and develop the new tools for
them, based on their community needs and desires. We are talking Global
Villages here and at the same time a new generation of Telecenters,
Telecenters that are based not on a Community having access to the ICT's
but Communities that are using ICT's for their development. Here is where the
Global Villages Network and GTA become one."
(email April 2009)



[[Category:Business]]