
=Typology=
 
Luke Burgis:
 
“I think there is a better way to think of creation which doesn’t require the conceit of thinking that we create things ex nihilo, yet which still acknowledges our tremendous capacity to participate in the continuing act of creation as humans.

Each person is a relational, mimetic creature—the difference is in the nature and quality of our imitation and the person or thing being imitated. There are at least three different kinds of imitation:

* '''Static imitation''' is simply copying someone else. Tone-matching in emails is an example of this. It doesn’t create or destroy anything: it might establish rapport or maybe even empathy, but it keeps a baseline.

* '''Destructive imitation''' is the kind of tit-for-tat competitive imitation that results in a zero-sum game, or in the destruction of one of the participants. The imitation of aggression in war is one particularly dangerous example of this. The language of war is often used in business schools, and it has led to the destruction of many companies (and lives).

* '''Generative imitation''' creates something new by taking imitation and combining it (raising it to the power of) with critical thinking, courage, boldness, and a willingness to do something for which there is no model. It is imitation combined with an anti-mimetic act.
Imitation is the runway; the anti-mimetic act is the moment of take-off.“
 
(https://read.lukeburgis.com/p/the-philosophy-of-zero-to-one-1)
 
 
[[Category:Relational]]