=Discussion=

Summary and comments of Wallerstein's theories by David Wilkinson:



Important  features  of the modern  capitalist  world-economy  in Wallerstein's theory, requiring  and receiving  closer  scrutiny,  arc that  it  is: regionally polarized, cyclical, occasionally hegemonic,  regressive,  doomed  and surpassable. To these features  we  shall turn next. 

Comment. Wallerstein  believes neither  in the revolutionary  nor  in the progressive  image of capitalism;  but  he misses  the strongest  argument  against both.  Whether  we use an accumulative  or ( as I  prefer)  a market-based propertarian definition of capitalism,  it  long predates  the modern  era,  seems to have time-boundaries  close or identical  to those of the phenomenon  of civilization  itself, and  therefore  cannot be  either as (recently) revolutionary  or as progressive as is sometimes  believed. The idea  of  "capitalism" as a reformist  strategy  for the survival of a landed  aristocracy  is remarkably  stimulating.  Quigley's  idea  of the  reform  of an institution of expansion  seems to provide  the general  theoretical  category  of which  this  is a possible  instance. (Quigley himself contends  that capitalism,  by which  he  means "an economic  system motivated by the  pursuit of profits  within  a  price structure,"  could  be  seen  either as a circumvention of feudalism or as a reform  of the medieval commercial system: 1961, 233). Pre-modern  and post-modern capitalist innovations  may also need reinterpreting as reformist  strategics,  or as circumventions,  e.g. of a socialist  state, as in the USSR  and China today. The economic  continuity  which Wallerstein  finds  between "feudal" and  "modern" Europe is the easier to accept since  it is paralleled  by a political continuity:  they  arc periods  in the history of  a region of the same states  system  (vide Wilkinson,  1988, 55-57). 

Wallerstein seems correct in asserting, and Quigley  wrong  in denying,  that  there  today exists  a single world-system' civilization, product of the global spread of what was in the fifteenth  century  only one  of many  such. It is not,  however possible  to  accept that feudal Europe, or modern  Europe  (with  or without Iberian America) ever constituted a world system with  a largely  self-contained life and endogenous dynamics.  Indeed,  it seems strange  even in sheerly economic  terms to find  Spanish  America  (an object of predation and redistribution rather than  commerce) has nonetheless gotten into the world-system,  while Russia, Turkey and Persia arc external to it. I prefer the judgement that, like  Quigley's Orthodox  and Islamic civilizations,  Wallerstein's Russian, Turkish  and Persian world-empires,  were not "external arenas" but part and parcel of a single  system, a single process and struggle, that  of Central  Civilization,  which a.., a whole  resembled  a Wallersteinian "world  economy" more  than  did  any of  its  parts,  which  were  not "worlds" to  themselves  politically,  nor,  in consequence,  economically. It is not  clear  by what  definition  equality  is incompatible  with  a capitalist  world-economy;  definitional   incompatibilities   are  in  any case innocuous,  since  it is empirical incompatibilities   that  have  practical  significance.  In  this case the  underlying  question  is, if every  human  society  whatsoever  displays  inequality  ( e.g. by age,  gender, lineage)  and new  forms  of inequality  appear  with every enlargement  or  complication of human society,  whether  capitalism ha.., any  relationship  to  equality except that of being one of the  forms  in which  it  fails to  occur.  I believe  that  researchers  who  look  for pre-modern classic, nations,  households  and states will  find  them  without  much  difficulty. 


'''Core and periphery.''' 

A world economy has a geographical as well as a functional  division of labor. "World-economics ... are divided  into  core  states  and peripheral area..,." Core states  arc  advantaged, have  strong  state  machineries  and national   cultures;  peripheral area.., have weak  or nonexistent  indigenous  states  (TMWSl  349).  Core  and periphery are features  of capitalism: "world-empires  had joined their 'edges'  to the  center by the collection  of tribute,  otherwise leaving  relatively  intact  the production  systems over  which  they had 'suzerainty,' whereas the  capitalist world-economy  'peripheralized' area.., economically by incorporating  them  into  the  division  of  labor."  (Hopkins,  Wallerstein et  al., 1982b, 55) a. Causation. Why  is there regional  polarization?  Wallerstein's  various  answers  include  definitional or functional requisiteness,  geoeconomic regionalism  (core-likeness) and force (unequal exchange). 


'''1. Requisiteness.''' 

"[W]ithin  a capitalist world-economy, all  states  cannot 'develop' simultaneously  by definition,  since the system functions by virtue  of having  unequal core and peripheral  regions." (W 1975, 23) 


'''2. Geography.''' 

Production processes are  linked  in complex  commodity chains (HC  16). These chains have a directionality, raw-to-finished.  Commodity  chains have  been geographically  convergent: "they  have  tended to move  from the  peripheries of the capitalist  world-economy to-the centres  or cores"  (HC  30).  The  more easily monopolized processes arc concentrated in core area..,, the  less skilled, more extensive manpower 
processes  in "peripheral" area.., (PWE 4-5). What  "makes a production  process  core-like or periphery-like  is the degree to which  it incorporates  labor-value,  is mechanized, and is highly  profitable"  (PWE  16). There  arc core states and periphery  states because there "tend to be geographical localizations of productive activities  such that core -like production  activities  and periphery-like production  activities  tend  each to be  spatially grouped  together"  (PWE  15). 

'''Unequal exchange.''' 

"The exchange of product.., containing unequal amounts of social labor we may  call the core/periphery relationship"  (PWE  15). There is a parallel  political polarization between strong core states and weaker  peripheral  states, "the 'political' process of 'imperialism'  being  what  makes possible the  'economic' process  of 'unequal exchange'." (PWE  5) Unequal exchange  "means, ultimately,  the transfer of some of the surplus  of one area to a receiver  of surplus  in another" a.., "consequence  of the fact that more  labor power ha.., gone into  producing the value exchanged in on e area than  in the other." (WSA 94)  Unequal exchange exists when commodities moving one way incarnate more  "real input ( cost)" than equally-priced  commodities moving the other way (HC  31 ). Unequal exchange existed in pre-capitalism   when  one party to a market transaction used force to improve his price  (HC  30-31 ). Core zones arc those which  gain profit or surplus by unequal exchange  transactions  (HC  31-32). In capitalism, unequal exchange ha.., been concealed by the fact that commodity  chains  cross state  frontiers (HC 31 ). Strong  core state-machines keep peripheral state -structures weaker, their economics lower on the commodity  chain, their  wage-rates lower (HC  32).  This is done by force --wars and colonization--when  there  arc significant  political challenges  to existing  inequalities, otherwise  by market  supply-and-demand with an enormous apparatus  of force latent (HC 32-33). b. Change. Cores move over time  (PWE 103, TMWSl   350, CWE 33). New technologies render different commodities "high-profit, high-wage"  at different moments: "At first, wheat was exchanged  against textiles;  later textiles  against  steel; today steel  against  computers and wheat"  (PWE  103). 

'''c. Intermediate  zones.''' 


"There  always exist semiperipheral zones" (PWE 15). Semiperipheral states "function as loci  of  mixed kind.:; of  production  activities"  (PWE 15), have enterprises  engaged in both "core-like"  and  "peripheral" processes. In moments  of expansion  of the  world-economy, these  states "serve to some  extent a.:; economic  transmission belts  and political  agents"  of some  imperial  core  power. In periods  of stagnation  and  crisis,  core  powers' hold on these states  may be weakened; one  or two, which  arc strong enough, may play  among the rivals, erect new  quasi-monopolies, displace  some  falling core powers  and impose thc1rnclvcs a.:; new  core  powers  (PWE 7). Semiperipheral area-; "arc in  between  the  core  and the  periphery on  a series  of dimensions,  such a.:; the complexity  of economic  activities,  strength  of the  state machinery,  cultural  integrity, etc. Some  of these area-; had  been core area-; of earlier versions of a given  world-economy. Some  had been  peripheral area-; that were later promoted,  so to  speak, a.:; a result  of the changing  geopolitics  of  an expanding  world-economy." (TMWSl   349) "The semiperiphery is a necessary  structural clement  in a world-economy. These area-; play  a role  parallel to that played,  mutatis  mutandis,  by middle  trading groups in an empire .... These  middle area-; (like middle  groups in an empire)  partially deflect the political  pressures  which  groups  primarily located in peripheral area-; might otherwise direct against  core  states  and  the  groups  which  operate  within and through  their state machineries."   (TMWSl 349-350) The middle  strata  in world-economics   consist  of the  semiperipheral states. (CWE  23) "The  three structural  positions  in  a world  economy--core,   periphery,  and semiperiphery -- had become stabilized by  about 1640."  (CWE 18) 

Quigley  seems  right  to  treat  cores  and  peripheries as features of all civilizations,  not  simply  of  states-system  periods or capitalist instruments of expansion, and right again  to  treat  them in the  first instance as rooted in the fact that expansion necessarily means that  some regions will  enter  a civilization later than others. Wallerstein seems right to  assert  that  cores move in space over  time;  this can be seen  as a different way of perceiving,  what  Quigley is sharper  in  asserting,  that  at least some semiperipheral and  peripheral states have usually in the long run been advantaged  in imperialist war  and universal-empire-   building. An interesting question, not fully explored, is that  of the balance  of advantage in economic expansion. Quigley  secs it  as lying with  the latecomers (because of geographic circumvention,   developmental short -cuts, and  preferential diffusion of material culture);  Wallerstein as clearly sees it  lying with the core  states (greater  force, stronger state-machines, unequal exchange). The  differences  might be reconciled: since cores  do move,  but slowly, Quigley's cited forces may operate  at longer timescales  than  Wallerstein's, and in the opposite direction. 

Quigley's  causal  mechanism  (geographic  expansion  over  time) seems sufficient  to account  for  the  origin  of core-periphery   distinctions.  The  enormously  uneven  distribution of  particular  natural  resources  ( ores,  soils,  climates,  water,  etc.)  across  the globe and each of its  regions  may combine  with  the  inequality  of the  distribution  of human  populations and the  self-interested  power  of the  core  states  to  account  for the  perpetuation   of such regionalization  (in  all world-systems),  technological  change  (Wallerstein),   at lca-;t if surprising  or uncontrolled,  and,  more  effectively  and  inescapably,  core  wars  (Quigley), may  help  to  account  for core  declines  and/or  movements  and their  direction.

It is not  clear  that  the  concept  of  "unequal"  exchange  is viable as a description--it seems to entail some  variant  of the  problematic  labor  theory  of value--or as an explanation--it seems  to  conflate  force,  which  would  plausibly  explain  involuntary  transfers of  surplus, with  technological   inequality,  which  would  plausibly  explain voluntary  exchanges  of high-labor-input   for low-input  commodities.  The  degree  to  which goods transports  arc characterized  by  either  vs. both  of those  mechanisms  would seem to be an intriguing  but empirical question. If cores  move,  there  is no reason to create  a triple  core-semiperiphery-periphery distinction  within  civilizations,  and we can reserve  "periphery" to designate those areas outside a civilization  (Wallerstein's  "external arenas") into  which  it may, or may  not, expand  at some  future  time.  The structural necessity of  an intermediate zone within  a world-economy at best  remains  to  be demonstrated. 


9. Cyclicity. 

The growth of the  capitalist  world-economy "has not  been  constant, but has occurred in wavelike spurts  of expansion and contraction"  caused by production exceeding  effective demand  (PWE  6). In periods  of  expansion, "Production  is expanding overall  and in  most  places. Employment  is extensive. Population  is growing. Prosperity  is the sign  of the time." Real wages  "for large  numbers of people  may  be  declining"  but  nominal prices  steadily inflate. "There  is considerable  social ferment,"  optimism, daring, apparent individual  mobility, apparently providential  progress. (TMWS2  129) Periods of downturn  "arc much  more visibly uneven." The  "regression, stagnation, withdrawal,  bad times"  arc "not bad for  everyone." Reduced production and employment are more likely  in the  peripheral areas. "The  strong  not  only survive; they frequently thrive." (TMWS2 178) 

Market  forces  in the  capitalist  world-economy  have  produced  an alternating  cycle of regular  and significant  expansions  and stagnations  in the  system as a whole (HC  34). What  forces  account  for  cyclicity  in  capitalism?  Perhaps  an underlying  cycle  of enterprise aging:  every  fifty  years  or so  commodity  chains  have  been  restructured,  resources  more efficiently  reallocated,  some  production  processes  demoted  and relocated  toward  the periphery,  some  entrepreneurs  and workers  eliminated  (HC  34-35). Eliminated producers tend  to  be the  less  efficient;  these  tend  to  be the  "older" enterprises ( and the states in which  they  arc  located)  because  of costs  of amortizing   "older"  capital  investment  and "rising  labor  costs  resulting  from  the  growing  strength  of workers' organization"  (PWE  6-7). Perhaps  a demand  cycle:  it  is suggested  that  "'expansion  occurs when the  totality of world production  is less  than  world  effective  demand, as permitted  by the existing distribution of world purchasing power,  and that  'contraction'  occurs  when  total  world production exceeds world effective  demand.  These  arc  cycles  of 7 5 - l 00 years length  in my view and the downward  cycle  is only resolved  by a political  reallocation of world income that effectively  expands world  demand."  (Wallerstein   1975, 24) Perhaps  a political  cycle:  periods  of stagnation  reduce overall production, lead to class struggles  in core  countries  which  force  redistribution   of income to  their lower  strata and raise  workers'  standards  of living.  Upper strata compensate  for this  by incorporating  new zones,  new  lower  strata,  new  ultralow-income-receiving    direct producers  (PWE  6). In any case, there  is a longer-term, asymptotic and limited trend as well: "The  mechanism by which  the  capitalist  system  ultimately  resolves  its recurrent cyclical downturns  is expansion:  outward spatially,  and internally  in terms of the 'freeing'  of the market...via the  steady  proletarianization   of  semiproletarian   labor and the steady commercialization   of semi-market oriented  land." The  geographic  limits arc largely  reached; the  freeing of the factors  of production  is perhaps  halfway completed. (CWE  162) This  implies that  at some point  a stagnation  will become  irresolvable. [

Comment. Cycles in civilizations/world systems  have  been observed  since  Vico, or even Ibn Khaldun.  The  best recent kinematic  account seems to have  been  Toynbee's  revised Helleno-Sinic  model (Toynbee, 1961,  197-209, 304; Wilkinson,  1986). The  Toynbian cycles seem to be as political as economic, not necessarily economically determined. Among  economically driven cyclical  theories, however, Quigley's  institutionalization theory seems more satisfactory than  Wallerstein's  because  it  is more general  ( cross-civilizational  and cross-polity)  in  its  application.  The  mechanisms  Wallerstein  cites probably  do work  locally,  within  markets,  and  within  the  scope of the  larger  Quigleyan process,  whose  fluctuations  have  a much  greater  wavelength  than  Wallerstein's. In a system  with  several  modes  of production/instrument.., of expansion,  of course,  there  can be more  than  one underlying  (or  regional)  Quigleyan  cycle  at work.  Quigley's supply-side emphasis  on waves  of  ( open-ended)  technological   innovation  is as notable as Wallerstein's  demand-side  concentration  on purchasing  power and his emphasis  on (asymptotically   limited)  geographically  and  structurally-based   expansion.  Supply-side and demand-side  factors  may very well work  on  different  timescales;  the  possibilities  of technological  innovation  still  seem  so  large as to  be  able to  outweigh, for the  next centuries  at least,  the  effects  of reaching  the  other  limits  to  growth;  here  again I would choose  to  follow  Quigley. 10.

=More information=

More of this text here:  [[Hegemony]].

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]