

=Definition=

From the Wikipedia:

"Immaterial labor is an academic term used to describe the affective and cognitive commodities produced by work that exist outside the traditional wage-based consideration of labor as a material-commodity-producing activity, as well as the activity of producing this new form of commodity.

Studies of immaterial labor have included analysis of commodities produced by work amidst the internet, although immaterial labor is understood as a concept pre-dating digital technologies, specifically in the performance of gender and domestic roles, and other aspects of affective and cognitive work.

Themes commonly associated with immaterial labor in the context of the internet include: digital labor, commons-based peer production, and user-generated content production, which might include open source, free software, crowdsourcing, and flexible licensing agreements, as well as the collapse or copyright amidst the ambiguities of sharing creative works in the digital age, digital care work, and other conditions produced by participation in social environments within the digital, knowledge economy."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immaterial_labor)


=Description=

Aras Ozgun:

"For Hardt and Roggero, the definitive characteristic of the hegemonic productive force in post-
Fordism is its ‘‘social’’ constitution*/its open, shared, collective, and cooperative
form. The linguistic, informational, cognitive, and affective constituents of immaterial
production are necessarily collective social resources, and these are what
immaterial labor also reproduces in the course of capitalist production. In its
postindustrial moment, the capitalist contradiction evolves into a new track; the
productive force which capitalist production relies on at this moment can only be
‘‘productive’’ for capitalism to the degree that it can produce and circulate
‘‘commons’’; its productivity diminishes when it is appropriated and restricted as
‘‘property.’’ For Hart and Roggero, post-Fordism is marked by this paradox and, as
such, capitalism today has to develop new techniques of rent extraction and new
property and production relations, such as licensing, branding, freelancing, crowd
sourcing, and so on."
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2010.490372)


=Discussion=

Michael Hardt:

"The passage toward an informational economy involves necessarily a change in the quality of labor and the nature of laboring processes.  This is the most immediate sociological and anthropological implication of the passage of economic paradigms.  Information, communication, knowledge, and affect come to play a foundational role in the production process.

A first aspect of this transformation is recognized by many in terms of the change in factory labor—using the auto industry as a central point of reference—from the Fordist model to the Toyotist model.[4]  The primary structural change between these models involves the system of communication between the production and consumption of commodities, that is, the passage of information between the factory and the market.  The Fordist model constructed a relatively "mute" relationship between production and consumption.  The mass production of standardized commodities in the Fordist era could count on an adequate demand and thus had little need to “listen” closely to the market.  A feedback circuit from consumption to production did allow changes in the market to spur changes in production but this communication was restricted (due to fixed and compartmentalized channels of planning) and slow (due to the rigidity of the technologies and procedures of mass production).

Toyotism is based on an inversion of the Fordist structure of communication between production and consumption.  Ideally, according to this model, the production planning will communicate with markets constantly and immediately.  Factories will maintain zero stock and commodities will be produced just in time according to the present demand of the existing markets.  This model thus involves not simply a more rapid feedback loop but an inversion of the relationship because, at least in theory, the productive decision actually comes after and in reaction to the market decision.  This industrial context provides a first sense in which communication and information have come to play a newly central role in production.  One might say that instrumental action and communicative action have become intimately interwoven in informationalized industrial processes.  (It would be interesting and useful to consider here how these processes disrupt Habermas's division between instrumental and communicative action, just as in another sense they do Arendt's distinctions among labor, work, and action.[5])  One should quickly add, however, that this is an impoverished notion of communication, the mere transmission of market data. 

The service sectors of the economy present a richer model of productive communication.  Most services indeed are based on the continual exchange of information and knowledges.  Since the production of services results in no material and durable good, we might define the labor involved in this production as immaterial labor—that is, labor that produces an immaterial good, such as a service, knowledge, or communication [6].  One face of immaterial labor can be recognized in analogy to the functioning of a computer.  The increasingly extensive use of computers has tended progressively to redefine laboring practices and relations (along with indeed all social practices and relations).  Familiarity and facility with computer technology is becoming an increasingly general primary qualification for work in the dominant countries.  Even when direct contact with computers is not involved the manipulation of symbols and information along the model of computer operation is extremely widespread.  One novel aspect of the computer is that it can continually modify its own operation through its use.  Even the most rudimentary forms of artificial intelligence allow the computer to expand and perfect its operation based on interaction with its user and its environment.  The same kind of continual interactivity characterizes a wide range of contemporary productive activities throughout the economy, whether computer hardware is directly involved or not.  In an earlier era workers learned how to act like machines both inside and outside the factory.  Today, as general social knowledge becomes ever more a direct force of production, we increasingly think like computers and the interactive model of communication technologies becomes more and more central to our laboring activities.  Interactive and cybernetic machines become a new prosthesis integrated into our bodies and minds and a lens through which to redefine our bodies and minds themselves. 

Robert Reich calls this type of immaterial labor "symbolic-analytical services"—tasks that involve "problem-solving, problem-identifying, and strategic brokering activities."[9]  This type of labor claims the highest value and thus Reich identifies it as the key to competition in the new global economy.  He recognizes, however, that the growth of these knowledge-based jobs of creative symbolic manipulation implies a corresponding growth of low value and low skill jobs of routine symbol manipulation, such as data entry and word processing.  Here begins to emerge a fundamental division of labor within the realm of immaterial processes.  

The model of the computer, however, can only account for one face of the communicational and immaterial labor involved in the production of services.  The other face of immaterial labor is the affective labor of human contact and interaction.  This is the aspect of immaterial labor that economists like Reich are less likely to talk about, but that seems to me the more important aspect, the binding element.  Health services, for example, rely centrally on caring and affective labor, and the entertainment industry and the various culture industries are likewise focussed on the creation and manipulation of affects.  To one degree or another this affective labor plays a certain role throughout the service industries, from fast food servers to providers of financial services, embedded in the moments of human interaction and communication.  This labor is immaterial, even if it is corporeal and affective, in the sense that its products are intangible: a feeling of ease, well-being, satisfaction, excitement, passion—even a sense of connectedness or community.  Categories such as in-person services or services of proximity are often used to identify this kind of labor, but what is essential to it, its "in-person" aspect, is really the creation and manipulation of affects.  Such affective production, exchange, and communication is generally associated with human contact, with the actual presence of another, but that contact can be either actual or virtual.  In production of affects in the entertainment industry, for example, the human contact, the presence of others, is principally virtual, but not for that reason any less real.

This second face of immaterial labor, its affective face, extends beyond the model of intelligence and communication defined by the computer.  Affective labor is better understood by beginning from what feminist analyses of “women’s work” have called “labor in the bodily mode.”  Caring labor is certainly entirely immersed in the corporeal, the somatic, but the affects it produces are nonetheless immaterial.  What affective labor produces are social networks, forms of community, biopower.  

Here one might recognize once again that the instrumental action of economic production has merged with the communicative action of human relations.  In this case, however, communication has not been impoverished but rather production has been enriched to the level of complexity of human interaction.  Whereas in a first moment, in the computerization of industry for example, one might say that communicative action, human relations, and culture have been instrumentalized, reified, and "degraded" to the level of economic interactions, one should add quickly that through a reciprocal process, in this second moment, production has become communicative, affective, de-instrumentalized, and "elevated" to the level of human relations—but of course a level of human relations entirely dominated by and internal to capital.  (Here the division between economy and culture begins to break down.)  In the production and reproduction of affects, in those networks of culture and communication, collective subjectivities are produced and sociality is produced—even if those subjectivities and that sociality are directly exploitable by capital.  This is where we can realize the enormous potential in affective labor. 

I do not mean to argue that affective labor itself is new or that the fact that affective labor produces value in some sense is new.  Feminist analyses in particular have long recognized the social value of caring labor, kin work, nurturing, and maternal activities.  What are new, on the other hand, are the extent to which this affective immaterial labor is now directly productive of capital and the extent to which it has become generalized through wide sectors of the economy.  In effect, as a component of immaterial labor, affective labor has achieved a dominant position of the highest value in the contemporary informational economy.  Where the production of soul is concerned, as Musil might say, we should no longer look to the soil and organic development, nor to the factory and mechanical development, but rather to today's dominant economic forms, that is, to production defined by a combination of cybernetics and affect. 

This immaterial labor is not isolated to a certain population of workers, say computer programmers and nurses, who would form a new potential labor aristocracy.  Rather immaterial labor in its various guises (informational, affective, communicative, and cultural) tends toward being spread throughout the entire workforce and throughout all laboring tasks as a component, larger or smaller, of all laboring processes.  That said, however, there are certainly numerous divisions within the realm of immaterial labor—international divisions of immaterial labor, gender divisions, racial divisions, and so forth.  As Robert Reich says, the U.S. government will strive as much as possible to keep the highest value immaterial labor in the United States and export the low value tasks to other regions.  It is a very important task to clarify these divisions of immaterial labor, which I should point out are not the divisions of labor we are used to, particularly with regard to affective labor.

In short, we can distinguish three types of immaterial labor that drive the service sector at the top of the informational economy.  The first is involved in an industrial production that has been informationalized and has incorporated communication technologies in a way that transforms the industrial production process itself.  Manufacturing is regarded as a service and the material labor of the production of durable goods mixes with and tends toward immaterial labor.  Second is the immaterial labor of analytical and symbolic tasks, which itself breaks down into creative and intelligent manipulation on one hand and routine symbolic tasks on the other.  Finally, a third type of immaterial labor involves the production and manipulation of affects and requires (virtual or actual) human contact and proximity.  These are the three types of labor that drive the postmodernization or informationalization of the global economy."

(http://www.vinculo-a.net/english_site/text_hardt.html)


==“Immaterial Labour” Properly Defined==

Maurizio Lazzarato:

"All the characteristics of the post-industrial economy (present both in industry and at a territorial level) are heightened within the form of “immaterial” production properly defined: audiovisual production, advertising, fashion, the production of software, photography, cultural activities etc.

The activities of this kind of immaterial labour oblige us to question the classic definitions of “work” and of “workforce”, because they are the result of a synthesis of varying types of savoirfaire (those of intellectual activities, as regards the cultural-informational content, those of manual activities for the ability to put together creativity, imagination and technical and manual labour; and that of entrepreneurial activities for that capacity of management of their social relations and of structuration of the social cooperation of which they are a part). This immaterial labour constitutes itself in forms that are immediately collective, and, so to speak, exists only in the form of network and flow. The organisation of its cycle of production, because this is precisely what we are dealing with, once we abandon our factoryist prejudgements) is not immediately visible because it is not confined by the walls of a factory. The localtion within which it is exercised is immediately at the territorial level: the basin of immaterial labour. Small and very small “productive units” (being often only one individual) are organised for ad hoc projects and are used for the given time of work. The cycle of production emerges only when it is solicited* by the capitalist, then to dissolve, once “order” has been determined, within networks and flows which permit the reproduction and enrichment of its productive capacities. Precariousness, hyperexploitation, mobility and hierarchy are what characterise metropolitan immaterial labour. Behind the label of the “independent or dependent” worker is hidden a true and proper intellectual proletarian, recognised as such only by the employers who exploit them.

What is worh noting, within these activities, is that it is increasingly difficult to distinguish free time from labour time. We find ourselves in front of a global lifetime which, in a certain sense, coincides with work.

This form of work is, at the same time, characterised by real entrepreneurial competences, which consist:

a) in a sort of ability of management of its social relations;

b) in the stimulation of social cooperation within

the basin of immaterial labour and within its structuration.

Thus the quality of this kind of workforce doesn’t reside solely in its professional capacities (which enable the construction of the cultural-informational content of the commodity), but also of its competences of “management” of its own activity and as coordinator of a different immaterial labour (production and management of the cycle).

This immaterial labour appears as a true mutation of “living labour”.

Here the distancing from the Taylorist model is at its maximum.

Immaterial labour finds itself at the crossroads (is the interface) of a new relationship between production and consumption. The activation, both of productive cooperation and of the social relationship with the consumer, is materialised within and by the process of communication. It is immaterial labour which continually innovates the form and the conditions of communication (and thus of work and of consumption). It gives form and materialises needs, images, the tastes of consumers and these products become in their turn powerful producers of needs, of images and of tastes. The particularity of the commodity produced through immaterial labour (seeing that its essential use-value is given by its value contained, informational and cultural)* consists in the fact that this is not destroyed in the act of consumption, but enlarges, transforms, creates the “ideological” and cultural environment of the consumer. This does not produce the physical capacity of the workforce, it transforms the person who uses it. Immaterial labour produces first of all a “social relationship” (a relationship of innovation, of production, of consumption); and only if it succeeds in this production does its activity have an economic value. This activity shows immediately that which material production “hid”: in other words, labour produces not only commodities, but first and foremost the capital relationship.


===The Autonomy of the Productive Synergies within Immaterial Labour===

Our working hypothesis consists in the observation that the cycle of immaterial labour is preconstituted on the basis of a social workforce which is autonomous, and able to organise its own work as its own relations with the enterprise. Industry does not form this new workforce, but simply recuperates it and adapts it. The control of industry, on this new workforce, is predisposed by an independent organisation and by a free “entrepreneurial activity” of its productive force. Proceeding on this terrain, we enter into the debate on the nature of work in the post-Fordist phase of the organisation of labour. Among economists, the predominant view of this problematic can be related back to a statement: immaterial labour reveals itself within the forms of organisation which industrial centralisation allows to it. On this terrain, and on the same basis, two schools differ: one is the extension of the neoclassical analysis; the other is that of systems theory.

In the first, the attempt to solve the problem consists in a redefinition of the problematic of the market. They ask whether, in order to explain the phenomena of communication and the new dimensions of organisation, there should not be introduced, not only cooperation and intensity of labour, but other analytical variables (anthropological? immaterial?) and whether on this basis there should not be other objectives of optimisation introduced, etc.

In reality, the neo-classical model finds great difficulties in freeing itself from the constrictions of coherenece imposed by the theory of general equilibrium. The new phenomenologies of labour, the new dimensions of organisation, of communication, the power (potenza) of spontaneous synergies, the autonomy of subjects, the independence of the networks, were neither foreseen nor foreseeable by a general theory which considered material labour and the industrial economy as indispensable. Today, with the new data available, the micro-economy revolts against the macro-economy, and the classical model is corroded by a new irreducible anthropology.

Systems theory, eliminating the constriction of the market and giving the central place to organisation, is more open to the new phenomenology of labour, and in particular to the emergence of immaterial labour. In the more highly developed systemic theories, organisation is conceived as the ensemble of material and immaterial dispositives,* both individual and collective, which can permit a given group to reach objectives. In order to assure the success of this organisational process, there are foreseen instruments of regulation, either voluntary or automatic. A consideration from the viewpoint of social synergies becomes possible, immaterial labour can be taken on board, in consideration of its global efficacy. Nonetheless these points of view remain tied to an image of the organisation of work and of its social territory, within which the afficiacious activity from the economic point of view (that is to say, the activity conforming to the objective) cannot not be considered as a surplus in relation to a collective cognitive dispositive. Sociology, as economy of labour, systemic, cannot detach themselves from this presupposition.

We think that the analysis of immaterial labour and the description of its organisation can lead us beyond the presuppositions of enterprise theory which itself developed under the form of the neoclassical school or under the school of systems theory; we think, meanwhile, that it can lead us to define, at a territorial level, a location of radical autonomy of productive synergies of immaterial labour. Against the old schools, the viewpoint of a constitutive “anthropo-sociology” can thus be decisively established.

With the predominance of this latter within social production, we find ourselves facing an interruption within the continuity of productive models. With this we mean that, unlike what is thought by many theoreticians of postFordism, we do not believe that this new workforce is solely functional to a new historical phase of capitalism and of its process of accumulation and reproduction; this workforce is thus the product of a “silent revolution” which is taking place within the anthropology of work and within the reconfiguration of its senses and its significance. Waged labour and direct subjugation (to organisation) are no longer the principal form of the contractual relationship between capitalist and worker; polymorphous autonomous work emerges as the dominant form, a kind of “intellectual worker” (operaio intellettuale) who is himself an entrepreneur, inserted within a market that is mobile and within networks that are changeable in time and space."

(https://www.multitudes.net/General-intellect/)

=More Information=

#[[Digital Labor]]
#[[Affective Labor]]
#[[Biopower]]

==Bibliography:==

Dowling, E., R. Nunes and B. Trott (2007), 'Immaterial and Affective Labour Explored', Ephemera 7 no. 1, pp. 1-7.

Dyer-Witheford, N. (2005), 'Cyber-Negri: General Intellect and Immaterial Labour', in T.S. Murphy and A.K. Mustapha, The Philosophy of Antonio Negri: Resistance in Practice, London: Pluto, pp. 136-62.

Lazzarato, M. (1996), 'Immaterial Labour'.
Available from: http://www.generation-online.org/c/fcimmateriallabour3.htm 




[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]