

=Bio=

born 1949, living in Berlin from 1969 until 2000, is a computer scientist, philosopher, journalist and documentary filmmaker. On the seventies she delt practically and critically with microelectronics and alternative technics. She was one of the founding publisher of the technical and nature-scientist critic platform “Wechselwirkung”. 1980 until 1993 she worked with taz (tageszeitung). In the nineties she studied philosophy, and from the middle of the nineties she startet making documentary films partly together with Thomas Winkelkotte. 
During all that time she took part of the political movements, especially of the autonomous movement of the late eighties and early nineties in Berlin. Text and film subjects deal with political-normativ fundamentals like autonomy, culture of conflict, property, value, utopia, provocation, power, history and self-image of left-wing movements. 
Since 2000 she lives on the country in an artist community eastern of Berlin. During last years Imma Harms was involved in rising up a rural exchange cycle and in supporting the PaG-projects (Projektwerkstatt auf Gegenseitigkeit, project-lab on Mutuality) (link). 


=Publications and Film Projects=

Some papers:

* Lego – Programmiersprache im Kinderzimmer, 1981
* Vertrauen auf die eigene Kraft – ländliche Entwicklungsprojekte in Tansania, im Auftrag der GTZ, 1985
* Stand der Bewegung – 18 Gespräche über linksradikale Politik, Buchprojekt zum Berliner Autonomiekongress, 1995
* Der Zwang zur Geschichtsschreibung, Vitrinisierung der eigenen Vergangenheit, 1999, auszugsweise in Bernd Hüttner: „Vorwärts und viel vergessen“, 2005
* Machtfragen, Entwurf einer relativistischen Machttheorie, 1997


Some film subjects:

* property – border - conflict: „Was man so sein eigen nennt – der Mauergarten und andere Grenzfälle“, 1999
* Practical value:         „Die Passage – Geschichten von Müll und Wert“, 2001
* Self organisation:     „Im Schatten der Zelte – Beobachtungen im Hamburger Grenzcamp“, 2003
* „Weg von der taz – 100 Portraits der Gründer und Gründerinnen der taz“, 2004
* „Berichte aus Staub“ – Dokumentation vom Aufbau des KünstlerInnen-Projekts Gutshof Reichenow, 2007


Papers of interest regarding the commons: 

-       Dissens und Konflikt 
-       Commons – eine Frage der Grenzziehung



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]