

=Discussion=

Sander Van Damme:

"There are three theories behind the high repayment rates of groups in microfinance:
first, there is a relational reason, implying fellow group members can impose social sanctions
on defaulters and even eject them from local social life as an ultimate sanction. Second, an
informational reason: group members self-select into homogenous groups and thus only allow
people to join who - to their best knowledge - will be able to repay the loans. And finally the
often-cited reason that members are jointly-liable and others thus take over loan payments
when a group member cannot afford it at the moment a payment is due. According to Cassar
et al. (2005) the first two reasons have the largest effect on the repayment rates in
microfinance; a fact also confirmed by other authors. Karlan (2007) finds that “stronger
social connections of the group lead to higher repayment and savings.” Everett (2010) shows
this is even true for virtual social lending groups; his research showing that being member of
such a group can have a significant impact on loan repayment only if a foothold in the real
world is retained. For the virtual groups in Everett's research without such a real-world
connection, the opposite was true: they even performed worse than individual borrowers. The
reason why groups usually outperform individual lenders is the insider bidder effect. As
mentioned earlier, when group members have additional inside information on a borrower, it
helps them to overcome the information asymmetries and thus avert the problems of adverse
selection and moral hazard.

Interestingly, we notice how in social lending, relationships actually drive down interest rates,
rather than resulting in a higher rate than transactional banking. This stems from the fact that
even when lending is based on relationships and inside information, insider bidding itself is
valuable information which is quickly disseminated to a highly competitive environment of
lenders. Therefore everyone who wishes to fund a small part of the loan knows whether
insiders are or are not bidding on the loan. In case a bank would possess inside information, it
could try to extract a higher interest rate while lending the loan. In the case of social lending,
an individual that has inside information will be willing to fund part of the loan but by not
funding it all there can be no rent extraction. The act of funding a fellow member's loan leads
to a clear signal for other lenders that this inside – and therefore better informed - party trusts
this borrower and causes a bidding spree on the loan, eventually driving down the interest
rate. This effect is even more important in the case of group leaders' inside bidding (Berger &
Gleisner, 2009). By doing so, peer to peer systems actually put the cost of investigation on
debtors, rather than creditors, allowing them to cut out the cost of the banking intermediary."
(https://www.zidisha.org/editables/news_docs/Louvain.pdf)



[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Relational]]