
'''* Projected research - Human right to breathe freely. By Fabio Balli. Montreal Concordia University, 2016'''

URL = http://www.fabioballi.net/en/research

=Description=

"Breathing is our first act in life. Each day, we inspire and expire 10000 to 15000 liter air. When unfolded, our airways cover 10 to 20 square meters – versus 1.7 for our skin. But what happens when breathing becomes a challenge ? What if we felt we would breath through a straw, or had water in the lungs ?

Each year, over four million people die from chronic respiratory diseases, and hundreds of millions more have respiratory failure.

Now, imagine that yoga practitioners, lung specialists, children affected with cystic fibrosis or asthma, designers, anthropologists and professionals of all fields collaborate. Imagine we join our collective intelligences to build Health games ; games that foster the inclusion and autonomy of people with chronic diseases, but that also learn us how to breath well ?

This is the mission of Breathing Games, an initiative started in January 2014. Breathing Games aims to provide a free/libre standard for Health Games, that is

    a community to build and share the Commons
    a process to help stakeholders from different organizations build on collective intelligence
    a software development kit, examples and specifications to create plug-and-play modules
    blockchain data management that preserves users' privacy and fosters research
    a marketplace with processes to call contributors, validate the work and redistribute funds

The applied research presented aims to root the initiative into scientific methodologies.

Challenges that will be addressed in the study are

    the inclusion of all stakeholders along the process (participatory action research)
    the financial sustainability of a non-proprietary approach (social economy)
    the development of a broad community and of an ethical governance (political sociology)
    the impact of the initiative on inner transformation (experiential learning)

respectively supervised by professors Warren Linds, Marguerite Mendell (co-chair), Satoshi Ikeda (co-chair) and Philippe Caignon. Two leading experts will also contribute : Madeleine Laugeri (group regulation) and Tiberius Brastaviceanu (open collaboration).

This research project is realized within the individualized program offered by Concordia University (Canada)."


[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Research]]