
'''* Policy Document: The Impetus Plan for the Social and Solidarity Economy in Barcelona 2016 – 2019. Ajuntament de Barcelona. Economia Cooperativa, Social y Solidaria y Consum, 2017'''

URL =



=Description=

"This document, titled The Impetus Plan for the Social
and Solidarity Economy in Barcelona, is the
result of a municipal initiative. Its aim is to offer
a transformative socio-economic vision of the urban
reality. It includes an action programme and
aims to contribute towards reducing social and
territorial inequalities, while promoting an economy
at the service of people and of social justice.
The Impetus Plan comprises a diagnosis, the development
process and the set of actions desired
to be carried out in the city over the coming years."

=Contents=

"It is structured into the following parts:

—— The social and solidarity economy in Barcelona:
analyses the reality of the transformative
socio-economic fabric of the city and its
roll-out across the territory

—— The Planning Process: explains the process involved
in drafting the Plan and related co-production
and co-responsibility dynamics.

—— Contents of the Plan: describes the general and
specific objectives, lines of work, measures and
actions to be implemented.

—— Development of the Plan: indicates the different
agents involved in the Plan’s execution
and spaces for joint and participatory work.

—— Budget, Monitoring and Evaluation: details
the budgetary allocations, as well as the impact
assessment criteria used.

—— Annex. Towards a New Socio-Economic Policy:
offers an overview of the plural economy
and of the proposal for the city’s socio-economic
transformation."

=Excerpts=

"As explained below, this Impetus Plan is the product
of dialogue between the SSE sector and the City
Council, which gave rise to a shared diagnosis. The
report The Social and Solidarity Economy in Barcelona
developed a compilation of needs that are summarised
in the following challenges tag cloud.

These challenges, detected by the SSE fabric itself,
show those aspects that require input in order to
consolidate and strengthen the social and solidarity
economy movement. This Impetus Plan contains
measures and actions related with these challenges,
which often require internal work by the sector itself.
In this sense, co-production and co-responsibility in
achieving them are essential.

To highlight those that enjoy the greatest consensus,
efforts need to be channelled towards improving the
coordination of the sector in a global sense. This will
make it possible to create a greater shared identity;
increase communication outreach to disseminate
the principles and values of the SSE among citizens;
make spaces available to the SSE so that it can become
the backbone of neighbourhoods and districts;
improve inter-cooperation to strengthen social
market construction; place emphasis on disseminating
and training in democratic and participative
governance as an eminently transformative element;
and influence socially responsible public procurement,
based on eco-social values, as a fundamental
strategy."

==Commons collaborative economy sector==

"Meetings were held, along with the sharing of
spaces for diagnosis, with BarCola, the collaborative
economy hub that groups together 18 organisations.
In March 2016, the city hosted the Commons
Collaborative Economies: Policies, Technologies
and City for the People (“Procomuns”)
event whose sessions featured participation by
over four hundred people and led to a declaration
of 120 measures for public policies on commons
collaborative economy matters, which were then
put forward in the Municipal Action Plan (PAM)."


=Status=

==Statistics on the Social and Solidarity Economy in Barcelona==

"According to the study The Social and Solidarity
Economy in Barcelona (2016), the city is home to
4,718 socio-economic initiatives that, according
to their legal structures, form part of the social
and solidarity economy. 

Some of the most significant
data are:

—— 2,400 third social sector organisations
—— 1,197 worker-owned enterprises
—— 861 cooperatives
—— 260 community-economic initiatives


In total, they account for 53,000 people employed,
over 100,000 volunteers, over 500,000
consumer cooperative members and approximately
113,000 mutualists.


SSE initiatives exist in all sectors of economic
activity: from energy through culture to the food
sector.


Barcelona is home to 861 cooperatives of all
types, representing 20% of all the cooperatives in
Catalonia. The large majority are worker cooperatives:
these account for 77% of the total (numbering
667, of which 36 are social initiative cooperatives).


Furthermore, the city is home to 31 consumer and
user cooperatives, which operate in a very wide
range of activity fields: food, paper, energy, health,
etc.


Since 1993, the city’s main housing cooperatives
have built 2,093 homes in Barcelona, and today a
new model is emerging known as housing cooperatives
with assignment of use rights.


In the education area there are 19 education cooperatives,
of which 80% are worker cooperatives,
10% consumer cooperatives and 10% mixed.

They concentrate around 2,500 members, over
5,600 students and they employ over 750 people.


There are also 13 free schools running plus
various child-rearing and shared education initiatives
for ages between 0 and 3 years.


Worker-owned enterprises enjoy a significant
presence in the city: they represent 25.4 % of Barcelona’s
SSE enterprise fabric, although a challenge
in this sector’s articulation is detected.
All local development projects must count on the
strength of the third social sector because, with
2,400 organisations in the city, it represents over
50% of SSE initiatives: 48 of them correspond to
special work centres and 20 are work integration
social enterprises (WISE).


The seven ethical finance organisations operating
in Catalonia are all based in Barcelona. Furthermore,
in the insurance sector, the EthSI (Ethical
and Solidarity Based Insurance) seal exists to
certify insurance products, brokers and agents in
line with SSE criteria. In Spain there are seven certified
companies, four of them based in Barcelona.
Community economies have emerged in the city
as self-managed and innovative projects in the
creation of new forms geared towards resolving
people’s needs. In this respect, especially worthy
of highlight are 23 citizen-managed facilities, 59
agro-ecological consumer groups, 13 exchange
markets, 21 time banks and 20 community market
gardens"


[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]