"The Inca were not only fierce conquerors but they also had a violent
punishment system. If someone stole, murdered, or had sex with a Sapa
wife or a Sun Virgin, they were thrown off a cliff, hands cut off or
eyes cut out, or hung up to starve to death. Prisons were of no use
because punishment usually consisted of death" -
(http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/prehistory/latinamerica/south/cultures/inca.html)

They were clearly a highly developed class society, as outlined in the
wikipedia entry - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inca_society :

"The descendants of the original Inca tribe were not numerous enough to
administer their empire without help. To cope with the need for
leadership at all levels the Inca established a civil service system.
Boys at age of 13 and girls at age of first menstruation had their
intelligence tested by the local Inca officials. If they failed, their
ayllu (extended family group) would teach them one of many trades, such
as farming, gold working, weaving, or military skills. If they passed
the test, they were sent to Cuzco to attend school to become
administrators. There they learned to read the quipu (knotted cord
records) and were taught Inca iconography, leadership skills, religion,
and, most importantly, mathematics. The graduates of this school
constituted the nobility and were expected to marry within that nobility.

While some workers were held in great esteem, such as royal goldsmiths
and weavers, they could never themselves enter the ruling classes. The
best they could hope for was that their children might pass the exam as
adolescents to enter the civil service. Although workers were considered
the lowest social class, they were entitled to a modicum of what today
we call due process, and all classes were equally subject to the rule of
law. For example, if a worker was accused of stealing and the charges
were proven false, the local official could be punished for not doing
his job properly.

Social Classes  Representatives
Inca

   * Sapa Inca

Royalty

   * The Auqui: Son of the Sapa Inca.
   * The Coya: Wife of the Sapa Inca
   * Royal Panacas: First generations of each Pañaca ( royal relative).

Nobility

   * Nobility of Blood: Other members of las Pañacas (royal relatives).
   * Nobility of Privilege: Those who had attained distinction through
their services; Sacerdotes & Acllas; High chiefs.

Ayllu

   * Hatun Runa: The general public.
   * Mitimaes: Those belonging to newly conquered races.
   * Yanaconas: Servers of the Inca and Empire, many of which were prisoners."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inca_society)


[[Category:Governance]]