
'''* Report: Incentivising the Transition to a Sustainable Economy. Stephen Hinton and Anders Hoglund.  Swedish Sustainable Economy Foundation
(TSSEF), 2017'''

URL = http://tssef.se/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/FSSD-align-report-R3IA.pdf

=Description=

From the Executive overview:

Stephen Hinton et al.:

"The [[Natural Step]] offers a five-level framework
for planning complex systems. The framework
is accompanied by a set of system conditions
for global socio-ecological sustainability.

This paper takes as its starting point the
economic system, and using the framework
explores how the economic system – with
price signals as powerful motivators- can be
designed to meet citizens’ needs whilst
ensuring natural resources and eco-systems
are available for future generations.

The framework methodology requires that the
system itself is described thoroughly. This
analysis offers a model of the monetary
system as a flow of money from citizens to
enterprises and government and back again.

The analysis is taken one step further
identifying the main areas where the
monetary system and the socio-ecological
system interface: production, extraction and
property ownership.

Models of the circular economy - where
substances are reused rather than being
emitted as pollutants or made unrecoverable
– include the concept of system nutrients.

These nutrients flow between the various
spheres of the natural and social system. Here
the concepts of product, service, property
ownership and legal transactions are
investigated to identify where the economic
system can provide incentive barriers or
stimulus for individuals and companies to
change their behavior towards sustainability.

The economic system cannot be accurately
described solely in terms of money flow. We
identify four types of capital along with the
role of the monetary system in building up
capital that supports the sustainable society.

Starting from the generally accepted idea that
money – within limits – can act as an incentive
for good, opportunities within the modern
digitalized economy are identified where fees
and surcharges can be applied to points in the
system in ways that incentivize desired
behaviours and influence the functioning of
the system as a whole. Applying a system
control approach to the economy, such
economic mechanisms would be designated
as ‘actuators’. ‘Sensors’ measure system
performance and data from sensors is fed
back to inform decisions on surcharges.

Rather than creating new taxes and fees, more
efficient stabilization of the economy can be
achieved by applying surcharges and dividends
within already existing fee and tax
mechanisms. Five types of fiscal mechanisms:
import fees, property fees, interest rates,
extraction fees and sales taxes can be
surcharged in a way that provides stabilizing
feedback to ensure the economic system
performs to requirements. A citizens’ tax
account provides the other potential financial
stimulus point. Sensors include economic
performance measurements that most nations
have in place already including emission
figures, import figures, the status of various
ecosystems and figures on mineral reserves
and extraction rates. Recycling performance
statistics are also important “sensor”
measurements.

The methodology for analyzing the often
complex eco-system of economic incentives
implicated in pollution and resource depletion
is a step methodology called back-stepping. It
involves identifying the key substances at
molecular level and mapping out their route 
through the supply chain. The elements to
prioritize – carbon from fossil sources
phosphorus and nitrogen - are identified in
the work on planetary boundaries by the
Stockholm Environmental Institute.

Fiscal mechanisms need to be flexible so the
levy can be raised at regular intervals until the
market responds. They need to be
redistributive in ensuring that goods and
services are affordable even to the poorest,
and they need to be self – financing rather
than putting an overall drain on the economy.

Six fiscal mechanisms, applied together, can
create an economic system that incentivizes
the socio-ecological system to perform within
system conditions. These mechanisms are
described for each system condition in terms
of strategic guidelines for their
implementation, specific actions required and
the tools that will aid their introduction. The
description includes the sensor measurements
that provide the feedback to decision-makers.

This report also offers a way of categorizing
investments in the firm as circular or linear,
and of analyzing to what extent a product is
linear (uses non-recycled material) or circular
(uses recycled or natural material). From this
it is possible to create the circular company
financial statements and report.

Several reports and analyses have been
produced on the economic stabilizing
mechanisms. Based on the findings in these
reports next steps could include small scale trials and simulations."
(http://tssef.se/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/FSSD-align-report-R3IA.pdf)


=Characteristics=

"Fiscal mechanisms

Six fiscal mechanisms are proposed by the TSSEF Foundation

• Dividend-bearing pollutant surcharges
• Dividend-bearing essential substance extraction surcharges
• Dividend – bearing toxin surcharges
• Dividend-bearing property surcharges
• Employment stabilization surcharges/discounts
• Mortgage interest rate surcharge for house price stabilization ."

(http://tssef.se/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/FSSD-align-report-R3IA.pdf)


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Articles]]