'''= Inclusive design aims to enable all people to have equal opportunities to participate in every aspect of society irrespective of cognitive, physical or sociocultural factors.'''

=Definition=

"Inclusive design is about making sure that as many people as possible can use or consume products, services and spaces. At Ergonomidesign, inclusion takes human diversity as a starting point."
(http://www.ergonomidesign.com/Default.aspx?ID=1024)


=Characteristics=

'''Cognitive inclusion is designing for the invisible'''

"Cognition is concerned with mental processes – such as perception, memory, reasoning, and motor response – and how these processes affect interactions between human beings or between humans and systems. Just as people have different physical capabilities they also have different cognitive capabilities that might not be as visible as the physical. These capabilities can be affected by age, injuries, trauma, or be congenital. Nevertheless our mental capabilities are a part of who we are and needs to be considered when designing.


'''Physical inclusion is designing to enable ordinary tasks'''

Physical inclusion is concerned with the physical objects and environment around you and how it affects your performance. People may have different physical and sensory capabilities due to age, disability or temporary conditions. Physical inclusion takes human diversity as a starting point, when designing products, environments and services that we all need to be able to use.

 

'''Sociocultural inclusion is designing for equal opportunities'''

Factors such as social class, economy, educational level and living conditions have a strong impact on the individual’s access to opportunities for participating in and benefiting from society. Social exclusion changes as communities become more culturally diverse and new societal norms develop. Certain groups are at higher risk of becoming marginalized. Vulnerable groups include the unemployed, the homeless, older people, immigrants and ethnic minorities, people with impairments, individuals in conflict with the legal system and people living in remote areas."
(http://www.ergonomidesign.com/Default.aspx?ID=1024)


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]