'''Article: Scaling Consensus: Increasing Decentralization in Wikipedia Governance. Andrea Forte and Amy Bruckman'''


=Abstract=

"How does “self-governance” happen in Wikipedia?
Through in-depth interviews with eleven individuals who
have held a variety of responsibilities in the English
Wikipedia, we obtained rich descriptions of how various
forces produce and regulate social structures on the site.
Our analysis describes Wikipedia as an organization
with highly refined policies, norms, and a technological
architecture that supports organizational ideals of
consensus building and discussion. We describe how
governance in the site is becoming increasingly
decentralized as the community grows and how this is
predicted by theories of commons-based governance
developed in offline contexts. The trend of
decentralization is noticeable with respect to both
content-related decision making processes and social
structures that regulate user behavior."
(http://www.andreaforte.net/ForteBruckmanScalingConsensus.pdf)


=Excerpt=


==Conclusions==

"Governance is not simply the sum of policy-related
social processes. There are also groups of individuals
who manage the execution of detailed procedures that
operate on a site-wide level such as the Featured Article
(FA) selection process used by Viegas et. al. to reveal
features of Ostrom’s eight principles of self-organization
in Wikipedia. The story we have told about policy in
Wikipedia provides a complementary view. The most
noticeable gap we found between Ostrom’s principles
and the structure of Wikipedia governance was in the
inability of WikiProject members to enforce their own
local guidelines in order to maintain local standards of
content production. It remains to be seen whether this
trend will prove disruptive over time. Perhaps
WikiProjects or some other form of local governance in
the site will acquire the authority to impose sanctions on
users who violate their locally-devised rules. It is also
possible that local enforcement will simply prove
unnecessary and that Wikipedia will ultimately
demonstrate an alternate model of self-governance for
which theoretical justification will need to be found.

Rather than suggest a prescribed community structure
based on discrepancy with existing theory, we can
continue to learn from the evolving practices of
Wikipedians.

Issues like the Virginia Tech biographies and
arachnophobia illustration arise every day, and
Wikipedians continue to use and refine both their
policies and their policy-related processes. Overall, the
story of Wikipedia governance that we assembled is one
of increasing decentralization. As the community grows,
it has become necessary for governance mechanisms to
shift outward into the community. This decentralization
was not entirely accidental; self-organization was
dependent in part on the design of the technology and
embedded in the philosophy of the community’s founder
and early participants.

We suggest that the Wikipedia community has
remained healthy in large part due to the continued
presence of “old-timers” who carry a set of social norms
and organizational ideals with them into every
WikiProject, committee, and local process in which they
take part. Instead of fracturing, the community has (so
far) gracefully distributed the pressure of expansion
among its members in ways that are largely consistent
with Ostrom’s propositions about the necessity of
decentralized decision-making authority in large, selforganizing
enterprises."

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]