

=Description=

Johannes Ernst:

"An Indie Box is an open-source home server appliance that lets us bring our personal data home from the big internet companies and run our own indie web applications at home.

* Instead of letting Google have your calendars => you keep them in your home on your Indie Box, and sync your smartphone and PC with your Indie Box instead.

* Instead of letting Flickr or Facebook have your photos => you keep them in your home on your Indie Box, and let grandma access the photos directly there, without going through a 3rd party.

and so forth, for social media data, bookmarks, e-mail, shared files, contacts, eventually include health/fitness, internet-of-things, and many other kinds of data that are really nobody's business other than ours.

If you have an Indie Box, and I have an Indie Box, we can directly connect to each other ("P2P") and do interesting stuff without the need of any centralized party.

Benefits:

* Privacy: the data is in our homes, and not on somebody else's cloud
* On-line services go away every few years. But we don't want our baby pictures and other valuable data to disappear!
* No selling of personal data to advertisers. No backdoors.
* More innovation is possible if personal data is not fragmented across dozens of sites
* No overlord that determines what we may or may not do on-line with each other.

This matters because, to our knowledge, Indie Box is the first product that puts together all the parts needed to de-centralize the internet again. And because it's open-source, it's an open innovation platform for anybody who thinks the internet should go back to innovate for the benefits of its users, instead of its advertisers."


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]