
'''* Indigenia: A House-Free Commons; Urban Habitat for the House-Free Young Adult'''

URL = http://members.efn.org/~finnpo/oe-commons.html

=Description=

'''Homeless   =   Unhoused   =   Houseless   =   House-Free'''


'''1.'''

"This initiative permanently addresses the social and shelter requirements of house-free young adults occupying Eugene's urban environment. The young adult is a growing sector of the homeless/houseless population. Within this sector there is a visible and active "house-free" subgroup. While claiming the need and the right to assemble and associate, they disavow needing to be housed at all. They are not homeless, houseless or unhoused, they are house-free, and recognizable as 'cultural creatives' whose ongoing house-free experience has become an important harbinger to our urban society in middle-class descent. In light of the economic transition that's now begun we acknowledge the house-free young adult, having successfully shed the cultural fantasy of the over-housed, as a crucial wayshowing asset to our civil society going forward.

Further, an established Commons will begin addressing an even greater challenge, that of our city's economy being over monetized and consumerist. In this regard The House-Free Commons (HFC) proposes to mature and steward the young and houseless experience toward an open source learning worknet devoted to the rapid infusion of natural and restorative economies into our local and bioregional communities. In this vision Eugene is underway to becoming a renowned eco-society, a tourable hotbed of the social innovations that a deepening green future requires. The house-free are well positioned to pioneer this emergent sharing and commons-based economy and its way of life.

This initiative is highly integrative and forward looking. It offers an expenditure benign, culturally poised and politically unique direction to houseless reintegration here in our particular city. It is decidedly not about building a "homeless camp", it is about re-animating the commons with house-free stewardship villages as a necessary best first use of those commons.

We therefore call upon the City of Eugene to allow for the prompt and steady establishment of a network of eight Opportunity Village Eugene (OVE) campus sites throughout the city. Wherein each and every city ward will internally and carefully select a permanent site through the agency of resident actionists within their own ward. These sites taken together are to become the OVE Commons. There would be no homelessness if there where a Commons. The need to begin appears urgent."
(http://members.efn.org/~finnpo/oe-commons.html)



'''2.'''

"Building further upon the OccupyEugene camp experience of 2011, the House-Free Commons Village Project offers a dynamic social model that holistically meets the needs of the rising house-free sector of the houseless population. 

Using permaculture principals and green nomadic skills each campus is to have a minimally built and transportable  infrastructure consisting of the basic shared utilities required for safe group assembly and sustainable sanitation.

It is both an immediate and deep, long-term solution.

Of equal purpose for each living campus is to promptly offer every young resident of the City of Eugene an 'eco-social classroom' for acquiring authentic experiential knowledge of 'sustainability', both socially and structurally. The importance of this opportunity is not to be under-estimated as we move together into the transitional era of peaked oil, post money and  climate instability. 

The Commons offers great hope for the future, providing practical, effective forms of governance and resource management that can address the growing failures of both the fundamentalist market order and our centralized, hierarchical institutions."
(http://members.efn.org/~finnpo/oe-commons.html)

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Housing]]