For more info, go to the general reference page: [[Re-Thinking Property for a Well-Being Society]]

For the participating organizations, see: [[Organizations Participating in the Re-Thinking Property Platform]]

=Organizations=

Organizers: 	       School for Wellbeing Studies and Research / Suan Nguen Mee Ma social enterprise

Leading sponsor: 	The Japan Foundation

Sponsors: 	

*Thailand Research Fund
*Chulalongkorn University; Chula Global Network
*Heinrich Boell Foundation;  (in Bangkok: [[Heinrich Böll Stiftung Southeast Asia Regional Office]])
*Right Livelihood College, Penang, Malaysia
*Sciences Po, Paris
*Universitee Catholique de Louvain, Hoover Chair of Economic and Social Ethics, Belgium
*CCFD – Terre Solidaire, France


Full list of participating organisations, including affiliation of speakers:


*[[School for Wellbeing Studies and Research]], Thailand
*The Japan Foundation, Japan
*Centre for Alternative Development Initiatives, Philippines
*Right Livelihood College, Penang, Malaysia
*[[Commons Strategy Group]], Planet Earth
*Public Interest Research Centre, India 
*Centre for Bhutan Studies, Bhutan
*Peace and Conflict Studies Centre, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand
*Healthy Public Policy Foundation; Thailand
*Thailand Reform Committee 
*Centre for Ethics of Science and Technology, Thailand
*Environment and Sustainable Development Division, UN-ESCAP
*World Future Council

=Participants per country of origin or residence=


==Belgium==

#[[Michel Bauwens]], [[Commons Strategies Group]]
#[[Christian Arnsperger]] – Universitee Catholique de Louvain, Hoover Chair of Economic and Social Ethics, Belgium/Germany  (update: is not able to attend)



==Bhutan==

#[[Dasho Karma Ura]] – President, Centre for Bhutan Studies; independent thinker on Gross National Happiness
#[[Khesang Tshomo]] ; Coordinator for the National Organic Programme, Ministry of Agriculture, Bhutan. Khesang works with farmers and extension, coordinating and facilitating multi-sector collaboration in common sector development and promotion of organic farming.

==China==


#Dr. [[Peiyuan Guo]]; one of China’s renowned experts in Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and Socially Responsible Investment (SRI)

==France==

#[[Francois Bafoil]]


==Germany==

* Ms. [[Silke Helfrich]] (Germany) – [[Commons Strategies Group]]

On  the commons and the growth paradigm, http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2011/06/03/commons-beyond-growth/

* [[Jost Pachaly]], Director of [http://www.boell.de Heinrich Böll Stiftung] in [http://www.boell-southeastasia.org/ Bangkok]; co-sponsor and organizer.

==India==

#[[Ramaswamy Sudarshan]] (India), Legal Policy Advisor, UNDP
#[[Prashant Varma]]: Coordinator of the Deerpark Institute, Bir, India; Prashant is active in the International Network of Engaged Buddhists.

==Japan==

#[[Takayoshi Kusago]] – Professor Social Systems Design, Kansai University, Japan
#[[Katsumi Kakazu]], Director General, The Japan Foundation, leading sponsor (5 min.)


==Laos==

#[[Sombath Somphone]]; Founder and Executive director of the non-profit Participatory Development Training Centre (PADETC); In 2005 Sombath received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership 


==Malaysia==

#[[Sharan Srinivas]], Programme Manager, Right Livelihood College, Penang, Malaysia


==Philippines==

#[[Nicanor Perlas]] (Philippines), Founder CADI (Centre for Alternative Development Initiatives); Right Livelihood Award Recipient 


==Thailand==

#[[Surat Horachaikul]], Director School for Wellbeing Studies and Research 
#[[Katsumi Kakazu]], Director General, The Japan Foundation, leading sponsor 
#[[Wallapa van Willenswaard]]
#[[Hans van Willenswaard]]
#[[Surin Pitsuwan]] (Thailand), Secretary General ASEAN 
#Ms. [[Rosana Tositrakul]], Senator, Thailand 
#[[Surichai Wungaeo]], Director, Peace and Conflict Studies Centre, Chulalongkorn University; Advisor of the School for Wellbeing Studies and Research
#[[Suthipand Chirativat]]
#[[Sutichai Eamcharoenying]]
#[[Nares Damrongchai]]
#[[Pun-Arj Chairatana]]
#[[Apichai Puntasen]]
#[[Prida Tiasuwan]]
#[[Somboon Chungprampree]]
#Ms. [[Amara Pongsapich]]
#Ms. [[Sarinee Achavanuntakul]]
#Ms. [[Chalida Tajaroensuk]]
#[[Soraj Hongladarom]]
#[[Chitphong Kittinaradorn]]
#[[Jarin Boonmathya]]
#Ms. [[Kingkorn Narintarakul Na Ayudhaya]]
#[[Sulak Sivaraksa]] – Thai public intellectual, socially engaged Buddhist activist and Right Livelihood Awardee. Recipient of the Niwano Peace Prize 2011. Advisor of the School for Wellbeing Studies and Research.
#Ms M.R. [[Kalaya Tingsabadh]], Vice President International Affairs, Chulalongkorn University (5 min.)

==USA==

#[[Craig Warren Smith]]
#[[David Korten]]

== To Be Determined ==

#Jost Wagner, Process Consultant/Facilitator: Explanation of the ‘exchange platform’ format; self-introductions of the participants 
#Jean-Pierre A. Verbiest, Country Director Asian Development Bank, Thailand Resident Mission 
#Francois Bafoil
#Ramaswamy Sudarshan, 
#Ms. Amara Pongsapich, 
#Guo Peiyuan, 
#Sebastien Treyer
#David Crookall 
#Kavaljit Singh 
#Rae Kwon Chung
#Nakamura Hishashi
#Jacques-chai Chomthongdi
#Decharut Sukkamnoed 
#Yoshiyuki Nagata
#Sharan Srinivas
#Jean-Pierre A Verbiest
#Takayoshi Kusago, 
#Krista Nadakavukaren
#Francois Bafoil
#Kavaljit Singh
#Ms. Cheah Vanath, 
#Ven. Dhammananda, 
#Ms. Padmawadi Suziki, 
#Sombath Somphone
#Daycha Siripatra
#Ong Kung Wai
#Ms. Khesang Tshomo