'''* Article: From the smart factory to the self-organisation of capital: ‘Industrie 4.0’ as the cybernetisation of production. Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab. Ephemera, volume 20(4), 2020.'''

URL = http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/smart-factory-self-organisation-capital-%E2%80%98industrie-40%E2%80%99-cybernetisation-production [http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf pdf]


=Contextual Quote=

"there are visions of the self-organization of industrial capital
reaching a point where labour-power is replaced entirely with machine-power
in fully automated smart factories. This would require either retrofitting, or
replacing entirely, all pre-existing machines with cyberphysical control
systems (Roblek et al., 2016: 4) as well as digitalising and integrating
cyberphysical control over the flow of all raw materials, production processes
and produced commodities. Such a fully automated production process would
involve all raw materials wirelessly transmitting instructions to surrounding
machines that automatically and flexibly produce each commodity on
demand and to specification (Siemens, 2013). We suggest that if the design
and implementation of fully autonomous smart factories becomes ubiquitous
to the point of raising the organic composition of capital, this process would 
represent an advance of capital’s real subsumption of the labour process
toward a third and final stage of capital’s autonomisation from labour-power,
the realisation of which could theoretically lead to the dissolution of the
labour-capital relation." 

- Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab [http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf pdf]


=Abstract=

"Governments and private sectors have collaborated on national initiatives that will introduce ‘cyberphysical systems’ and the ‘industrial internet of things’ to the sphere of production in a new wave of capitalist development currently referred to in Germany as ‘Industrie 4.0’. We refer to the historical and technical development of the means of control within the capitalist mode of production that began with scientific management, management cybernetics, digital process control, and now Industrie 4.0, as the cybernetisation of production. This article analyses the German context of Industrie 4.0 as a new regime of production. Data drawn from a series of semi-structured interviews with managers and engineers of Industrie 4.0 companies reveal current developments and future visions for the digital transformation of German industry. Based on these data and some theoretical considerations, we argue that Industrie 4.0 is designed to automate the self-organisation of industrial capital in ‘smart factories’. This will shift the personal control of middle management toward the more direct and immediate cybernetic control of market forces over the production process. The article concludes that as direct labour and managerial labour is replicated, extended and/or entirely replaced with autonomous machines, the cybernetisation of production is advancing capital’s real subsumption of the labour process toward capital’s autonomisation from labour-power, which is creating new autonomous forms of production."


=Contents=

Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab:

"This article begins with '''a historical review of the scientific, technical and management paradigms that have developed the human and non-human means of feedback over the labour process'''. ''We refer to this as the historical process of the cybernetisation of production, which creates new forms of cybernetic work and leads toward full automation of the labour process''. As cyberphysical systems are rooted in the control logic of cybernetics, we therefore suggest that Industrie 4.0 is the technical realisation of capital’s self-organisation, extending from the shop floor to the top floor of ‘smart factories’.

The article then analyses empirical data from an ongoing research project to illustrate the historical continuity of Industrie 4.0 as part of the contemporary process of the cybernetisation of production. The empirical data stem from a series of 20 semi-structured ‘comprehensive interviews’ (Kaufmann, 2015). Interviewees were managers and engineers of companies based in the German high-tech industry areas of Bavaria and Baden Württemberg who consider themselves to be part of Industrie 4.0. The cases were selected to generate an overview of the vision pursued by engineers and managers of industrial organisations as exemplars of the digital transformations of Industrie 4.0. The data were analysed with the coding software dedoose according to the standards of qualitative content analysis. The code system followed the theoretical research question but was, in its concrete form, derived inductively from the material (Kuckartz, 2016). Drawing on the empirical data, we argue that the introduction of the industrial internet of things and cyberphysical systems to the sphere of production will advance industrial capital’s self-organisation of the production process. Industrie 4.0 therefore could advance what Marx referred to as capital’s real subsumption of the labour process toward a third and final stage that we refer to as capital’s autonomisation from labour-power, which we suggest could lead to a new autonomous mode of production."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf)


=Excerpts=


==The [[Cybernetic Production Regime]]==

Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab:

"The entanglement of state-driven ideology and the technological
development of industry is best grasped by Burawoy’s (1985) notion of a
production regime. According to Burawoy, a production regime refers to the
intersection of state politics and the politics of production that regulates
industry. By extension, we argue that, through the implementation of
networked digital technologies, Industrie 4.0 is part of the historical process
of the cybernetisation of production that represents the tendency of
industrial capital to become increasingly autonomous from the labour-capital
relation. This leads toward a cybernetic regime (Schaupp, 2017a). The
following analysis develops this argument by discussing how middle
managers became capital’s early means of delivering feedback to the labour
process, which would eventually be replicated, extended and/or replaced with
automation technologies as the means of cybernetic control over the labour
process."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf)


==The [[History of the Cybernetisation of Production]]==

Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab:

"The introduction of scientific management to the assembly line in the early
twentieth century focused initially on the production of a greater mass of
products in the same or smaller amount of time by calculating the number of
products produced within the labour process. Scientific management
physically restricted options for deviating practices on the side of the workers
and was therefore often quoted as the prime example for technical control
(Edwards, 1979). At about the same time, large industrial companies began to
introduce differentiated rules and procedures, fostering a top-down
hierarchical order that was described as bureaucratic control (ibid.). Both
technical and bureaucratic control became the basis for scientific
management, which developed in the Fordist era as a result of the division of
manual labour of production from the cognitive labour of management and
planning (Braverman, 1974). The replication of this division of labour in turn
further divided social development of the technical aspects of manual and
cognitive labour.

Grids, graphs, and other informational tools for measuring the labour process
provided management the means of objectifying, and thus representing,
various aspects of the labour process in data. Scientific management included
measurements of the labour process such as Taylor’s ‘time studies’. These
measures would become coupled with the motion studies of Gilbreth when
managers calculated the physical motion of the labour process in relation to
the number of products produced in a given amount of time for the purpose
of identifying inefficient activity (Gilbreth and Kent, 1921; Taylor, 1913).
These forms of analyses were used for the systematic measurement of
productivity in the labour process in order to physically alter it for the purpose
of increasing productivity, and therefore, total output. The forms of
managerial action taken as a result of these measures were therefore an early
form of data-driven feedback. Hence, scientific management’s systematic and
detailed collection of data from the labour process foreshadowed the logic of
cybernetic control in industrial production, but in a form more heavily reliant
on human managers. Central hierarchical order, however, was still personified
at its core by the figure of the manager, inspiring Edwards (1979: 132) to write
about a ‘managerial revolution’. In this respect, industrial capital developed 
its own human means of control over the labour process through the division,
reorganisation, and thus, development of the productive forces of labour in
the historical stage of capital’s real subsumption of the labour process. This
meant that managers functioned as capital’s means of control over the direct
labour process through the open-loop of managerial feedback. Thus, we
suggest that the development of managerial labour is capital’s historical
development of the means of enforcing the technical requirements of
valorisation within the production process.

As Noble (2011) noted, the history of the ‘automatic factory’ began with the
development of the process industries in the early twentieth century. These
were developed on the principles of process control that were objectified in
the development of industrial automation technologies that replicated,
extended and/or replaced the labour-power of the direct production process.

As Noble (2011: 59) described it, ‘all continuous process production
demanded unprecedented devices-sensors and effectors (actuators) for
carefully monitoring and adjusting direct production operations too complex
for complete human oversight and manual control’. However, early
computerisation meant that process manufacturing still relied on the
decisions of human operators to monitor and respond to the production
process based on the information produced by computers, which is
understood as an open-loop form of feedback. Hence, early process control
was neither about physically restricting options – as in technical control – nor
about bureaucratic top-down order. Rather, its primary goal was the
development of computer monitoring combined with human control in the
direct production process. With the development of closed-loop automation
in the process industries, automation technologies that were produced and
used as the means of control of the direct production process were developed
to replicate, extend and/or replace the labour-power of managerial feedback.
The principles of control were later formalised with the development of
cybernetics, an interdisciplinary science that was shaped by neurophysiology,
information theory, statistical mechanics, psychiatry, physics, biology,
anthropology and other sub-disciplines in the natural and social sciences
(Kline, 2015). Cybernetics was conceived and promoted during the well publicised Macy conferences in the post-wartime era of the late 1940s and 
1950s by natural and social scientists such as Norbert Wiener, Claude
Shannon, Ross Ashby, Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson who had
aspirations to develop it as a universal science of control and communication
(Wiener, 1948). Early cybernetic theory was initially derived from
observations on the self-organisation of biological systems that
‘automatically’ adapt to changes in the environment instead of first making a
cognitive plan or hierarchical instruction. Its epistemology relied on models,
analogies and other abstract representations of complex systems for the
purpose of interdisciplinary comparison, including, for example, modelling
the human nervous system as an electronic machine and vice versa.

At its core, cybernetics used prediction and filtering to combine
communications and control engineering (Kline, 2015: 22). Feedback loops
were designed to bring a given system to a state that cyberneticists call
homeostasis. For this, at least two entities influence each other through
mutual feedback until they reach a state of equilibrium. Homeostasis,
however, was not conceptualised as a static optimum. Rather, homeostasis
was considered a dynamic process of optimisation through adaptation,
referred to as the Viable System Model (Beer, 1959). With the development of
management cybernetics, industrial managers adapted cybernetic principles
to the design and management of human communication in organisations,
while engineers objectified the general principles of cybernetic control in the
production of machines designed to replicate, extend and/or replace both the
productive forces of labour and managerial feedback in industrial production."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf)


==Integration of the industrial [[internet of Things]] with industrial cyberphysical systems==

Simon Schaupp and Ramon Diab:

"In contrast to the cyberphysical paradigm, the internet of things (IoT)
paradigm originated in the computer science community. As it has been well
documented, the Internet first began as a US military project with the
development of the ARPANET nodes in the late 1960s and early 1970s (Levine,
2018). While these nodes were later expanded to the university system, and
eventually, to the commercial sector, it was not until 1999 that the phrase ‘the
internet of things’ was first used to refer to the use of computers for producing
knowledge about ‘things’ and the efficiencies this knowledge could bring to
industry. Early applications of the ‘industrial internet of things’ (IIoT) were
used to organise and control the flow of data and people with technologies 
such as product data management and product lifecycle management (Jeschke
et al., 2017: 5). Therefore, ICPS refers to information technologies that are
applied to the direct production process and the IIoT refers to information
technologies that are applied to overall production planning and management
and that may integrate with ICPS technologies. On this point, it has been
suggested that the objective of the IIoT is to fully digitise and network all
‘things’ and processes in factories for the purpose of creating digital or ‘smart
factories’ (Krumeich, 2016). Wang et al. conceptualize smart factories as a
dual closed-loop system in which ‘one loop consists of physical resources
connected to a ‘cloud’, while the other loop consists of supervisory control
terminals and cloud’ (Wang et al., 2016: 159). This dual closed-loop system
connects smart objects on the shop floor with control technologies at the
management level which are in turn connected to global smart factory
monitoring and control systems. With respect to the intended purpose of
designing and implementing higher-level production planning systems in
smart factories, the interviewees have stated that their systems will eliminate
the influence of human managers in order to make production ‘organise
itself’.

One developer of a cyberphysical system – who aims to connect different
levels of industrial control systems from the point of enterprise resource
planning (ERP) to the point of control over individual operations – explained
that the efficiency gains his system provides are specifically due to the
replacement of human planning and decision making with automated data
analytics:

- You don’t have any management -influence. Especially with the keyword ‘lot size
one’, it is exactly about this planning organising itself, that you always have
enough material, that the material is there in time, that the machines are
always running. Management decisions only occur if I either have a scarcity of
resources or in case of some exceptional situations. (our emphasis)


The claim here is that it is precisely the replacement of human
production planning with automated data analytics that increases production
efficiency. The IIoT may also reduce production time by predicting machine
maintenance and by tailoring commodity production more precisely to the
requirements of both industrial and consumer demand, which suggests that 
Industrie 4.0 will automate several aspects of the lean manufacturing
paradigm (Sanders et al., 2016)."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/contribution/20-4Schaupp_Diab.pdf)

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]