
URL = http://www.iiconsortium.org/


=Description=

By QUENTIN HARDY:

"The natural successor to the Industrial and Internet Revolutions, the Industrial Internet will completely transform the way that we live and work. Intelligent machines enable optimization, leading to better performance, lower costs and higher reliability. Check the scenarios to learn more about how the Industrial Internet can be applied in different industries.

The Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC) '''manages the collaborative efforts of industry, academia, and government to accelerate growth of the Industrial Internet'''. This not-for-profit Consortium provides the forum to catalyze, coordinate, and manage the collaborative program.."
(http://www.iiconsortium.org/)



=Discussion=

"The group, called the Industrial Internet Consortium, hopes to establish common ways that machines share information and move data. Creating standards for things like the electricity levels within small machines, or the kinds of radio technology a railroad might use to signal track conditions, can increase the size of the potential market and speed product development.

“As an industry, we’ve come to the conclusion that for the Internet of Things to really take off, we needed more interoperability, better building blocks and better standards,” said Abhi Ingle, a senior vice president of AT&T’s advanced solutions group. In addition to approving standards and practices, the group is expected to publish case studies, run forums and cooperate on new security practices.

There is also a government push behind the group. About a year ago, Mr. Ruh said, an academic adviser to G.E. introduced him to people from the National Science Foundation, the White House and others about creating standards.

Besides the member companies, other academics, venture capitalists and private equity investors were in the discussions, he said. “We came to the conclusion that if we were really going to move this forward, it would require that these systems would have to integrate off the shelf,” Mr. Ruh said.

Creating a big group of large United States players that sets policies could also seem like domination of a nascent industry. Even if other companies come in, the founders will each hold permanent seats on the group’s  steering committee, along with four nonfounding members. Other companies are expected to join the consortium soon.

The group’s executive director, Richard Soley, is also chief executive of the Object Management Group, a global technology standards group. He said the new consortium was already seeing interest from overseas companies, including Fujitsu of Japan, Germany’s Siemens and China’s Huawei.

“What we have got to do is get all of the standards working together,” he said. “If Malaysian Airlines Flight 370 had had full interoperability with the world’s tracking systems, we’d know where it is to a square meter.”
(http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/27/consortium-wants-standards-for-internet-of-things/)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Business]]