

URL = https://industrycommons.net/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Industry Commons is the first system to use Open Innovation methods to generate traceable IPR for a value network which combines competencies and capabilities around a creative core and spins out breakthrough business models. It creates a sustainable, transversal, open innovation production value chain, which allows for radical innovation to be built directly on top of existing industry capabilities.

The Industry Commons Ecosystem (ICE) responds to the rapid transformation of enabling technologies by building a platform for hybrid applications across industries. Disruptions to the industrial paradigm are accelerating and opening routes to collaborative and co-creative business value beyond the current business models. With its open approach, ICE integrates all elements required for this industrial transition.

Our 7000+ global multidisciplinary innovator community is exceptional in their knowledge and experience of innovation testbeds, as well as their creative approach to problem solving and technology transfer skills. Over 7 years of translating thought into practice, this community has gone through remarkable upskilling with cutting edge methodologies and groundbreaking experiments in AI, 5G,  blockchain and IoT."
(https://industrycommons.net/)


'''2. Andrew Dubber:'''

"As you know, #MTFLabs have put creativity at the centre of innovation across all industry sectors for a long time. For the past couple of years, we've been working on a scale up of that MTF innovation ecosystem.

Last week, we finally received official validation from Stockholm County of our new not-for-profit organisation: Industry Commons Foundation. This is a huge deal for the entire MTF community.

The Industry Commons places culture and creativity at the core of industry innovation, protects the intellectual property of both the source technology provider and the individual innovators, and democratises radical innovation using the latest technologies.

It enables technology transfer from academia and industry to labs filled with brilliant innovators from the global MTF community, it supports the ingenious transversal and hybrid ideas that come out of that process through incubation, creates entirely new market categories and helps those ideas grow to commercial prototype.

The creation of this foundation provides the platform, infrastructure and network to boost the intellectual capital that emerges from this diverse and multi-disciplinary community.

The Industry Commons is the brainchild of MTF's founder and innovation advisor to the European Commission, Michela Magas, who will serve as the Foundation's chair."

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Sweden]]