

=Discussion=

==The Three Industrial Revolutions==

Wim Grommen:

===THE FIRST INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION===

"The first industrial revolution lasted from around 1780 tot 1850. It was characterized by a
transition from small scale handwork to mechanized production in factories. The great catalyst in
the process was the steam engine which also caused a revolution in transport as it was used in
railways and shipping. The first industrial revolution was centered around the cotton industry.
Because steam engines were made of iron and ran on coal, both coal mining and iron industry
also flourished.

Britain was the first country that faced the industrial revolution. The steam engine was initially
mainly used to power the water pumps of mines. A major change occurred in the textile industry.
Because of population growth and colonial expansion the demand for cotton products quickly
increased. Because spinners and weavers could not keep up with the demand, there was an
urgent need for a loom with an external power unit, the power loom.

A semi-automatic shuttleless loom was invented, and a machine was created that could spin
several threads simultaneously. This “Spinning Jenny”, invented in 1764 by James Hargreaves,
was followed in 1779 by a greatly improved loom: ‘Mule Jenny’. At first they were waterpowered,
but after 1780 the steam engine had been strongly improved so that it could also be
used in the factories could be used as a power source. Now much more textiles could be
produced. This was necessary because in 1750, Europe had 130 million inhabitants, but in 1850
this number had doubled, partly because of the agricultural revolution. (This went along with the
industrial revolution; fertilizers were imported, drainage systems were designed and ox was
replaced by the horse. By far the most important element of the agricultural revolution was the
change from subsistence to production for the market.). All those people needed clothing.
Thanks to the machine faster and cheaper production was possible and labor remained cheap.
The textile industry has been one of the driving forces of the industrial revolution.
Belgium becomes the first industrialized country in continental Europe. Belgium is “in a state of
industrial revolution” under the rule of Napoleon Bonaparte. The industrial centers were Ghent
(cotton and flax industries), Verviers (mechanized wool production), Liège (iron, coal, zinc, 
machinery and glass), Mons and Charleroi. On the mainland, France and Prussia followed
somewhat later. In America the northeastern states of the United States followed quickly.
After 1870 Japan was industrialized as the first non-Western country. The rest of Europe
followed only around 1880.\

The beginning of the end of this revolution was in 1845 when Friedrich Engels, son of a German
textile baron, described the living conditions of the English working class in “The condition of
the working class in England“.


===THE SECOND INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION===

The second industrial revolution started around 1870 and ended around 1930. It was
characterized by ongoing mechanization because of the introduction of the assembly line, the
replacement of iron by steel and the development of the chemical industry. Furthermore coal and
water were replaced by oil and electricity and the internal combustion engine was developed.
Whereas the first industrial revolution was started through (chance) inventions by amateurs,
companies invested a lot of money in professional research during the second revolution, looking
for new products and production methods. In search of finances small companies merged into
large scale enterprises which were headed by professional managers and shares were put on the
market. These developments caused the transition from the traditional family business to Limited
Liability companies and multinationals.

The United States (U.S.) and Germany led the way in the Second Industrial Revolution. In the
U.S. there were early experiments with the assembly line system, especially in the automotive
industry. In addition, the country was a leader in the production of steel and oil. In Germany the
electricity industry and the chemical industry flourished. The firms AEG and Siemens were
electricity giants. German chemical companies such as AGFA and BASF had a leading share in
the production of synthetic dyes, photographic and plastic products (around 1900 they controlled
some 90% of the worldwide market). In the wake of these two industrial powers (which soon
surpassed Britain) France, Japan and Russia followed. After the Second Industrial Revolution
more and more countries, on more continents, experienced a more or less modest industrial
development. In some cases, the industrialization was taken in hand by the state, often with
coarse coercion – such as the five-year plans in the Soviet Union.

After the roaring twenties the revolution ended with the stock exchange crash of 1929. The
consequences were disastrous culminating in the Second World War.


===THE THIRD INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION===

The third industrial revolution started around 1940 and is nearing its end. The United States and
Japan played a leading role in the development of computers. During the Second World War
great efforts were made to apply computer technology to military purposes. After the war the
American space program increased the number of applications. Japan specialized in the use of 
computers for industrial purposes such as the robot.

From 1970 the third industrial revolution continued to Europe. The third industrial revolution
was mainly a result of a massive development of microelectronics: electronic calculators, digital
watches and counters, the compact disc, the barcode etc. The take off phase of the third industrial
revolution started around 1980 with the advent of the microprocessor. The development of the
microprocessor is also the basis of the evolution and breakthrough of computing. This had an
impact in many areas: for calculation, word processing, drawing and graphic design, regulating
and controlling machines, simulating processes, capturing and processing information, monetary
transactions and telecommunications. The communication phase grows enormously at the
beginning of the new millennium: the digital revolution. According to many analysts now a new
era has emerged: that of the information or service economy. Here the acquisition and
channeling of information has become more important than pure production. By now computer
and communication technology take up an irreplaceable role in all parts of the world. More
countries depend on the service sector and less on agriculture and industry.


===EFFECTS OF THREE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONS===

The first (and second revolution) transformed an agricultural society into an industrial society
where mechanization (finally) relieved man of physical labor. The craft industry could not
compete with the factories that put products of the same or even better quality on the market at a
lower price. The result was that many small businesses went bankrupt and the former workers
went to work in the factories. The effects of industrialization were seen in the process of rapid
urbanization of formerly relatively small villages and towns where the new plants came. These
turned into dirty and unhealthy industrial cities. Still people from the country were forced to go
and work there. Because of this a new social class emerged: the workers, or the industrial
proletariat. They lived in overcrowded slums in poor housing with little sanitation. The average
life expectancy was low, and infant mortality high. The elite accepted the filth of the factories as
the inevitable price for their success. The chimneys were symbols of economic power, but also
of social inequality. You see this social inequality appear after each revolution. The gap between
the bottom and the top of society becomes very large. Eventually there are inevitable responses
that decrease this gap. It could be argued that the Industrial revolutions have created the
conditions for a society with little or no poverty.

The third revolution transformed an industrial society into a service society. Where
mechanization man relieved of physical labor, the computer relieved him of mental labor. This
revolution made lower positions in industry more and more obsolete and caused the emergence
of entirely new roles in the service sector."
(http://basisinkomen.nl/wp-content/uploads/The-present-crisis-a-pattern-paper.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Transition]]

[[Category:P2P History]]