=Discussion=


==Agrarian Cycles==

Michael A. Alexander:

"Inequality cycles  associated  with secular  cycles have been  identified  in  pre-industrial  societies (Turchin  and  Nefedov  2009:36,  82). A  secular  cycle  is  '''a “demographic-social-political  oscillation  of  very  long  period'''  (centuries  long)” (Turchin and Nefedov 2009:5). They arise from population cycles (Korotayev et al.  2006). In  an  agrarian  economy,  demand  for  labor  is ultimately  limited by  the maximum amount   of arable land,   while   labor supply is   proportional to population. As the fraction of arable land under cultivation approaches one, rising population  means  a  rising labor  supply  relative  to an  increasingly fixed labor demand  which  leads to  lower  real  wages and rising economic inequality. Thus, population  and  inequality trends are correlated,  either can  serve  to  define  a secular  cycle.  Several models  that  describe  how  population/economic  inequality affects elite  number,  state  strength  and  sociopolitical  instability  in  agrarian societies have been proposed (Turchin 2003:123; Turchin and Korotayev 2006:122; Turchin  2013:251).  Some  of  these  have  been  shown  to  give  a  good fit of historical data (Alexander 2016). The empirical and theoretical methods developed for agrarian societies do not apply  to  industrial  societies."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42p5m46m)


==Industrial Cycles==

Michael A. Alexander:

"Turchin  (2016)  has  recently tried to  apply  the  secular  cycle  concept to America. Although there are no population cycles, there are still empirical cycles in  economic  inequality  that  may  be  used  to  define secular  cycles.  Turchin uses measures of economic, physical, and social well-being: relative wage (wage/GDP per capita), male stature, life expectancy, and age at first marriage as proxies for inequality. A composite of these measures defines the American secular cycles in terms  of  inequality  (Turchin  2016: 73,fig.  3.7).The  composite  trends  show  two secular  cycles:  the  first  over 1780–1930 the  second from1930 to  the  present(Turchin 2016: 73).He develops  a  modified  demographic  explanation  for  inequality  in  which demand for labor is assumed to be independent of labor supply, allowing separate relations  for  each  to  be  developed  and their  ratio  used  to  explain  real  wage trends. Changes in labor supply, chiefly from changes in immigration, depress real wages,  causing  rising  inequality.  Given  this,  he  employs  percent  foreign  born  as another  proxy  for  inequality."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42p5m46m)


=More information=

* [[Secular Cycles]]

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]