
=Bibiography=

William Rupish, recommendations on the influence of mystical theology on modernity. 

"Since I read it I’ve been looking out for good literature on mysticism and freemasonry, particularly in connection to the enlightenment and revolution. I’ve found the subject to be a treasure trove of philosophical food for thought. In case any of you here have similar interests I thought I would give some additional recommendations.

Margaret C. Jacob has done some excellent work on the more rationalist inclined freemasons of the Dutch and Hanoverian strand

* https://global.oup.com/ushe/product/living-the-enlightenment-9780195070514?cc=no&lang=en&
* https://cornerstonepublishers.com/radical-enlightenment/

Regarding American freemasonry the best I’ve found is this work by Steven C. Bullock

* https://uncpress.org/book/9780807847503/revolutionary-brotherhood/

On the Russian side we have this one by Raffaela Faggionato, dealing with Martinism and Rosicrucianism and the intellectual circle surrounding Nikolay Novikov, the preeminent figure of the Russian enlightenment. Christopher McIntosh’s book The Rose Cross and the Age of Reason is also an excellent resource on Rosicrucianism and its relation to the enlightenment.

* https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9781402034862
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikolay_Novikov
* https://www.sunypress.edu/p-5147-the-rose-cross-and-the-age-of-r.aspx

Those of you interested in fascism may have a good time reading the works of Ljubinka Toseva Karpowicz, a specialist on the political history of the city of Rijeka. She has done work on the Hungarian branch of the Rite of Strict Observance and the Martinists who gave us Gabriele D’Annunzio.

* https://westphaliapress.org/2017/06/23/freemasonry-politics-and-rijeka/
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gabriele_D%27Annunzio

Finally, to all of you continental philosophers and Hegel fanboys out there I give you these two (I haven’t read the second one though)

* https://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/9780801438721/hegel-and-the-hermetic-tradition/#bookTabs=1
* https://www.routledge.com/Mystical-Theology-and-Continental-Philosophy-Interchange-in-the-Wake-of/Lewin-Podmore-Williams/p/book/9780367881788

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]