
'''= to promote awareness and use of open formats to ensure that access to information is not needlessly hampered by technological barriers (UK)'''

URL = http://www.okfn.org/iai/


=Description=

"The IAI's aim is to promote awareness and use of open formats to ensure that access to information is not needlessly hampered by technological barriers.

Obstacles to Access Created by Closed Formats

Obstacles to access created by closed formats are of of two kinds:

1. Obstacles to physical accessibility. Closed formats mean fewer and more expensive tools this makes it harder to find software to assist those with disabilities, for example screen readers for the partially sighted.

2. Obstacles to social accessibility. Closed, proprietary formats limit the tools that can be used to read and manipulate information and may also necessitate the use of expensive proprietary products. This excludes those whose financial means are limited or those who wish to retain freedom in their choice of software systems and applications.

For example, often the only way to access information in a closed format will be with an expensive piece of commercial software such as Microsoft Office.

By using open formats one can ensure that information is accessible to all. It should be made clear that we have no objection to the use of commercial software but to the fact that closed formats often necessitate the use of expensive proprietary software and limit choice.

Furthermore the use of open, and standard, formats has other important benefits. It allows for easier reuse by end users, it usually permits for easier processing by a wider variety of tools, and it allows for easier preservation and archiving. Closed proprietary formats also assist in locking in monopolists and raising barriers to entry hurting all consumers through higher prices and reduced quality and choice.

The IAI does not concern itself with the cost of information. This is in contrast to, for example, the [[Open Access Initiative]].

The distinction can be summarized by saying that IAI addresses accessibility rather than access. Importantly the goal of free accessibilty applies equally to proprietary and public information while clearly that of free access does not. Of course the goals of access and accessbility are complementary - both are aimed at reducing the obstacles to information access and transfer."



[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Movements]]