
=Description=

Rick Falkvinge, founder and leader of the Swedish Pirate Party:


"There's a superb hard science game called Transhuman Space that is probably one of the most believable views of what Earth may be 100 years from now I've ever read. In that game setting, there's a revolution in several Asian countries and a political philosophy called Infosocialism emerges. The basic tenet of Infosocialism is that idea and culture cannot be owned by individuals, they must be owned by the state and shared freely among the citizens. I'm increasingly wondering if this is not the general direction in which we're headed. Then again that's what good sci-fi is about: making you wonder and ponder..."
(cited in the Arch-Econ mailing list, January 2008)


=Excerpt=

From the game:

"Nanosocialism
This was a political philosophy developed (under the name "information
socialism") by the Australian academic Kyle Porters in 2034. Originally from
the left-anarchist tradition, Porters felt that the vision of a pure
anarchosocialist society was unrealistic. Nevertheless, he observed that
although modern civlization was utterly dependent on information
technologies, the central notion of "intellectual property" often gave rise
to significant injustice. He believed that only the state could properly
reward innovation, while still distributing the benefits of such innovations
fairly to all. Infosocialism thus began with the premise that "information
needs to be free", but redefined freedom as the nationalization of
intellectuel property and its free distribution by the state. Thus the
government does not allow patents, but subsidizes research and creative
endeavor. This is less absurd when one imagines a "university" rather than
"corporate" model of research and development.

Infosocialist doctrine failed to take hold in the hyper-developed nations
and instead took root in less-developed nations, many of whom felt they were
being exploited by wealthier corporations' locks on major genetic patents,
nanotechnology designs, and software systems. Infosocialism - later known as
nanosocialism - gained power in Peru, Indonesia and Thailand.

One of the policies of nanosocialism was an end to the enforcement of
international copyright agreement and trademarks. The sanctions that
resulted provoked a backlash, and helped weld nanosocialist countries into a
tighter (and increasingly paranoid) bloc. This culminated in the Pacific War
and the overthrow of nanosocialist governments in Vietnam and Thailand.

Despite that reverse, nanosocialism remains an important factor in world
politics. There are infosocialist or nanosocialist parties and sympathisers
in most nations. Although Thailand was forcibly separated in the aftermath
of the Pacific War, nanosocialist strength is growing in South America and
in India. At present, the situation is one of "cold war". The issues that
led to the Pacific War have not yet been resolved. Meanwhile, the world has
seen its first outbreak of total war since 1945 - and most nations have
become uncomfortably aware of how vulnerable they are to the destructive
potential of the Fifth Wave."
(From the role-playing game Transhuman Space at http://www.amazon.com/Transhuman-Space-HC/dp/1556344546/planetharmonica, by
David Pulver)


[[Category:Gaming]]

[[Category:Politics]]