
'''* Report: Informal Citizen Networks. The Case of Greece. Tepsie, 2013'''

URL = http://siresearch.eu/sites/default/files/sites/default/files/WP5_informalnetworks_Greece.pdf

Full citation: Garefi, I., Kalemaki, E. (2013). Informal Citizen Networks: The case of Greece. A deliverable of the  project: “The theoretical, empirical and policy foundations for building social innovation in Europe”  (TEPSIE), European Commission – 7th Framework Programme, Brussels: European Commission, DG  Research.


=Excerpts=

==Introduction==

"Since 2009 Greece has experienced a severe financial recession and the government has adopted 
austerity measures that have had a severe impact on the lives of citizens. High rates of 
unemployment, people living below the poverty line and social disruption are just some of the 
main characteristics of the current situation. At the same time, we are seeing the emergence of a 
large number of informal citizen networks and grassroots movements aiming to provide innovative 
solutions to the difficult situations which the country is facing. 

Our aim in this paper is to provide a further insight on the main characteristics of the informal 
citizen networks in Greece which have gradually emerged during the last few years and which have 
recently become more visible. 

This paper is thus structured around the following sections: 

• The first section covers the description of the structure of Greek civil society, its special 
features and its evolution during the last century. Given that there is a long road ahead 
before civil society gains the position and recognition it deserves within modern Greek 
society, our approach will be to present and highlight the most important factors that not 
only shaped civil society, but also those factors that hindered its development in contrast 
to other European countries where the sector is more developed. 

• The second section attempts to provide the main characteristics and differences of the 
informal networks that have developed during the last thirty years. Our main focus will be 
to answer two very important questions: Can the emergence of the informal networks be 
attributed only to the current financial crisis? And, what other factors eventually led to 
their widespread adoption across Greece? 

• The third section presents an indicative number of informal networks that are currently 
active in Greece based on a typology that we have developed as a result of their main 
characteristics and objectives. 

• In the fourth and last section of this paper our endeavour is to highlight those factors that 
may influence the future of the informal networks as well as the extent of their 
contribution in forming a new future for Greece. Some first considerations regarding 
current and future trends are also presented. 


==Civil Society in Greece==
 
Civil society in Greece has a very long tradition which has been quite chequered throughout the 
years. The term, ‘civil society’ is widely used by the public and in academic discourses in Greece. It
describes both formal organisations and informal collective activities of people who are 
independent of the state, contributing to the development of civic values and social capital and 
taking a generally constructive stance towards democracy as a social order (Sotiropoulos, 2004). 
Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) as the main precursors of civil society activity have played a 
rather significant role in the country’s history, starting from the Greek War of Independence 
against the Ottoman Empire (1821-1827) and then throughout the 19th century. Τhe process of 
democratisation is associated with the development of civil society and with rising political 
participation (Schmitter 1986, Diamond 1997). While parliamentary democracy and the 
development of CSOs were closely related in the nineteenth century, in the twentieth century this 
democratic tradition was interrupted by the Greek Civil War (1946-1949), which followed the end 
of the Second World War and also by the military intervention into Greek politics. The last 
intervention occurred in 1967 and led to a military dictatorship which lasted for seven long years. 

During this period (1967-74), a number of resistance organisations of students, intellectuals and 
left-wing activists developed. Following the transition to democracy since 1974, we have observed 
a phenomenal boom in civil society. According to Sotiropoulos (2004), “compared to other young 
democratic nations, including South-East European nations, Greece is an example of a successful 
democratic consolidation and civil society development. However, compared to other West 
European nations with strong civil society traditions, Greece has a less well-developed civil society”. 

Looking at the literature, we observe a frequent characterisation of the Greek civil society as 
underdeveloped, weak, poorly organised as well as having a limited impact on society at large. 
Even though we observe the existence of a rather strong informal civil society which has flourished 
during the last years and has become more evident during the economic downturn which is 
currently traumatising the country, Greece was further described by Sotiropoulos (2004) as “having 
a low stock of social capital and trust“. 

There are two distinct factors which have hindered the development of social capital in Greece. The 
first one refers to the economic and political instability throughout the years of Greece’s modern 
history. The second can be attributed to the heavy dependence of Greek civil society on central 
state institutions (ministries and public sector organisations). Mouzelis (1995) also confirms this 
trend by reporting that “the “weakness” of Greek civil society is attributed to the dominance of 
clientelism and patronage and the vertical, rather than horizontal, incorporation of the social 
spectrum to politics”. Even though democracy has flourished in Greece since 1974, CSOs did not 
emerge in large numbers until the 1990s which is also when empirical research on them began. 



==The emergence of informal networks during the last 5 years==

"Up until 1990 and since the democratisation of Greece in 1974, the emergence of civil society 
organisations was not that common or at least, as mentioned above, empirical research on them 
has only begun after 1990. From that period onwards and up until the beginning of the Greek 
economic recession in 2009, many informal citizen networks have emerged but without much 
communication about them, which means many people are unfamiliar with these organisations 
and their activities. Some key questions emerging from this situation are: What does it tell us about 
informal citizen community mobilisation in the years prior to the economic crisis?; Were CSOs 
structured in an organised manner?; What specific examples of informal civil society mobilisation 
are there, what are their main characteristics and, if and how they differ from those networks 
flourishing after the crisis? 

As the literature shows, there have been quite a few events during the late 90s that can be 
described either as cases of constructive civil society participation or that could be seen in a more 
negative sense, as being quite destructive. We provide two examples of these cases below, which 
indicate the characteristics of such networks prior to the crisis. These cases were widely 
communicated to the public, although they were not representative of all the existing networks 
during that period. 

On the one hand, there was a constructive civil society mobilisation which surfaced during the early 
fall of 1999. It was the case of non-governmental mobilisation which aimed to help the victims and 
the material damages of the earthquake in Western Athens. A lot of collective actors devoted part 
of their resources to alleviate the situation of the victims of the earthquake in 1999. A vast number 
of associations (it was estimated around 700), foundations, NGOs as well as a lot of private 
businesses were mobilised. They offered goods, such as money, food, clothes, and also services, 
such as health care and psychological support to the victims. 

On the other hand, an example of a not-so-constructive, but rather destructive, civil society 
mobilisation also surfaced in the late 1990s. This refers to the Greek school parades, which take 
place to celebrate national anniversaries. The parade follows the lead of the pupil who carries the 
Greek flag and who is chosen from among the graduating class as being the top pupil in his or her 
class (according to a specific ministerial ordinance). In 2000 and again in 2002, in two small Greek 
towns the local community convened to reject the decision of the school’s head master to deliver 
the Greek flag to a student because he happened to be of Albanian origin. People from the local 
community announced that they would use force to obstruct the parade if it were headed by the 
Albanian student carrying the Greek flag. Just one day before the parade was scheduled to take 
place, the Albanian student backed down and passed the flag to the second best student who 
happened to be Greek. 

What do these stories tell us about the different informal collectives that appeared then in 
comparison to the current citizen networks identified and developed after the crisis? According to 
Sotiropoulos (2004), it seems that under particular circumstances, the informal collectives that 
were formed prior to the crisis fought to preserve their own interests against those of the wider 
region or the country as a whole opposed to what is happening with the post crisis citizen 
networks. 

Another important aspect that should not be neglected is the structure and organisation of those 
collectives. Careful attention needs to be given to the terms and definitions adopted before and 
after the crisis period when characterising the mobilisation of the informal civil society. The main 
difference of those phenomena in the late 90s was the fact that they were mentioned and 
acknowledged as collectives- which of course continue to exist even after the crisis serving different 
or the same interests - instead of how they are conceived nowadays, after the crisis, i.e. informal 
citizen networks. 

In order to have a more complete picture of the situation of civil society in Greece and more 
specifically of informal networks, it is important to describe how the mobilisation of those 
networks has evolved over the years gaining greater momentum after the economic recession. 
A new era for civil society organisations started in 2009 and is still developing today. Since 2009 
there has been a boom in informal citizen networks and grassroots movements shaping an 
“alternative”, “parallel” economy in Greece. Despite the poor tradition of Greece in the field, a 
rather stronger “informal” civil society has emerged. In various Greek cities, informal gatherings of 
citizens have turned into local social movements trying to provide solutions or a new way of
thinking in order to structure a new future for Greece. This new alternative economy is becoming 
more and more popular in Greek society as it spreads rapidly across the country. 

However, the emergence of such networks is not a new phenomenon, at least during periods of 
economic crisis. Although completely new for Greece, in several other countries around the world 
such informal networks have a long history – for example, Argentina. During the Argentinean 
economic crisis (1999-2002) several citizen networks and parallel currencies were developed. Social 
currencies such as creditos5,6 of the Red Global del Trueque (RGT) – literally "Global Network of 
Multi-Reciprocal Exchange Clubs" or more simply the "Global Exchange Network" (GEN) which 
facilitates trade between some 200.000 producers and consumers- emerged, involving millions of 
people. Soon, a massive barter exchange movement expanded to several other parts of Latin 
America. 

Another example is the cimarrón, one of the several alternative currencies in Venezuela. LETS is a 
very popular Exchange System which started in the UK and expanded in many countries around the 
world. Many other schemes such as the time banks operate within the framework of a parallel 
economy springing up in many regions of Spain. These are just some of the ways that people 
develop creative approaches to meeting their needs, especially during tough economic times. 
Returning to the situation in Greece: could such networks be considered as an after-effect of the 
crisis? We believe that the answer here is twofold. Undoubtedly this is the case for Greece as the 
emergence of many informal networks coincides with the outbreak of the financial crisis. Having 
this perspective in mind, someone could easily and logically believe that the emergence of these 
networks should be attributed to the economic recession. But what other reasons lie behind their 
existence? 

The emergence of these informal networks can also be attributed to the transformation of 
consumers’ behaviours and attitudes towards a more responsible way of living different from the 
current one which is characterised by passive consumerism, over-production and the great 
dependence on money. In particular, it is the desire felt by many people for a new way of thinking 
and acting in their everyday life, a kind of creative resistance to the current situation. 
Other sources claim that these new kind of networks have appeared in order to fill the gaps 
between people’s needs and the social services provided by the state. In spite of the large public 
sector in Greece, the country’s social services are often not up to the task of helping people in 
need10. More broadly what is happening in Greece and elsewhere could be understood as a way of
redesigning the mainstream economy that has failed to meet people’s needs, and prioritising wellbeing and resilience. 

Taking a closer look at the core features of these informal networks, all the above mentioned 
reasons for their appearance are reaffirmed. Starting from their objective, which is explicitly 
claimed by each one of them, most of these grassroots movements aim to respond to the current 
crisis through innovative ideas and joint solutions. They aim to modify existing thinking and provide 
support to people in need in order to improve life in community, to promote fair and equitable 
sharing and distribution of goods and services as well as to promote and preserve resources and 
assets of their local communities. 


 
Most of the informal citizen networks in Greece also share some common features among them. 


These mainly involve the following: 

• The participation of people in the networks on a voluntary and democratic basis. 
• The promotion of fair and equitable distribution of resources. 
• The development of relationships based on solidarity. 
• A focus on a smaller scale economy. 
• A different value system, which promotes concepts such as self-sufficiency, mixed with 
modern ideas like sustainability and ethical consumption. 
• Independence from public authorities. 


As a consequence, we have tried to categorise the various existing citizen networks based on the 
following typology. 


More information as well as examples of the different categories will be 
provided in the next section. Our typology includes the following eight categories: 

• Exchange and virtual currencies networks 
• Cost cutting networks - “Without intermediaries” 
• Social kitchens 
• Social clinics- social pharmacies 
• Social education networks 
• Social /Cultural activism 
• Self-management & self control networks 
• Networks for change


==Conclusions==

"It is generally acknowledged that one of the biggest challenges for Greece in the current crisis is the 
rebuilding of a strong civil society. As already mentioned, the role of the informal citizen networks 
towards this goal is seen to be important although the real impact of these networks cannot yet be 
measured. After a critical overview of the actions and impact of the informal citizen networks 
identified in Greece, the following thoughts can provide a further illustration of possible future 
trends. 

Bottom up movements and networks can provide alternative solutions and present a way of 
breaking the cycle of crisis. The existence and growth of such networks in Greece may contribute to 
the development of a new economic model or system. This has already been achieved to some 
degree with the cost cutting networks where a new economic model enabling transactions without 
the involvement of intermediaries has already been adopted by many Greek citizens. 
Another emerging trend concerns the redefinition of values and the gradual transformation of 
lifestyles. Greeks acknowledge that the social and political system has failed and by self-organising 
mechanisms they try to provide a response to their needs. The existence of a large number of 
networks aiming to transform the current way of thinking and the adoption of new values comes as 
a solution to the failure of the country’s social and political system. 

A third trend that can be identified concerns the development of smaller 
scale economies,  encompassing principles such as self-sufficiency, solidarity and substantive democracy. This is  especially the case with most of the solidarity and exchange networks which are developed on a 
local level and according to their members seem to have a positive impact in local employment 
rates as well as in boosting local economies through the mobilisation of transactions without the 
use of money. 

Last but not least, there is a clear orientation towards collective action in the last few years. The 
increasing participation of citizens in networks and groups that through organised collective action 
manage to improve their lives shows that people acknowledge the power of acting together. Thus a 
growing trend towards the empowerment of individuals seems to be developing as part of the 
emergence of informal networks. 

Aside from these initial thoughts, the development of the informal networks cannot be predicted. 
Their future will probably depend on several factors. Definitely, the financial crisis which is the 
main reason for their emergence will have a strong impact on them but it cannot help in the 
prediction of further trends regarding the future development of the networks. In this respect, the 
results of a study conducted by Sotiropoulou19 are indicative. According to her, there are several 
regions in Greece with high unemployment rates or sudden unemployment increases as a result of 
the economic downturn. However the participation of citizens in such networks in the specific 
regions is limited or does not even exist. So it is not possible to say that the deeper the crisis (e.g. 
higher unemployment rates), the more the development of the informal networks will be 
enhanced. 

Other factors that will probably influence the further development of such networks concern the 
role of the state and the local public authorities as well as the support provided by private 
institutions and organisations. The case of TEM is indicative as the support from the local 
authorities and the local private business contributed significantly in the development and 
spreading of the network. 

Among other factors that may influence the development of those networks is the use of 
information technology which has already facilitated the mobilisation of the Greek civil society and 
the spreading of the networks across Greece. Considering that Greece is not a particularly 
advanced information society, will future developments in ICT enable better networking and more 
engagement from all citizens? Are new technologies powerful enough to contribute towards a 
strong and robust civil society in Greece or is their role dependent on the support of a wider 
political environment and culture?

History shows that such networks usually disappear after the end of a crisis. Whether or not they 
will remain and produce long-term effects by helping turn new ideas into innovative and concrete 
actions that will have a real impact for Greece is still be determined. Whether or not these 
networks will have the same characteristics, dynamics and whether they will be underpinned by 
the same values also remains to be seen. Another important aspect that should also be examined 
in the long run is whether or not they will be transformed into formal structures, whereby the 
commercial exploitation of their services would be their first priority (and this applies particularly
to those networks which are currently opposed to adopting principles of commercialisation and 
profit). 

Overall, these networks could be seen as marking the beginning of a more solid and sustainable 
future for Greece but their real impact and evolution remains to be seen, especially after the end of 
the crisis. 

Even though the Greek civil society is characterised as being weak, underdeveloped or even poorly 
organised, there is a growing acknowledgment during the last few years that a stronger and 
dynamic informal civil society has surfaced through the mobilisation and self organisation of 
several citizen networks. This form of civil society is now gaining considerable visibility. 
The emergence of these networks can be attributed not only to the financial crisis and citizen 
needs which cannot be met by the state, but also to the desire for a redefinition of values and 
lifestyle. 

In contrast to the citizen collectives that existed prior to the crisis, the current citizen networks 
have a more structured form, and they are better organised. They focus on the promotion of 
principles such as solidarity, fair and equitable distribution of goods and services, self sufficiency, 
infusion of true democracy, etc. 

For many they represent the first signs of a lifestyle transformation. For others, they are just 
alternative methods for dealing with the crisis. We think of them as the beginning of an era bearing 
great potential for both citizens and the country at large."

=Examples=

* [[Greek Potato Movement]]

* [[TEM Local Alternative Unit - Greece]]



=Directory=

* [[Exchange and Virtual Currencies Networks in Greece]]

* [[No Middlemen Cost Cutting Networks in Greece]]

* [[Social Kitchens - Greece]]

* [[Social Clinics and Pharmacies]]

* [[Social Education Networks]]

* [[Self-Management and Self Control Networks in Greece]]

* [[Post-Crisis Networks for Political and Social Change in Greece]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]