'''Article: Infrastructure commons in Economic Perspective. By Brett M. Frischmann.'''

URL = http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_6/frischmann/index.html


=Abstract and Key Argument=

This essay briefly summarizes a theory (developed in substantial detail
elsewhere) [1] that better explains why there are strong economic arguments for
managing and sustaining infrastructure resources in an openly accessible
manner. This theory facilitates a better understanding of how these fundamental
resources generate value for society and how decisions regarding the allocation
of access to such resources affects social welfare. The key insights from this
analysis are that infrastructure resources generate value as inputs into a wide
range of productive processes and that the outputs from these processes are
often public goods and nonmarket goods that generate positive externalities
that benefit society as a whole. Managing such resources in an openly
accessible manner may be socially desirable from an economic perspective
because doing so facilitates these downstream productive activities. For
example, managing the Internet infrastructure in an openly accessible manner
facilitates active citizen involvement in the production and sharing of many
different public and nonmarket goods. Over the past decade, this has led to
increased opportunities for a wide range of citizens to engage in
entrepreneurship, political discourse, social network formation and community
building, among many other activities.


'''Infrastructure'''

The term “infrastructure” generally conjures up the notion of physical
resource systems made by humans for public consumption. A list of familiar
examples includes: (1) transportation systems, such as highway and road
systems, railways, airline systems, and ports; (2) communication systems, such
as telephone networks and postal services; (3) governance systems, such as
court systems; and, (4) basic public services and facilities, such as schools,
sewers, and water systems. I refer to these resources as “traditional
infrastructure.”

Two generalizations about traditional infrastructure are worth noting at the
outset. First, the government has played and continues to play a significant
and widely–accepted role in ensuring the provision of many traditional
infrastructures. While private parties and markets play an increasingly
important role in providing many types of traditional infrastructure (due to a
wave of privatization as well as cooperative ventures between industry and
government), the government’s position as provider, coordinator, or regulator
of traditional infrastructure remains intact in most communities.

Second, traditional infrastructures are generally managed in an openly
accessible manner. That is, they are managed such that the resources are openly
accessible to members of a community who wish to use the resources [2]. This
does not, however, mean that access is free. We pay tolls to access highways,
we buy stamps to send letters, we pay telephone companies to have our calls
routed across their lines, and so on. Users must pay for access to some (though
not all) of these resources. Nor does it mean that access to the resource is
unregulated. Transportation of hazardous substances by highway or mail, for
example, is heavily regulated. The key point is that the resource is openly
accessible to all within a community regardless of the identity of the
end–user or the end–use [3]. As discussed below, managing traditional
infrastructure in this fashion makes economic sense.

Infrastructure resources constitute an important class of resources for which
society should value nondiscriminatory public access. Yet conventional economic
analysis of many infrastructure resources fails to fully account for how the
resources are used as inputs to create social benefits. Economists (regulators,
politicians, and others) recognize that there is a tremendous demand for public
infrastructure and that infrastructure plays a critical role in economic
development, but exactly why there is demand, how it manifests, how it should
be measured, and how it contributes to human well–being is not fully
understood. Critically, many infrastructure resources act as inputs into a wide
variety of socially valuable productive activities, including the production of
public goods and non–market goods. These activities generate significant
social welfare gains generally associated with traditional infrastructure [4].


'''Commons as Resource Management'''

This essay uses “open access” and “commons” interchangeably to refer to
the situation in which a resource is openly accessible to users regardless of
their identity or intended use [5]. I intentionally abstract from the
institutional form (property right, regulation, norm, etc.) to focus on a
particular institutional function (opening or restricting access), i.e. the
management principle itself. Tying form and function together obscures the fact
that the management principle can be implemented through a variety of
institutional forms, which are often mixed (property and regulation, private
and communal property, etc.), and not necessarily through particular forms of
property rights [6]. The optimal degree of openness/restrictiveness depends
upon a number of functional economic considerations related to the nature of
the resource in question, the manner in which the resource is utilized to
create value, institutional structures, and the community setting.

The general value of commons as a resource management principle is that it
maintains openness, does not discriminate among users or uses of the resource,
and eliminates the need to obtain approval or a license to use the resource. As
a general matter, managing infrastructure resources in an openly accessible
manner eliminates the need to rely on either market actors or the government to
“pick winners” downstream. In theory, at least, this facilitates innovation
in the creation of and experimentation with new uses. More generally, it
facilitates the generation of positive externalities through the downstream
production of public goods and non-market goods that might be stifled under a
regime where access is allocated on the basis of individuals’ willingness to
pay.

=More Information=

Full Article at
http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_6/frischmann/index.html


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Commons]]