
'''= project for innovation economics'''


URL = http://www.ingenesist.com/


=Description=

The Ingenesist Project (TIP) began life as an international engineering education project during the early 1990′s NAFTA implementation. Ingenesist is a “Crowd Think Tank” with dozens of brilliant and creative advisors from all over the world who contribute to the goal of The Ingenesist Project.  Our objective is to discover the next economic system and methods that will help transition society out of the expiring Fiat Currency / Market Capitalism model and into a sustainable value system.  To this end, TIP specifies 3 web based applications to facilitate that economic transition.  The working titles of these systems are as follows: [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/curiosume-integrating-social-innovation.html Curiosumé];  [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/social-capitalism-the-value-game.html The Value Game]; and the [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/system-for-the-monetization-of-social-capitalism.html WIKiD Tools Algorithm].

TIP business methods have been deployed to several companies including Social Flights – a ride sharing service for private aircraft (acquired), [http://crmanage.com CRManage] – a community organization game for condominium remediation (acquired), and [http://coengineers.com Community Engineering Services, PLLC] (active); an engineering co-op supporting the infrastructure of shared asset communities. An impressive and growing list of companies,  start-ups and entrepreneurs are using TIP methods and systems to access new domains of efficiency.  They all participate on our board of advisors (List available upon qualified request) providing feedback.

=Discussion=

'''The Innovation Economy:'''

"Based on extensive research in major corporations, international trade agreements, and multiple start-ups in which The Ingenesist Project was directly involved, they have identified a relatively small flaw in Market Capitalism which may be easily corrected.  In order to do so, three relatively simple web applications must be built and deployed to Social Networks and the block chain protocol.  These will allow human intellect, social capital, and creativity to become tangible outside the construct of the traditional corporation.

The working titles of these systems are as follows: [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/curiosume-integrating-social-innovation.html Curiosumé];  [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/social-capitalism-the-value-game.html The Value Game]; and the [http://www.ingenesist.com/general-info/system-for-the-monetization-of-social-capitalism.html WIKiD Tools Algorithm].


'''The New Market'''

Countless “new-to-the-world” business plans and patentable methods, systems, and devices will result from the development and deployment of these three applications.


'''Conclusion:'''

The factors of production of an Innovation Economy are Social Capital, Creative Capital, and Intellectual Capital.

Deficit spending is unsustainable. The existing financial system has exceeded its ability to pay back the debt and is being consumed by the interest on this debt.

As the dollar devalues, society will need to have another system in place ready to increase productivity.  This next economy must have a currency backed by a tangible asset.  In this case; Social Capital, Creative Capital, and Intellectual Capital."
(http://www.ingenesist.com/the-ingenesist-project)





[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]