
URL = http://www.imeb.org/


=Description=

"Founded in 2011 by Jacob and Emanuel Thaler it's currently in the process of becoming known.
 
Based on settled conviction that developed societies need to establish a sense of moderation in both inidvidual acting and political decisions, IMEB wants people to think about the impact they have as consumers.

We live in abundance, powered by insatiable demands to own more and more, fly off every year, always have the newest things. It's what our economic system is like. But not in the slightest are we willing to discuss the effects and admit our contributions to child labor, economic exploitation, and destruction of the earth. And, even more, we wouldn't even dream of doing without excessive consumption.

We have come to be firmly convinced that all abundance we live in is something we deserve. We hide behind a smokescreen of seeming awareness of the problem, yet refusing unwaveringly to relinquish wealth. This attitude will be our extinction.
 
Are we too selfish to moderate?

It seems beyond us to even imagine a different sort of society. A society of moderation that puts an end to uncritical admiration for free markets and endless growth. A society of thinking individuals that truly face up to the problems it has caused.

But the way it seems cannot be the way it is. IMEB refuses to accept people do not change. It needs endurance. But it's still possible to alter people's minds. It's essential for survival.
IMEB was founded to contribute to a world of moderation."


Our aims:

* Stimulate people's thoughts. Our most important goal, by far, is to raise an overdue discussion about our personal economic demands. We must relearn to relinquish for the benefit of the poor, our descendants, and our environment.

* Challenge those who profit from exploiting others and satisfying our voracity for consumption. We must not condone it.

* Finally set limits to the unbound spread of markets. At a terrific speed, we ascribe every tiny part of our life to the logic of markets: information, science, our whole thinking becomes a matter of markets. In fact, we have replaced individualism by consumerism and friends by facebook-friends. Are we on the way to be a submissive mass? We speak of market-compliant democracies. What exactly does it mean?

* Confront us with all those injustices we cause: be it inhuman working conditions in the Coltan mines of Congo or gigantic trash mountains permeating throughout our oceans - we want to show what we are responsible for, thereby demonstrating our power, as sophisticated individuals, to change direction.

* Make clear that all change starts by changing one's mind. Thinking musnt' be left to politicians. We must not deprive ourselves of the right of thinking. It's totally up to us.

* Contribute to a new attitude of mind: An attitude that not only judges the world by economic value but emphasizes the inherent worth of it.
Help those who suffer from immoderation. There is a mass of people who carry the load of our abundance."
(http://www.imeb.org/about-1/)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Economics]]