
'''= a new global network of activists, academics, civil society groups, and movements around the world working on issues related to social, economic and political inequality.'''

URL = https://www.initiativeforequality.org/


=Description=

"Initiative for Equality (IfE) is a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization incorporated in the United States. IfE’s purpose is to provide public interest research, advocacy, global networking and political and legal strategy for groups and movements working on issues related to social, economic and political inequalities (see Mission). IfE was founded in 2011 (see History). Our organizational structure consists of a Board of Directors, Board of Advisors, five Project Steering Committees, a global network, and a staff (see Structure).

IfE’s Global Network is open to interested activists, academics, policymakers, and others working on issues related to social, economic and political inequality. Network members receive periodic updates, participate in IfE’s projects and activities, engage in dialogue about issues and strategies through comments on our webpages, and support the organization with donations (see Global network).

IfE’s Board of Advisors brings global perspectives into the decision-making of the organization. Advisors are involved in activities on every continent. They meet quarterly to discuss IfE’s agenda and strategies, and keep in close touch to exchange information and suggest activities (see Board of Advisors). Our Board of Directors brings experience in non-profit management. Directors are primarily from the US, and are responsible for ensuring that our mission is implemented, and that we remain in compliance with US laws and regulations governing non-profit 501(c)(3) organizations (see Board of Directors).IfE does not have any staff yet; instead the organization’s work is accomplished by volunteers. The organization will be funded by public donations and private foundation grants (see Funding).

IfE has five major projects in varying stages of development (see Projects). These include the New Paradigm Project, Equity and Sustainable Development Project, New Economy Project, Model Policies Project, and Caste, Class, Race & Ethnicity Project. Each project is directed by a Project Steering Committee made up of members from the Board of Advisors and the Global Network who are actively working on the project."
(https://www.initiativeforequality.org/index.php/about-us)


=More Information=

* the People's Sustainability Treaty on Equity, https://www.initiativeforequality.org/images/equity_treaty_june_2012.pdf


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Politics]]