URL = http://www.ink-media.com/Ink-About.html

=Description=

From the Wikipedia [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InkMedia]:

The InkMedia mobile computer (Ink MC) by Ink-Media Inc. (www.ink-media.com)
Canada, is a low cost mobile computer running Linux/FOSS[http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Software] costing under
US$300 manufactured for the developing and developed world to reduce the
digital divide. InkMedia have a different technology and approach to market
than the other low cost computer initiatives. It was developed after
experience in India showed how the traditional PC fared badly with respect
to overheating, hard drive failures and virus infections, all of which added
to the total cost of ownership. The Ink MC is ROM based and so has no hard
disk or moving parts. It draws power more like a mobile phone and can run on
a 12V car battery or solar power solution. As an individual productivity
tool it is designed to bring inclusive access to technology to the following
social and economic sectors of society."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InkMedia)

=Project Background=

"InkMedia's mission, is to produce portable, powerful and people driven
products to bridge the digital divide. Its main activities involve producing
a highly innovative low cost ROM based laptop computer to tackle the digital
divide. InkMedia's research and prototyping began well before the concept of
other low-cost laptop projects like One Laptop Per Child and Classmate PC
were introduced. The InkMedia is already commissioned by OLDES, an EU
co-funded project under the IST Programme costing 3.65 million euro (under
6th FWP Sixth Framework Programme) with a funding of 2.5 million euro. 

The InkMedia business and distribution model is based upon providing
distribution through local channel business partners whom they see as key to
supporting sustainable development. They want the local partner to add value
in ways that are appropriate to their local communities, for example through
providing content or training services and thereby offering employment
opportunities. This is a for-profit approach but is augmented by the Gerry
Morgan Foundation, a charitable foundation. Currently manufacturing is based
in Beijing but InkMedia are seeking opportunities to expand the
manufacturing and/or assembly bases to other regions."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InkMedia)

Gerry Morgan is the inventor of InkMedia. 

=Key Features=

For the technical specs see http://www.ink-media.com/Ink-Specs.html

"Ink MC is a Mobile Computer which radically reduces the Total Cost of
Ownership from initial cost, to software licensing and maintenance. The
InkMedia design ensures that the typical points of failure are removed as:

- There is no hard disk to fail, slow down or pick up viruses.
- It has no moving parts to overheat and there is only a usb connection
between the keyboard and the computer, which is located behind the screen.
- The keyboard can be detached leaving the computer as a screen reader.
- Users save files to a usb stick/MP3 player, network or web server.
- This helps schools who currently struggle to recover work from a hard disk
when the laptop fails.
- Ink MC is designed as a personal productivity device but it can just as
easily be used as a public computer for example in clusters for flexible use
across a school.
- It does over 90% of what most people need on a day to day basis through
its Free and Open Source Software (FOSS), which includes Open Office.
- There is no training overhead as it is simple to use and users are not
expected to carry out running repairs."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InkMedia)


[[Category:Resources]]
[[Category:Technology]]