
=Description=

'''1.'''

“Inner Development Goals (IDGs) is a blueprint of the capabilities, qualities and skills we need in order to achieve the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We want to educate, inspire and empower people to be a positive force for change in society and find a more purposeful way to look at our lives and the lives of the people around us.
We are a global initiative that develops inner abilities, skills and other qualities for people and organizations involved in efforts to contribute to a more sustainable global society.

In 2015, the Sustainable Development Goals gave us a comprehensive plan for a sustainable world by 2030. The 17 goals cover a wide range of issues that involve people with different needs, values, and convictions. There is a vision of what needs to happen, but progress along this vision has so far been disappointing. We lack the inner capacity to deal with our increasingly complex environment and challenges. Fortunately, modern research shows that the inner abilities we now all need can be developed. This was the starting point for the 'Inner Development Goals' initiative.”

(https://www.innerdevelopmentgoals.org/)


'''2. Hanzi Freinacht:'''

"(IDGs) (define) goals of “development that matters”—not the development of new and cooler furniture and gadgets (even if such things can also matter) but of things like the personal qualities, lived experiences, and relationships of real human beings. Those things also need investments in terms of time and resources. The IDG framework is still young and being developed and encompasses 23 “skills” divided into five categories: Being, Thinking, Relating, Collaborating, and Acting. The “Being” category, for instance, would include such traits as Authenticity/Integrity, Presence (being able to be in the moment), and Self-Awareness. It’s all work-in-progress and needs to be funded, expanded, fleshed out, and experimented with—the IDG team are already working with Costa Rica at a government level to create an IDG strategy, and seem to be starting up in more countries."

(https://metamoderna.org/acceptance-not-tolerance-is-the-elixir-of-a-good-society/)

=Details=

“The IDGs will provide an essential framework of transformative skills for sustainable development, a field-kit (in co-creation now) on how to develop these necessary skills - open source and free for all to use. The current IDGs framework represents 5 categories and 23 skills and qualities which are especially crucial for leaders who address SDGs, but fundamentally for all of us!  It is the greatest possible accelerator to reach the Sustainable Development Goals and create a prosperous future for all humanity.

The IDGs initiative has co-creation at its center with ongoing development and input from more and more experts, scientists, practitioners and organisations around the world. In 2021 the first IDGs report was published that explains the background, method and framework with 5 categories and 23 transformational skills. 

The report represents the results of the two online surveys based on input from 1000+ participants. We co-create in a community together with 23 supporting organisations and have conducted so far three MindShift - Growth that Matters conferences with 3000+ active participants in total.

The IDGs framework consists of five categories organising 23 skills and qualities of human inner growth and development. The framework has been developed by a team of international researchers after an extensive outreach consultation involving more than a thousand persons.

(https://www.innerdevelopmentgoals.org/)


=More information=

•	Full framework at https://www.innerdevelopmentgoals.org/framework

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]