

=Discussion=

Rune Kvist Olsen:

"An “Inner Democracy” is based on the belief in the internalized resources, energy, capacity,
capability, and competence of the individual. In other words “Inner Democracy” grants
everyone in the workplace personal authority to perform their jobs as responsible and
independent persons. “Inner Democracy” is the source of a “Participatory Democracy”. A
“Participatory Democracy” is a direct form of governance where the individual is responsible
for his or her respective area of work. The person has within this field of work, autonomous
authority to make independent decisions. 

The unconditional trust of the individual human
being to make autonomous decisions in a “Participatory Democracy” can be described as
follows:

1. The individual human being is capable of ruling and governing his or her own person
and taking responsibility for his or her own actions in the workplace. Each individual
operates with personal freedom as a trustworthy member of the working community.
Mutual trust and personal freedom are unconditionally granted (in contrast to
conditional privileges that are given as rewards or compensation) as a prime value and
support in the performance of tasks. These values are the driving factors in developing
and maintaining awareness and consciousness of the people’s contribution whether it
is alone as individuals or together as a collaborative force in the work-process.

2. The individual human being must conceive the fact that all individuals are different as
human beings and have unique resources and competencies that are complementary in
the processing of work. On this basis it must be acknowledged that everyone’s
contributions are necessary in achieving the goals of the group as a whole. The effort
to release human potential and latent human resources is the enabling mechanism that
can ensure that different jobs are done in the organization by the individual person
through collaboration with others.


“Outer Democracy” is, on the other hand, based on the belief of governance by externalized
authorities. The need for superior authorities in charge of subordinates is caused by fear and
mistrust about the ability of the individual human being to act responsibly and to be
trustworthy through the leading of one self in the workplace. This fear and anxiety of the
people’s ability to function and operate as responsible and independent persons at work, is the
basis for the creation of an organizational regime based on control and command.
Consequently the superior authorities confirm their prejudiced misconceptions about people
by controlling and commanding the individuals through controllers and control-systems in the
workplace. In that way these authorities will think that by controlling the people, they will
prevent the anticipated unpredictable and undesirable consequences that would occur if
people were allowed to operate as free persons in the workplace."


=Source=

Text: The DemoCratic Workplace. Empowering People (demos) to Rule (cratos) their own workplace. Organizing Individual and Group Decision Processes through Personal Competence-based Authority.
By Rune Kvist Olsen, 2009



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Relational]]