

=Discussion=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman: 

"the Innovator’s Dilemma, Clay Christensen describes the
cyclical rise and fall of mature, industry-leading companies that at first, enjoy market
dominance, and then again and again, fall into sudden obsolescence. The force that
pulls powerful, well-managed companies to their knees is not, as typically believed,
poor management or brain drain. Instead, powerful market-leading companies falter
because they are defeated by the innovator’s dilemma: sales of their once cuttingedge,
feature-rich, market-leading incumbent product are cannibalized by cheaper
simpler products which Christensen calls “disruptive technologies.”

A disruptive technology is not the most sophisticated or highest performing
technology. Instead, a disruptive technology is a lower-cost product, or commodity
product, that has fewer features but is cheap and considered “good enough” by at
first, fringe users, and eventually, by mainstream users. The lifecycle of companies
felled by the innovator’s dilemma is as follows: a tech company painstakingly
develops and improves their product according to ongoing feedback from their most
lucrative customers. Although the incumbent company does everything right
according to conventional business wisdom, its market dominance can’t last forever.

Eventually, a small company appears on the scene that presents a disruptive
technology to the marketplace. The disruptive technology at first, appeals only to
smaller customers who can’t pay for, or don’t need the incumbent company’s
expensive, feature-rich product.

The underdog business selling their disruptive technology continues to develop its
product and eventually moves up market as their low-end technology improves to the
point of being “good enough” for mainstream use, yet is significantly cheaper than the
incumbent technology. Eventually, the disruptive technology cannibalizes the market
from the incumbent technology, putting the putting formerly leading incumbent
company out of business. Interestingly, before their demise, incumbent companies
facing the innovator’s dilemma are fully aware of commodity-level competitors. In
Christensen’s analysis of the phenomenon of disruptive technologies, the incumbent
companies 1) already knew about the technology that eventually undercut them yet
2) chose to not do anything about it due to the small market size of potential
customers and fear of cannibalizing sales of the incumbent product. In a sense,
incumbent companies could be considered a victim of their own success.

We mention Christensen’s work here to call attention to the possibility that personal
manufacturing technologies have the potential to disrupt the dominance of their
larger, more powerful industrial cousins in the manufacturing machine marketplace.
The average selling price of an industrial-scale 3D printer continues to drop. In 2007,
the average cost of a commercial-scale 3D printer was $77,000; in 2008, the cost was
$70,000 in 2008; in 2009, the average price dropped further, to $52,0009.




[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Economics]]