=Source=

    
*  Climate Justice as Business Case: Innovative Business Models for the Transfers of Climate-Friendly Technologies. By Hans Schuhmacher, with support from Julio Lambing et al. European Business Council for Sustainable Energy. Preliminary English version. 06 December 2009 [1] 

URL = http://www.e5.org 


=Examples of strategies and initiatives=

==The Open-Source model – Open Hardware==

● Concise definition: Analogous to Open
Source Software, Open Hardware is a
community-based development instrument
for technologies. A viral GPL (General
Public License) facilitates implementation
and further development of technologies.

* Application for technology cooperation:
Adaption of technologies to local conditions,
steady further development of technologies,
cost-effective involvement of many codevelopers.

* Achievement potential : Adaption of
technologies can be transacted by those
who know these conditions best. The viral
GPL license allows commercial use of
technological knowledge and know-how
under the condition that further
developments are accessible under the
same conditions and under the same
license. Innovations and discoveries by
grassroots innovators, also in the global
South, can be utilised. Co-developers pass
through an „unofficial apprenticeship“. Also,
technologies that are not marketable can be
utilised. Participating technology companies
can access the capacity of developer
communities. Peer-to-Peer-assessment
safeguards high quality.

* Prerequisite for effectiveness : Clarification of
legal and juridical framework conditions,
design of a valid business model for a Open
Hardware platform, investment in the development of the database, public funding for
this, international interlinking of Open Hardware initiatives, creation of suitable public
environments, involvement of publicly-funden RD&D. The problem of deficient protection
of innovations in many countries of the global South has to be solved, for the benefit of
technology companies from the global North as well as for the benefit of innovators in the
global South.

* Practical experiences : Numerous positive experiences in the sphere of Open Source
software, sporadic experiences regarding Open Hardware

* Possible correlations : In the spheres of knowledge transfer and capacity building, also
with initiatives for development cooperation. Cost reduction due to Open Hardware may
facilitate proliferation of start-ups. Peer-to-Peer assessments, like in Open Source
software development, can facilitate validation of businesses and projects.

The success of Open Source software development brought about the appearance of similar
initiatives in the sphere of Open Hardware. Utilisation of Open Hardware for global climate
protection attracts growing interest. To date, e5 initiates an Open Hardware project.

The characteristic strengths of Open Hardware are the following:
Generally, Open Hardware projects do not only make patent documentation accessible, they also
provide information on design, components used, software codes and descriptions of
development steps. This information packets are, in turn, extended by the communities and their
further developments. The development of a given technology, thus, becomes intelligible for
others and facilitates implementation, adaptation and further development of the technology.

Open Hardware is „viral“, i.e. the model incorporates, by means of its characteristic licenses (for
example the GNU public license GPL25), every innovation based on the original technology under
this license. Thus, further innovations are accessible under the same conditions. This is important
if a steady circuit of feedback and further development is desired. Analogous to companies that
cooperate with Open Source communities, the innovation gain of participating technology
companies may rise the faster and the more diversified the process of further development is.
Peer-to-Peer review safeguards the characteristic high quality of Open Source software and will
likely do the same in Open Hardware development.

Active participation in an Open Source or Open Hardware community is comparable to an
inofficial technological apprenticeship that is practically costless for those who provide know-how.
„Local Champions“ and cooperation partners in the global South can improve their expertise as
well as participating technology companies in industrialised countries. Furthermore, Open
Hardware facilitates supranational or even global exchange of knowledge and experiences as
well as networking effects. The intensity of the innovation stimulus is not predictable and
unratable.

Open Hardware is an interesting option for technology companies in industrialised countries also
because of new possibilities to utilize technologies unsuitable for the market. Advantages are
also conceivable regarding technologies that can be easily imitated and are components of
technologies fit for the market. In these and similar cases, the common innovation dividend
provided by Open Hardware may bring about the development of new marketable products. The
expenditure, however, is minimal. At the same time, these platforms can be used for establishing
contacts between companies in different hemispheres. These contacts, in turn, may become
points of origin for technology cooperation projects.

A difficulty encountered in the initiation phase of such an innovation model is lack of knowledge
among investors regarding cooperative models. Only when business models are fully developed,
clear criteria for businesses will be discernible when, depending on market penetration and state
of development, a decision for a viral license is advisable. This is another reason why technology
companies should participate in the development of this instrument. As an alternative or
additionally to a full GPL licence, commercial license can be employed that allows patenting and
licensing of further developments but grants a share of all gains to the original patent holder. This
would enable technology companies with small production capacities to market their technologies
globally and particularly foster SMEs. A part of these gains would be withheld by the platform for
covering costs and creating funds for the advancement of technology development.
A step-by-step realisation of the instrument is conceivable. Even if technology companies in the
initial phase only contribute technologies unsuitable for the market, it is possible that the model
succeeds. Potential candidates are also technologies which are no longer protected by patents –
e.g. many patents for the use of renewable technologies are expired. In contrast to so-called
„patent databases“, Open Hardware enables a return flow of further development and options for
cooperation. Such an initial phase may already be beneficial for technology cooperation. At the
same time, it facilitates building of trust, reification of the debate and gaining insights which may
be used to improve the instrument.


==Technology Cooperation Commons==

* Concise definition: Imparting of knowledge and knowledge exchange on a global plane by
means of web 2.0 platforms and and a Creative Commons license fur advancing
technology cooperation.

* Application for technology cooperation : Overcoming of cultural, language and knowledge
barriers,imparting of knowledge and knowledge exchange in the spheres of climatefriendly
technology and business.

* Achievement potential: Technologies have to be adapted to local conditions, private
business activities have to be integrated in cultural and social environments. In order to
be effective, local „forms“ of technologies and business have to be developed locally. A
prerequisite for this is access to knowledge and know-how. The instrument facilitates this
and also enables interlinking and exchange between technology cooperation projects and
their participants world-wide.

* Prerequisite for effectiveness: Clarification of legal and juridical framework conditions,
public funding, creation of suitable public environments, involvement of publicly funded
RD&D.

* Practical experiences: Web 2.0-based knowledge and communication platforms and
Creative Commons are successfully employed in diverse spheres of activities and
knowledge, but up to now not in the sphere of technology cooperation.

* Possible correlations: Interlinking with all models for capacity building and knowledge
transfer are possible. Open Hardware or the Web 2.0 Cleantech Investment Forum would
benefit from this instrument, and vice versa. The instrument may facilitate startups in the
global South, instruments proposed in this paper (Section I) may be employed to finance
them.

Cultural and language barriers are potential
obstacles for technology cooperation. Language
barriers alone26 may be an obstacle for potential
technology entrepreneurs or grassroots developers
in developing countries because basic English, for
example, does not suffice to impart complex
technological information. Open Source platforms
for technical texts that provide basic knowledge
(„How does wind power work?“) up to very complex
information could produce relief. Students and
scientists from developing countries could provide
translations under Creative Commons licenses and
would, thus, contribute to the sustainable
development of their countries. When translations
into the main languages of a developing country are
accessible, the barrier for translations into local languages is much lower. Documents under
Commons licenses may be printed, copied and diffused in order to reach those who have no
access to modern communications technologies. For businesses and project personnel on site it
is easier to write reports on technological developments, problems and so on in their own
language. If these reports also find their way to the translator communities of the Technology
Cooperation Commons, local experiences can be utilized globally. In the sphere of Open
Source software, this response process as well as communication among users work very well.

The portals of this virtual hubs of technology cooperation may be designed by user communities
according to their own needs. Examples would be technology encyclopedia analogous to
wikipedia that collect and provide implantation know-how, collections of project documents,
exchange forums and synopses of local parameters based on geographical information systems.
Modern ICT technology facilitates other depiction modes apart from texts and technical drawings.
Video material and animations with multilingual soundtracks and sub-titles as well as other media
may achieve positive effects. Likewise, vital information for novice entrepreneurs can be
imparted and experiences can be shared.



==LEEN - Management System for Local Energy Efficiency Networks==

URL = http://www.leen-system.de/en

This system for learning networks for medium sized
companies was initiated in Switzerland as instrument
for advancing energy efficiency. Moderated by a
professional, knowledgeable senior engineer , 10-15
companies participate in regular meetings (four times
per year) for sharing experience and learning from
invited experts . The companies define a joint target for
energy-efficiency improvement and CO2 emission
reduction with a four-year time horizon, based on
individual potentials of the sites. Yearly, energy demand
and CO2 emission of the participating companies are
verified, the whole process is monitored. Participating
companies have reduced their specific energy
consumptions as well as their specific carbon dioxide
emissions by about 12-20% within 6 years. About 90
learning networks are active to date, the participants
are approximately 1.000 companies from Switzerland
and Germany.

These networks could also be employed for technology
cooperation. Learning networks for energy efficiency
might be as useful in rapid developing regions.



==RETEX (Renewable Energy Technology Exchange)==

URL = http://www.gtz.de/en

This concept for technology cooperation was developed by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
(GTZ) in collaboration with the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, commissioned by the German Federal
Ministry for Economic Collaboration and Development.

RETEX aims at overcoming three main obstacles for the diffusion of climate-friendly technologies in the global South,
namely: lack of reliable and cost-efficient technologies; lack of knowledge and know-how; lack of financial means. The
instrument focusses on poor developing countries and is to advance the South-South exchange of technologies. In the
initial phase, RETEX is to concentrate on Mini- and Micro-Hydro power (MHP). Core elements are an online platform for
knowledge exchange and the establishment of a network of local expert core groups which, in collaboration with other
institutions, maintain a training and consulting service.

Essential elements are:

• intensive local training units;
• an interdisciplinary approach, integrating technical, business, legal, juridical and policy aspects;
• advancement of South-South exchange by means of active networking;
The online internet platform provides information on:
• standards – technical information on MHP technologies, feasibility analyses, monitoring systems, definitions of terms
etc.;
• library: technical manuals, training handbooks, software for downloading (free of charge), links, an evaluation
department;
• selection criteria for electro-mechanical gear – turbines, measurement and control technology etc.;
• database: providers of technologies, consulting companies, finance partners, international organisations etc.;
• best practices: examples for policies and regulations, critera for project selection, solvency, financing instruments etc.
For members of the RETEX network, the following exclusive features are also to be available:
• open expert forum for questions and discussions;
• consulting service: by experts, for a fee;
• training material accessible if certain quality standards are met;
• licenses and blueprints for members that meet certain criteria (obligation for regular training, obligation to report).


=Conclusion on Cooperative Innovation Models:=

Identified Need for Action

1. Financing of translations of important websites that advance Open Source in the spheres of
climate-friendly technologies as well as legal and juridical aspects of Open Source. Most of
them are in English. As a first step, translations into the lingua franca of a given global region
are needed, i.e. Chinese, French, Spanish and Arabian. As a second step, initiatives willing to
provide translations into more local languages should be encouraged and financed.
Multilingual moderation of these websites should be provided for.

2. The public sector should play an important role by the creation and financing of a noncommercial
Green Open Hardware Database. Due to the current financial crisis, private companies
are hard to win over for highly innovative projects. Public funding would be necessary as an initial
spark. Furthermore, financing by the public sector is necessary in order to avoid the impression
that a few private companies would aim at utilizing the project for hidden particular interests.

3. For the development of an international legal and juridical framework for a Clean Tech GPL
License a technical expert group has to be established. Up to now, there have only be scattered
approaches for appropriate licenses. This panel could also work as secretariat for the database
platform. Their tasks would consist of management of the Clean Tech GPL license, maintenance of
legal integrity of the original products, diffusion and promotion of technologies and Clean Tech
GPL licenses, maintenance of a platform for publications on new ideas and innovations developed
under this license.

4. International conferences should be funded that conjoin creative thinkers and thought-leaders of
the Open Source and Open Hardware communities. Some of the thought-leaders, initiatives and
experts relevant for such a venture do not have the means to meet face to face. The following key
actors should be gathered: a) thought leaders of the Open Source movement from industrialised
countries and from the global South; b) companies that already employ Open Hardware; c)
representatives from Green Open Hardware initiatives d) legal experts on Open Source; e)
companies and technology developers in the sphere of climate-friendly technologies; f) research
institutions that can release patents; g) experts from the sphere of development cooperation.

5. It should be proved which of the patented hardware and software under copyright or patents the
development of which was financed by G20 countries should flow into the portfolio of the Clean
Tech GPL programme. This should be mandatory and regulated accordingly. Such a provision
would demand either joint ownership (patent/copyright holder and platform) or a contract which
allows the platform to issue licenses for these technologies. The national interest of the country in
question should be taken into account.

6. Setup of international Clean Tech patent libraries: Transferring of patents into a pool for crosslicensing
grants all producers access to relevant technologies. Users should be enabled to buy
access by warranting a percentual share in later profits. The gains would flow to the library and
distributed among those who contributed to the technology in question. The allocation formula
should be based on the frequency of technology use.

7. Publicly funded tenders for bounty hunters: An agency, set up by the United Nations, should
identify climate-relevant problems and publish solutions under a GPL license. Such a system could
be funded by emissions taxes.


=More Information=

* Examples for existing Open Hardware projects, databases and communities:
http://www.e5.org/modules.php?op=modload&name=PagEd&file=index&topic_id=0&page_id=57

* A Creative-Commons license suitable for Technology Cooperation: Attribution – Noncommercial – Share-alike.
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

* Ghosh, R.: Study on the Economic Impact of Open Source Software on Innovation and the Competitiveness of
the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Secor in the EU (FLOSSImpact), UNU-Merit 2006. S.90


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Policy]]