

=Description=

From an interview of [[Simon_Delakorda]] by Violetta Bulc:



'''"VB: Your name is most frequently connected to the acronym INePA. What is INePA?'''

SD: It is the Institute for Electronic Participation. This is a private institute working as a non-profit, non-governmental organisation. It is the first organisation professionally working in the field of e-participation in Slovenia and the European Union. E-participation is an innovative implementation of web technologies for supporting participation and inclusion of the public, and the society in decision-making and the legislative processes."
(http://www.violeta.si/2010/03/new-opportunities-for-social.html)


=Interview=


'''VB: It sounds similar to electronic democracy?'''

SD: Yes, electronic participation is often associated with the notion of electronic democracy.


'''VB: Do you cooperate with other similar organisations abroad?'''

SD: Yes, the Institute's development and professional activities are tied to the political community of the European Union. Thus, the Institute cooperates with other organisations participating in the Pan European eParticipation Network (PEP-NET) and the Central and Eastern European Citizens Network (CEECN). The institute also maintains professional contacts with players in the USA.



'''VB: Is the EU a leader or more of a follower in the field?'''

SD: According to the United Nations’ e-participation index, the EU is the most innovative political community in the field of implementation of new technologies for the purpose of democracy. However, the effects of these technologies have yet to attain our highest ambitions since projects of e-participation are currently still limited to technological innovation and have yet to expand to social innovation.



'''VB: What are the effects of your initiatives and their results?'''

SD: In addition to professional work, education and advocacy, the Institute’s projects are connected to the use of web technologies in supporting participation of Slovenian residents, civil society and the interested public in the political processes and topics at the level of the European Union.



'''VB: How do I get involved?'''

SD: There are two such projects, namely the web portal for non-governmental organisations’ involvement in the Slovenia EU Council Presidency at www.predsedovanje.si which has already been archived and the web Citizens’ Forum at www.evropske-razprave.si where moderated discussions and consultations with Slovenian representatives in the European Parliament are taking place. In the web forum’s specific discussions, an average of 50 to 100 individuals and organisations participate with contributions regarding the Parliament’s work, climate change, social issues, etc. Their contributions are summarised in reports that are reviewed by members of the Parliament who then publicly state their positions on the issue and define how they will implement them in their work in the European Parliament. This is the role of the web Citizens’ Forum."
(http://www.violeta.si/2010/03/new-opportunities-for-social.html)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Slovenia]]

[[Category:Politics]]