
URL = http://responsibletechnology.org/about

=Description=

"The Institute for Responsible Technology is a world leader in educating policy makers and the public about genetically modified (GM) foods and crops. We investigate and report their risks and impact on health, environment, the economy, and agriculture, as well as the problems associated with current research, regulation, corporate practices, and reporting.

Jeffrey Smith PhotoFounded in 2003 by international bestselling author and GMO expert Jeffrey Smith, IRT has worked in more than 30 countries on 6 continents, and is credited with improving government policies and influencing consumer-buying habits.

IRT's work comes from a dedicated team of subject experts, consultants and staff who generously donate their time and experience. In addition, IRT employs media experts, social network campaigners, writers, graphic designers, communications specialists, fundraisers, outreach professionals and support staff, who operate both at our headquarters in Iowa, and from virtual offices in the US.

IRT's Campaign for Healthier Eating in America mobilizes citizens, organizations, businesses, healthcare professionals, and the media, to achieve the tipping point of consumer rejection of GM foods.

Our website has become one of the most respected resources for online videos, podcasts, blogs, and reports for accurate and up to date information on GMOs. Our Spilling the Beans newsletter is a trusted source of updates, events and news to our subscribers. Check out the Campaign and find out what you can do to help reclaim a healthier non-GMO food supply."
(http://responsibletechnology.org/about)

=More Information=

To order education materials, books and dvds, please visit: SeedsofDeception.com


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]