
'''= "dedicated to studying the cooperative digital economy".'''

URL =


=Description=

"The Institute for the Cooperative Digital Economy is dedicated to studying the
cooperative digital economy.

Where, when, and how work is done is changing. Advances in artificial intelligence,
automation, and data processing continue to shift responsibilities from workers to digital
systems. These disruptions are often unpredictable and still unfolding.

To navigate these challenges, we need research that imagines, builds, and explores new
visions of a fairer future of work. One starting point is the platform co-op model, which
carries the cooperative principles into the digital economy. Platform cooperativism
addresses the root causes of systemic inequality and presents a near-term solution for
the problems plaguing our economy and democracy.

The cooperative digital economy is an under-researched area in the fields of anthropology,
political science, sociology, history, and economics. This emerging field is closely linked
with labor studies and cooperative studies. In business schools, this field of study is
situated in the areas of finance, entrepreneurship, and organizational studies. In law
schools, the pertinent areas are governance and corporate structure.

Acknowledging these research gaps, it is the purpose of the Institute to provide prospective
and existing platform co-ops with applied and theoretical knowledge, education, and policy
analysis. We are committed to realizing new visions for a fairer future of work grounded
in relevant research, driven by imaginative proposals. Initial research questions focus on
distributed governance, scaling, marketing, and start-up funding. The ICDE makes this
knowledge accessible to diverse audiences in innovative formats.

Through this research, the Institute builds a body of knowledge that advances platform
ownership and democratic governance for workers and Internet users alike."

(https://ia801707.us.archive.org/9/items/morshed-mannan-single-web/Morshed%20Mannan_single_web.pdf)


=More information=

* Learn more at: https://platform.coop/who-we-are/icde/

* see their study on: [[Evaluating the Legal and Governance Structures of Shared-Services Platform Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]