'''* Report: Sue Robinson. “Someone’s gotta be in control here.” The [[Institutionalization_of_Online_News_and_the_Creation_of_a_Shared_Journalistic_Authority]]. 2007'''

URL = http://mediatrope.files.wordpress.com/2011/08/someones-gotta-be-in-control.pdf

study of participatory journalism


=Abstract=

"Journalists explain daily happenings according to a uniform mission, agreed-upon routines, and
established societal relationships. Their product*American newspaper stories in this case*helps
shape the social order by controlling information dissemination in a structured environment. As a
result, the press enjoys the status of a political institution that operates with some authority. When
technology allows the audience to take over some control in this process, its institutional dynamics
shift. This research examined the words of 35 journalists to explore how technology is causing
marked evolutions in newspaper journalism’s missions, routines, and relationships with sources
and readers. This paper found that news considerations center on personal experience for
journalists and their audiences. The evidence indicates that journalists are sharing their ability to
tell the day’s news with people outside of the institution. Eventually, the changes in 
production will have implications for the press’s ultimate authority as a societal institution."


=Source=

Citation: Robinson, Sue (2007) '"SOMEONE'S GOTTA BE IN CONTROL HERE"', Journalism Practice, 1:3, 305 - 321




[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]