
'''=  "ID3 is building a new open source platform for secure digital identity, user-centric control over personal information and data-driven institutions"''' [http://bollier.org/blog/next-great-internet-disruption-authority-and-governance]

URL = http://www.idcubed.org/

=Description=

"ID3 is a research and educational nonprofit, headquartered in Boston Massachusetts, whose mission is to develop a new social ecosystem of trusted, self-healing digital institutions. This endeavor seeks to address the severe structural limitations of existing institutions by empowering individuals to assert greater control over their data, online identities and authentication, and in so doing, enable them to design and deploy a new generation of trusted digital institutions and services globally.

Key elements of the new infrastructure include a new architecture of five layers for open digital services and APIs for the mobile Internet, Trust Frameworks for secure, authenticated digital interactions, and a range of customized applications for specific circumstances. Using these tools, people will be able to ensure the privacy of their personal information, leverage the power of networked data, and create new forms of online coordination, exchange and self-governance. They will be able to forge new “social contracts” and participate in new types of legal and regulatory systems for managing organizations, markets and their social and civic lives. These systems will conform to both international legal standards and to the specific social norms and priorities of its members.

All ID3 software is open source and designed to enable a community of users, at differing skill levels, and to develop their own social contracts, applications and services. We envision entrepreneurs, organizations, social networks and ordinary people using the platform to launch next-generation applications in the financial, educational, commercial, agricultural and urban sectors that build on pro-social values and behaviors."
(http://idcubed.org/about/vision-mission/)


=Projects=

#[[Open Mustard Seed]]
#[[Open PDS Project]]



=Discussion=

David Bollier:

"If we take Reed’s analysis of network dynamics seriously, and apply his logic to the contemporary scene, it becomes clear that the best way to unlock enormous stores of value on networks is to develop tools that can facilitate GFNs.  This will be the next great Internet disruption.  But to achieve this, we must develop a network architecture and software systems that can build trust and social capital in user-centric, scalable ways.

Necessarily, this means that we must begin to re-imagine the very nature of authority and governance.  We must invent new types of digital institutions that are capable of administering authority recognized as authentic and use algorithmic tools to craft and enforce “law.”
(http://bollier.org/blog/next-great-internet-disruption-authority-and-governance)


=More Information=

* [[Self-Organized Network Governance]]


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Governance]]