'''= "an open source project that aims to enable peer-to-peer methods for storing and disseminating information on the web".'''

URL =

=Description=

By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman:

"The Inter-Planetary File System (IPFS) is an open source project that aims to
enable peer-to-peer methods for storing and disseminating information on the web. The
goal of this project is to give users the ability to publish online without having to trust a
single third party server to host their content. Instead, IPFS provides a verifiable means
of retrieving content from a distributed network of storage providers. IPFS’s main
insight is to use hashing functions to point to content, instead of using the IP address of
a server where the content is housed. A hashing function is a function that can be used
to map a data file of any size to an output of a fixed size, usually in the form of a series
of random letters and numbers. The hash produced by a file can serve as a unique
fingerprint of that information–for any given file, the hash generated will always produce
the same unique value. Conversely, if any aspect of the file is modified, the hash value
will change.

The IPFS system uses the hash of a file as its pointer, effectively decoupling the
physical server that hosts the content from the address that points to where that content
can be found. It does this by storing files in a distributed hash table (DHT). A distributed
hash table is a distributed system in which the responsibility of maintaining the mapping
from key to value is distributed over all nodes in the system. A DHT replicates data, and
can tolerate nodes entering and leaving the system. Clients are assured of the integrity
of the data they are receiving by checking the hash of the file they are looking for.

Therefore anyone can easily copy and serve content, making it harder to take that
content down, and potentially improving latency by making files accessible in multiple
places. IPFS stands in contrast to the way content is currently discovered online today,
using URLs and HTTP links to identify a specific server host, where that content lives.
If IPFS were to gain mainstream adoption, it would make content more resilient in
contexts where Internet connectivity is weak, or censorship threats are high. IPFS is
essentially a distributed file system with a simple protocol that enables easy finding,
caching, and serving of files. If those files are appropriately replicated across the
network, they could tolerate outages more easily than today’s web. The developers on
the IPFS project imagine their system could serve as the backbone for a peer-to-peer
file sharing network, whereby information is exchanged locally via a mesh-like network.
In this way, important digital content could be disseminated, even if access to the
Internet is cut off or platforms are pressured to take down specific content.

Not only might IPFS make content more resilient, but it could also enable a more
competitive landscape for publishing platforms in the future. Agreeing upon a
peer-to-peer protocol and a way for storing and retrieving content is one way we could
enable more sharing between applications, as we saw with the web, and thus lower the
barrier for a more diverse social media landscape. If combined with a shared common
data format, IPFS might reduce switching costs between applications. Many different
services could use the same data, thus eliminating the need for the user to replicate the
same information, such as their social graph, photos, prior posts, and interaction history
each time they sign up for a new service. If it’s easier for users to switch between
related platforms, then it makes it easier for new services to bootstrap a network,
ultimately providing more choices in the market."
(http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf)


=Status=

* As of now, the project has two implementations, in Go and Javascript


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]