

=History=

Mike Lewis and Pat Conaty:

"Credit unions originate in rural action to
combat usury.The first credit union was
founded in 1849 in a rural town in the
German Rhineland where farmers were
losing their cattle to lenders and having to
sell their land to settle debts. As a
solution, Friedrich Raiffeisen, the local
mayor, proposed a savings and lending
co-operative. As with other co-operatives,
a savings dividend acted as the members’
incentive to save.This experience formed
the model for the international credit
union movement.

There have also been co-operative and
mutual experiments that did not use
dividends or interest rates to incentivize
savings. In 1775, Richard Ketley, a
Birmingham publican, set up a mutual
savings fund on rotational principles to
allow savers to put aside money to build a
house.Members periodically drew lots to
allocate funds until in due course every
saver had received a capital sum to build a
home, and the fund was terminated.
This system gave rise to the building
society movement internationally and
inspired the mutual savings and loan
movement in North America.

In the 1840s, another Englishman,
Thomas Bowkett set up similar rotational
savings societies in order to
allocate smaller loans to savers. Like the
first “terminating” building societies, these
Starr-Bowkett societies did not use a
dividend or an interest rate to persuade
people to save.They operated successfully
for decades, spread to Australia and
continued to trade until the 1960s.
Behind all these experiments was a
deeply rooted, ethical social investment
movement.The co-operative pioneers in
fact were all seeking viable alternatives to
avoid the usurious practices of banks and
pawnbrokers. In the 1850s in the U.S.A.,
Edward Kellogg andWilliam Greene set
out practical proposals for interest-free mutual banks.

In Denmark in the 1930s, another
group of farmers facing repossession by
banks set up a system that continues to
operate successfully today. Building upon
earlier practices of interest-free systems
in Germany, Christian Christiansen
championed the founding of a number of
rural savings and loan co-operatives that
went by the acronym JAK, short for
(“Land Labour Capital”).

The personal savings and community
benefits that have accrued to members of
this democratic co-operative finance
system are testimony to the dramatic
impacts that can be realized by moving
from charging compound interest to a
fee-based approach to lending.
Sweden is now home to the largest
number of JAK branches and members.
Started in 1965, the co-op expanded
rapidly in the late 1980s and secured a
banking license in 1998.Today JAK has
35,000 members in Sweden,US$163
million in assets, and $147 million out on
loan. It operates on the basis of mutual
aid and financial reciprocity amongst its
membership. JAK members agree to pool
their savings and then lend them to one
another, interest-free, for mortgages,
home improvement, student loans, etc.

[[JAK Bank]] is based in Skövde but has
30 local branches and a large number of
JAK member groups across the country.
To keep overheads low, the local branches
rely heavily on the assistance of 650
community-based volunteers, trained by
JAK staff in interest-free lending
principles and practices.These volunteers
recruit new members through the JAK
newspaper and educational events in the
local areas. Volunteers can tap into a
number of JAK systems to assist them
with community engagement, including
internet services and on-line forums.A
JAK school conducts courses for
volunteers and members."
(makingwaves volume 20, number 3)


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Money]]