

=Directories=


Sarah Kuck:

"Here are a handful of online volunteer opportunity directory sites that I think are doing a fairly good job of helping organizations find great volunteers and vice versa:


'''Idealist.org'''

Idealist is a project of Action Without Borders, a nonprofit organization founded in 1995 with offices in the United States and Argentina. Idealist is an interactive site where people and organizations can exchange resources and ideas, locate opportunities and supporters, and take steps toward building a world where all people can lead free and dignified lives.

As of today, there were more than 12,000 volunteer opportunities posted on the site. You can also find or post job listings, internships, events and more.


'''SERVEnet.org'''

Launched in 1996, servenet.org is a website that mobilizes and empowers the volunteer service community to tackle some of the toughest challenges facing local communities. Since its inception, servenet.org has enabled millions of youth volunteers to connect with local nonprofits to make a difference in communities throughout America. In 2000, as a part of Global Youth Service Day, Servenet.org expanded into a global resource for the 3.5 million young people, in 155 countries around the world that participate in Global and National Youth Service Day.

Search by region, event, or category to find the right event for you. Using Servenet.org I found more than 180 Seattle-based events to volunteer for within the next month. You can also use Servenet to find grants, jobs and service related news and resources.


'''VoulunteerMatch'''

VolunteerMatch is a leader in the nonprofit world dedicated to helping everyone find a great place to volunteer. The organization offers a variety of online services to support a community of nonprofit, volunteer and business leaders committed to civic engagement. Our popular service welcomes millions of visitors a year and has become the preferred internet recruiting tool for more than 50,000 nonprofit organizations.

Enter your zip code, your area of interest and how far you’re willing to travel and VolunteerMatch will create an automated list of all the volunteer opportunities in your area that fit your criteria. Currently, VolunteerMatch searchable database includes more than 50,000 listings from organizations located all across the globe.

For more Internet volunteering and volunteering resources, visit Serviceleader.org or volunteertoday.com."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/009329.html)



[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Sharing]]