= Project =

URL = https://internet-of-production.webflow.io/

""We are a global network of people and organizations '''building the knowledge and tools to enable a future of sustainable, globally networked local manufacturing'''.

Internet of Production was formed after the MakerNet Pilot in 2016-17 which explored some of the ideas around networked local manufacturing. We found that there are all kinds of people and organisations around the world doing groundbreaking work in this area – and few formal ways of sharing the knowledge.


Our main focus is:

* Global open knowledge - We want to increase the global open knowledge base on how to successfully make useful items in low resource settings.

* Open standards and protocols - We plan to develop the open standards and protocols that are necessary for an open internet of manufacturing that supports decentralised supply networks, particularly in the Global South."
(https://internet-of-production.webflow.io/about-us?) 

See also: the [[MakerNet Pilot on Networked Local Manufacturing]]



= Conference=

'''= conference ('summit') in Copenhagen's meat packing district, Denmark, on September, 6, 2019''' 

URL = https://techfestival.co/event/internet-of-production/

"Co-creating the Internet of Production

Much like we’ve seen the internet disrupt industries from news media, music and video, to commerce and financial services we now expect to see a disruption of product development and manufacturing industries.

A new era of collaborative design and production engineering is emerging, which involves communities of designers, software companies and developers, as well as manufacturers in new and more flexible economic relationships to deliver increasingly customised products and compete with large corporations in smaller and more agile groupings.

 

Three key trends are set to disrupt the way the next generation of physical products are designed, manufactured, and distributed:

* Product design is going online (3D models).
 
* Increasingly flexible machines, such as 3D-printers, CNC and robotics.

* Open and Internet-enabled supply chains.
 

This summit will share, discuss and work on developing open standards and infrastructure for:

* The way product designers share and work with files online.
* Interoperability between all the software services necessary to do everything from design to production (CAD-CAM, Simulation, Industrial IoT, quality testing data).
* The Internet-connected production capacity of flexible and digital fabrication machines.

In short, we call this the Internet of Production."

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Denmark]]
[[Category:Conferences]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]