
'''iFOSSF = International Free and Open Source Software Foundation'''


URL = http://www.ifossf.org



=Description=


'''About iFOSSF'''

The International Free and Open Source Software Foundation (iFOSSF) is a
nonprofit organization incorporated in Michigan, United States. Its mission
is to accelerate the development and usage of Information and Communication 
Technologies with Free and Open Source Software worldwide for sustained
economic and social development, especially for the socially disadvantaged.


'''Purpose & Strategy'''

iFOSSF is one of many organizations within an era of a new global 
enlightenment committed to improving the quality of life for all world
citizens. The organization is centered on FOSS, its purpose is to apply
thought leadership in support of innovation and creativity in research and 
development of FOSS solutions for the benefit of the global community.

The organization facilitates growth of new and emerging businesses with
consideration for equal inclusion, and provide strategic leadership in 
developing FOSS opportunities that are driven by both market and social
contexts. 


We will achieve our mission and goals by applying the following
strategies:

1. Engagement in R&D using Free and Open Source Software that can help meet 
the needs for crisis management and economic development by promoting
innovative approaches.

2. Creation of tools & initiatives that can help bridge the digital divide
between developed and developing countries. 

3. Cultivation of the organization as a global resource with expertise in
FOSS based strategies to create new marketplace(s).


'''Governance'''

The Foundation is established in August 2006 under the laws of State of Michigan, USA. The organization is organized for exclusively charitable,
educational and scientific purposes within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3)*
of the United States Internal Revenue Law. Specifically, the Foundation will 
apply thought leadership in support of innovation and creativity in
development of Free and Open Source Software solutions for the benefit of
the global community.

iFOSSF is a directorship driven organization, the organization may at any 
stage appoint various voluntary committees comprised of members from the
Foundation's partner network for providing assistance and advice. The
organization's funding is sought through private, government, non-profit 
grants, individual/corporate sponsorships as well as public and private fund
raising activities.


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]