

=Description=

Vint Cerf:

"While companies are competing to make a bigger, better, larger cloud service, fewer people are concerned with the basic mechanics of the inter-cloud and how we ensure that it all works efficiently, reliably, and securely.

"I'm seeing a possibility of inter-cloud problems mirroring the Internet problems we had thirty or forty years ago," Cerf said.

According to Cerf, and many others, inter-cloud communication issues such as formats and protocols, as well as inter or intra-cloud security need to be addressed urgently.

Analogous to the pre-Internet period when Cerf along with Bob Kahn were finding a way of connecting the ARPANET to other independent networks, Cerf points out that today, cloud computing brings similar challenges. "You build these clouds and they know about themselves and they know about their own resources, but they don't know about any other cloud. So the question is: how do you say 'send this information to this cloud over here' if there isn't any way to call it," Cerf asked.

And the challenges don't end with inter-cloud communication. There are other issues to consider, such as security and portability, particularly with financial and health services turning more and more to the cloud. What metadata needs to move with the data in order to protect it?

One of the biggest issues people have with the idea of the cloud is loss of privacy."
(http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/vint_cerf_despite_its_age_the.php?mtcCampaign=2765)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]