
=Discussion=

Lance S. Owens:

"On 16 January 1916, C. G. Jung transcribed in his Black Book journal an extraordinary myth told to him by Sophia – the Lady of Wisdom. Though it remained hidden for a nearly a century, this vision was foundational to his later work. Near the end of his life, he declared that the vital task waiting our age was the remembrance – the anamnesis – of Sophia. But how do we remember Sophia? Who is she?

In the post-Jungian psychology of Wolfgang Giegerich, we encounter a vision that is fundamentally logo-centric. Giegerich has declared the death of myth and of meaning, and invoked the birth of logical Man as the opus magnum waiting our age. But where is Sophia? Has she, too, been expunged from human life? Is there a place left in psychology for Sophia and Feminine Wisdom?

Two thousand years ago, at the beginning of the current epoch, a story of Logos and Sophia became the primal myth for a new age. The story appeared first in Jewish Wisdom literature. Over the next three hundred years, this tale underwent intricate development, and emerged in the first centuries of the current era as the foundational myth of Gnostic psychology.

Though largely discarded by Western Christianity (particularly in its later Protestant reformation), Sophia's story lived on in the image of the Shekhinah within Jewish Kabbalah, and within Alchemy as the experienced image of the Anima mundi.

In the first seminar (five sessions) we examine the origin of Sophia's myth, and the nature of Gnostic "psychology." We will consider the major post-Jungian conceptualizations, placing them in relation to Jung's Gnostic psychology and his vision of a Sophianic anamnesis. It is not the understanding of the "logical life of the soul" (as argued by Giegerich) that confronts our age with an opus magnum. Our task, as suggested by Dr. Jung, is to know the intimate and redemptive relationship of Sophia with Logos."

(http://www.gnosis.org/gnostic-jung/Remember-Sophia.html)

[[Category:Integral Theory]]