'''= is the internet a commons?''' (and if so, what kind of commons?)

Answer: the nature of the internet cannot be adequately explained by [[Common Pool Resources]] theory (CPR Theory).




=Source=

Excerpts from:

Essay: Hofmokl, Justyna. 2008. "[[Towards an Eclectic Theory of the Internet Commons]]." Presented at "Governing Shared Resources: Connecting Local Experience to Global Challenges," 12th Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of Commons, Cheltenham, England, July 14-18, 2008.

Full text available as: http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00003831/00/Hofmokl_213801.pdf

=Summary=

Justyna Hofmoki:

"In order to determine whether the term commons is applicable to Internet
goods, I shall conduct first an analysis of their key biophysical attributes:
excludability and substractability, in line with the methodology adopted in the
mainstream theory of commons. Additionally, I shall identify some other
characteristics which differentiate Internet commons from traditional common
goods. While embarking on such a task, I shall indicate some potential
difficulties, as the particular attributes largely are dependent upon certain
technical features of a given good. Analyzing the technical aspects of the
Internet is beyond the scope of the present paper, so I will restrict references to
technical aspects to a minimum."
(http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00003831/00/Hofmokl_213801.pdf)


=The Three Layers=

==The physical layer==

"The physical layer consists of all the physical tools and equipment that enable
the process of communication. These include computers (the equipment to
produce and send information), and tools that enable communication between
computers – routers, wires, cables and wireless networks. Recently, a wide
range of mobile devices - such as mobile phones, handhelds and mp3 players -
have been added, which also facilitate communication. Following the
terminology adopted in the mainstream theory of commons, the key hardware
components basically are purely private goods (excludability combined with
rivalry consumption). However, a closer look points to a somewhat diversified
picture.


'''a) Telephone cables'''

In order to connect to the Internet, the user needs a computer connected to a
telephone network, cable line or some other device that can receive a wireless
signal (like a router). Cables that transmit the signal to the end user belong to
telecoms or cable operators. These are private goods, which are extremely
expensive due to the high costs of building and maintaining the cable
infrastructure. Therefore, ownership of the cables usually belongs to big
telecommunication companies, who generate profits by leasing the cables to
smaller operators. The dominant and often monopolistic position of the
telecoms results in very strict policies related to sharing access to cables.
These relations also are monitored and controlled by specified governmental
agencies. Therefore, the cable infrastructure falls into the category of regulated
private goods.


'''b) Wireless networks'''

Wireless networks are an alternative source of internet connection. These
networks have distinctive features, making them an interesting object of
analysis. Until recently, due to the high level of radio wave interference,
consumption of the radio spectrum was steeped in rivalry, thereby falling within
the CPR category. This spectrum was considered to be a scarce resource that
needed to be regulated by the authorities. Moreover, alternative governance
structures were based either on restricted access to specialized government
agencies (collective goods) or the privatization of specific frequencies through
concession systems (private goods).

Recent technological developments have enabled smart receivers to distinguish
signals from different sources, thereby allowing the sharing of certain
frequencies (Benkler, 2006:88). Consequently, multiple users can use the same
frequency with very little or no decline in the quality of service. For that reason,
modern wireless networks are becoming an open alternative to closed
broadband networks. 

In terms of key characteristics in common, I must
differentiate between three broad categories of wireless network:

• Commercial networks owned by telecommunication companies or private
corporations, to which access is granted to subscribers or designated
members. These networks fall into the club goods category;

• Municipal networks built by local governments, to be freely used by citizens
or visitors. Municipal networks can be classified as public goods – the costs
of providing the good are covered by the local government, and access
usually is free to all citizens or users in range of the network;

• The most interesting category of wireless networks is comprised of open,
bottom-up networks, usually set up by individuals who allow anyone to
connect to their transmitters. These so called social WiFi networks or mesh
networks, and they generally fall within the public goods category.

Technological developments in wireless communications also have given rise
to the widely spreading concept of an ‘open spectrum’. Open spectrum
proponents call for decision makers to deregulate and free up the radio
spectrum (Benkler, 1998). They claim that, as a result of recent technological
developments, radio waves have become public goods. Consequently, they
appeal to regulators to create a friendly, institutional environment, facilitating
and encouraging bottom-up civic initiatives.

To summarize, wireless networks are in the midst of major changes. New
institutional arrangements that allow for the transformation of classic private
goods into club or public goods are particularly interesting. The informal
networks serve as a primary example of the impact major technological
developments in the ICT field have had on the common character of specific
goods that comprise the physical layer of the Internet structure.


'''c) Computer hardware'''

These goods should be classified as classic private goods, owned by
individuals or organizations. What is interesting, however, is that they can
change their purely private character once the equipment is connected to the
Internet. This is because personal computers hooked to the network can share
excessive processing power or disk storage. Since this involves practically no
additional costs to the owner, this paves the way to providing excessive
processing power free of charge to perform certain socially valuable initiatives.
There are numerous examples of sharing private resources for the benefit of
the community, just to mention distributed computing projects like SEITI@home
and peer-to-peer networks. It should be underlined that individuals share their
resources with a community of strangers, having often little or no knowledge
about the way the resources will be used. One, therefore, may note certain
duality with respect to private versus common character, which becomes an
essential characteristic of some Internet goods.

Moreover, private goods that are jointly used within a network can become
valuable resources for commercial activities. One of the most profound
examples is Skype, the company that offers free VoIP calls. Skype uses the
power of computers connected to the network to establish VoIP connections.
When the user installs and runs Skype on his computer, he joins the community
of users that form a peer-to-peer network. The network enables free internet
calls (benefitting users) but also brings revenue to the private company. In the
context of the analysis of Internet commons, this example points to the
apparent diversity in existing patterns. Here, the private goods (computers)
shared for free are being commercialized by a private company while
benefitting a community of users. What is worth noting, due to the high
complexity of the system, is that users often are very unaware that their
computer is taking part in such an exchange."


==The logical layer==

"The goods that constitute the middle, or logical, layer are internet protocols,
technical standards and software that enable the process of communication.


'''a) Technical standards'''

Technical standards (technical specifications and protocols) define the rules of
communication between computers, and are the core element of the logical
layer. The choice of a technical standard not only influences the basic
operations of the computer system, it also has vital implications for the
hardware industry, internet providers and end-users. Abbate stresses that
standards are a form of control not only over technology, but also over the user
(Abbate, 1999:147). Technical standards can be either open or closed, as far as
ownership and availability are concerned.

The Internet has been built on open, non-proprietary protocols, such as the
TCP/IP suite of protocols, which were defined as common property of the whole
internet user community (Solum, Chung, 2003:23). Tim Berners-Lee, the
inventor of the World Wide Web, has deliberately kept the HTTP protocol and
HTML programming language open, in order to maintain the innovative
character of the network for as long as possible (Berners-Lee, 1999: 36). Such
open standards are non-rival resources, open for everyone to use without
access restrictions. Therefore, they should be classified as public goods,
becoming the common property of Internet user community.

While the network technical standards responsible for the seamless cooperation
of different networks and devices are, to the great extent, open, many technical
specifications and file formats are proprietary and closed – protected by
copyright or patent law. These formats are designed by companies who want to
have exclusive rights to produce specific software. Among the examples of
proprietary formats are the following types of files: .doc (text files), .pdf (text
files), .gif (images), flash (animation), and .mp3 (music). Proprietary standards,
owned by private entities fall into the category of private goods or club goods.
One is not allowed to tinker with the formats without the copyright holder’s
consent, and access to specific tools is granted only to licensees.


'''b) Domain name system'''

Among the most important resources within the logical layer are IP addresses
and domain names. These are private goods governed by the dedicated
organization called the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN). The right to use a certain Internet domain name is granted to a person
or organization who rents the domain for a limited period of time (with priority to
extend that time, if wanted). The first-come, first-served rule is applicable to
new and previously-unknown domain names. Otherwise, a person or
organization must prove that it should be granted exclusive rights to use a
certain domain.


'''c) Applications and software'''

Applications and software comprise the largest group of resources within the
logical layer. Software enables computers to perform productive tasks for users
– it translates content and commands from machine language into human
language and vice-versa. Among software, we can list operating systems,
programming tools, and applications (word processors, email applications,
video software, games, etc.). Although computers can work perfectly well
without an Internet connection, more and more software is designed to work
within the network. Therefore, I do not make a distinction between Internet and
non-Internet software.


As discussed in the previous section, in the early formation stage of the
Internet, the prevailing approach was based on the principle that software
should be open and non-proprietary. This all changed, due to Bill Gates’
initiative back in 1976, which resulted in the division of the software market into
two segments: proprietary software and free/open source software. The owner
of the rights to proprietary software imposes on users’ strict restrictions
concerning its use, and the ability to copy and modification it. In the case of
proprietary software, the source code is closed as well. Such software can be
distributed either for free (Internet Explorer, Adobe Acrobat Reader) or licensed
to the individual or multiple users (Microsoft Office).

On the other hand, free/open source software is characterized by free access to
source codes and a wide range of freedom for the user. The majority of f/oss
distributions are given away for free; but there also are versions of the software
that are distributed on a commercial basis.

Computer software is an intangible good in digital form. Software code can be
copied almost for free (the cost of a recordable CD is negligible) and without
any loss of quality. Therefore, computer software, both non-proprietary and
proprietary, belongs to the category of non-rival resources. In the case of
proprietary software, the owner can limit the number of unauthorized users by
selling licenses. Thus, the proprietary software falls into the category of club
goods. On the other hand, open source/free software is both non-rival and
difficult to exclude. Therefore free/open source software can be classified as a
public good."


==The content layer==

"The resources in the content layer of the Internet are intangible. These are
human intellect products in digital form – information, ideas, knowledge, music,
text, videos and images. Information is a key resource that is a basis for all the
other goods in the content layer.

CPR scholars have recognized that informational resources are of a different
nature than tangible, material goods. Hess and Ostrom stressed that analyzing
information is much more tenuous than natural resources, because
“Information, on the other hand, often has complex tangible and intangible
attributes: fuzzy boundaries, a diverse community of users on local, regional,
national, and international levels, and multiple layers of rule-making
institutions”(Hess & Ostrom, 2003:132). These authors distinguished three
forms of informational resources: artefacts, facilities and ideas. “An artefact is a
discreet, observable, nameable representation of an idea or set of ideas (for ex.
articles, research notes, books, databases, maps, computer files, and web
pages.[…] A facility stores artefacts and makes them available. […]The ideas
contained in an artefact can be understood to mean the creative vision, the
intangible content, innovative information, and knowledge. Ideas are the
nonphysical flow units contained in an artefact” (Ibid.).

It should be noted that recent technological developments, especially
digitization, has redefined the whole environment of informational goods. In the
‘analogue’ era, artefacts were physical and mostly private goods, and the
infrastructure – like libraries and archives - that made these resources available
to the public either were club goods or public goods. Ideas always were a
common good and remained as such within the digitalized environment.


With regard to Internet goods, examples of informational goods include various
resources in digital form. Although traditional artefacts in physical form belong
to the category of classic private goods, digital artefacts have different attributes
and therefore represent wider range of goods. One of the most distinguished
features of digital artefacts is the possibility of copying without the loss of quality
and at almost no cost. This makes digital artefacts non-rivalry goods, as one
person’s use of a digital file does not subtract from another person’s capacity to
use it. Free copying changes the whole process of distribution, enabling the
immediate delivery of digital artefacts. Additionally, new technologies entering
the market have facilitated the collective production of informational goods, so
that they have become common property. Thanks to collaborative website
creators, such as Wiki, the users can edit and share information easily with
others. The authors also have gained new tools for managing their copyrights.
These are special copyright licenses that enable copyright holders to grant
some of their rights to users while retaining other rights. Examples of new
licensing models include Creative Commons licenses or GNU Free
Documentation Licenses. The digitization of artefacts and the whole electronic
environment for producing information has fundamentally altered their basic
attributes. On one hand, their consumption have become non-rival. As for
access, the existing arrangements range from full exclusion of unauthorized
users to granting free access with some intermediary solutions. Consequently,
digital artefacts fall within various categories of common good, depending upon
the degree of exclusion.

As far as the infrastructure is concerned, one also may note a visible shift to
digital forms. Digital repositories and databases typically fall within the category
of club goods (they are open only to authorized users), but there is a growing
number of digital open access archives that gather informational resources
which are free for anyone to use. Therefore, one may conclude that, within the
realm of informational goods, one can observe very interesting changes
corresponding to the radical innovations being developed in information
technologies, which are shaping entirely new conditions for the production and
exchange of such goods."
(http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00003831/00/Hofmokl_213801.pdf)


=Discussion=

==Is the Internet a Commons?==

1). It should be stressed that the process of placing Internet goods on the map
of common goods only can be indicative; we do not have the precise tools to
measure the intensity of these two basic attributes (excludability and
substractability).

Among Internet goods, many fall within the pure public goods category. This is
especially visible in the case of the logical layer (open standards and free/open
software) and the content layer (open informational resources). A large group of
Internet goods can be categorized as club goods (non-rival consumption and
excludability). Examples of this are broadband internet access, proprietary
software, and closed databases.

The most striking evidence of ‘novelty’ in the context of the mainstream CPR theory
is the virtually empty ‘CPR quadrant’? With the exception of traditional radio waves, it
is difficult to identify any other Internet good which would fall within the CPR
category. This is a very important conclusion, with regard to the explanatory power of
the CPR theory, as applied to Internet goods. The analytical focus of the CPR theory
was confined to a particular set of biophysical attributes: non-excludability combined
with rivalrous consumption. This combination of the key biophysical attributes is
almost non-existent in the case of Internet goods, so that the major concepts and
theoretical underpinnings of mainstream CPR theory simply do not apply to the
Internet commons.

Until recently, problems associated with network congestion have been perceived as
similar to the excessive exploitation of natural resources, the main field of study by
CPR scholars (Bernbom, 2002). However, technological advancements and growing
bandwidth capacity have led to more efficient Internet connections and bigger file
transmissions. Such revolutionary changes in the physical conditions are hardly to
be expected in the case of natural resources.

Hence, there is an obvious need for extension of the existing theoretical analysis of
commons, so as to encompass particular features of Internet goods. This will not be
an easy task, particularly due to their diversified but, at the same time, interrelated
structure. We need to develop new methodological tools to investigate how the key
biophysical attributes used in CPR theory interact at the level of individual Internet
goods and affect the functioning of the Internet as a composite structure.

An additional important feature of Internet goods is their duality. The same goods
can, according to different institutional arrangements, fall into either the public,
private or club goods category. Duality can be observed in cases of open or closed
computer software or open and proprietary information resources. Another
manifestation of duality is the previously mentioned personal computers that change
their attributes when they work within a network. A piece of hardware, like a portable
computer, when it is standalone represents a classic private good; but,, once it is
connected to a network, it can reflect certain features of a club or semi-public good.
The rise of the Internet gives a new impulse for incorporation of other than CPR
common goods, categorized with the use of non-excludability and joint consumption
criteria; namely, the (pure) public goods and club goods. The former category meets
both the non-excludability and non-rival consumption criteria – e.g. watching the
sunset or benefitting from national defence protection was very narrow and,
therefore, attracted limited attention from the research community. This needs to
change once Internet goods are investigated, as many of them can be categorized
as pure or semi-pure public goods, just to mention open standards and open access
software, electronic repositories of freely available information and knowledge, etc.
As discussed earlier, free access to information in the electronic format by millions of
Internet users, combined with the active involvement in the generation of said
information and knowledge, already have affected human civilization in all important
spheres: economic, socio-cultural, political, etc. We need to study these new Internet
goods, which calls for revisiting the concept of public goods in various disciplines
within the social sciences.

The Internet commons also have opened new perspectives with respect to another
category of broadly-defined common goods; namely, the club goods. Again, during
the pre-Internet era, club goods (easy exclusion combined with non-rivalry
consumption) were quite rare and predominantly local (country clubs, subscribed
theatre services).This has changed radically due to the rise of the Internet.

Contemporary ‘clubs’, which gather users of proprietary software and subscription-based
proprietary databases, can have millions of members all over the world.

Classic club goods used to be treated in academic analysis as impure private goods,
whereas the key characteristics of Internet club goods render them closer to pure
public goods. Let us take the example of the electronic repositories of scientific
journal articles, which are accessible to scholars on the basis of subscriptions paid
by their university. From the individual scholar perspective, such service can be
viewed as a pure public good, as she/he is not confronted directly with restrictions in
their use (except that the access code needs to be provided).

The above considerations reinforce the key argument that the rise of the Internet
requires a major extension of the mainstream theory of commons. Some of the new
elements discussed above can be incorporated within the existing neoinstitutional
framework. However, there are other features and characteristics of the Internet
commons which call for a more fundamental change in the overall conceptual
framework of the mainstream CPR theory of commons. First, in the analysis, one
needs to incorporate the impact of the radical changes in the history of civilization
that have been brought about by the widespread application of the Internet and of
information and communication technologies (ICT) in general.

The second argument calling for significant adjustments in the neoinstitutional theory
of commons relates to important new attributes that can be identified in cases of
Internet goods. True, additional characteristics of individual CPR goods typically
have been included in analysis, particularly following the Institutional Analysis
Development (IAD) framework. However, such characteristics have played only an
auxiliary role relative to the two basic attributes, excludability and substractability
(Ostrom, Hess 2007: 22-27). In the case of Internet goods, there are other distinct
features which seem to be equally, if not more important than the two classic
biophysical attributes.

In my view, the current mainstream theory of commons does not provide sufficient
grounds for the comprehensive analysis of the new phenomena that have been
brought about by the rise and rapid expansion of the Internet. At the same time, we
have noted the development of new, interesting concepts, outside the mainstream
theory of commons, which might be very useful in explaining the new dimensions of
the Internet commons. The proposed scope and structure of the eclectic framework
for the expanded theory of commons is depicted in Figure 2."


==The Sharing Potential of Internet Goods==


"In the preceding section, I identified an important attribute of the Internet commons –
its ‘sharing potential’, which reflects the broadly-defined efficiency of joint
consumption (use) of a given good, often by a very large and expanding number of
users. Such joint use does not diminish a good’s value; but, quite often, such value
increases with the number of consumers. The sharing potential stays, in contrast
with the characteristics of classic CPR goods, where exceeding a certain number of
users causes consumption to become competitive. The useful concepts which might
be helpful for explaining the sharing potential of Internet goods are network effects,
sharable goods, and positive free riding.


'''a) Network effects'''

The network effects concept was introduced to the economic literature in 1985 by
M.L. Katz and C.Shapiro, who used the term ‘[[Network Externalities]]’. They noted that,
in the case of many products, “the utility that a user derives from consumption of the
good increases with the number of other agents consuming the good” (Katz,
Shapiro, 1985:424). This concept was later refined by S. Liebowitz and S. Margolis,
who argued that network effects, in their pure form, do not need to coincide with
externalities; i.e. positive or negative effects on parties not involved in a given
transaction (Liebowitz, Margolis, 1994). The added value of existing and new
customers results from direct interactions between the users of a given good, as well
as from the increased availability of complementary products and services.

Back in the 1980s and 1990s, when the network effects concept was introduced and
refined, traditional telephone systems were viewed as the primary exemplification of
these effects. Nowadays, with the rapid development of information technologies, the
ICT sector is believed to demonstrate the most significant network effects, just to
mention the development of the World Wide Web, where new essential
functionalities were added once the number of Internet users increased. The same
goes for websites facilitating exchanges via the Internet (eBay) or dedicated portals
used for social networking. The developments taking place within the Internet
spectrum clearly contrast with the classic CPR scenario. Specifically, the network
effects increase radically once the number of users of a given Internet good reaches
a certain threshold. For CPR goods, the increased number of users results in the
excessive exploitation of a given resource.

While emphasizing the incidence and magnitude of positive network effects,
particularly in the case of Internet commons, I shall point out negative implications,
as well. These are reflected in the so called ‘locked-in situations’, profoundly
exemplified in the market for professional software applications, presently dominated
by Microsoft. The providers of alternative applications, often of superior quality, have
faced major obstacles convincing potential clients to shift from Microsoft Office. The
clients were reluctant to lose obvious benefits derived from the network effects:
compatibility with the applications used by their business partners, standard
installations on purchased hardware, access to auxiliary services, additional
combatable applications, etc.

'''b) [[Positive Free Riding]]'''

The so-called ‘free-riding problem’ reflects the principal of social dilemma – a conflict
between individual self-interest and the community. In a classic CPR scenario (costly
exclusion and rivalrous consumption) the production of such goods normally would
call for voluntary contributions from community members. However, this is in conflict
with the maximization of individual benefits among community members who,
following homo oeconomicus logic, are not be willing to pay for goods which are
otherwise freely accessible.

Empirical studies on human behaviours in typical CPR scenarios have proven that
homo oeconomicus logic may not be predominant (Stiglitz, 2004: 156). In the
following section, I shall present additional concepts explaining diverse nonpecuniary
motives among people involved in the consumption and production of
Internet goods. In case of positive free riding, even while retaining the homo
oeconomicus assumption, free riding behaviour can be beneficial for those users
who are actively involved in the production of a given Internet good. “Internet
reduces the cost of free riding… each free rider actually adds value to the final
product. If the free rider is completely passive, she adds value by adding market
share (and thus increasing the space for reputational returns to contributors). If she
is just a little bit active, the free rider becomes a de facto tester and might just report
a bug or request a new feature. The Internet reduces the communication costs of
doing all that to just about zero” (Weber, 2000:36). P. Kollock calls Linux an
‘impossible public good’; i.e., having characteristics making it impossible to
materialize, if the classic free riding social dilemma remains intact. (Kollock, 1999:3-
25).

There are obvious inter-linkages between positive free riding and the network effects
discussed earlier. This is because network effects materialize with the increased
number of users, including passive free riders (Weber, 2004:154).



'''c) [[Shareable Goods]]'''

In the preceding analysis, I concentrated primarily on the largely positive effects
derived from interactions between the increased number of consumers of Internet
goods. In turn, the shareable goods concept, introduced by Y. Benkler, refers to
intrinsic characteristics of some private goods (computers, wireless transceivers,
Internet connections) which facilitate sharing with other users (Benkler, 2004). The
key argument behind this concept is that some goods available on the market are
‘lumpy’; i.e., they are produced in discrete sizes and represent varying capacities.

Typically, available capacity is fully utilized only in specific time intervals; otherwise,
it remains partially underused. Such idle capacity of some Internet goods can be
shared with other users at practically no additional cost to the owner. Notable
examples of capacity sharing are distributed computing projects and peer-to-peer
networks.

It should be noted that the issue of available excess capacity is not restricted to
Internet goods, but common in other sectors as well. The difference is that, in the
former case, sharing is much easier and more efficient. To share excess storage
capacity in a warehouse located on the company premises would call for a set of
additional logistic arrangements (controlled access to the warehouse, separate
storage space, sharing additional costs of monitoring and insurance, etc.). Such
problems are practically non-existent when sharing excess computer processing
capacity via the Internet network.

Definitely, certain attributes of Internet goods make them more suitable for sharing
than other goods. However, the simplicity, cost-efficiency and functionality of sharing
are dependent upon the Internet network facilitating the whole process.
The shareable goods theory can be extended easily to include the increased shareability
of certain other private goods, once sharing is accomplished via the Internet.
Here, I shall refer to the role of information and communication technologies as
enablers of innovation processes, spread across various industrial sectors. Clearly,
there are numerous examples of increased share-ability as a result of Internet
connectivity, just to mention carpool (especially for long distance travel) and
apartment-sharing systems. On the other hand, the simplified, practically cost-free
sharing opportunities that exist on the Internet may provide additional powerful
stimuli to accelerate the production of specific goods, as profoundly demonstrated by
the most recent success of the YouTube exchange of short amateur movies."
(http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00003831/00/Hofmokl_213801.pdf)

==Conclusion==

J. Hofmoki:


"In conclusion, I want to emphasize that the rise of the Internet poses a serious
challenge for the research community studying the commons, calling for major
revision of theoretical concepts, methodologies and analytical apparatus. However,
at the same time, it creates a fascinating ground for a radical revitalization of the
theory of commons. This is because the object of the study – the Internet commons -
is expanding at an unprecedented pace. Simultaneously, its role in the global
economy is increasing exponentially, affecting all key spheres of human interaction.
As exemplified in the preceding analysis, the structure of the Internet commons is
highly diversified, thus calling for scientific exploration of its modalities and
dimensions.


The current author believes that, considering the state-of-the-art of the theory of
commons and the challenges connected with the rise and expansion of the Internet,
the development of a single theoretical framework encompassing the whole diversity
of the Internet commons may not be feasible. The alternative eclectic route seems to
be more promising, particularly as interesting new concepts with direct relevance to
the Internet have emerged in various branches of the social sciences. The proposed
format, which identifies both open questions and the sources of theoretical
inspiration, is by no means exhaustive and serves merely as an initial platform,
facilitating academic discussion and, thereby, leading to refinement of the eclectic
model.

Finally, a word of caution shall be offered. Researchers of the Internet commons are
confronted, on one hand, with the limited timeframe of the analysis which results
from the very brief history of the Internet. On the other hand, expansion of the
Internet brings fundamental changes that affect practically all spheres of human
interaction. This expansion calls for immediate reaction from the academic
community. However, the former points to the significant risks of concentrating
research endeavours on issues of a transient, nature while neglecting other,
significant, long-term tendencies."
(http://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/archive/00003831/00/Hofmokl_213801.pdf)



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]