


=Description=

"he coliving community is likely to continue growing quickly. With the success of Couchsurfing, AirBnB and global coworking networks like Loosecubes, the time may be right for a network of coliving houses around the globe.

For location-independent professionals and those who travel frequently, this is a fond dream: Imagine having a home wherever you go, well-appointed and populated by people you can truly enjoy. Imagine landing in a new city and having an extensive professional network already in place, or scooting off to another country for a month to work on a project in a new space. It’s all quite possible, and the concept of a coliving network is already in development.

Jessy Kate Schingler’s Embassy Network is preparing for an alpha run of houses in the fall of 2012. A membership model designed for both long-term residents and short-term travelers, the network will allow members to pay “rent” that gives them reservation access to any home in the network.

Chelsea Rustrum, inspired by the effectiveness of coworking and coliving as well as the power of travel, is spearheading a project called Startup Abroad. It’s designed to bring entrepreneurs outside their comfort zone and daily distractions for an intensive, two- to four-week experience. The first session is scheduled for August 2012 in Bali.

Damian Madray points out that an international network can help to inform innovators, helping them to look beyond first-world applications for their ideas. “If you solve a problem in a developing country, then those solutions can be applied to other developing countries,” he says. “Guess what? There are more developing countries than there are first world countries.”
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/hacking-home-coliving-reinvents-communal-living-for-a-networked-generation?)


=More Information=

* [[Coliving]]



[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Movements]]