=Context=

Mixel Kiemen:

"To understand the tipping point, let me consider the etymology of both university and interversity. The university was about “the whole” (from the Latin “uni-versitas”), indicating that universities were the place for universal knowledge. Due to the information overload and the acceleration of innovation, the concept of universal knowledge is becoming impossible. Even the largest universities today have specialized research performed by specialized research institutes. Indeed the university is getting distributed and is dissolving in a larger social fabric by Public-Private Partnership (PPP). Universities are following a trend similar to our data-storage: from mainframes to distributed servers, creating the internet.

To honor this parent of dissolving into a web, the prefix “uni-” get replaced by “inter-”. The Interversity draws attention to “what is between us” (from the Latin Inter, like used in the Internet, interacting, interchange, interdependent, interbreed, etc.)."

(https://mixelkiemen.medium.com/the-4th-generation-of-university-is-the-first-of-three-generations-inteversity-5cc459dc3936)


=Discussion=

==Avoiding a [[Tragedy of the Commons]] in Interversities==

(FOSS communities often get overtaken by corporate cultures at their more advanced stages, can Interversity communities avoid this ?)

Mixel Kiemen:

"Cultivating the innovation commons is central to the 1ste generation interversity, software development was ahead with lean-agile management, all other sectors seem to following up. TTO have to do more than exploitation of research and focus on how research exploration improves societal values. Overcoming the tragedy of the innovation commons requires more than cultivation. The role of the 2nd generation integrated interversity is to guid the transition and include the incumbents. The integration of a total solution should avoid the cultural collapse. Let me provide an overview using the same table for generations of university now applied to generations of interversity. The 3rd generation is about the commons in a later phase transition."

(https://mixelkiemen.medium.com/the-4th-generation-of-university-is-the-first-of-three-generations-inteversity-5cc459dc3936)


=More information=

* [[Massive Open Online Research]] (MOOR)

[[Category:Education]]