
=Typology=

Mark Edwards:

Lens description and domain of application

1. The lens of personal perspectives

Recognises the validity of first, second and third person accounts in both their singular and plural settings. Hence, the perspective lens can be used to disclose the subjective world of the first-person, the relational world of the second person world, and the objective world of the third-person.


2. The interior-exterior lens

Recognises the validity of subjective (tangible) and objective (intangible) realities. Hence, this lens can be used to disclose and draw relations between the world of consciousness and the world of behaviour


3. The individual-collective lens (Multilevel or micro-macro lens)

Recognises the validity of the micro-world of personal events, the meso-world of group events, and the macro-world of socio-cultural events. This lens situates human activity within the spectrum of ecological environments – micro, meso, macro – and discloses connections between the local and global.


4. The lens of developmental levels (waves, stages)

Recognises the spectrum of qualitatively different shifts (paradigm changes) in personal and collective. Hence, discloses the developmental world of vertical development.


5. The lens of developmental lines (streams or domains)

Recognises the validity of various domains of development. Hence, disclose the complex world of multidimensional development.


6. The agency-communion lens

Recognises the validity of unifocal, self-directed realities and the multifocal, other-centred, communal realities. Hence, this lens discloses and connects agentic identities and relational identities.


7. The lens of transformational and translational change

Recognises the distinction between transformational change (stage-based spectrum of development) and translational change (legitimating change). Hence, discloses the need for both hierarchical heterarchical understandings of change.


8. The process/dynamics lens
Recognises the validity of evolutionary (ascending) and integrative (descending) dynamics. Hence, discloses the world of growth and the world of integrative sustainability.


9. The learning lens

Recognises the validity of single, double and triple-loop learning. Hence, discloses the world of learning through various stages of injunction, apprehension, interpretation and validation.


10. The lens of social mediation

Recognises the validity of personal and interpersonal processes of development. Hence, discloses the world of social mediation and the sociogenetic sources of consciousness and behaviour."

(https://integralleadershipreview.com/5492-dialogue-integral-theory-into-integral-action-part-1/)