
'''= "All parties can now publish rules of commerce to the Internet in a common standard way. An “Internet of Rules” (IoR) is created when computational algorithms can be readily transmitted from any independent source repositories".'''

URL = https://internetofrules.org/

=Description=

"A market is a system of rules in which buyers and sellers trade goods and services at prices and on terms they understand and agree to.

Yet, how much do buyers and sellers know about the third-party rules involved in each transaction?

All parties can now publish rules of commerce to the Internet in a common standard way. An “Internet of Rules” (IoR) is created when computational algorithms can be readily transmitted from any independent source repositories, within which they are maintained, to any applications that would use them.

Lichen is a free auxiliary IoR component to run alongside or integrate within any purchase or sales order for context-specific discovery and verification."
(https://internetofrules.org/)


=More information=

==[[Xalgorithms Alliance]]==

"Compete on the unique. Collaborate on the universal.

Independent organizations have diverse reasons for committing resources to, and cooperating in advancing market integrity through comprehensive rules automation.

Technical personnel can adapt Xalgorithms components to bring secure auxiliary IoR support to their own organizations’ solutions.

Join Xalgorithms Alliance to co-implement and build upon a universal Internet of Rules."
(https://internetofrules.org/)

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]