

=More Information=

==Bibliography==

Compiled by Peter Waterman:


Anderson, Perry. 2002. ‘Internationalism: A Breviary’. New Left Review, No. 14.

Achcar, Gilbert. 2013. ‘Marxism and Cosmopolitanism’, in Marxism, Orientalism, 

Cosmopolitanism,http://www.amazon.com/Marxism-Orientalism-Cosmopolitanism-Gilbert-Achcar/dp/0863567932.

Alvarez, Sonia et al. 2003. ‘Encountering Latin American and Caribbean Feminisms’.  In Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society. 28(2): 537-579.

Biblio. 2002. ‘Cosmopolitanism and the Nation-State’, Biblio: A Review of Books (New Delhi), May-April (Special Issue). 58 pp.

Braga Vieira, Flávia. 2011. Dos proletarios unidos a globalização da esperança: um estudo sobre internacionalismos e a Via Campesina. (From Workers United to the Globalisation of Hope: A Study of Internationalisms and of Via Campesina). Bella Vista: Alameda Casa Editorial.

Cleaver, Harry. 1998. ‘The Zapatistas and the Electronic Fabric of Struggle’, https://webspace.utexas.edu/hcleaver/www/zaps.html. 

Desai, Manisha. 2013. ‘The Possibilities and Perils for Scholar-Activists and Acrtivist-Scholars: Reflections on the Feminist Dialogues’, in Juris and Khasnabish (eds), pp. 89-107.

Electronic Intifada. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Electronic_Intifada. 

Escárcega, Sylvia. 2013. ‘The Global Indigenous Movement and Paradigm Wars: International Activism, Network Building and Transformative Politics’, in Juris and Khasnabish (eds), pp. 129-50.

Escobar, Arturo. 2003. ‘Other Worlds Are (Already) Possible: Cyber-Internationalism and Post-Capitalist Cultures’. Cyberspace Panel, Life after Capitalism Programme, World Social Forum, Porto Alegre, January 23-28, 2003. http://zena.secureforum.com/Znet/escobarcyner.htm 

Featherstone, David. 2012. Solidarity: Hidden Histories and Geographies of Internationalism. London: Zed Press.

Fernández, Gonzalo, Silvia Piris and Pedro Ramiro. 2013. Cooperación internacional y movimientos sociales emancipadores: bases para un encuentro necesario. (Development Cooperation and Emancipatory Social 

Movements: Bases for a Necessary Encounter). Bilbao: Hegoa. http://publicaciones.hegoa.ehu.es/assets/pdfs/295/Cooperacion_internacional_y_movimientos_sociales_emancipadores.pdf?1372679883. 

Fuster, Mayo. 2004, ‘The Invisible Network’, Mute Magazine, Vol. 1, No. 28, http://www.metamute.org/editorial/articles/invisible-network. 

Gallin, Dan and Pat Horn. 2005. ‘Organizing Informal Women Workers’. http://www.streetnet.org.za/docs/research/2005/en/informalwomenworkers.pdf. 

Gallin, Dan. 2013. ‘Dan Gallin on the Future of the International Labour Movement: “The Network is the Vanguard”.’  http://www.unionbook.org/profiles/blogs/dan-gallin-on-the-future-of-labour-internationalism-the-vanguard. 

Gerassi, John. 1971. The Coming of the New International.  New York: World Publishing. 610 pp.

Goldmann, Kiell, Ulf Hannerz and Carles Westin (eds). 2002. Nationalism and Internationalism in the Post-Cold War Era. London: Routledge.

Global Labour Institute. http://www.global-labour.org/ 

Global Labour Institute UK. http://global-labour.net/ 

Harcourt, Wendy. 2013. ‘Transnational Feminist Engagement with 2010+ Activisms’, Development and Change, Vol. 44, No. 3, pp. 621-37.

Holloway, John. 2005. ‘Zapatismo Urbano’. Humboldt Journal of Social Relations, Vol. 29, No. 1. http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/23263128?uid=3738736&uid=2134&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&sid=21103103490783 

International Domestic Workers Federation. 2013. ‘IDWN Congress: Our New Federation is Born!’. http://www.idwn.info/news/idwn-congress-our-new-federation-born.  

Juris, Jeffrey. 2012. ‘Reflections on #Occupy Everywhere: Social media, Public Space, and Emerging Logics of Aggregation, American Ethnologist, 39: 259–279). DOI:10.1111/j.1548-1425.2012.01362.x. 

Juris, Jeffrey and Alex Khasnabish (eds). 2013. Insurgent Encounters: Transnational Activism, Ethnography and the Political. Durham and London: Duke University Press.

Juris, Jeffrey, Giuseppe Caruso, Stepane Couture and Lorenzo Mosca. 2013. ‘The Cultural Politcs of Free Software and Technology within the Social Forum Process’, in in Juris and Khasnabish (eds), pp. 342-66.

Mariátegui, José Carlos. 2005 (1923). ‘Internationalism and Nationalism’, http://interactivist.autonomedia.org/node/4579. 

Nantambu, Kwame. (1998). Pan-Africanism Versus Pan-African Nationalism: An Afrocentric Analysis. Journal of Black Studies, Vol (28) 5. 

Narayan, Bhuva. 2013. ‘From Everyday Information Behaviours to Clickable Solidarity in a Place Called Social Media’, Cosmopolitan Civil Societies Journal, Vol.5, No.3.

Networked Labour https://www.facebook.com/pages/Networked-Labour/460360007334523 

New Unionism Network. 2013. ‘Discussing Global Unionism II: The Social Network Model. http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/discussing-global-unionism-ii-the-social-network-model/2012/11/13. 

Marx, Karl and Frederick Engels. 1968/1848. ‘The Manifesto of the Communist Party’, in Marx/Engels Selected Works in One Volume. Moscow: Progress Publishers and London: Lawrence and Wishart. Pp. 35-63. 

Rogers, Ben. (1955). William E. B. DuBois, Marcus Garvey, and Pan-Africa. Journal of Negro History, Vol 40 (2). 

Routledge, Paul. 2013. ‘Activist Ethnography and Translocal Solidarity’, in Juris and Khasnabish (eds), pp. 250-68.

Salomon, Noel. 1986. ‘Cosmopolitanismo e internacionalismo (desde 1870 hasta 1940)' [Cosmopolitanism and Internationalism (from 1870 to 1940)], in Leopold Zea (ed), América Latina en sus ideas. Mexico DF: Siglo XXI. Pp. 157-71.

Senalp, Orsan. 2012. ‘The Dramatic Rise of Peer-to-Peer Communication within the Emancipatory Movements: Reflections of an International Labour, Social Justice and Cyber Activist’, Social Network Unionism http://snuproject.wordpress.com/2012/10/23/the-dramatic-rise-of-peer-to-peer-communication-within-the-emancipatory-movements-reflections-of-an-international-labour-social-justice-and-cyber-activist/. 

van Holthoon, Frits and Marcel van der Linden (eds). 1988. Internationalism in the Labour Movement 1830-1940. Leiden: Brill. 675 pp. 

Vos, Henk. ????. Solidariteit…

Waterman, Peter, 1982?. ‘International Labour Communication by Computer: The Fifth International?’, in Under, Against, Beyond: Labour and Social Movements Confront a Globalised, Informatised, Capitalism. http://www.into-ebooks.com/download/228/. 

Waterman, Peter. 2001. Globalization, Social Movements and the New Internationalisms. London: Continuum.

Waterman, Peter. 2003. ‘Some Propositions on Cyberspace after Capitalism: Cyber-Utopianism without Cyber-Illusionism’. http://www.nadir.org/nadir/initiativ/agp/space/cyberspace.htm 

Waterman, Peter. 2006. Los nuevos tejidos nerviosos del internacionalismo y la solidaridad. Lima: Programa de Estudios Sobre Democracia y Transformación Global.

Waterman, Peter. 2009. ‘Labour at the 2009 Belem World Social Forum: Between an Ambiguous Past and an Uncertain Future’,  http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/cssgj/documents/working-papers/wp008.pdf 

Waterman, Peter. 2010. ‘Five, Six, Many New Internationalisms! Nine Reflections on a Fifth International’, http://alainet.org/active/37930. 

Waterman, Peter. 201?. Recovering Internationalism, Creating the New Global Solidarity: Labour, Social Movements and Emancipation in the 21st Century. Into-Ebooks….

Waterman, Peter. 2013. ‘Trade Unions at World Social Forum, Tunis, Call for a Global Union Forum (Federation of Workers of Quebec - FTQ)’, http://www.unionbook.org/profiles/blogs/trade-unions-at-world-social-forum-tunis-call-for-a-global-union. 


[[Category:Global Governance]]