
'''* Report: Defending​ ​Internet​ ​Freedom​ ​through​ ​Decentralization: Back​ ​to​ ​the​ ​Future? By Chelsea​ ​Barabas, Neha​ ​Narula and Ethan​ ​Zuckerman. The​ ​Center​ ​for​ ​Civic​ ​Media​ ​& The​ ​Digital​ ​Currency​ ​Initiative. MIT Media Lab, 2017'''

URL = http://dci.mit.edu/assets/papers/decentralized_web.pdf


=Executive Summary=

"The Web is a key space for civic debate and the current battleground for protecting freedom of
expression. However, since its development, the Web has steadily evolved into an ecosystem of
large, corporate-controlled mega-platforms which intermediate speech online. In many ways this
has been a positive development; these platforms improved usability and enabled billions of
people to publish and discover content without having to become experts on the Web’s intricate
protocols.

But in other ways this development is alarming. Just a few large platforms drive most traffic to
online news sources in the U.S., and thus have enormous influence over what sources of
information the public consumes on a daily basis. The existence of these consolidated points of
control is troubling for many reasons. A small number of stakeholders end up having outsized
influence over the content the public can create and consume. This leads to problems ranging
from censorship at the behest of national governments to more subtle, perhaps even
unintentional, bias in the curation of content users see based on opaque, unaudited curation
algorithms. The platforms that host our networked public sphere and inform us about the world
are unelected, unaccountable, and often impossible to audit or oversee.

At the same time, there is growing excitement around the area of decentralized systems, which
have grown in prominence over the past decade thanks to the popularity of the cryptocurrency
Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a payment system that has no central points of control, and uses a novel
peer-to-peer network protocol to agree on a distributed ledger of transactions, the blockchain.
Bitcoin paints a picture of a world where untrusted networks of computers can coordinate to
provide important infrastructure, like verifiable identity and distributed storage. Advocates of
these decentralized systems propose related technology as the way forward to “re-decentralize”
the Web, by shifting publishing and discovery out of the hands of a few corporations, and back
into the hands of users. These types of code-based, structural interventions are appealing
because in theory, they are less corruptible and resistant to corporate or political regulation.
Surprisingly, low-level, decentralized systems don’t necessarily translate into decreased market
consolidation around user-facing mega-platforms.

In this report, we explore two important ways structurally decentralized systems could help
address the risks of mega-platform consolidation: First, these systems can help users directly
publish and discover content directly, without intermediaries, and thus without censorship. All of
the systems we evaluate advertise censorship-resistance as a major benefit. Second, these
systems could indirectly enable greater competition and user choice, by lowering the barrier to
entry for new platforms. As it stands, it is difficult for users to switch between platforms (they
must recreate all their data when moving to a new service) and most mega-platforms do not
interoperate, so switching means leaving behind your social network. Some systems we
evaluate directly address the issues of data portability and interoperability in an effort to support
greater competition.


We offer case studies of the following decentralized publishing projects:

* [[Freedom​ ​Box]], a system for personal publishing
* [[Diaspora]] a federated social network
* [[Mastodon]] a federated Twitter-like service, 
* [[Blockstack]]​, a distributed system for online identity services
* IPFS​ ​([[Interplanetary​ ​File​ ​System]]),​ a distributed storage service with a proposed mechanism to
incentivize resource sharing
* [[Solid]]​ ​(Social​ ​Linked​ ​Data),​ a linked-data protocol that could act as a back-end for data sharing
between social media networks
* [[Appcoins]],​ a digital currency framework that enables users to financially participate in
ownership of platforms and protocols
* [[Steemit]],​ an online community that uses an appcoin to incentivize development and community
participation in a social network


Considering these projects as a whole, we found a robust and fertile community of
experimenters developing promising software. Many of the projects in this report are working on
deeply exciting new ideas. Easy to use, peer-to-peer distributed storage systems change the
landscape for content censorship and archiving. Appcoins may transform how new projects are
launched online, making it possible to fund open-source development teams focused on
developing shared protocols instead of independent companies. There is also a renewed
interest in creating interoperable standards and protocols that can cross platforms.

However, we have reason to doubt that these decentralized systems alone will address the
problems of exclusion and bias caused by today’s mega-platforms. For example, distributed,
censorship-resistant storage does not help address problems related to bias in curation
algorithms – content that doesn’t appear at the top of your feed might as well be invisible, even
if it’s technically accessible. And though censorship-resistance and decentralization are noble
goals that will undoubtedly appeal to tech-savvy and politically inclined users, most users are
not ideologically motivated and have no interest in shouldering the additional cost and
responsibility of running these complex systems directly. They will want to engage with the Web
through friendlier, third-party publishing platforms, and these platforms will suffer from the same
forces that drive consolidation today.

It’s important to remember that today’s mega-platforms are built on top of the Web’s already
distributed and open protocols. The real issue to address is this natural tendency towards
market consolidation. Underlying these concerns is the predominant business model for
platforms on the Web – user-targeted advertising. Advertising based business models
encourage the consolidation and the hoarding of user views and data, driving platforms to
become ever larger.


The challenges decentralized systems as a whole face are as follows:

* User​ ​and​ ​developer​ ​adoption.​ Technical feasibility alone does not guarantee the sort of
widespread adoption necessary to build a useful social network. Some of the more mature tools
developed in this space have faced serious difficulties in attracting a permanent user base, and
the problems those platforms suffer from may hinder the growth of new systems as well. Social
networks, in particular, are difficult to bootstrap due to network effects. We generally join social
networks because our friends are already there. Systems like Steemit and Diaspora are
currently incompatible with existing social networks, planning to supersede existing communities
like Reddit and Facebook, rather than integrate with them. Taking a competitive, rather than
complementary, position in the market creates a difficult barrier to entry for new projects.

* Similarly, interoperable protocols require adoption at the developer level. Solid, which hopes to
bridge between existing and novel social networks, faces a serious adoption challenge: Why
should developers choose to switch to Solid’s new data model, and what's the incentive for
Facebook to make their data interoperable without legal requirements forcing them to do so?

* Security.​ ​ Another major issue is security. “Decentralized” networks generally means anyone
can join, which implies these systems have to take strong precautions to enforce security,
usually by pushing the responsibility of security to users in the form of managing public key
cryptography. It is extremely difficult to develop software that is both cryptographically secure
and easy to use. Most of these systems, like IPFS and Blockstack, do not yet have a good
story for how users will manage their private cryptographic keys and gain a good mental model
of complex security protocols. As companies like Signal, an encrypted messaging service, have
recently demonstrated, this is not impossible to achieve, but it requires an intense focus on
usability that we did not see in many of the tools we review in this report.

* Monetization​ ​and​ ​incentives.​ ​Given that user data is so important for monetizing these
platforms, there is little incentive for the mega-platforms to adopt interoperable protocols – they
would rather own all the data. Similarly, content that is viewed and clicked on the most
generates the most advertising revenue, so mega-platforms have an incentive to prioritize viral,
attention-grabbing or feel-good content. Steemit offers a fascinating alternative model to
prioritizing and monetizing content. However, it replaces opacity with a semi-transparent free
market model that concentrates power in a few hands and, if not carefully crafted, might even
incentivize more clickbait. Designing robust reward mechanisms for community-governed
content is still an open problem, but if solved, this could be integral to placing curation control in
the hands of a community.

* Resisting​ ​market​ ​consolidation?​ Platforms benefit from economies of scale in multiple ways –
it’s cheaper to acquire resources like storage and servers in bulk and as platforms become
larger they become more useful as a social network and usually, more profitable. Even in
decentralized systems like Bitcoin, there has been a natural market consolidation in the form of
large mining pools. This type of consolidation into a few super-participants might be inevitable
due to economies of scale. We are increasingly persuaded that this isn't necessarily a bad thing,
and that a more realistic goal might be the development of a robust, competitive marketplace
that offers a range of ground rules for online speech, rather than a return to a purely
peer-to-peer architecture for communication online.


Recommendations:​ We advise investors–whether motivated by civic or fiscal concerns–both to
watch this space closely and to advocate for the pre-conditions that we believe will enable a
healthier marketplace for online publishing. A precondition for the success of these distributed
platforms is a shift towards user-controlled data, the ownership of a user’s social graph and her
intellectual property created online. It will be difficult for new platforms to develop without
widespread support for efforts towards data portability and rights over data ownership.

Data portability also enables new models for aggregation.

Small, thoughtfully curated news sources will be made more powerful by having access to the
user data currently locked inside mega-platforms, but right now, federated clients that
interoperate between different platforms are borderline illegal – fixing this may require adjusting
overly broad regulations, like the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. We believe that these
user-controlled data rights are essential to develop a more robust market and allow new efforts
to emerge from existing communities. Though individual users might not directly care about or
understand these rights, their adoption will free developers to create applications that leverage
users’ existing data, so that they can provide compelling, interesting new experiences, even with
a small user base.

In envisioning a marketplace for open speech platforms that support more generative and
censorship-resistant discussions, we recommend focusing on supporting existing efforts that
provide alternatives to Facebook’s opaque curation and ranking. These alternatives might look
more like Reddit's sub-communities, with different rule sets to enable different types of
conversation, overseen and administered by members of the community with a system for due
process when contentious issues arise.

Funding developers directly to create a diverse ecosystem of publishing platforms and curation
websites is another place to make a difference. In particular, foundations are in an excellent
place to fund the development of user-friendly software to implement common security practices
that are common across many applications. An example of this is Let’s Encrypt, which makes
using secure HTTP (HTTPS) easier for small website administrators. Most small platforms do
not have the resources to directly hire experts in usability and security.

Another fascinating space to watch and explore is that of Appcoins. Recently there has been a
dramatic upsurge in the adoption of appcoins as a mechanism for funding new projects and
platforms. Appcoins potentially provide a way to circumvent the existing open-source or
VC-funded software development models to create systems where users collectively own their
data. Creating an alternative business model to advertising could end up pushing the markets to
create entirely new, different types of applications than the ones we’ve seen so far, which
mainly rely on user data and views. New funding models means smaller projects could more
easily bootstrap small, personalized communities. However, this space also has a lot of
potential for scams, and it might be unreasonable to expect users to manage a financial stake in
many different networks."


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Articles]]