The first International Commons Conference, co-organized by the Heinrich Boll Foundation and the [[Commons Strategies Group]], took place in Berlin November 1 and 2, 2010.

In this Wiki, we are collecting ongoing working documents and information about participants, sessions, thoughts and results.

* [[Interpretative Summary of the International Commons Conference]], by David Bollier [http://www.commonsknowledgealliance.org/content/conference-summary-david-bollier]

Other general material:

** For basic general info, see here: [[Constructing a Commons-Based Policy Platform]]
** For the conceptual outline of the conference see: [[Some_Thoughts_on_the_Commons]]
** There is also an [http://www.boell.de/economysocial/economy/economy-commons-10451.html  official site of the conference, with many background articles]
** Agenda/program: http://www.boell.de/economysocial/economy/economy-agenda-international-commons-conference-10456.html

* '''subpages of this page that facilitate documentation and discussion:'''

* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Participants | Participants]]
* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/SteeringComitteeAndSupportGroup |Steering Comittee And Support Group]]
* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/ProjectVisits | Project Visits]]
* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/WorldCafe|Results from World Cafe Tables]]
* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Workshops|Reports from Workshops]]
* [[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Final_Plenary | Notes from the Final Plenary]]

* Specific page to gather '''[[Participant Reactions to International Commons Conference]]''' with following items:

** [[Abundance_of_Food_vs_the_Abundance_of_Recipes]] Contribution from [[Brian Davey]] of [[Feasta]], reacting to the [[Berlin Commons Conference]] tension between [[Abundance]] and [[Scarcity]].
** [[Brigitte Kratzwald on the Notion of Time to Change]]

=Introduction=


==Basic Documents==

* [[Some Thoughts on the Commons]]: Prepared by the Steering Committee, International Commons Conference, to stimulate discussion and reflection

* [[Beatriz Busaniche]] [http://identi.ca/beabusaniche/]: [http://www.bea.org.ar/2010/11/conferencia-internacional-sobre-bienes-comunes-reporte-en-espanol/ Conferencia Internacional sobre Bienes Comunes]: reporte en español



==Press Coverage==

* Richard Poynder has done a profile with extended interview with Silke Helfrich on her understanding of the commons and the purpose of the conference, via 
http://poynder.blogspot.com/2010/10/silke-helfrich-on-commons-and-upcoming.html 
* Excerpt: [[Silke Helfrich on the International Commons Conference in Berlin]]
* [https://plus.google.com/photos/107380766839762957567/albums/5552930308658480737?authkey=CNP2-OH4yPHLFA&banner=pwa Photo gallery]

===Post-Conference===

'''In English:'''

* Neal Gorenflo at Shareable: [http://shareable.net/blog/notes-from-the-international-commons-conference Notes from the International Commons Conference]

* Leo Burke at Commons Knowledge Alliance: [http://www.commonsknowledgealliance.org/content/growing-voice-global-commons The Growing Voice of the Global Commons]

* Jay Walljasper (OnTheCommons): [http://www.onthecommons.org/potato-commons-power-standing Potato Commons & the Power of Standing Up]. Report from a groundbreaking international conference in Berlin

* Brian Davey: The [[Abundance of Food vs the Abundance of Recipes]]: free culture abundance advocates have a lot to offer, but should take into account the real dangers of coming material scarcity

* Michel Bauwens: The [[Emergence of a Global Commons Movement, Year Zero]]

* Christian Siefkes (keimform.de): [http://www.keimform.de/2010/memorable-quotes-from-the-icc/ Memorable quotes from the Berlin Commons Conference]

* Stefan Meretz (keimform.de):
** [http://www.keimform.de/2010/the-generative-logic-of-the-commons-slidecast/ The Generative Logic of the Commons — Slidecast]
** [http://www.keimform.de/2010/ten-theses-about-global-commons-movement/ Ten Theses About Global Commons Movement]

* George Pór at Commons Knowledge Alliance: [http://www.commonsknowledgealliance.org/content/remixing-berlin Berlin Remix]

'''In German:'''

* Andrea Goetzke (Netzpolitik): [http://www.netzpolitik.org/2010/international-commons-conference-in-berlin/ International Commons Conference in Berlin]

* Silke Helfrich (CommonsBlog):
** [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2010/11/10/den-commons-eine-stimme-geben/ Den Commons eine Stimme geben]
** [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2010/11/12/die-welt-verandern-das-geht-leicht-aber-langsam/ Die Welt verändern: Das geht leicht aber langsam]
** [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2010/11/16/gemeinguter-als-politische-leitlinie-stimmen-aus-drei-kontinenten/ Gemeingüter als politische Leitlinie? Stimmen aus drei Kontinenten]
** [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2010/11/17/international-commons-conference-danke-fur-eine-tigerisch-peerig-konferenzorganisation/ International Commons Conference: DANKE für eine „tigerisch peerige“ Konferenz]
** '''Important: [http://commonsblog.wordpress.com/2011/02/27/mit-big-society-haben-commons-nix-gemein/ Mit Big Society haben Commons nix gemein]!'''

* Helmut Höge (blogs.taz.de): [http://blogs.taz.de/hausmeisterblog/2010/11/12/gemeineigentumallmendecommon/ Gemeineigentum-Allmende-Common] (see last part of article)

* Lara Mallien (Oya-Blog): [http://www.oya-online.de/blog/17/view.html Internationale Konferenz über Gemeingüter]

* Markus Euskirchen (who-owns-the-world.org): [http://www.who-owns-the-world.org/2010/11/26/berlin-commons-conference/ Berlin Commons Conference]

* Stefan Meretz (keimform.de): [http://www.keimform.de/2010/zehn-thesen-zur-globalen-commons-bewegung/ Zehn Thesen zur globalen Commons-Bewegung]

* Farah Lenser: [http://www.info3.de/c5/index.php?cID=447 Gemeingüter: Eine Bewegung entdeckt sich]


'''In Portuguese:'''

* Gabriela Agustini (Cutura Digital, Brazil): [http://culturadigital.br/blog/2010/11/15/a-cultura-digital-brasileira-na-conferencia-sobre-o-%E2%80%98commons%E2%80%99-em-berlim/ A Cultura Digital Brasileira na Conferência sobre o ‘commons’ em Berlim]

* Richard Poynder interviews Silke Helfrich: [http://ecodigital.blogspot.com/2010/10/silke-helfrich-apresenta-conferencia.html Silke Helfrich apresenta a Conferência Interacional sobre o Commons]: Em busca de um movimento mais amplo


'''In Spanish:'''

* Beatriz Busaniche:  [http://www.bea.org.ar/2010/11/conferencia-internacional-sobre-bienes-comunes-reporte-en-espanol/ Report in Spanish]  [http://www.bea.org.ar/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/ICC.report.es_.pdf Download the report in .pdf]

==Videotaped Presentations==

All videos are presented via this consolidated link at http://www.boell.de/economysocial/economy/economy-commons-10451.html

#[[Roberto Verzola and Stefan Meretz on the Generative Logic of the Commons‎]]
#[[Multilateralism 2.0‎]];
#[[Philippe Aigrain on the Commons as a Challenge for Classic Economic Patterns‎]]
#[[Michel Bauwens: an Overview of the Commons as Transformation Paradigm‎]];
#[[Ruth Meinzen-Dick: an Overview of the Commons as Transformation Paradigm‎]]


In other languages:

# [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jGEBw8oquRw Alberto Acosta presenta una ponencia sobre el ITT. Parte 1]
# [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jOMpltTwry4 Alberto Acosta presenta una ponencia sobre el ITT. Parte 2]


===The [[Remix the Commons Video Series]]===

#[[Silke Helfrich on Framing the Commons]]
#[[David Bollier on Framing the Commons]]


=Post-post Conference Updates=


==Italian-language translations==

* [http://socialforge.org/art/654 Alcune riflessioni sui Commons]

* [http://socialforge.org/art/835 Scarsità ed abbondanza]: Abbondanza di cibo contro abbondanza di ricette. di Brian Davey – 17 novembre 2010. Contributo di Brian Davey di Feasta, in risposta alla tensione al Congresso di Berlino sui Commons tra Abbondanza e Scarsità, sottotitoli di Franz Nahrada.

* [http://socialforge.org/art/847 Scarsità ed abbondanza II] (dibattito). Dibattito sul testo “Abbondanza di cibo contro abbondanza di ricette”, con commenti di Michel Bauwens, Franz Nahrada e Wofgang Hoeschele al documento di Brian Davey del 17 novembre 2010. Michel Bauwens: Come l’abbondanza immateriale può assistere un’economia stabile

=Policy Proposals by Topic=


==Introduction and Generalities==

* [[Ruth Meinzen-Dick]], Text of keynote lecture: [[Commons as a Transformation Paradigm]]


Contributions:

#[[Developing the Meta Services for the Eco-Social Economy]], draft proposed by [[Feasta]] writers, Ireland/UK
#[[Framework for Augmenting the Collective Intelligence of the Ecosystem of Commons-based Initiatives]], [[George Por]], [[Community Intelligence]]
#[[Infrastructural Commons for Sustainability]], edited by Emer O'Siochru and David Korowitz. EENGO Submission to the (Irish) National Sustainable Development Strategy. [http://www.ien.ie/news/publications/national-sustainable-development-strategy-nsds/ Final Report January 2008].
#[[Securing the Commons]]. By Ruth Meinzen-Dick, Esther Mwangi, and Stephan Dohrn. CAPRi Policy Brief 4. [http://www.capri.cgiar.org/pdf/polbrief_04.pdf]
#[[Giovanna Ricoveri]]: [[Commons vs Commodities]]. Paper by Giovanna Ricoveri for the 13th Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of the Commons (IASC), “Sustaining Commons: Sustaining our Future” 10-14 Jan. 2011, Hyderabad, India.
#Hazel Henderson, [http://wholeearth.com/issue/2094/article/44/function.mysql-connect Defending the Global Commons]

On the Economy of the Commons:

* Pierre Calame: [[Different Categories of Goods and Services and their Systems of Governance]] [ http://bases.basedefiches.net:8080/ire/docs/chapitre2.2.pdf]

==Topics and Policy Domains==


=== Commons Governance ===

* Workshop notes provided by Dr. [[Stephan Krall]]: The [[Commons and their Governance]] as paradigm for the 21st century.

* The [[Commons Law Project]] (CLP), dedicated to reinventing the law and governance of the ecological commons and thereby operationalize the human right to a clean, healthy, ecologically balanced, and sustainable environment. A project by [[Burns Weston]] and [[David Bollier]]

===Cultural Commons===

* “Charter for Innovation, Creativity and Access to Knowledge” (http://www.fcforum.net). The Charter was signed by more than 200 international organizations and used in policy making at the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA), the European Council of Ministers of Culture, and the Spanish Law for Sustainable Culture, among others. 
* Constructing Commons in the Cultural Environment (Michael Madison, Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)95 Cornell L. Rev. 657 (2010) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1265793 and a collection of papers discussing that work at http://www.lawschool.cornell.edu/research/cornell-law-review/Volume-95-Number-4.cfm
* The Complexity of Commons (Michael Madison, Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)95 Cornell L. Rev. 839 (2010) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1607701
* The University as Constructed Cultural Commons (Michael Madison, Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)30 Wash. U. J. Law & Pol’y 365 (2009) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1256090
* [http://paigrain.debatpublic.net/?page_id=171 Internet & Création: comment reconnaître les échanges sur internet en finançant la création], Philippe Aigrain, InLibroVeritas, 2008
* [http://www.vacarme.org/article1853.html La culture en communs], Entretien de Philippe Aigrain avec Aude Delalande, Philippe Mangeot et Victoire Patouillard], Vacarme, 81, 2010
* Ethical foundation of knowledge as a common. [[Rainer Kuhlen]]. Preprint Vortrag Seoul 8.10.2010 (text: http://bit.ly/b85rUO) 
* Towards a commons-based copyright. [[Rainer Kuhlen]]. IFLA World Conference Gothenburg 14.8.2010 (PP: http://bit.ly/9aa3Zg)
* Report: [[Imagining a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]. A community approach to sharing traditional knowledge for non-commercial research. [[Natural Justice]] and IDLO, 2009. By Elan Abrell et al. [http://www.idlo.int/publications/TraditionalKnowledge.pdf]
* Report: - [[Implementing a Traditional Knowledge Commons]]. Opportunities and Challenges. Developments following the Traditional Knowledge Commons Workshop, December 2009, Cape Town, South Africa. Natural Justice, 2010. 



In Brazil:

* [http://www.cultura.gov.br/consultadireitoautoral/ Open Consultation on the Brazilian Copyright Reform Proposal] - [http://www.gpopai.usp.br/blogs/blog/2010/08/03/the-brazilian-copyright-bill-in-english-translation/ English version]
* Reserva Cultural ("Cultural Reserve"), a community-based project for sharing of cultural works, in São Paulo:  http://www.gpopai.usp.br/wiki/index.php/Reserva>, [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gMit9HQX4o video]
* [[Volker Grassmuch]]: A [[Copyright Exception for Monetizing File-Sharing]]. A proposal for balancing user freedom and author remuneration in the Brazilian copyright law reform, 19. März 2010, http://www.vgrass.de/?p=193

===Healthcare===

* Krikorian G. (2009), The politics of patents: conditions of implementation of public health policy in Thailand. In S. Haunss and K. C. Shadlen (éd.), The Politics of Intellectual Property: Contestation over the Ownership, Use, and Control of Knowledge and Information (Edward Elgar, UK), 29-55.

* Krikorian G. (2009), New trends in IP protection and health issues in FTA negotiations. In B. Coriat (éd.), The Political Economy of HIV/AIDS in Developing Countries. TRIPS, Public Health Systems and Free Access (Edward Elgar, UK) 52-77.

* Krikorian G. & Szymkowiak D. (2007), Intellectual property rights in the making: the evolution of intellectual property. Provisions in US free trade agreements and access to medicine. The journal of world intellectual property, 10 (5), 388-418.

* [[Denis Postle on the Psychological Commons]]

===Earth and Climate Commons===

#[[Cap and Share]]: A Fair Way to Cut Greenhouse Emissions [http://www.feasta.org/documents/energy/Cap-and-Share-May08.pdf], written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK.
#[[Global Climate Trust]], written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK
#The [[Viable Systems Model and Climate Governance]]; written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK
#[[Against Ecological and Information Enclosures]] : Towards a Convergence of “Commons”.''' A Note on a Workshop in New Delhi, December 13 2007’. [[Jai Sen]] ([[Cacim]] 2008) [http://cacim.net/twiki/tiki-index.php?page=Multilogues2Notes]
#“Cllimate Change and Intergenerational Justice: Foundational Reflections,” 9 Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 375 (2009). [[Burns Weston]]

===Currency or Monetary Commons===


#[[Liquidity Network]] [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/will-big-business-privatise-the-monetary-commons/2010/02/25]: Mutual credit commons written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK
#Intervention by [[Margrit Kennedy]], [[Ludwig Schuster]]: [[Sustainable Financial Markets as a Global Commons]]
#[[Stefan Meretz]] on the question of transition and the role of open money: http://www.keimform.de/2009/the-question-of-transition-and-the-role-of-money/
#Podcast interview with [[Thomas H. Greco, Jr. on the Credit Commons]] [http://www.newdimensions.org/cafe/C0108/thomas-h-greco-jr-towards-a-credit-commons/]
#Text: [[Transforming Finance Group's Call Recognizes Finance as a Global Commons]]
#Ongoing research: [[Dyndy]] on the website http://www.dyndy.net

===Infrastructure Commons===

# [[Developing the Meta Services for the Eco-Social Economy]], draft written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK
# Applying abundance to cities, http://shareable.net/blog/how-to-create-abundant-cities, by [[Wolfgang Hoeschele]]

===Land, Food and Water Commons===

#[[Food and Water Watch]], USA, represented by [[Maude Barlow]]
#[[Land Value Tax]], written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK
#Biting the Bullet: How to Secure Access to Drylands Resources for Multiple Users. By Esther Mwangi and Stephan Dohrn. CAPRi Working Paper 47. [http://www.capri.cgiar.org/wp/capriwp47.asp]

CCRI website has links to the IASC conference and [http://www.ccri.ac.uk/Events/Conf_IASC.htm the 8 National Seminars], 

#with 8th seminar on Common Land,  http://www.ccri.ac.uk/Events/8thseminarcommonland.htm
#the 'heritage and landscape' category, e.g. http://www.ccri.ac.uk/Projects/HeritageandLandscape/Current/Assessingdevelopingprinciplesdeliverynationalbiodiversitytargets.htm

Brazil:

#Jean Pierre Leroy's chapter about territorial management by Amazonian communities, in the book [[Genes, Bytes and Emissions]] [http://www.boell.org/downloads/Leroy_The_Guardians_of_Our_Future1.pdf] [http://www.boell-latinoamerica.org/download_es/Bienes_Comunes_total_EdiBoell.pdf in Spanish]


UK:

#the Commons Act 2006. Text of the law is at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/26/pdfs/ukpga_20060026_en.pdf 
#legal aspects of common land approach in the UK at DEFRA: http://www.defra.gov.uk/rural/protected/commonland/index.htm
#Useful summary on common land in England and Wales: see http://www.naturenet.net/law/commonland.html
#Examples of local councils: the [http://www.cumbriacommoners.org.uk/ Federation to Cumbria Commoners] and the [http://www.dartmoorcommonerscouncil.org.uk/ Dartmoor Commons Council].
#OSS (Open Spaces Society) either: http://www.oss.org.uk/

===(Commons-based) Taxation===

#[[Land Value Tax]], written by members of [[Feasta]], Ireland/UK ([http://vimeo.com/6099122 video]

===Knowledge/Science Commons===

*Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities [http://oa.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/berlindeclaration.html]
*Berlin 8 Open Access Conference [http://www.berlin8.org]
*Coalition for Action "Copyright for Education and Research" [http://www.urheberrechtsbuendnis.de/index.html]
*Workshop on Knowledge commons in the World Forum Science and Democracy 
:: Videos of the workshop
:: [http://vecam.org/article1109.html Valérie Peugeot] VECAM France
:: [http://vecam.org/article1110.html Amit Sengupta], AIPSN, Inde
:: [http://vecam.org/article1117.html Pablo Ortellado] GPOPAI, Universidade Saõ Paulo
:: [http://vecam.org/article1168.html James Love] Knowledge Ecology International
:: [http://vecam.org/article1112.html Pascale de Robert], Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, France & Amazonie
:: [http://vecam.org/article1111.html Viviana Muñoz Tellez], The South Centre
:: [http://vecam.org/article1169.html Discussion] - [http://vecam.org/article1170.html Reactions] of the panélistes
*SCIENCES ET DÉMOCRATIE : La leçon du Tapajos [http://vecam.org/article1121.html video] 

In Brazil:
* [http://culturadigital.br/marcocivil/ Collaborative Civil-rights based Regulatory Framework for Internet in Brazil] - The [http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/index.php/component/chronocontact/?chronoformname=WSProposals2010View&wspid=57 IGF Workshop]

= Conference Documentation =

see  [[Berlin_Commons_Conference | header of this page]]

*[[Berlin_Commons_Conference/WorldCafe]]
*'''[[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Workshops|Reports from Workshops]]'''
*[[Berlin_Commons_Conference/Final_Plenary | Notes from the Final Plenary ]]

=General Documentation=


==Peer to Peer Urbanism==

From Dr. [[Nikos Salingaros]] of the [[Gruppo Salingaros]]:

#http://www.greekarchitects.gr/en/architectural-review/peer-to-peer-urbanism-id1973
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/urban-seeding-and-the-city-as-computer/2008/09/08
#http://p2pfoundation.net/Peer-to-Peer_Themes_and_Urban_Priorities_for_the_Self-organizing_Society


==Video==

#[[Emer O'Siochru on Reclaiming the Commons]] [http://vimeo.com/5667418] : addresses destruction of 'the commons' - the vital but undefined resources that sustain life and civilisation that are under threat form the current system. It offered ideas about how they can be redefined, given legal protection within the market economy
#[[Dan Sullivan on the Land Value Tax as a Community Development Tool]]





[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Commons]]