'''* Book: Dr Phoebe Moore, International Political Economy of Work and Employability, Palgrave Macmillan, September 2010'''

URL = http://www.palgrave.com/products/title.aspx?PID=278622


=Summary=

Global shifts to a knowledge-based economy have led to the semiproletarianisation of labour and the emergence of a transnational precariat class. It has allowed for the propaganda of the emancipation of labour by way of membership in the creatives club. Workers and the rising unemployed are increasingly expected to become self-managing lifelong learners due to the impact of technological development. Dr Moore conducts a critical investigation of how employment and education policy in three different locations is informed by a dominant view of what should make a person 'employable', created by the elite, and then looks for new models for post-capitalist production such as peer to peer communities that can overcome this binding set of rules. The International Political Economy of Work and Employability provides the basis for research into the dramatic impact of global instability on workers such as is seen in the context of the recent recession.

'Phoebe Moore makes an important contribution to our understanding of the fundamental changes to International Political Economy over recent years. Her impressive analyses of education policy linked to "employability" as a means of producing forms of subjectivity that sustain neoliberal reforms even against their economic failures will be critical tools in the hands of scholars, researchers, organizers and activists. Her case studies underscore the convergences occasioned by neoliberal policies even in the contexts of diverse national and cultural experiences. This book makes a compelling case for bringing work, labour, and production "back in" to the study of International Political Economy.'

- Matt Davies, Newcastle University, UK

'This book provides one of the richest and most systematic comparisons of skills revolutions in three countries in the east and west. Phoebe Moore introduces brilliantly the International Political Economy of Work and Employability into the literature on employability and skills.'

- Joohee Lee, Associate Professor, Department of Sociology, Ewha Womans University, Korea


=More Information=


Phoebe Moore lectures in International Relations and International Political Economy at University of Salford, UK and has two interrelated research interests: globalised labour struggle and post-capitalist models for socio-political economies.

Dr Phoebe Moore

Lecturer in International Relations & International Political Economy

Programme Leader, MA in International Relations and Globalisation

http://www.salford.ac.uk/course-finder/course/1779

Profile http://www.espach.salford.ac.uk/page/Phoebe_Moore


[[Category:Books]]