

URL = http://www.ecocitybuilders.org/what-we-do/ecocity-standards/


=Description=

"The International Ecocity Standards provide both the vision for an ecologically restorative human presence on earth as well as a practical methodology for assessing and guiding the achievement of such vision through the lens of the ecocity.

As humanity is confronting the limits of a finite planet, observing global climate destabilization and the endangerment of entire ecosystems, the responsibility of its settlements and lifestyles' impact on climate change, ecological destruction and resource depletion needs to be addressed.

The IES will establish levels of certification at scales from the block to the region, and will insure that the highest level can be sustained in a way that is enhancing of and synergistic with other living species and natural systems. The various levels of certification will allow for a manageable progression from our current situation to the highest level.

The IES platform adopts a systems view: not only is the built environment one of the elements of that system, but so are the humans living there, the other species sharing the same bioregion, as well as the human agency in the world through lifestyle choices, work and investments.

We've created an early version of the top tier standards for the following categories: materials, food, water, energy and air. Furthermore, we've created a land use classification to identify areas of concentrated human use (C) and areas to be set aside for relief and restoration (R) like wilderness, natural parks and organic agriculture. Areas that are not clearly identifiable as C or R are classified transition area (T), which over time would either need to convert to C or R. This "C-R-T" System allows planners to collapse a system with several hundred codes into three simple areas. Then policy can create incentives for parts of the transition areas' return to nature or continued development to concentrated human use. This classification is important for the IES because a top tier ecocity will have proximity to nature and a minimum of transition areas.



We created a classification of urban elements (UE) from city block to neighborhood, and a classification of areas under various levels of governance. We are planning to provide IES certification for city blocks (UE1), neighborhoods (UE2), district/ward (UE3), city (G1), county/sub province (G2) and metropolitan area G3 with our initial focus on G1 (city level governance area). We created an additional classification system of human settlements to account for differences based on population, density, latitude, climate, altitude, continent, ethnic diversity, primary economic driver, ecological footprint, wealth distribution and remoteness. 

We have also drafted a list of representative towns that span across all ranges of the above characteristics. The representative towns will be used to test how IES and the certification process would impact towns with different characteristics."
(http://www.ecocitybuilders.org/what-we-do/ecocity-standards/)


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Standards]]