
=Description=

Seb Paquet:

"Interest brings groups together, but intent is what brings teams together to actually get things done.   
Intentcasting is deceptively simple to describe. It consists in broadcasting your intent to make something happen.

...

There is a capability that is complementary to intentcasting: intentcatching. Intentcatching means connecting to an intent that has already been cast, in effect signaling, "I want this to happen too" or "We want this to happen too" and moving from a passive to an active stance towards the intent. 

At its core, intentcasting is invitation into a possible future. It is a statement of possibility and will. Although it does not have to spell out how the intent is to materialize, it contains the germ of an architecture of participation."
(http://emergentcities.sebpaquet.net/blueprints-for-networked-cocreation-1-intentc)


=Characteristics=

Seb Paquet:

"In order for intent to catch on, it has to meet a few conditions:

* It must describe a promise - a future state of affairs that could conceivably happen, explained in a way that people understand.
    
* It must open participation in one or more well-defined ways.
    
* It must be expressed in a way that enables it to travel and spread over the communications infrastructure.
    
* There must be other people or groups out there who resonate with the intent and can get excited enough to connect."


Tools:

"Social tools that directly support intentcasting can be classified according to the modalities of participation that are offered to intent catchers (as we'll call those who respond to the intent):

* Crowdfunding services, where catchers are invited to support the intent by donating money. Kickstarter is probably the most famous crowdfunding website right now.
    
* Event platforms, where catchers are invited to announce their intent to attend the event. Plancast and Facebook Events fall in this category.
    
* Challenge markets / prize systems, where catchers is invited to submit a solution of their own to a challenge. ChallengePost is an example of a challenge market.
    
* Action platforms, where catchers is invited to support the intent by joining the effort and a collaboration framework is offered. IfWeRanTheWorld, Superfluid, and epic.io fall in this category.
    
* Goal-centered platforms, where the focus is squarely on the intent and catchers are simply invited to show support. A grandfather example of this is 43things. Facebook pages like this one do a similar job.
    
* Task managers / Project trackers, where intent is usually expressed as a task or issue that needs to be taken care of. Pivotal Tracker is an example of this."
(http://emergentcities.sebpaquet.net/blueprints-for-networked-cocreation-1-intentc))





[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Media]]