
=Discussion=

Akasha:

"Intersubjectivity refers to the inherent characteristics of relationships between subjects. It provides evidence of external objective existence through the existence of dispersed "Others." Additionally, there's another angle, a non-dualistic view, such as that in Taoism and Buddhism, which emphasizes the concept of non-duality. Non-duality doesn't imply singularity; philosophically, the relationship between subjects is seen as continuously interconnected, with energy flowing perpetually, embodying commonality, and resisting separation. Such separation would disrupt intersubjectivity.

A friend once asked why I'm so interested in intersubjectivity. The reason is simple: I believe in multiple possibilities and interpretations between subjects and objects, rather than a singular or universal explanation. Descartes' answer of invoking God seems too simple, and we need not be confined to Husserl's dispersed "Other" theory or a thorough non-dual fusion. The characteristics of intersubjectivity, from the problem itself to the compatibility of answers, provide ample space for us to explore the authenticity of the world anew. Whether dualistic or non-dualistic, we can find harmonious transcendental evidence to jointly prove this authenticity.

In a pluralistic society, such exploration of intersubjectivity is evidently reasonable. Our understanding of society isn't just about seeking commonality or differences but increasingly acknowledging diversity and focusing on the consensual rules of interaction between small communities. This is the recent discussion about "social consensus," which in fact refers to intersubjective consensus. This type of consensus shifts the focus from subjectivity and objectivity to intersubjectivity, emphasizing common underlying traits, interaction rules, and harmonious relationships. From Habermas' perspective, intersubjectivity refers to mutuality and unity between subjects, characterized by equal communication, bilateral interaction, proactive dialogue, mutual understanding, and integration.

From an economic perspective, traditional consensus is about data ownership, from Bitcoin to Ethereum. However, intersubjective consensus addresses data usership. For more complex economic models to thrive in a decentralized world, we need to encourage diverse data permissions and incentive templates. Future off-chain data service providers will not only incentivize based on data ownership but also offer more diversified incentives based on data usage.

For instance, in decentralized AI, new productivity and production relations must diverge from the current ownership-centric incentives. Data privacy and ownership must be guaranteed before other permissions can be fully utilized, ensuring trusted AI services. Payment methods will also become more diverse, focusing on supporting services and how services interact and pay each other, not just around ownership.

Intersubjective incentives are not solely about ownership. Opening up usage rights can invigorate the economy and provide better interaction models for different economic entities. This minimal trust between economic entities can foster more economic possibilities.

When we examine intersubjective systems from a systems perspective, we see that placing two or more heterogeneous systems together requires abstracting intersubjectivity into overall security."

(https://akasha.buzz/what-is-intersubjectivity)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]