
Video, "Alexander Dugin: Introduction to Noomakhia" available via https://paideuma.tv/en/video/alexander-dugin-introduction-noomakhia#/?playlistId=0&videoId=0

=Description=

"Noomahia project is based on the in-depth studies of cultures, philosophical systems, arts, religions and psychological features and characteristics of human civilizations.  It reviews ancient and modern, highly sophisticated and also the “primitive", from the highly technologically developed to those lacking the written language. The ultimate aim is to demonstrate and conclusively prove that no single culture can be regarded in hierarchical way (developed/under-developed, higher /lower, modern/premodern, civilized/savage and so on). Responsible evaluation of any human culture should be judged from within by those who belong to it - without any imposition of outside biases (interpretation is always culturally biased). Noomahia aims to achieve this by deconstructing, removing all elements of cultural racism and ethnocentrism, that tend to be the key feature of every and any society – whether it be liberal and traditional, religious or secular.  Noomahia argues the case for the dignity of humanity that lives within the incommensurability of all existing cultural forms.

The starting point - and the main feature of Noomahia - is the concept of Three main Logos (Noological paradigms) that define the structure of any culture. 

Three Logos are:

1. Apollonian (patriarchal, hierarchical, androcratic, vertical, exclusive, “heavenly”, transcendent) – light Logos; 

2. Dionysian (middle, androgyneous, ecstatic, immanent without materialism, balanced, dialectic) – dark Logos; 

3.    Cybelian (matriarchical, horizontal, gynekocratic, inclusive, chthonic, immanent, materialistic) – black Logos.

 

Noomakhia: Wars of the Mind is the ongoing magnum opus of the “most dangerous philosopher in the world”, Alexander Dugin (1962-). Soon to enter its final, 28th volume in Russian, Noomakhia is shaping up to be one of the 21st century’s most ambitious and complex contributions to numerous fields and schools of thought. Beyond a series of innovative Noological studies in the history of Civilizations, and beyond an original culmination of many of the author’s previous ideas and works, Noomakhia aims to inaugurate a new philosophical paradigm, based on the radical deconstruction of the universalism of Western Modernity and the daring reconstruction of a pluriversal model of the variations of the Logoi which structure human cultures. Noomakhia strives to initiate a new anthropology, to establish a new discourse on the history and structures of the Noomachy (“War of the Mind”) that conditions the diversity of human civilizations, and to contribute to an inter-continental Dialogue of Civilizations. 

As Noomakhia begins to gradually enter the English-language sphere, this section of Eurasianist Internet Archive‘s growing library of original translations of Eurasianist and related thinkers is dedicated to assembling the first glimpses into the epicenter of Noomakhia. In the section that follows, readers, researchers, and translators can find a regularly updated database of Noomakhia in the process of being outlined, excerpted, and translated for the first time in the English language. Like the Noomakhia project as a whole, this resource is a work in progress. All volumes of Noomakhia are presently published in Russian by Academic Project (Moscow, Russian Federation). "

(https://paideuma.tv/en/video/alexander-dugin-introduction-noomakhia#/?playlistId=0&videoId=0)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]