
'''* Article:An Introduction to [[Generative Justice]]. By Ron Eglash. Revista Teknokultura,  Vol. 13(2), 369-404.'''

URL = http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997


=Description=

Ron Eglash:

"Marx proposed that capitalism’s destructive force is caused, at root, by the alienation of labor value from its generators. Environmentalists have added the concept of unalienated ecological value, and rights activists added the unalienated expressive value of free speech, sexuality, spirituality, etc. Marx’s vision for restoring an unalienated world by top-down economic governance was never fulfilled. But in the last 30 years, new forms of social justice have emerged that operate as “bottom-up”. Peer-to-peer production such as open source software or wikipedia has challenged the corporate grip on IP in a “gift exchange” of labor value; community based agroecology establishes a kind of gift exchange with our nonhuman allies in nature. DIY citizenship from feminist makerspaces to queer biohacking has profound implications for a new materialism of the “knowledge commons”; and restorative approaches to civil rights can challenge the prison-industrial complex. In contrast to top-down “distributive justice,” all of the above are cases of bottom-up or “generative justice”." (http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)


=Discussion=

Ron Eglash:

"It is common to hear conservative politicians declare that “liberals just argue over who got a
smaller piece of the pie—but we want to make a bigger pie for everyone.” While this
characterization is often misleading rhetoric, it reveals an uncomfortable truth about the
political left: they have historically focused on the “distributive justice” of top-down
government intervention. But in the last 30 years, new forms of social justice have emerged
that are better described as “bottom-up”. Open source computing is perhaps the best known
of these trends: the bloated, proprietary software of giant corporations is increasingly replaced
by code that was generated in a kind of “gift exchange” of labor value: free distribution
inspires free contributions. Another example is the food justice movement: the networks of
community composting, urban gardens, “farm to fork” organics, and other means to establish
a gift exchange with our non-human allies in nature. A third is the “maker” movement — a
kind of open source network for the material world—which puts technologies ranging from
3D printing to “DIY bio” in the hands of lay citizens. Bottom-up value generation is not only a
framework to address wealth inequality and environmental degradation; it also characterizes
liberation from authoritarian control over free expression: peer-to-peer distribution of music,
arts and other media; grassroots activism for sexual diversity across the globe; and so on. The
time has come for a framework to describe these bottom-up alternatives to distributive justice:
hence the need for this collection on generative justice.

Generative justice is more than just a list of helpful activities; it is a fundamentally
different way of thinking about economics, politics, technology, ethics, and other categories
that make up our vision for how societies should be arranged. If we think of the spectrum
running from capitalism to communism, generative justice would be orthogonal to that line:
open source software, composted soil, and reproductive rights have been just as much a
struggle in the context of state ownership as they have been under private ownership. As
isolated examples of bottom-up organization we already have “peer to peer economy”
movements, “eco-utopia” movements, “restorative justice” movements, etc. But there is no
cohesive framework for understanding what they have in common. Generative justice defines
that common principle as the bottom-up circulation of unalienated value. This essay will
provide a basic understanding of generative justice; a means to recognize its presence and
potentials as it emerges; and a vision for how we might nurture its growth from these isolated
examples to systems that can encompass an entire technosocial landscape."
(http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)


==Generating [[Unalienated Value]]==

Ron Eglash:

"In Marx’s original formulation of “alienated labor value”, he contrasted the meaningful work
of traditional skilled artisans, taking pleasure in their craft and earning respect from their
community, with the dull repetition, low pay and enervating conditions of factory labor under
capitalism. There are at least four challenges to making the alienation concept useful today.
First, corporate marketing schemes are increasingly appropriating the artisanal allure: my
Starbucks coffee is served by an underpaid “barista”; my cookies claim they were hand-made
by Keebler elves. I can buy Domino’s Artisan Pizzas, Tostitos’ Artisan Recipes Tortilla Chips,
Burger King’s Artisan bun, and Dunkin’ Donuts’ Artisan Bagels. If artisanal labor is so easily
simulated, what chance do we have for making it a basis of social critique? Second, evoking
older, pre-capitalist forms could be read to imply that artisanal labor is better because it is
more natural. But as I will outline below, some of the best examples of unalienated craft labor
today are in highly “unnatural” realms of open source hardware and software. And romantic
organicist notions of what constitutes “natural” labor are notoriously tied to stereotype gender
roles; homophobic claims that only heterosexuality is natural; nationalist claims that “nature
did not intend the races to mix” and so on. Third, older production forms may be a poor fit to
contemporary population densities and needs. And finally, the stress on artisanal production
often overlooks the gender, race and ecological dimensions of economies of care and histories
of colonialism. To address these problems, we need a deeper look at what the concept of
“generating unalienated value” could mean if liberated from some of this unwelcomed
baggage.

The phrase “generating value” is implicitly referring to the power of “self-generation.” In
his 1944 book What is Life? physicist Erwin Schrödinger noted the mysterious way organisms
seemed to defy the second law of thermodynamics: “It is by avoiding the rapid decay into the
inert state of 'equilibrium' that an organism appears so enigmatic; so much so, that from the
earliest times of human thought some special non-physical or supernatural force... was
claimed to be operative” (p. 70). He characterized this self-generative property of life as
“negative entropy” (later shortened to “negentropy”). Terms for this phenomenon can now be
found at every scale: “autocatalysis” for cycles in which biomolecules produced themselves;
“autopoiesis” for an organism’s self-reproduction; “sympoiesis” for ecosystem self-assembly,
and so on. When we grow living organisms for food, we tap into this self-generating power;
that is to say, some of the value that is normally circulated can be diverted for our own use. It
is here that we must choose between either becoming part of the circulation, or extracting—
i.e. alienating—that value. Soils for example can be easily depleted of nutrients. Yet
traditional farmers and horticulturalists have avoided this problem for thousands of years
simply by returning our waste to the soil, and thus becoming part of the circulation of value
through a broader array of sustainable practices called agroecology.

Marx made an analogy between unalienated labor and agroecology in Capital volume 1,
where he stated that capitalist farming “prevents the return to the soil of its constituent
elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing... All progress in capitalist
agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil...”
(Marx 1976, pp. 637-638). Recalling Schrödinger’s comment that the negentropic character
of life is often attributed to a supernatural force, it is no surprise that Marx’s inspiration for
this insight, German chemist Justus von Liebig, originally justified recycling sewage back to
farm lands because of a “vital force” that gave living soils their generative power.
Marx was dedicated to eliminating “mystification”, but when he invokes the “living labor”
of unalienated production, it sounds suspiciously like the vitalist “living soil” of von Liebig.
This is not necessarily a flaw. Granted, it does pose the dangers of any organicist or
naturalizing discourse, as noted above. But one can also interpret vitalism as humility; as a
way of saying “there is something complex and wonderful in the generative force that we do
not fully understand”. Indeed that was Schrödinger’s final conclusion. Today we know that the
“living soil” concept was not far off: ordinary dirt is a complex ecosystem of bacteria, fungi,
nematodes, decaying matter, water percolation, minerals and other features that form a
dynamic, evolving network which still challenges our understanding. Analogous complex, selfsustaining
networks in the social domain—not the simulation of artisanal labor in the
Starbucks barista or Keebler elf—are necessary for real unalienated labor. We will now turn
to one exemplar for such a network. "
(http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)

=More Information=

* [[Unalienated Value]]

* [[Historical Perspective on Generative Justice]]


[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Research]]