
'''* Article: Introduction To Modes of Exchange. By Kojin Karatani.'''

URL = http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf


=Introduction=

Kojin Karatani:

"The  history of  social  formations  should be  seen in terms  of  hybrid forms  that include  multiple  modes  of  exchange. But  the  various  modes  of  exchange  themselves  also undergo transformations  within the  transformations  of  social  formations. The  first  social formation arises  with clan society, in which mode  A  is  dominant. Even at  this  stage, however, the  germs  of  modes  B and C are  present, albeit  to a  barely noticeable  degree. In state  society, mode  B becomes  dominant, but  this  does  not  mean that  mode  A  disappeared. It  persists  in the form  of  the  agricultural  community that  submits  to state  rule. It  is  submissive  to the  power that stands  above  it, but  within  its  interior is  a  collective  characterized by self-government  and egalitarianism. On top of  this, under the  dominance  of  mode  B, trade  carried out  between different  communities  causes  cities  to flourish and leads  to an expansion in mode  of  exchange  C. At  the  same  time, however, mode  B also expands. Through this  process  “world-empires”  take shape. These  in turn undergo a  transformation when they reach a  stage  at  which, together with the  establishment  of  a  global  market, mode  C undergoes  an explosive  expansion. At  this  time, the  modern social  formation comes  into being. Viewed in this  way, it  becomes  clear that  we  need to see  transformations  in social  forms not  simply along the  temporal  axis, but  also along the  spatial  axis. What  I have  just  described is  a simplified model  of  the  social  formation. But  no society exists  in isolation. All  societies  engage in ‘intercourse’ with other societies. In other words, they engage  in ‘exchange’ relations  with other societies. I call  this  sort  of  grouping of  social  formations  “world systems,”  after the  work of Fernand Braudel. They differ depending on which mode  of  exchange  is  dominant  within them. (See  figure  4). For example, even clan societies  form  ‘mini  world systems.’ These  are  not  necessarily on a  miniature  scale;  some, such as  the  Iroquois  Federation in North America, were  of  an enormous  scale. The  special  characteristic  of  this  system  is  that  the  bonds  between different clans  are  based in mode  of  exchange  A. The  next  world system  is  the  ‘world-empire.’ This  is grounded in mode  of  exchange  B. The  next  to appears  is  the  world system  that  Braudel  calls  the ‘world-economy.’ In it, mode  of  exchange  C is  dominant, but  even here  B and A  persist, albeit  in altered form. Namely, B in the  form  of  the  sovereign state  and A  in  the  form  of  the  nation (imagined community). Accordingly, the  modern social  formation takes  the  form  of  a combination of  three  modes  of  exchange—that  is, capital-nation-state. Borrowing Wallerstein’s 16 language, this  can be  call  the  ‘modern world system.’ (See  figure  5). As  we  have  seen, the  history of  social  formations  can be  explained in terms  of  their combinations  of  modes  of  exchange, the  economic  base. 


=Discussion=

==Why Kojin Karatani Switched from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange==

Kojin Karatani:

"I proposed the  notion of  switching “from  modes  of  production to modes  of  exchange”  in The  Structure  of  World History  (2010;  English trans. 2014). Here, I would like  to provide  a simple  explanation of  this. Orthodox Marxist  theory, using an architectural  metaphor, explains the  history of  social  forms  in terms  of  modes  of  production, which form  the  economic  base (foundation), and of  the  political  or  ideational  superstructures  that  are  determined by that  base. A mode  of  production consists  of  the  productive  forces, which arise  from  the  relations  between humans  and nature, and the  relations  of  production, which are  constituted by the  relations between  humans. I do not  oppose  the  idea  that  the  history of  social  forms  is  determined by the economic  base, but  in my view  that  base  consists  not  of  modes  of  production, but  rather modes of  exchange. What  I call  modes  of  exchange  includes  both relations  between nature  and  humans and relations  between  humans.1 I came  to see  things  this  way as  a  result  of  various  critiques  that  were  mounted in response  to problems  in the  Marxist  view  that  modes  of  production constituted the  economic base—critiques  that  ultimately resulted in  a  rejection of  the  idea  of  an economic  base. 

This  does  not  amount  to a  rejection of  Marx. At  the  stage  of  writing  The  German Ideology, Marx himself  used the  expression “productive  forces  and intercourse,”  not  “productive  forces and  relations  of  production.”  The  concept  of  intercourse  (Verkehr) includes  relations  of production, transportation, trade, sexual  intercourse  and even war. In other words, it  includes  all the  various  types  of  “exchange”  that  occur among  that  occur among communities.Accordingly, the  various  forms  that  I call  modes  of  exchange  can be  said to correspond to what  Marx called intercourse. A  perspective  centered on modes  of  production (productive  forces  and relations  of production) fails  to see  that  the  relation between people  and nature  is  itself  a  form  of  exchange (metabolism) and as  a  result  loses  sight  of  the  ecological  awareness  that  was  included in Marx’s use  of  the  term."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)


==Historical Materialism and the focus on Modes of Production Originated from Engels, not Marx==

Kojin Karatani:

"Historical  materialism  based on modes  of  production was  a  view  originally proposed by Engels. After Marx’s  death, Engels would describe  this  as  Marx’s  own epochal  invention, but  this  was  not  the  case.5  Engels  had already adopted this  line  of  thought  back when Marx was  still  under the  intellectual  sway of  the German Young Hegelian school. This  was  because  Engels  lived in England, where  he  witnessed the  development  of  a  capitalist  economy and the  class  struggle  (the  labor movement) that characterizes  it. From  that  point, he  turned his  gaze  back on the  history of  society. The  formulas of  historical  materialism  amounted to the  projection back onto pre-capitalist  society of  a perspective  that  was  established on the  basis  of  capitalism. In that  sense, it  might  be  of  some  use as  a  “guiding thread”  for understanding pre-capitalist  society, but  cannot  be  used for grasping a capitalist  economy. Accordingly, Marx brought  in a  different  approach. According to the  theory of  historical  materialism, the  base  of  capitalist  society lies  in the relations  of  production between capitalists  and workers. But  Marx in  Capital  does  not  begin from  there, but  rather from  exchange  (money  and commodity). Why?  In general, according to historical  materialism  and those  forms  of  Marxism  based on it, production is  of  primary importance, and exchange  is  secondary. Yet  this  is, if  anything, a  view  grounded in the  thought of  the  classical  economists  such as  Adam  Smith, who were  the  object  of  Marx’s  critique. Smith and his  ilk were  rejecting merchant  capital, which earned its  profits  from  exchanges, as  well  as the  theories  of  their mercantilist  and bullionist  predecessors, whose  thought  was  grounded in merchant  capital. Smith asserted the  legitimacy of  the  earnings  of  industrial  capital, as  opposed to those  of  merchant  capital. In sum, for classical  economists  like  Smith, exchange  was  of  only secondary importance. But  for Marx, exchange  was  fundamental. This  was  because  he  was  taking up questions that  had been disavowed by classical  economics. In that  sense, we  could say that  he  analyzed capital  by returning to mercantilism  and bullionism. He  considered merchant  capital  and  moneylending  capital  to be  the  essential  forms  of  capital. Mercantilism  and bullionism  demonstrated that  what  drove  capital  was  not  the  desire  for material  goods, but  rather for  money—in other words,  the  drive  to accumulate  the  ‘power’ that  enables  one  to acquire  material  goods  through exchange  with the  money one  has.Moreover, this  accumulation of  power could only by realized through differences  generated through exchange  (surplus  value).6 The  real  question is, where  does  this  ‘power’ (exchange  value) come  from?  Marx saw  it as  a  kind of  spiritual  power adhering to the  commodity—as, that  is, a  fetish.  

The  essential  characteristic  of  a  capitalist  economy cannot  be  explained through its  mode of  production. This  is  because  that  characteristic  lies  in its  mode  of  exchange. For example, the relation between capitalist  and worker is  based on an agreement/contract  between the  capitalist who has  money and the  laborer who has  the  labor power commodity. Accordingly, this  is qualitatively different  from  the  relation in medieval  Europe  between feudal  lord and serf, just  as it  is  qualitatively different  from  the  relation in classical  Greece  and Rome  between citizen and slave. In sum, the  difference  between relations  of  production in capitalism  and those  in earlier relations  of  production is  a  difference  in mode  of  exchange. Under the  theory of  historical materialism, transformations  in the  social  formation are  understood as  a  series  of  stages  in the development  of  relations  of  production. But  in reality, transformations  in mode  of  exchange  exist at  a  more  fundamental, basic  level. A variety of  modes  of  exchange  continue  to exist  in a  modern capitalist  societies, but  the commodity mode  of  exchange  is  dominant. The  “productive  forces  and relations  of  production” of  these  societies  are  simply the  results  of  this. Accordingly, when Marx undertook his consideration of  the  capitalist  economy, he  began from  its  mode  of  exchange. He  relied on historical  materialism  as  a  “guiding thread”  only with regard to earlier societies. But, in fact, even in the  case  of  pre-capitalist  stages, trying to understand them  in terms  of  modes  of 10 production leads  to difficulties. Had Marx tried to tackle  this  on his  own, probably he  would have  ended up taking a  different  approach to pre-capitalist  social  formations  as  well. This  is clear, as  I will  discuss  below, from  the  study he  made  of  Morgan’s  Ancient  Society  in his  later years.   


...



Engels’s  words:  “These  two great  discoveries, the  materialistic  conception of  history and the revelation of  the  secret  of  capitalistic  production through surplus-value, we  owe  to Marx.” (Engels,  Socialism: Utopian and Scientific;  Marx and Engels,  Collected Works, 24:305). After Marx’s  death, he  began to describe  these  as  constituting “Marxism.”  But  as  Wataru Hiromatsu long ago demonstrated, this  is  not  correct.  It  was  Engels  who in the  1840s  first  proposed the “materialist  view  of  history”  (historical  materialism). Moreover, it  is  also clear that  their collaborative  work  The  German Ideology  (especially its  first  section, “Feuerbach”) was  also written largely at  Engels’ initiative."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)


==The [[Gift Economy as a Mode of Exchange]]==


Kojin Karatani:

"Generally speaking, Marxists  have  made  few  contributions  to our understanding of pre-capitalist  societies. This  was  because  they relied on the  formulas  of  historical  materialism. As a  result, the  epochal  breakthrough in our understanding of  the  social  formation in clan societies came  not  from  a  Marxist  but  rather  Marcel  Mauss. 

He  analyzed it  not  in terms  of  productive forces  or means  of  production, but  rather of  exchange. This  was  not  commodity exchange, but rather the  reciprocal  exchange  of  gift/counter-gift. I call  this  mode  of  exchange  A  to distinguish it  from  commodity exchange  (mode  of  exchange  C). This  kind of  exchange  is  comprised of  three rules:  one  must  give  gifts, one  must  accept  gifts, and one  must  reciprocate  for gifts  received. These  rules  are  not  something that  people  invented. They are  instead imposed  by a  ‘magical power’ (hau) that  people  are  compelled to obey. The  social  formation of  clan society is  created through this  principle  of  exchange. For example, the  form  of  kinship is  established through reciprocal  exchanges  in which one  gives  one’s  daughter or son to another community and then receives  in turn a  reciprocal  return gift. In this  sense, the  clan society social  formation was established by exchange  in this  broad sense, and this  is  what  constitutes  its  true  economic  base.   Incidentally, the  Marxist  anthropologist  Marshal  Sahlins  argued for the  existence  of  a “family mode  of  production”  at  the  root  of  reciprocal  exchanges, while  Maurice  Godelier proposed a  mode  of  inalienable  communal  ownership.7  Both are  trying above  all  to salvage  the theory of  historical  materialism. But  in reality it  was  the  reciprocal  mode  of  exchange  that brought  about  the  family mode  of  production and communal  ownership, not  the  other way around. Accordingly, we  have  to start  from  modes  of  exchange  in understanding primitive societies—as  we  can see  from  consulting Marx’s  own views  on the  matter.   In his  later years, when Marx praised Morgan’s  Ancient  Society  and discussed clan society, he  did not  invoke  mode  of  production. Marx paid less  attention to the  economic  equality of  clan society than to the  freedom  and autonomy of  its  individual  members. “All  the  members of  an Iroquois  gens  personally  free, bound  to defend each other’s  freedom; equal  in privileges [and]  personal  rights.  Sachem  [and] chiefs  claiming no superiority;  a  brotherhood bound together  by  the  ties  of  kin. Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal  principles  [of  the]  gens….”8   If  that  is  the  case, what  is  the  source  of  the  principles  of  liberty, equality, and fraternity in the clan society?  This  cannot  be  explained by way of  mode  of  production or communal  ownership. Marx never argued this  point  explicitly himself, but  in my view, they arise  from  the  principle  of reciprocal  exchange, and this  is  what  formed the  economic  base  that  determined clan society. Moreover, Marx described future  communism  as  being ‘the  return in a  higher dimension’ of  the principles  of  clan society. This  shows  that  he  did not  regard future  communism  as  a  situation arising simply out  of  the  further development  of  modes  of  production. While  he  didn’t  explicitly spell  this  out, Marx did hint  that  future  communism  should be  sought  through modes  of exchange."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf) 


==The [[Submission for Protection as a Mode of Exhange]]==

Kojin Karatani:

"What  was  the  situation with state  society that  emerged after clan society?  It  may appear to be  grounded primarily in violent  exploitation, but  in fact  it  is  also based on a  kind of ‘exchange.’ While  not  ordinarily regarded as  a  kind of  exchange, what  we  find here  is  an exchange  of  submission for  protection.9  The  state  has  its  beginnings  in conquest  and violent domination, but  it  can only become  a  sustained form  of  rule  when the  ruled willingly  submit  to it. This  becomes  possible  when they receive  protection in return for their submission—in other words, when the  relation of  ruler/ruled becomes  a  kind of  exchange. This  gives  rise  to a  form  of ‘power’ other than violence. This  power binds  not  only the  ruled, but  also the  rulers, because  if the  rulers  are  unable  to protect  the  ruled, they will  lose  their position as  rulers. In this  sense, this relationship is  bilateral  (reciprocal), so that  in a  sense  it  is  related to mode  of  exchange  A.    I call  this  form  of  exchange  mode  B. Just  as  with mode  of  exchange  A, a  kind of  nonmaterial  ‘power’  is  at  work in mode  B. But  this  is  something  born out  of  ‘exchange’ itself, not something that  somehow  bubbled up from  within the  ideational  superstructure. If  we  consider mode  of  exchange  to constitute  the  economic  base  of  a  social  formation, the  state  is  not something that  originates  in the  superstructure, outside  the  realm  of  the  economic, but  rather is directly rooted in a  specific  form  of  exchange—that  is  to say, in the  economic  base, broadly conceived. Gramsci’s  “hegemony,”  Althusser’s  “ideational  apparatuses,”  and Foucault’s “knowledge-power”  all  come  not  from  a  superstructure  that  is  autonomous  from  the  economic base, but  rather from  the  economic  base  itself. Moreover, those  entities  that  Freud regarded as “psychological  factors”  in order to distinguish them  from  the  economic  realm  also in fact originate  from  modes  of  exchange  and hence  are, in the  broad sense, of  the  economic  base.  

Note: In  Leviathan, Hobbes  argued that  the  condition of  peace  was  produced via  a  social  contract from  out  of  the  ‘natural  condition’ of  struggle  of  all  against  all. This  social  contract  was, he  says, a  covenant  “extorted by fear.”  This  means  it  was  a  kind of  exchange, because  those  who submitted were  granted their lives  in exchange  for submitting. Moreover, the  rulers  were  placed under an obligation to carry out  their end as  well. In this  sense, we  can say that  Hobbes understood the  state  in terms  of  mode  of  exchange  B. But  theorists  from  Locke  on have  thought of  the  ‘social  contract’ only in terms  of  mode  of  exchange  C."


==[[Capitalism as a Mode of Exchange]]==

Kojin Karatani:

"What  about  mode  of  exchange  C?  As  I noted above, this  may appear at  first  glance  to be a  simple  exchange  of  material  goods, but  that  is  incorrect. Here  too an  ideational  power is  at work—and it  too arises  from  ‘exchange’ itself. Marx describes  it  the  following terms. “The exchange  of  commodities, therefore, first  begins  on the  boundaries  of  such communities, at  their points  of  contact  with other similar communities, or with members  of  the  latter.”10  In other words, exchange  takes  place  with an unknown, perhaps  dangerous  other. Hence, the  need arises for a  ‘power’ to control  the  other—a  ‘power,’ moreover, that  is  different  from  those  that  hold sway at  the  level  of  community or state. It  is, moreover, of  an  ideational/religious  nature. It  is, in fact, what  we  call  ‘credit’ or ‘trust.’ Marx called this  sort  of  power a  fetish. “Hence  the  riddle presented by money is  but  the  riddle  presented by commodities;  only it  now  strikes  us  in its  most glaring form.”11  In this  way, Marx was  trying to demonstrate  how  the  commodity fetish, in the form  of  the  money fetish and then the  capital  fetish, comes  to dominate  society as  a  whole. To repeat, what  Capital  made  clear is  that  the  capitalist  economy is  controlled not  by the  material, but  rather by the  power of  fetishism—that  is,  by  the  idiational  power. (See  figures  1, 2, and 3). From  the  above  it  should be  clear how  modes  of  exchange  A, B, and C each gives  rise  to an  ideational  ‘power’ that  compells  people. All  of  these  are  born out  of  ‘exchange’ itself."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf) 


==[[What Kinds  of  Class  Struggle  Existed Prior To Capitalist  Society]]?==

Kojin Karatani:

"when we  view  feudal  societies  in terms  of  relations  of  production, we expect  to find class  struggle  between feudal  lords  and serfs—and yet  instances  of  this  are  hard to find. When struggle  did occur, it  was  mainly due  to misgovernment  by the  feudal  lord. In other words, when he  failed to meet  his  obligations  under bilateral  mode  of  exchange  B. Accordingly, even when struggle  emerged, it  could only take  place  within the  terms  defined by mode  B. In the middle  ages, cases  of  class  struggle  that  transcended  mode  B were  those  between  feudal  lord  and city people. In other words, resistance  to mode  of  exchange  B came  from  mode  of  exchange  C, which emerged in the  cities. In sum, the  ‘class  struggle’ that  took place  during the  medieval period was  not  an issue  of  modes  of  production;  it  was  a  conflict  between mode  of  exchange  B and mode  of  exchange  C, which was  spreading  from  the  cities. And in the  end, it  was  the  latter that  won out.   That  being the  case, this  may have  been a  ‘struggle  between classes,’ but  it  was  not  a ‘struggle  to abolish class  in itself.’ In fact, these  various  struggles  did harbor within themselves elements  that  could ‘sublate  class  in itself.’ That  is  what  rendered these  struggles  into epochmaking ‘class  struggles.’ But  those  elements  were  never realized and in the  end only aided in replacing one  ruling class  with another. For example, the  French Revolution with its  slogan of “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity”  ended in the  realization of  capitalist  society. That  being the  case, where  does  the  movement  to ‘sublate  class  in itself’ come  from? Generally, it  seems, this  arises  from  the  dimension of  religion and thought. In other words, not from  the  economic  base, but  from  the  ideational  superstructure. In my view, however, these actually come  from  the  economic  base—that  is, from  modes  of  exchange—but  in form  of  a  mode of  exchange  that  is  different  from  A, B, and C, and that  in fact  aims  to sublate  them. Moreover, 18 unlike  a  simple  concept  or idea, these  has  its  own ‘power’ of  compulsion. I will  discuss  this again below.   What  is  clear by now  is  that  the  class  struggles  we  can identify from  the  premodern period arise  not  from  mode  of  production, but  rather mode  of  exchange. And we  can say the same  thing with regard to class  struggle  in capitalist  society. For example, as  I noted above, Engels  observed the  class  struggle  in 1840s  England and from  this  hit  upon the  idea  of  ‘historical materialism,’ but  in 1848 when revolutionary movements  swept  across  Europe, the  quickest cessation of  class  struggle  was  seen in England. Moreover, this  happened not  because  of  the defeat  of  the  Chartist  Movement—but  rather because  of  its  partial  victory. After this, the  labor movement  in England was  legalized  and before  long there  appeared the  so-called labor aristocracy. What  emerged subsequently was  Fabian Socialism  (Social  Democrats). In sum, the class  struggle  that  occurred in England disappears  with the  victory, to a  certain degree, of  the working class.  Why? The  disappearance  of  class  struggle  at  this  time  did not  mean the  disappearance  of  the capitalist  mode  of  production. As  a  result  of  the  struggle, it  became  legal  for labor unions  and others  to engage  in negotiations  over wages. Seen from  the  perspective  of  modes  of  exchange, this  means  that  the  relations  of  capitalists  and laborers, which had resembled modes  B or A, started to move  towards  mode  C. Looking back from  this  perspective, the  fierce  class  struggle  of the  Chartist  Movement  arose  not  from  ‘relations  of  production’ or ‘contradictions  between productive  forces  and relations  of  production,’ but  rather from  the  emergence  of  a  new  mode  of exchange  that  was  in the  process  of  replacing the  previously dominant  mode. And when this  was achieved, the  labor movement  became  an accepted part  of  the  labor market—that  is, of  the capitalist  market  economy. And with this, while  it  appeared that  the  class  struggle  continued, in 19 fact  any ‘consciousness  to sublate  class  in itself’ had vanished.   In the  advanced capitalist  countries, class  struggle  and socialist  revolutionary movements were  destined to fade  away after an initial  period of  activity. Faced with this  situation at  the  end of  the  nineteenth century, following the  death of  Engels, Engel’s  desciple  Bernstein proclaimed the  end of  Marx-Engels  revolutionary theory. But  Lenin concluded that  because  the  proletariat would naturally come  to acquire  a  bourgeois-like  consciousness  and lose  its  class  consciousness that  would abolish class  in itself, and for that  reason believed that  class  consciousness  had to be introduced from  ‘outside.’ Lukacs’s  History  and Class  Consciousness  (1923) aimed to provide the  philosophical  basis  for this. In their case, the  ‘outside’ meant  the  ideas  provided by vanguard intellectuals  (or the  vanguard party). But  this  was  no different  from  Plato’s  philosopher-king, and in the  end its  result  was  to legitimize  dictatorship by the  party. By contrast, from  early on Ernst  Bloch pointed out  the  limitations  of  historical  materialist theory, and in  Thomas  Müntzer  as  Theologian of  Revolution  (1921) he  attempted to link the socialist  revolution with religion. Lukacs  criticized this  as  a  deviation from  correct  Marxism, but what  I want  to point  out  here  is  that  already in 1848, Engels  had confronted the  same  problem and adopted the  same  point  of  view. At  the  moment  when ‘class  struggle’ in England had died away, he  revisited the  question of  how  class  struggle  or even socialist  revolution might  be possible. This  could not  be  resolved from  an approach centered on ‘productive  forces  and relations  of  production.’ In other words, the  person who was  the  first  to propose  this  approach was  also the  one  who came  to this  realization about  its  limitations.   Specifically, he  began to research peasant  movements  from  sixteenth-century Germany (The  Peasant  War  in Germany, 1850). In this  work, he  tried to find ‘communism’ in the  thought of  the  millenarian movement  leader Thomas  Müntzer. 

Engels’s  previous  position was  that  the 20 ‘power’ that  drives  socialism  and movements  to sublate  class  in itself  comes  from  the  economic base  (contradictions  between productive  forces  and the  relations  of  production). But  here  he acknowledged that  these  come  instead from  the  ideational/religious  dimension. He  would then launch into a  study of  the  history of  primitive  Christianity that  would continue  until  the  end of his  life. It  is  also true, however, that  he  was  never able  to go beyond this  stage  and bring this question to its  logical  conclusion.14 Bloch was  in many ways  the  heir to this  approach.  He  would write  that, “Only a  athiest can be  a  good Christian;  only a  Christian can be  a  a  good atheist.”15  (Atheism  in Christianity). Even before  this, the  Christian theologian Karl  Barth would write  that, “A  well-known theologian and author has  recently argued that  these  two ought  not  to be  joined together as  they are  in our topic:  ‘Jesus  Christ  and  the  movement  for social  justice,’ for that  makes  it  sound as  if they are  really two different  entities  which must  first  be  connected more  or less  artificially. Both are  seen as  one  and the  same:  Jesus  is  the  movement  for social  justice, and the  movement  for social  justice  is  Jesus  in the  present.”16   We can say that  these  thinkers  were  confronting the  same  problem  that  Engels  had faced. Through a  paradoxical  logic, they were  trying to repair the  rupture  between religion and social movements—in other words, the  rupture  between  ideational  superstructure  and economic  base. But  this  problem  can be  resolved if  we  view  the  economic  base  in terms  of  modes  of  exchange rather than modes  of  production."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)


==Towards Mode D: How Post-Capitalist Class Struggle Is Different==

Kojin Karatani:

"Up until  this  point, I have  been speaking only of  three  kinds  of modes  of  exchange, but  here  I would like  to introduce  mode  of  exchange  D Strictly speaking, D  is  not  one  of  the  modes  of  exchange. It  is  a  drive  that  seeks  to negate and  sublate  ‘exchange’ (whether of  mode  A, B, or C). It  appears  in the  form  of  an ideational/religious  power. Nonetheless, it  is  deeply connected to the  economic  base—that  is, to exchange. It  is  precisely for this  reason that  D  is  able  to oppose  the  various  powers  that  arise from  A, B, and C. It  is  not  some  imaginary being created through human desire  or intention;  to the  contrary, it  possesses  its  own ‘power’ of  compulsion over humans. D is  undoubtedly religious  in nature. But  if  that  is  so, A, B, and C are  also each in their own way religious. Weber referred to religion as  ‘Gotteszwang  or coercion of  the  god,’ which is nothing other than ‘mode  of  exchange  A,’ in which one  makes  a  gift  to the  gods  in order to compel  them  to reciprocate. The  state, too, can be  called  a  religion grounded in mode  of exchange  B. Mode  C, on the  other hand, gives  rise  to religion in the  form  of  commodity fetishism. This  may at  first  glance  seem  to be  nonreligious. For example, in today’s  advanced capitalist  countries, we  see  increasing secularism  and rejection of  religion. Yet  this  does  not amount  to a  criticism  of  religion:  it  shows  instead the  situation of  neoliberalism, in which mode C has  become  the  dominant  fetish. Mode  of  exchange  D, by contrast, arises  in the  form  of  a  criticism  of  those  kinds  of religion. In concrete  terms, it  emerges  in all  regions  at  the  stage  of  world-empire, where  modes A, B, and C have  achieved a  certain degree  of  maturity, in the  form  of  universal  religions.

Universal  religions, that  is, emerge  in the  form  of  ‘critique  of  religion.’ Of  course, these  later transform  to become  the  religion of  the  community (mode  A) or the  religion of  empire  (mode  B), and yet  within these  elements  of  mode  D  will  ceaselessly reappear in the  form  of  heretical movements—for example, Thomas  Müntzer’s  movement. Accordingly, historically mode  D  has played an active  role  in transformating social  formations. In that  sense, despite  the  fact  that  mode D is  not  an element  of  the  social  formation, which is  a  combination of  multiple  modes  of exchange,  it  nonetheless  persists  as  an active  force  within it.   In modern social  formations, mode  C is  dominant. This  does  not  mean, however, that  modes  A and B are  absent. They remain, albeit  transformed under the  sway of  mode  C. For example, even in the  modern state  which has  adopted bourgeois  forms  of  law, mode  B persists  in the  form  of ‘state  power.’  And after the  dissolution of  the  tribe  or community at  the  hands  of  mode  C, mode A is  revived in the  form  of  the  ‘imagined community’ (Benedict  Anderson). Hence, the  modern social  formation takes  to form  of  capital-nation-state. Today, mode  A  functions  as  an impulse  toward the  restoration of  community—as, that  is, nationalism. But  it  can never overcome  modes  B or C. 

To the  contrary, taking the  form  of xenophobia, it  serves  to bolster capital-state. In the  past, it  led to Fascism, and it  is  likely that something similar will  reoccur in the  future. By contrast, mode  D  does  not  seek the  restoration of a  past  community. It  bears  only a  superficial  resemblance  to  mode  A. 

Insofar as  modes  A, B, and C continue  to exist, D  will  persist  as  a  drive  toward their negation. Where  does  it  come  from?  D  might  seem  to come  from  the  heavens. But  in fact, it issues  from  the  economic  dimension. Or again, it  might  seem  to come  from  the  future. But  in fact, it  issues  from  the  past.   From  where  does  D’s  ‘power’ arise?  The  answer to this  cannot  be  separated from  the question of  where  A’s  ‘power’ comes  from. In short, how  did reciprocal  exchange  begin?  

This cannot  be  demonstrated empirically. I would like  to refer here  to something Marx wrote  in the preface  to  Capital. “In the  analysis  of  economic  forms, moreover, neither microscopes  nor chemical  reagents  are  of  use. The  force  of  abstraction must  replace  both.”  As  this  indicates, he carried out  his  investigation into the  origins  of  commodity exchange  C via  the  “force  of abstraction.”  Accordingly, we  can adopt  the  same  approach with regard to the  other modes  of exchange. In primitive  societies, the  principle  for the  establishment  of  the  social  formation undoubtedly lay with reciprocal  exchange. This  did not, however, exist  from  the  start. When the human race  was  at  the  sage  of  nomadic  hunter-gatherers, modes  B and C did not  exist—but neither did mode  A. Most  likely, all  products  were  distributed equitably at  this  stage. Nomadism made  the  accumulation of  goods  impossible. The  size  of  the  nomadic  band was  determined by the  scale  needed to engage  in hunting and did not  grow  larger or smaller than this. Nothing compelled members  of  the  band to remain. When they encountered other bands, probably they carried out  simple  exchanges, but  these  did not  develop into warfare. I call  this  situation nomadism  U. What  caused this  situation to change  was  the  shift  to fixed settlement  in many parts  of  the world, itself  a  result  of  global  climate  change. After this, interpersonal  conflict  and disparities  of wealth began to appear within the  collective. Fixed settlement  made  exchanges  with other collectives  necessary — which in turn gave  rise  to new  difficulties. It  was  at  this  time  that  mode of  exchange  A, the  reciprocity of  the  gift, began. Needless  to say, this  was  not  something that people  invented or thought  up. It  arrived as  something that  transcended human intentions.   

...


After the  appearance  of  clan society, human society came  to be  dominated by the ideational  ‘power’ that  is  produced by modes  B and C. When mode  B is  dominant, mode  A  is limited to functioning as  the  principle  of  the  community. As  I noted above, however, when modes  A, B, and C have  reached a  certain stage—that  is, at  the  stage  of  world-empire—mode  D appears  in the  form  of  universal  religion. In other words, universal  religion cannot  exist  in isolation from  the  economic  base.   Mode  D  is  not  the  return of  mode  A;  Accordingly, it  intends  not  the past  but  the  future. Nonetheless, it  is  different  from  human hopes  and fantasies:  it  has  the character of  a  repetition compulsion. What  D  makes  possible  is  various  forms  of  resistance  to the ‘powers’ possessed by A, B, and C. We  can include  literature  and art  among these.  The  ability of literature  and art  to escape  direct  determination by the  productive  forces  and relations  of production and to present  a  utopia  that  transcends  these  comes  from  mode  D. 

Insofar as  the  powers  of  modes  A, B, and C persist, mode  D  will  always  return as  a  kind of compulsion that  attempts  to  sublate  these. Accordingly, insofar as  it  consists  of  mode  D, ‘communism’ is  historically necessary and inevitable."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)

=More Info=
* [[Introduction To Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Evolution of the Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Historical Approach to Shifts in Modes of Exchange]]
* [[From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Kojin Karatani on Why We Should Move from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Power and Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Mode Of Production]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]