=Description=

Joseph Dillard:

"Intrasocial capital is meant represent a polycentric and multi-perspectival perspective, one that is open to shifting among all these forms of wealth, any combination of them, or all of them together, depending on the circumstances. The important point is that an intrasocial perspective is not centered on what I need (a psychologically geocentric perspective) or what we need (an ethnocentric perspective) but on multi-perspectivalism itself. There is no one center of identity; it shifts according to the context, meaning that it is polycentric. If financial capital is metaphorically Earth with the sun, planets, and stars orbiting around it and social capital is metaphorically the solar system orbiting the sun, intrasocial capital is metaphorically space, in which every point is the center and there is no set standard by which to measure time. The multiple perspectives of intrasocial capital cannot be reduced to self-aspects or self perspectives, because to do so is reductionistic: we are taking a psychologically geocentric approach to capital. Clearly, multi-perspectivalism is not the “best” approach. For example, in self-development, a psychologically geocentric perspective is required for the development of identity and skill sets. If our priority is to protect and maintain some group identity, a sociocentric or ethnocentric perspective is superior. Therefore, multi-perspectivalism needs to be considered one more tool, but one without any fixed tool user — and that is a critical difference."

(https://medium.com/@josephdillard/financial-social-and-intrasocial-capital-in-an-integral-context-d96dad67e29c)


=Discussion=

Joseph Dillard:

"If social capital generates a more resilient, sustainable, and healthier future than a world orbiting mostly around financial capital, individual lives and social collectives become even more resilient, sustainable, and healthier when they are built and draw upon intrasocial capital. Intrasocial capital is even more foundational than social capital, yet we can have both financial and social capital but lack intrasocial capital. While social capital is based on mutual respect, reciprocity, trustworthiness, and empathy, intrasocial capital is based on respect for multiple perspectives that are subjective sources of objectivity.

Phenomenologically-based experiential multi-perspectivalisms (PEMs) are varieties of intrasocial capital while cognitive multi-perspectivalisms, such as Integral AQAL, provide their own varieties of capital. Cognitive multi-perspectivalisms emphasize the expansion of consciousness in the interior individual quadrant, mainly through meditation, but also through various integral life practices and the adoption of a multi-perspectival worldview. Worldviews are cognitive elements of the interior collective quadrant. In contrast, experiential multi-perspectivalisms emphasize the decentralization of the self and Self through disidentification and simultaneous identification with alternative perspectives. In childhood this is known as “role playing” and it is an essential component of the development of identity. However, accessing intrasocial capital involves a conscious practice or yoga that childhood identification does not.

Integral Deep Listening is one variety of phenomenologically-based experiential multi-perspectivalism (PEM). Although it is the only one I know of, there is no reason why others that are superior cannot be developed. In IDL, subjective sources of objectivity of indeterminate ontology are interviewed in order to access emerging potentials that point toward the priorities of one’s own unique life compass. These perspectives cannot be reduced to self-aspects, as psychology tends to view mental imagery, and they also cannot be reduced to objective realities, as shamanism assumes. Experiential refers to the centrality of disidentification/identification to the process. Phenomenologically-based refers to the surfacing and tabling of underlying assumptions, interpretations, projections, expectations, and cognitive filters. The reason such objectification of assumptions is essential to intrasocial capital is that while assumptions and filters are unavoidable, we can only counteract or take into account their impact when they are first recognized and then temporarily set aside. Without doing so, we never see the other, but instead view the echo chamber of our own cognitive filters while firmly believing we are encountering the other, whether in waking life, dreams, or mystical experiences. Disidentification/identification with the other, subsequent to the objectification of assumptions, is done routinely in IDL interviews of elements from mystical or near-death experiences, or the “fire” of our anger at our partner or our fear of failure that pursues us like some monster or criminal.

Many people, probably most, associate interviewing dream characters and the personifications of life issues with either projection, shadow work, or profound subjectivity that leads nowhere. There are good reasons for such conclusions: most interactions with imagery, fantasy, and subjective constructs amount to exactly that. If that is all that one has known, with the exception of exceptionalistic shamanic and mystical claims to “true” revelations, why shouldn’t one be skeptical of capital or value of an intrasocial sort based on interviewing ostrich eggs and unicorns? IDL invites such skepticism and provides a methodology by which both the methodology and its theoretical underpinnings can be empirically tested in one’s life, looking for truth based on pragmatism, as well as by collectives determining truth on the basis of consensus. Any PEM that is authentic will follow the three strands of empiricism noted by Wilber: stated injunctions will be tested and then subjected to collective verification and validation. The trans-rational nature of many interviewed perspectives, in that they are based on a rational methodology and provide recommendations that include one’s own rationality, yet transcend it by providing trans-rational perspectives and recommendations, are foundational to the claim of PEMs that they are transpersonal yogas.

In the accompanying table I have listed various characteristics of IDL, as one variety of PEM, as it relates to intrasocial capital. Intrasocial capital is intrasocial because it involves collectives of objective others, which are generally considered as exterior collective relationships that are interactive and interdependent, yet inhabiting the interior collective quadrant — the realm of multiple values, worldviews, cultures, interpretations, and perspectives which are interior to objective actions and others. Interviewed emerging potentials supply their own values, worldviews, culture, interpretations, and perspectives, as differentiated from those of objective others and our own entirely subjective interior scripting and preferences. Intrasocial perspectives are “intrapersonal,” “between psyches” or identities, pointing toward the interaction among elements of intrasocial collectives, and are not to be confused with interpersonal, which means “within the psyche.”

The intrasocial realm remains invisible as long as no interviewing methodology exists by which imaginal preferences are disclosed. For example, instead of practicing integral deep listening to the road, car, or dead dog in a dream we typically project our assumptions as symbols onto a dream, mystical experience, or life event, ending up with an interpretation that merely reflects someone’s associations. That is not integral, deep, or listening but is instead closer to “egocentric and superficial projection.”

Not any interviewing or questioning accesses the intrasocial or develops intrasocial capital. It not only has to be phenomenologically-based but ask questions that 1) establish and maintain identification with another perspective, 2) are relevant to the life and concerns of the subject, 3) solicit reframings, recommendations, and alternative perspectives, and 4) are of sufficient length to begin the process of the expansion and thinning of self and Self.

Intrasocial capital is abstract in the sense that no one attaches importance to the perspectives of dream toilet brushes or imaginal hurricanes. We typically discount any responses from such perspectives as projections by the interviewed subject, who is assumed to be putting their words into the mouth of the interviewed lightning bolt or beetle. But this is itself an assumption to be surfaced and tabled, since it discounts the very real autonomy of both the presence and what is stated by such perspectives. It is not unusual to discover that they disagree with our priorities while proposing appropriate but creative alternative ways of approaching seemingly intractable problems."

(https://medium.com/@josephdillard/financial-social-and-intrasocial-capital-in-an-integral-context-d96dad67e29c)

[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]