
'''= The Invisible Garden is a 'pop up city located in Chiang Mai', taking place in the fall of 2024'''

URL = https://invisible.garden/


=Description=

"Invisible Garden is an Ethereum, ZKP and culture pop up city located in Chiang Mai, dedicated to fostering the synergy of technology, culture, and community. Inspired by the 17th-century Invisible College and the philosophical concept of the Infinite Garden, we embrace a culture of boundless growth, endless possibilities, and the free exchange of knowledge. Our initiative is built, run, and governed by the Mentors Collective DAO, a group of subject-matter experts in technology, culture, and community building.

As a public good, we operate as a non-profit registered foundation, maintaining transparent finances with the ultimate goal of achieving open governance.

Our mission is to foster the development of Ethereum and ZKP builders through immersive learning environments that promote inclusivity and diversity. Participants will have the opportunity to engage in hands-on workshops, hackathons, and collaborative projects guided by leading experts in the field.

To ensure financial barriers do not hinder talented developers, Invisible Garden offers full scholarships covering six weeks of accommodation, co-working space, and access to cultural activities. This unique experience aligns with Ethereum’s core values of neutrality, censorship resistance, openness, data ownership, and security. Join us at Invisible Garden to shape the future of blockchain technology."

(https://invisible.garden/our-program)


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Thailand]]