='''OTHER PEOPLE TO INVITE'''=
----

==''Buddhist leaders''==

* Santi Asoke:
** Chamlong Srimuang
** Prah Bodhirak
** Sang Kwan
** Nungput Vimuttinun,Santi Asok follower 
** Atisa Saengartit, Chaing Mai


* Tavivat Puntarigvivat (TAVIVAT PUNTARIGVIVAT, who received his Ph.D. in religion from Temple University, is professor in the Humanities Department at Mahidol University in Thailand and was head of its Comparative Religion graduate program from 1995 to 1997. His lectures and essays on social ethics from cross-cultural and Buddhist perspectives reflect his first-hand experiences as a bhikkhu in the Thai Theravada tradition.)
* Phra Khamkhian Suvanno  (community at Tahmafaiwan in northeastern Chaiyabhum is an exemplary Buddhist base community)
* Phrakhru Sakorn (community at Yokkrabat in central Thailand is another exemplary Buddhist base community)
* Phra Prachak Khuttacitto (a Buddhist monk who was campaigning to preserve a large rain forest in Buriram, Pah)
* The Buddha-Kasetra Foundation was founded in Chiangmai in 1989, with Phra Chaiyot as coordinator of all its schools and activities.
* Paiboon Teepakorn (Thamkaenchan Community)
* Phra Kittivuttho 
* Phra Phayom Kanlayaano.
* Phra Pa?anantha  
* Phra Thepwethi (Wat Mahathat) 
* Phra Yan Wittayakhom (Luang Pho Khun) 
* Phra Chayanantho
* Phra Thammachayyo 
* Phra Thattachiwo
* Acaan Pongsak Thetchathammo Bah Laad Temple Chiangmai.
* Venerable Phra Thepsophon is Rector of Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya Univeristy
* Mr.Sommai Kornsakoo, past president of WFBY
* Ven. Nicholas Tanisaro, 
* Mr. Manit Ratanasuwan,
* Dr. Viphandh Rueng Pithaya
* Dhammakaya Foundation,
* Buddhist Youth Association under the patronage of His Majesty 
* Foundation of Luangpoh Viriyang.
* Ven. Ching-Yao, President of CYBA
* Phra Phromkunaporn biotech
* Soraj Hongladarom currently co-ordinates the ASEAN-EU LEMLIFE Project, a project promoting bioethics funded by the European Union. He is an associate professor of philosophy at Chulalongkorn University
* Laurence Maund, Buddhist scholar teacher at the Buddhist University in Chiang Mai,

==''Christian Leaders''==

==''Muslim Leaders''==

* AMANA Deciana Speckman deciana.speckmann at arf-asia.org
* Asian Resource Foundation Deciana Speckman deciana.speckmann at arf-asia.org

==''Education Leaders''==

==''Business Leaders''==

* Mr. Prasert Bunsumpun, PTT Public Company Limited, Thailand Business Leader of the Year 2005
* Mr. Chumpol Nalamlieng, The Siam Cement Public Co., Ltd., CEO's Choice of the Year 2005
* Mr. Vichai Tanpatanarat, Fancy Wood Industries Public Co., Ltd., Corporate Citizen of the Year 2005
* Mr. Aditheb Bisalbutr, Thai Olefins Public Company Limited, Innovator of the Year 2005
* James P. Reinnoldt, Managing Director of Northwest Airlines for Thailand, Indochina, and West Asia,  started the nonprofit Thailand Business Coalition on AIDS (TBCA) to combat AIDS
* Bill Black, General Manager of Bangkok's Regent Hotel,  started the nonprofit Thailand Business Coalition on AIDS (TBCA) to combat AIDS
* Supavud Saicheau, managing director of Phatra Securities and a former adviser to the Ministry of Finance.
* Tony Sukreepiron, an entrepreneur with a hand in property, tourism, and manufacturing
* Thaksin Shinawatra, Shin Corp.
* Kaisri Nuengsigkapian, KPMG's Chief Executive in Thailand email: kaisri at kpmg.co.th
* Diageo
* ThaiBev
* Nestle
* Manpower
* Cadbury Thailand
* Sopawadee Lertmanuschai, senior executive vice president of the Stock Exchange of Thailand
* Linda Cruse, Director of Projects, Thailand Business Partnership email: linda.cruse at iblf.org
* Khunying Jada Wattanasiritham became CEO and President of Siam Commercial Bank
* Mr. Banthoon Lamsam, president of Kasikornbank 
* Kiatpong Noychaibun, Federation of Thai Industries (FTI) vice chairman 
* Andrew McBean, Microsoft Thailand’s managing director
* Marco A Sucharitkul, president of JP Morgan Securities (Thailand).
* Khunying Pornthip Narongdej, KPN Group chairwoman 



==''Civic/Political Leaders''==

* Korn Chatikavanij, deputy leader of the opposition Democrat Party and a former investment banker.
* Kasit Piromya, a retired diplomat turned opposition politician
* Jakrapop Penkhair, a Thai Rak Thai MP in Bangkok
* Abhisit Vejjajiva, leader of the opposition Democrat Party.
* Thitinan Pongsudhirak, a politics professor at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok.
* Tanet Charoenmuang, a political scientist at Chiang Mai University and an informal government adviser.
* Surin Pitsuwan, former foreign minister and opposition MP
* Surapong Suebwonglee, Information and Communications Technology Minister.
* Panitan Wattanayagorn, a professor of international relations at Chulalongkorn University
* Chamlong Srimuang, A former army general and politician, 
* Visit Tantisunthorn, Government Pension Fund secretary-general 

==''Media and Writers''==

* Nation Multimedia
* The Bangkok Post
* Simon Montlake, Correspondent of The Christian Science Monitor 
* Sanitsuda Ekachai, a writer on religious affairs.



==''Others including missed NGOs''==

* SET (have address)
* Asian Resource Foundation
* Plan International
* Rural and Social Management Institute



* Awea Burahanudin