
'''* Article: Invoice Factoring as the Basis for a Digital Token Currency. By Thomas Greco.'''

URL = https://beyondmoney.net/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/544776-invoice-factoring-greco.pdf


=Abstract=

"This paper proposes and describes a system that can solve two of the most pressing
problems that confront communities today. Firstly, it can provide small- and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) with a source of credit other than borrowing from banks. The basic
structure of this system is akin to the Swiss WIR cooperative clearing circle (now called
the WIR Bank but formerly called the Wirtschaftsring-Genossenschaft) and the more recent
commercial trade exchanges and mutual credit clearing circles, which enable SMEs to
provide one another with adequate amounts of credit which can be under their own
collective control.

Secondly, the proposed system can, at the same time, provide community and regional
economies with an independent non-political circulating voucher currency in the form of
digital tokens that can serve as an alternative and supplementary means of payment to
political fiat money. These are digital tokens which, unlike Bitcoin and other similar crypto
so-called currencies, are based on and redeemable for real goods and services that are
available in the market.

The proposed system is inspired by and in some ways mimics the conventional and
long-established process known as “factoring” in which businesses effectively sell their
accounts receivable/invoices to obtain cash sooner from a lender called a “factor” rather
than waiting for their customers to pay what they owe later. By aggregating the invoices of
many SMEs into a commitment pool, a cooperative entity similar to a “factor” has the
capability of creating a digital token currency which is properly based on promises to
deliver real value and can be put into circulation by the SMEs that sell their invoices. This
paper explains the creation, circulation, redemption, and retirement of these tokens in a
repetitive and continuing process."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]