
Concept by Dr. Chris Chester to update the outdated definition of 'digital computers'.


=Definition=

From the Wikipedia at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invocational_media

"Invocational media are communication technologies based on digital computers. Invocational media infrastructures assign names (or addresses) to given entities (e.g. web pages with URLs, variables in programming, disk sectors with file allocation tables), and perform events to call up these named entities from invocable domains on demand (e.g. an HTTP request, a subroutine execution, a read or write to a hard disk).

The theory of invocational media identifies the event of invocation as the defining feature (or force) of digital computing."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invocational_media)


=Discussion=

From Chris Chester's article in [http://ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=334 CTheory]:

"My claim that invocation persists in technological form offers no promises of transcendence, but rather suggests cultural continuity. An invocation is characterised by a call to another for assistance or support. It is familiar particularly from Ancient, Classical and Romantic poetry -Homer, Chaucer, Milton and Shelley. The archetypical invocation is addressed to a Muse. The nine Muses were the minor goddesses of culture, history, music, science and the arts in Ancient Greece.[20] They provided inspiration and connection with things past and distant. Greek myths can be particularly canny in marking out cultural forms: it is significant that the father of the Muses is Zeus, the ruler of Olympus- the god of command, and that their mother is Mnemosyne, the goddess of memory. The invocational relationship marries command and memory. Invocational power is never direct. It is tempered by being mediated through the Muses - it calls to a past partly forgotten, to elusive inspiration, or to powers that are often unreliable.

Invocational media perform as substitute non-human others to which invocations are addressed. They too are distinguished by a coupling of command and memory. The interplay between central processing units and memory devices recalls the ancestry of Zeus and Mnemosyne. The CPU is the locus of command, a specialised collection of circuits that reads instructions from memory or other inputs, and then interprets and executes these instructions. Memory devices, including RAM, ROM, hard drives and so on, store programs and data, providing a repository for potential future invocations - invocable domains. Users intervene in the ongoing invocational processes by offering invocations of their own. They call on calculations, databases of texts and images or other documents, or peripheral devices such as printers. The services that invocational media offer also recall the forgotten delegation implicit in the original computer.

The consequent relationship between a human and an electronic invocator is a quasi-magical refrain of the ancient cultural form of invocation. When someone utters a properly formed command, the invocator seems to respond to the user's command. A web page is summoned. A document curls out of a laser printer. A song begins to play. The general purpose of these devices is to mediate invocations. But like the Muses, invocators are notoriously capricious, not always producing what the invoker had hoped.

Irrespective of their reliability, invocational media are quite different from other media forms. Broadcasting might said to be distinguished by signals radiating from antennae. Print media are characterised by mechanically produced marks on paper. Photography is characterised by the singular combinations of lenses, photosensitive chemicals and light. Of course there is more to media specificity than technical attributes. Deleuze[21] argues that cinema is characterised by the 'movement image'. He sees this as the 'genetic element' out of which arise many of the effects that cinema creates.

In invocational media, the genetic element is the electronic invocation between CPU and invocable domains. While all invocations are ultimately reducible to first order binary switchings of circuits, the most observable invocations are compound, second order events. Something as apparently simple as a user clicking on a web page link actually invokes a sequence of events at multiple levels: an application passes a request to the operating system, triggering signals in local and network hardware, passing a sequence of events through TCP-IP networks to the addressed server. The server responds to the http request, and finally, within some milliseconds, the user reads the page she has invoked. For users, though, this is only one invocational event.

Opening a web page can hardly be described as a process of computation. Nor can printing a word processor file, or playing a first person shooter. And while these operations are digital at the level of logical description, for users they are largely analogue: blocks of colour on the screen, the impact of hands on keys, soundwaves in the air. What makes this medium different is clearer in terms such as random access; non-linearity; simulation; interactivity and virtuality. These are all various manifestations of the same genetic element: invocation.

The digital computer is dead. Long live invocational media.

Invocational media have a different heritage from the recently departed digital computer. Computers belonged within histories of mathematical and logical abstraction. They inherited Aristotle and Boole's logic, Turing's incomputable numbers and Von Neumann's automata. The digital computer's distinctiveness was said to come from its capacity to automate and accelerate the symbol manipulation. Symbols supposedly stood in for objects processes in the world and sometimes modelled changes across time. The computer inherently belonged within a rationalist representationalist tradition, which has recently come under some challenge.

The theory of invocational media is an attempt to construct a non-representational concept for new media. Rather than simply critique the dominant tradition, I am attempting to create a productive alternative history, present, and future for this phylum of machine. Invocational media, by contrast with reductive rationalist digital computers, have pragmatic and material histories drawing together technology, language and magic. But computers were always invocational, and invocation to artefacts long predates computers.

Invocational media can be situated in a tradition of technologies that make the material world perform as language. A light switch allows a human hand to make a kind of a statement: let there be light. With a rudimentary gesture, often completely unconscious, a space is filled with light. The gesture performs like a command, and the command is immediately answered, because the assemblage (including not only the switch and the light, but the whole infrastructure of electrical power) has put light on call. As Heidegger argues, modern technology presents the world as standing reserve, stored up to be available on demand. This almost magical event is a new form of invocation. The light and switch assemblage is what I call an invocatory device. Invocatory devices offer a single effect that can be summoned almost as easily as making a statement with a voice: a light switch, a door bell. But even the most ancient technology - a lever - is becoming invocatory because it starts to make physical action more like language.

Events of switching performed with invocatory devices are often almost invisible, because most significance is usually given to what the switching reveals. McLuhan[23] argues that the content of the electric light is what it illuminates: night baseball or brain surgery. Without electric light, these activities could not take place."
(http://ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=334)


=More Information=

Chris Chester. Why the Digital Computer is Dead, at
http://ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=334

Author bio at http://www.arts.usyd.edu.au/departs/digitalcultures/index.php?page=staff&id=chrchesh


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Relational]]