
=Description=

'Alvaro Cassinelli is an assistant professor at the Ishikawa-Oku lab at the University of Tokyo. He and his partner, Alexis Zerroug, have created a multi-modal, spatial augmented reality, a system that instantaneously changes household objects into communication devices. The effect, known as "invoked computing", is a process that has enabled Cassinelli to transform a discarded pizza box into a laptop computer and a banana into a telephone. The idea won the grand prize at Laval Virtual, an international conference and exhibition on virtual reality and converging technologies."
(http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/jan/01/invoked-computing-household-objects-cassinelli)


=Interview=

Alvaro Cassinelli, interviewed by Sam Price:

'''How did you come up with the idea of "invoked computing"?'''

"The project started with a self-imposed challenge which had both ecological and geeky motivations. The question was: could we revive an old laptop computer thrown in the garbage, not by repairing its internal components but by using augmented reality (our speciality), thus transforming this inert, rain-soaked object into something functional again – something that looked "alive" for any casual observer from the outside?

Soon, we realised that, were we to succeed, something very interesting would be happening: although the computer would be "dead", it would perform fine thanks to the intervention of external, invisible powers. Life would be instilled from the outside; the corpse of the computer would be "possessed", animated like a puppet by a ubiquitous "ambient intelligence". And nobody would notice the difference. When looking for a name, I first thought about "poltergeist computing" or "zombie computing", but the connotations were all too negative. We settled on invoked computing which seemed more appropriate: it makes you think about spiritual invocation (of invisible, higher powers) as well as of the software engineering technical expression: "invoking an application" meaning "to launch it"."
http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/jan/01/invoked-computing-household-objects-cassinelli)


[[Category:Technology]]