IP Maximalists are those who want to strengthen Intellectual Property protections to the maximum amount possible, to protect private monopoly interests, in disregard of any human cost, such as the millions who die from too expensive IP-protected medecines.

Source: overview by Prof. Susan K. Sell, Susan.sell@gmail-com

'''THE GLOBAL IP UPWARD RATCHET, ANTI-COUNTERFEITING AND PIRACY ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS: THE STATE OF PLAY.''' by Susan K. Sell

URL = http://www.twnside.org.sg/title2/intellectual_property/development.research/SusanSellfinalversion.pdf


=Background on IP Maximalist Tactics=


Some excerpts:

1. Relentless search for non-participative institutional forums

“Proponents of an IP maximalist agenda increasingly have been rebuffed in recent years.
Developing country governments, NGOs, and Access to Knowledge (A2K) advocates have
thwarted their efforts to ratchet up standards of intellectual property protection in multilateral
intergovernmental forums such as the World Trade Organization, the World Intellectual Property
Organization, and the World Health Organization. A2K advocates challenge the premises behind
ever higher and broader intellectual property protection and seek, if not a rolling back of IP
rights, at the very least a standstill. They argue that in the balance between rights and
obligations, IP maximalists assert their rights without recognizing their obligations. IP
maximalists always have seen TRIPS as a floor, not a ceiling. Ever since the WTO TRIPS
negotiations that ended in 1994, they have been using every opportunity to increase intellectual
property protection and enforcement beyond TRIPS. They have been relentless, focused, and
have devoted untold resources to their quest for higher global standards of intellectual property
protection and enforcement. Undaunted by recent setbacks at the multilateral level, IP
maximalists have launched a major, almost surreptitious, anti-A2K campaign focused on
“counterfeiting”, “piracy” and “enforcement”.

Since the early 1980s advocates of a maximalist IP agenda have shifted forums both
horizontally and vertically in order to achieve their goals. Those who seek to ration access to IP
are engaged in an elaborate cat and mouse game with those who seek to expand access. As soon
as one venue becomes less responsive to a high protectionist agenda, IP protectionists shift to
another in search of a more hospitable venue. As Peter Drahos points out, developing country
negotiators, NGOs, and A2K advocates must adopt a longitudinal perspective on IP
negotiations or they will risk winning small battles (e.g., the Doha Declaration) but losing the
war (e.g., access to affordable medicines).According to Drahos, “forum shifting means that
some negotiations are never really over.” Strong states like the U.S. shift forums to optimize
their power and advantages and minimize opposition. The IP enforcement agenda is just the
latest in a series of strategic forum shifts.

IP-based firms, with their supportive governments, seek to go far beyond TRIPS in IP
enforcement. Their four main goals are to: document and explain the value of IP; ensure strong
government support for IP in the US; rally allied nations and organizations to defend IP; and
hold anti-IP governments accountable. For instance, under the proposed Anti-Counterfeiting
Treaty (ACTA) they would like to see all countries sign on to the WIPO Copyright Treaty and
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT); together they are referred to as the
“Internet Treaties.” Enforcement provisions under these treaties include legal remedies against
circumvention of technological protection measures (e.g., encryption) or deletion of electronic
rights management information. Since many countries have not signed on to these treaties,
the efforts to have everyone sign would raise IP standards and reduce some states’ flexibilities in
IP policy. For economically advanced countries like Canada, IP-based firms would like to see
them go beyond the TRIPS-Plus WIPO treaties and adopt something similar to the US Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). The ACTA would run roughshod over differences
across jurisdictions. (e.g., many countries have yet to sign on to the WIPO Internet
Treaties). The following section provides a brief institutional roadmap to the complex and
comprehensive process underway.”


'''2. Politics of fear'''

“Advocates of the IP enforcement agenda have engaged in a shrill public relations campaign to
frighten people into accepting their agenda. At a CropLife America meeting on December 1st
2007 Dan Glickman, head of the Motion Picture Association, recommended that advocates
underscore the danger of counterfeited and pirated goods. Through fear mongering, IP
enforcement agenda advocates are constructing a big tent that includes all types of intellectual
property: trademarks, patents, copyrights. Despite the very real differences between all the types
of intellectual property contained in the IP enforcement agenda’s “big tent” approach, there is
one thing that Kate Spade bags and pharmaceuticals DO have in common and that is high
prices. High prices are directly related to the demand for counterfeit products. This campaign is
characterized by strategic obfuscation; its message is intentionally misleading. For example, it is
difficult to imagine a “dangerous” counterfeit handbag, or a “dangerous” dvd.

The fear mongering ranges from tales of exploding cell phones and toxic counterfeit drugs, to
unsubstantiated allegations of organized crime and even terrorist involvement.

The IP enforcement agenda advocates have promoted two sensationalist books, Illicit: How
Smugglers, Traffickers, as Copycats are Hijacking the Global Economy and Knockoff: the
Deadly Trade in Counterfeit Goods.The ICC funded a public broadcast of a program based
on Illicit, which equates counterfeiting with human smuggling, drug smuggling, small arms
trafficking, and black market trade in nuclear materials.

The big tent approach to “counterfeiting” and “piracy” is designed to capture behavior that is
legal.”
(http://www.twnside.org.sg/title2/intellectual_property/development.research/SusanSellfinalversion.pdf)


=What can we do to counter such tactics?=

Susan K. Sell recommends:

“Is there any way to stop the IP rights holders’ juggernaut of ever higher levels of protection and
enforcement?

I present several possibilities below.

First, one should insist that IP enforcement proponents define terms such as trademark
counterfeiting and copyright piracy quite explicitly. As Outterson and Ryan suggested, it is
important to clarify terminology and explicitly distinguish between and create different sets of rules
for counterfeited goods, pirated goods, grey goods, parallel imports, generic goods, and goods
produced under TRIPS-compliant compulsory licenses.

It is also imperative to identify and target policymakers and industry representatives who are
sympathetic to the A2K agenda. Some members of the US Congress have been supportive, and the European Parliament has injected some balance into EU policies.

The OECD is another potential venue to lobby against this IP enforcement agenda. Also, despite the USCC approach, many successful and powerful business firms have good reason to object to the IP enforcement agenda.

Many IT firms have been lobbying Congress to roll back patent protection in their industry because
of the so-called” patent troll” problem.

The hypocrisy of the campaign must be highlighted. For instance, the MPA always emphasizes its interest in preserving American jobs. Indeed, when you watch a Hollywood dvd you get to see the FBI anti-piracy notice, and sometimes the brief testimonials of caterers, stunt people, make up artists, and camera people claiming that downloading movies illegally costs them their jobs. MPA is always telling Congress how many American jobs counterfeiting costs Hollywood.

Yet MPA does huge amount of filming in Canada due to lower production costs and generous subsidies;
Hollywood unions have tried to sue MPAA for taking jobs out of the country. As Lee points out,
“in a 2000 report, the US Department of Commerce estimated that this ‘runaway production’ to
Canada resulted in production losses of $2 billion to the U.S. economy in 1999.” Thus, despite
the sometimes seemingly altruistic rhetoric, MPA “lobbies for the interests of its own members,
even when doing so appears to go against the interests of the U.S. economy.”

Furthermore, films and music, and even apparel, do not fit in to the “danger” trope, even though
US State Department ads about dangerous counterfeits (e.g. pills, exploding cell phones, faulty
electrical cords, failing care brakes, and DVDs?!) include images of dvds.. Also, it is reasonable to
assume that Microsoft would prefer that poor people use bootleg Microsoft software rather than
Linux, in order to get them hooked on the Windows platform. Monsanto just might not mind the
unauthorized transfer of GMO seeds across borders from Argentina to Brazil to circumvent
biosafety regulations, because once the proverbial cat is out of the bag it is hard to go back.

Hypocrisy is also evident in the narrative that counterfeits cause injury. According to the
USPTO-commissioned study on the subject, governments are obligated to protect public health. Yet
IP enforcement agenda advocates actively oppose government efforts to protect public health when
it comes to compulsory licensing and parallel imports, even when millions of patients are at risk of
death.

Clearly, in this field, evidence-based empirical analysis is necessary to counter some of the more
outlandish claims advanced in support of this enforcement agenda. The current ACTA push is based
on highly suspect data. The IP enforcement agenda advocates’ use of data can be creative. For
example, while BASCAP claims that worldwide losses to counterfeiting and piracy amount to $600
billion per year, $250 billion in the U.S. alone, the more sober yet still supportive OECD
estimates that worldwide trade in counterfeit and pirated goods is closer to $200 billion per
year.The IIPA quoted one study as estimating lost tax revenue in the US to be $2.6 billion in
2006. Many IP enforcement agenda advocates rely on just one economist, who continues to
produce reports that echo the ACTA lobbyists’ narrative. Steve Siwek provides figures for IIPA, and
Institute for Policy Innovation, RIAA, and MPAA with his “True Cost of Piracy” series. Siwek
has conducted over 11 studies for industry and also helped to formulate methodology for WIPO to
calculate the copyright industries’ role in all economies. Figures provided by self-interested
industry lobbyists can be inflated, by assuming, for example, that one may calculate lost revenue
based on the differential between the full retail price of a good and the lower price of the
“knockoff.” Yet often those who buy the cheaper version could not afford to pay the full retail price
and would not buy it if the knockoff were unavailable. Thus the industry-generated numbers are
unreliable guides for policymaking. Finally while the danger rhetoric is sensational, a USPTO commissioned study on injuries and counterfeit goods concluded that over 60% of counterfeit
seizures have nothing to do with health or safety.Independent studies must be conducted by
economists who are not on industry’s payroll and who will not be tempted or obligated to inflate
numbers.

Finally, it is important to emphasize that “enforcement” is not a one-sided concept. Enforcement
means not only enforcing IP holders’ rights, but it also means enforcing balance, exceptions and
limitations, fair use, civil rights, privacy rights, and antitrust (or competition policy).”


=Overview of Organizations=

The main actors in the ACTA process are “nodal actors” or networks of state and private sector
actors who coordinate their positions and enroll nodal actors to help the cause. These are not
single issue coalitions of states, but rather a mélange of private and public sector actors who
share compatible goals and continue to coordinate their negotiating positions over time and
across forums. Drahos states that “there is considerable evidence that the US runs its trade
negotiation as a form of networked governance rather than as a simple process of domestic
coalition building.”[12] The anti-counterfeiting and enforcement agenda represents densely
networked governance. Among the actors that this network recently has enlisted are the World
Customs Organization, the US Department of Homeland Security, and Interpol.

==Campaign to Protect America==

This campaign is the USCC’s Coalition against Counterfeiting and Piracy’s Intellectual
Property Enforcement Initiative. This initiative lays the groundwork for all of the other
efforts because it is comprehensive, and outlines the full court press strategy that industry
and supportive government agencies currently are pursuing. While it is US-based, it offers
significant insights into the broader global strategy because the US has been the first mover
and major instigator of the quest for ever higher IP standards. Many of the initiatives that
follow fit neatly under this broader rubric. The campaign includes a number of ambitious
goals. The campaign presents six initiatives. I will discuss each in turn. First, is to improve
coordination of federal government intellectual property enforcement resources. To this end,
the campaign sought to designate a chief IP enforcement officer (“IP czar”) within the White
House. The US House of Representatives passed this provision, in the Prioritizing Resources
and Organization for Intellectual Property Act (PRO-IP) in May 2008.It awaits the
Senate vote. The campaign also sought to raise anti-counterfeiting and piracy
responsibilities to senior levels at the Department of Justice and Department of Homeland
Security.

In 2004 the White House initiated its Strategy Targeting Organized Piracy STOP! This has
focused on interagency coordination. The US has established the National Intellectual
Property Enforcement Council. Its members include the U.S. Coordinator for International
IP Enforcement and high level officers from the Departments of Commerce, Homeland
Security, Justice, State, and USTR. The US Copyright Office serves as an advisor to the
Council.

The second initiative focuses on border protection against counterfeiting and piracy. This
involves expanding information-sharing capabilities, developing databases to flag suspect
shipments, to fund more agents and training programs, to give Customs and Border
Protection agents more legal authority “to audit and assess fines for importers, exporters, or
other parties that materially facilitate the unlawful entry of counterfeit and pirated goods
into the US.” This raises important questions because what constitutes a “counterfeit” or
“pirated” product varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. These are complex legal issues that
Customs officers are neither trained nor authorized to adjudicate. Border protection goals
include eliminating the existing “personal use” exemption and outlawing importation of any
quantity of counterfeit or pirated products including via mail or courier service.[17] These
goals could impact the fair use doctrine, or allowances for infringements for noncommercial
purposes.

The third initiative addresses enhanced law enforcement capacities to crack down on
“intellectual property theft” by increasing funding for law enforcement (US Attorneys’
Offices, FBI, training for state and local law enforcement), enhancing penalties for
counterfeiters who cause bodily injury or death, and increasing coordination between law
enforcement and industry.

The fourth initiative to “Protect America” is to coordinate with law enforcement and
customs officials across borders and abroad. Activities include training and technical
assistance. USTR and industry are, together, to devise and coordinate priorities for technical
assistance. Public-private partnerships feature prominently. It also involves funding
“technical assistance” to train governments in IP enforcement, establish IP attaches at US
embassies, and increase funding for Intellectual Property Law Enforcement Coordinators
internationally. Again, in conjunction with USTR, the initiative endorses the use of the
Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) and regional trade preference programs to
encourage enforcement of IP rights.

Fifth, “Protect America” seeks to establish a pilot program for judges to handle
counterfeiting and piracy cases, and institute treble damages against complicit activity
related to counterfeiting.

Finally, “Protect America” seeks to create and administer a nation-wide consumer awareness
campaign revealing the harms caused by counterfeiting and piracy (including paid and
donated ads for television, radio, print, and the Internet).[20] It also seeks to focus on
college campuses to fund R&D to secure campus networks against P2P network activity,
and to direct funding agencies to favor those campuses that have the most stringent antipiracy
practices.


==Industry associations and the USTR==

Associations such as Motion Picture Association, the Recording Industry Association of
America, the International Intellectual Property Alliance, and the Business Software
Alliance routinely provide data and information about foreign governments’ failure
adequately to protect their intellectual property. They submit reports and complaints through
the Special 301 process and USTR names alleged offenders on its annual Watch Lists.

According to law professor Michael Geist, “Canadian officials have ‘rightly dismissed’ the
Special 301 process as ‘little more than a lobbying exercise.’ … One official told a
parliamentary committee that Canada does not recognize the process because it ‘lacks
reliable and objective analysis’ and is ‘driven entirely by US industry.’” The 2008 Watch
List identified China, Russia, and Thailand as among the worst offenders. Significantly,
China’s placement on the Priority Watch List is due to concerns about enforcement. The US
has filed a complaint against China with the WTO; this will be the first WTO dispute
focused on enforcement. Industry, through the USTR, is pressuring Russia to adopt
TRIPS-Plus measures as part of its WTO accession process.

On October 23rd 2007, just two weeks after WIPO’s September 2007 adoption of the
Development Agenda, USTR Susan Schwab announced that it would seek to negotiate
ACTA in order to “set a new, higher benchmark for enforcement that countries can join on a
voluntary basis.” Kevin Havelock, president of Unilever United States noted that
Schwab ‘’made quite a commitment of her own energy’ pushing for ACTA.”On that
same day, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan and the European Commission
announced their intentions to pursue an international enforcement agreement. Notably
this process will go forward independently of any international organization. Indeed, Eric
Smith, head of IIPA, reflects industry’s determination for an uncompromising agreement
when he states that the ambitious agreement for strengthened enforcement “should not be
sacrificed for additional signatories or the need for a hurried conclusion of
negotiations.”


==Industry-dominated groups in International Organizations==

WIPO: the Advisory Committee on Enforcement (ACE), established in 2002 is industry
dominated, and has devoted its efforts to discussing strengthening enforcement and
problems that rights holders face in third countries. ACE has not devoted attention to
public interest considerations or rights holders’ obligations.

The World Health Organization’s International Medicinal Products Anti-Counterfeit
Taskforce (IMPACT) is supported by the International Federation of Pharmaceutical
Associations (IFPMA). Interpol is deeply involved in this effort and has focused its
efforts in Southeast Asia. Other members include representatives of WIPO, OECD,
WTO, and WCO. Government participation is voluntary; IMPACT tends to be industrydominated,
and according to Outterson and Ryan, industry tends to blur the distinctions
between parallel trade, compulsory licenses, and generics. Critics question this
initiative, which is a G8 priority that focuses on counterfeit drugs rather than other pressing
health issues.

Industry is very involved in monitoring the WTO accession process, and is pressing to make
enforcement a permanent part of the TRIPS Council agenda.


==ACTA==

While copyright and trademark-based industries have been concerned about enforcement for
many years, the most recent push for a new approach emerged in 2004 at the first annual
Global Congress on Combating Counterfeiting. The Global Business Leaders’ Alliance
Against Counterfeiting (GBLAAC), whose members include Coca Cola, Daimler Chrysler,
Pfizer, Proctor and Gamble, American Tobacco, Phillip Morris, Swiss Watch, Nike, and
Canon, sponsored the meeting in Geneva.Interpol and WIPO hosted the meeting. At the
July 2005 Group of 8 (G8), meeting Japanese representatives suggested the development of
a stricter enforcement regime to battle “piracy and counterfeiting.” The G8 issued a postmeeting
statement: “Reducing IP Piracy and Counterfeiting Through More Effective
Enforcement.” In what would become a familiar trope, the first line claims that trade in
counterfeit and pirated goods “can have links to organized crime,” and threatens
employment, innovation, economic growth, and public health and safety. That same year,
the US Council of International Business partnered with the International Chamber of
Commerce to launch the Business Coalition to Stop Counterfeiting and Piracy (BASCAP).

A recently leaked discussion paper about ACTA circulated among industry insiders and
government negotiators from the US, Japan, Switzerland, Canada, the European Union,
Australia, Mexico, South Korea, and New Zealand included all of these negative effects and
added “loss of tax revenue” to the litany.

This is no high-minded quest for the public good. As David Fewer of the Canadian Internet
Policy and Public Interest Clinic and the University of Ottawa noted, “if Hollywood could
order intellectual property laws for Christmas what would they look like? This is pretty
close.”One of the central features of ACTA’s approach would be to enlist the public
sector in enforcing private rights. This means that tax payers’ dollars would be used to
protect private profits. The opportunity costs of switching scarce resources for border
enforcement of IP “crimes” is huge. There surely are more pressing problems for law
enforcement in developing countries than ensuring profits for OECD-based firms. Other
concerns address the lopsided nature of the ACTA approach, favoring rights holders above
all else and presuming suspects to be guilty. Due process of law will be sacrificed to the
interests of IP rights holders and there will be few, if any, checks on abuses of rights.[38] It
would authorize border guards and customs agents to search laptops, iPods, and cell phones
for infringing content. Customs officials would have authority to take action against
suspected infringers even without complaints from rights holders; they could confiscate the
laptops and iPods. Privacy issues arise over extensive data sharing and possible wire tapping
that could be involved in ramped up enforcement efforts.

ACTA would require Internet Service Providers to police and control their systems for
infringing content.[39] Its one-size fits all policy exacerbates the problems that even the far
more forgiving and flexible TRIPS revealed. It sharply reduces policy space for developing
countries to design appropriate policies for their public policy for innovation and economic
development. It also would create an additional international intellectual property
governance layer atop an already remarkably complex and increasingly incoherent
intellectual property regime.

As Shaw points out, “instead of merely shifting the debate from one forum to another, the
ACTA supporters now seek to create an entirely new layer of global governance.” The
treaty will be tabled at the G8 meeting in Tokyo in July 2008.

==World Customs Organization==

The G8 opened negotiations at WCO to establish customs enforcement standards. In June
2006 Members recognized the major role that they could play in IP protection, and
established a set of standards for IP enforcement.[42] Brussels-based WCO is a congenial
forum for IP rights holders because there they are on equal footing with governments.

Discussions at WCO have not been transparent, and advocacy and consumer groups have
not been able to participate; many suspect that “rich country governments view it as a forum
where they can strive for new IP rules, free from scrutiny.”  The provisional Standards
to be Employed by Customs for Uniform Rights Enforcement (SECURE), dramatically
expand the scope and level of enforcement protections beyond TRIPS, leading some
commentators to refer to these as Trips-Plus-Plus standards. At its third meeting of the
Working Group on SECURE the WCO Secretariat announced that consultations on
SECURE had been completed, with an eye toward adopting SECURE at its June 2008
meeting.

SECURE is Trips-Plus-Plus because it: extends the scope from import to export, transit,
warehouses, transshipment, free zones, and export processing zones; extends protection
from trademark and copyright to all other types of IP rights; removes the obligations of
rights holders to provide adequate evidence that there is prima facie an infringement to
initiate a procedure; requires governments to designate a single authority as a contact point
for Customs; gives Customs administrations the legal authority to impose deterrent penalties
against entities knowingly involved in the export or import of goods which violate any IPR
laws (versus just trademark counterfeiting and copyright piracy).

The IP enforcement agenda’s nodal network has enlisted the WCO to champion IP
protection and to pursue an expanded mandate. SECURE privileges IP rights holders, and
while at this moment adopting SECURE is voluntary, these TRIPS-Plus-Plus provisions are
likely to appear in bilateral and regional trade and investment treaties.[47] One can expect
this given the US and EU track record of norm-setting, and then institutionalizing Trips-Plus
provisions into Bilateral Investment Treaties, Free Trade Agreements, and EPAs.[48] Thus
even though “the WCO lacks the authority to set or enforce policies that contradict the
WTO,”[49] TRIPS specifies that member states are free to adopt IP protection and
enforcement standards that exceed TRIPS provisions; therefore if states adopt SECURE
provisions in bilateral or regional agreements they will not be contradicting WTO. WCO
works with WIPO, Interpol, OECD, the European Commission, WHO, and the Council of
Europe to coordinate its activities. Brazil has been an outspoken critic of these measures as
setting a dangerous precedent and of sneaking in TRIPS-Plus-Plus provisions “’through the
backdoor.’”


==Interpol==

Interpol increasingly has gotten involved in IP enforcement. It has been a prominent
participant in the Annual Global Congresses Combating Counterfeiting & Piracy.

Interpol, WCO, WIPO, International Trademark Association, International Chamber of
Commerce, and the International Security Management Association co-sponsor the
Congresses, which have become an important global forum for government officials and IP
rights holders to exchange information, best practices, and to discuss ways to stop
counterfeiting and piracy. Interpol has dedicated one officer full-time to work with WHO’s
IMPACT program. It has introduced an IP crime training program, beginning in June 2007
and will be expanding these activities.

In 2006 Interpol entered into partnership with the US Chamber of Commerce to develop a
database on IP crime to facilitate information sharing. In February 2008, Interpol
presented its database on international IP crime (DIIP) at the G8 IP Experts Group meeting
in Japan as best practice for all countries to adopt.Critics have raised privacy concerns.
Ronald Noble, Interpol’s Secretary General, has stated that “it is no longer acceptable to
invoke misguided data-protection arguments for not sharing information.” The politics
of fear have facilitated support for a law enforcement approach to IP protection. Interpol and
the World Customs Organization enthusiastically have embraced this new mission, with its
prospect of high-level support and expanded resources. Thomas Donahue, President and
CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce actively has supported an expanded role for
Interpol through lobbying government, and targeting “hotbeds” of piracy such as China,
India, and Russia. Interpol and the US Chamber of Commerce conducted their 1st Annual
Global Forum on Innovation, Creativity and Intellectual Property in Beijing in March 2007,
and their 2nd in Mumbai in February 2008. The USCC has provided resources and
information for an Interpol Database on International Intellectual Property Crime (DIIP).
While Interpol has largely focused on counterfeit pharmaceuticals, it has been working with
the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software Association, the International
Federation of the Phonographic Industry, and the Motion Picture Association to build
internet anti-piracy capacity.

Interpol’s “intellectual property crime” unit fails to provide clear definitions of trademark
counterfeiting and copyright piracy; “this is a serious concern for developing countries and
consumers, given that the potential scope of the definition of counterfeit and piracy may be
so wide as to include legitimate uses of works and cases where an individual may infringe
an intellectual property right without knowing it.”


==The Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America==

The SPP is a White House-led initiative among NAFTA signatories: the US, Canada, and
Mexico, “to increase security and to enhance prosperity.” Under a competitiveness
rubric the SPP aims to enhance IP enforcement and crack down on counterfeit and pirated
goods. It seeks to target export processing zones in particular {maquilladoras}, and has
established a task force of senior officials from all three countries to develop a coordinated
strategy to combat counterfeiting and piracy. It is best described as an ongoing dialogue
rather than a formal agreement or treaty. The US government agencies engaged in this
dialogue are the Department of Commerce {“prosperity}, the Department of Homeland
Security {security} and the Department of State {to coordinate}. The SPP is focused on
increasing private sector engagement in the process to help the North America’s competitive
position in the global economy.


==APEC==

In APEC the U.S. has been pressing an “Anti-Counterfeiting Piracy Initiative.” APEC has
adopted a number of U.S. proposals including five model guidelines on reducing trade in
counterfeiting and pirate goods.

==“Think Tanks”==

One of the IP maximalists’ objectives is to build a “virtual IP network (NGO) capable of
influencing leading European political parties and non-business think tanks in favor of
government support for IP – in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France, Italy, Scandinavia,
and the UK.”Industry-supportive “think tanks” have been producing studies for the
cause of ratcheting up IP standards and enforcement. For example, industry lobbyist outlets
such as the International Intellectual Property Institute, the Institute for Policy Innovation,
the Stockholm Network, and the Center for Innovation and Economic Change, have all
supplied studies and articles promoting TRIPS-Plus-Plus approaches to IP."
(http://www.twnside.org.sg/title2/intellectual_property/development.research/SusanSellfinalversion.pdf)



[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:IP]]