For a list of pages [[:Category:Ireland]].

= Digital Rights =

'''Digital Rights Ireland'''

Digital Rights Ireland is a body devoted to defending Civil, Human and Legal rights in a digital age.

http://www.digitalrights.ie


'''Creative Commons Ireland''' 

University College Cork group working on Irish local implementation of the [[Creative Commons]] licenses.

http://creativecommons.org/international/ie/

= Open Data =

'''Open Data Ireland'''

Mailing list for Open Data related discussion in Ireland

https://groups.google.com/group/open-data-ireland


'''CKAN Ireland'''

Irish Open Data Registry

http://ie.ckan.net/


'''International Open Data Day events'''

Galway Open Data Hackathon Sat Dec 4th 2010

https://bit.ly/OpenDaWest


= Open Government =

'''TheStory.ie'''

Data Journalism and self declared FOI junkies

http://thestory.ie/


'''KildareStreet.com'''

Is a non-partisan website which aims to make it easy for people to keep tabs on their elected representatives in the Houses of the Oireachtas.

http://www.kildarestreet.com/


'''Contact.ie'''

Is a website that makes it easy for people to contact their elected representatives in the Oireachtas.

http://www.contact.ie

= Hackerspaces =

Also see the [[Hacker Spaces]] page.


'''Dublin'''

Tog is Irelands first Hackerspace

http://www.tog.ie


'''Galway'''

091Labs

A non-profit member funded community space for peer learning, creativity and collaboration.

http://091labs.com

Declan Elliot founding member of 091Labs discussing Open Community Labs, Creative Spaces and Doocracy at http://blogtalk.net conference. http://vimeo.com/14607774 .


'''Clare'''

[http://theknittingclub.net The Knitting Club is a Hackerspace in the rural village of Ballyvaughan]


'''Limerick'''

[http://groups.google.ie/group/limerick-hackerspace Limerick Hackerspace Google Group]


'''Cork'''

[https://groups.google.com/group/hackerspace-cork Cork Hackerspace Google Group]


'''Northern Ireland'''

[http://www.hackni.org http://www.hackni.org]


'''Irish Hackerspaces Week'''

[http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/Irish_Hackerspaces_Week http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/Irish_Hackerspaces_Week]



= Arts and Culture =


'''Tweak'''

Digital Arts Festival in Limerick

http://www.tweak.ie/


'''Darklight'''

Digital Film Festival Dublin

http://www.darklight.ie/


'''DATA.IE'''

Dublin Art and Technology Association

http://www.data.ie/


'''Robots.ie'''

Irish robotics club

http://robots.ie/


'''Blackletter'''

Blackletter is Dublin based initiative set up to create a collaborative publishing environment for Irish artists. Blackletter advocate an open-source DIY culture for interaction and collaboration.

http://www.blackletter.ie/


'''Exchange Dublin'''

Collective arts centre in Dublin.

http://exchangedublin.ie/


'''Knowledge Exchange'''

Open group organising free public lectures.

http://knowledge.exchangedublin.ie/


'''Seomra Spraoi'''

Autonomous Social Center in Dublin

http://seomraspraoi.org

= Sustainability =


'''Feasta'''

The Foundation for the Economics of Sustainability

[[Feasta]] aims to identify the characteristics (economic, cultural and environmental) of a truly sustainable society, articulate how the necessary transition can be effected and promote the implementation of the measures required for this purpose.

http://feasta.org/


'''Cultivate'''

Cultivates mission is to respond to energy vulnerability and climate change by providing access to the knowledge and tools to cultivate sustainable lifestyles and resilient communities.

http://cultivate.ie


'''7th Generation Project'''

The 7th Generation Projects vision is to create a sustainable ecology of community that is built upon interdependence, diversity, transformation, equity, and self-responsibility.

http://7thgenerationproject.ning.com


'''Transition Towns Ireland and Northern Ireland'''

http://transitiontownsireland.ning.com



[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:Ireland]]
[[Category:Country]]