
=Bio=

"Isaac Mao has been called the ultimate Chinese digital guru, maintaining interests in commerce, electronic communication, and, increasingly, network politics. He is broadly labelled a venture capitalist, blogger, software architect, entrepreneur, and researcher in learning and social technology, dividing his time between research, social work, business, and technology. 


He is currently venture partner at Neuron VC, director of the Social Brain Foundation (foundation for social media and free culture in China, including particularly access, speech and thiking freedom), and advisor to Global Voices Online. He is now a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, developing his Sharism theory discussed below. 


As one of the earliest bloggers in the Chinese community, Mao was a co-founder of CNBlog.org, the earliest grassroots publishing evangelism site in China, and a co-organizer of the annual Chinese Blogger Conference. The CNBlog team later became the Social Brain Foundation, which promotes social media and free culture in China, particularly including free access, free speech, and free thinking. The Foundation currently supports Idea Factory, Memedia, Digital Nomads, Open Education, and Creative Commons China, among other initiatives. As a trained software engineer, he has a long history in leading the development of both business and consumer software. After turning to social computing research, Isaac organized the first Social Software Forum in China."
(http://www.digicult.it/digimag/article.asp?id=1904)


=More Information=

* [[Sharism]]
* Webcast via http://www.we-magazine.net/2008/09/07/interview-with-isaac-mao/


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:China]]