Isaac Wilder (imw) is the co-founder and Executive Director of the Free Network Foundation. He studied Computer Science and Philosophy at Grinnell college until 2011, when he left Grinnell to pursue free network advocacy full-time. He is currently based in Kansas City, MO. 



=Discussion=

Isaac Wilder on the [[Free Network Movement]]:

"My name is Isaac Wilder, and I'm a sophomore at Grinnell College in
Iowa. At the beginning of this school year, I helped to bring together
a group of hackers that calls itself FreeNet (sorry about the name
duplication). Our mission is build exactly such a system as is being
discussed here: an F/LOSS p2p physical network layer that scales to
the municipal level. We believe that a federation of such municipal
networks could serve as a building block for a self-governing network
on a global scale. We call our system the Mesh Interface for Network
Devices, or MIND.
 
We have a wiki at www.freenetworkmovement.org where we have been
documenting our progress. Things have not progressed as quickly as we
would have liked, but we are very near an initial rollout to the
general Grinnell public. We are using a variety of hardware platforms
(Ubiquiti , Linksys , Asus, etc...) and replacing their propriety
firmware with dd-wrt, a F/LOSS linux distribution for embedded
systems. dd-wrt supports optimized link-state routing, which we are
planning to use until something better comes along.
 
Our hardware is completely crowd-sourced, and we've got a sizeable
group of people that are willing to install hardware in/on their homes
when the time comes. I can tell you all from experience that the
difficult part here is on the technical side - people, most people,
are downright enthralled by the idea of a community-owned network
co-op. Those that aren't compelled by philosophical reasons are
compelled by economic ones. What we need to focus on is designing for
a user experience that is streamlined and no-fuss.
 
What's more, four of us from FreeNet attended the Students for Free
Culture conference at NYU in February. (That's where I met Devin
Balkind, which is how I got to be a member of this group.) The
response to our gameplan at SFCNYC was amazing. Students from all over
the world are looking to help with this project. The MIND is an idea
that just makes sense to people.
 
To make the prospects of the project even more exciting, we've been
talking to the folks at www.ahumanright.org about potential
collaboration. We are thinking that bandwidth from their
buythissatellite.org campaign could be used for backhaul between
geographically disparate pockets of the MIND."
(Next Net mailing list, March 2011)



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]