
'''= IT for Change (ITfC) is a non-profit organisation located in Bangalore, India, which advocates the use of ICTs as a means to further the goals of progressive social change.'''

URL = http://www.itforchange.net/


=Description=

"IT for Change envisions a society capable of, and comfortable with, innovative and effective use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) as a means to further the goals of progressive social change. We believe that the changes brought about by ICTs in our social milieu are far-reaching and of a structural nature, connoting the advent of what may be called an information society. Correspondingly, progressive engagements with this phenomenon have to adequately address structural and systemic issues at a deeper level.

IT for Change strongly believes that an equitable information society can flourish only through inclusive and informed debate, involving not merely actors from the technology arena but all actors in the development arena, especially from the South. Current information society and 'ICTs for development' or ICTD approaches predominantly represent Northern realities and perspectives, tending to favour market-fundamentalist thinking and valorising technology per se. They seldom transcend efficiency parameters, and fail to integrate fundamental ethical cornerstones of development like participation, social justice and equity. IT for Change perceives its role as a catalyst of change, initiating and engaging in debates on the emerging information society and ICTD domains, and foregrounding social and political perspectives and realities that are currently sidelined.

IT for Change champions change through its wide-ranging research and advocacy activities. In addition, the organisation demonstrates innovative ICT possibilities in actual developmental situations through its field projects, which involve partnerships with community-based organisations and grassroots NGOs. These projects are consciously designed to examine the theory and enrich the conceptual framework of the information society and the ICTD discourse. At the same time, the field projects arise out of our theoretical understanding and work in this area, including of changes that are occurring in the broader context of developmental activity. Countering stereotyped notions of technologies and 'bandwagon' approaches to ICTD, our ICT strategies aim to work towards technological possibilities that go beyond tokenism to address complex issues of social change and infuse development processes with new vibrancies."
(http://www.itforchange.net/about-us.html)



[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]