
'''* Essay: “Inspire and conspire”: Italian precarious workers between self-organization and self-advocacy. Annalisa Murgia and Giulia Selmi. Interface: a journal for and about social movements, Volume 4 (2): 181 – 196 (November 2012)'''

URL = http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Interface-4-2-Murgia-and-Selmi.pdf


=Abstract=

"The scenario we see today in the labor market in Italy is composed of a
progressive proliferation of non-standard contracts. This involves first and
foremost a problem of citizenship and welfare, due to the lower or almost nonexistent
possibility of access to social rights associated with these types of
contracts. Faced with this situation, over the last ten years, Italy has seen the
emergence of a complex social movement to counter precariousness. This
movement at first concentrated its efforts in the rewriting of the symbolic
vocabulary and imagination at work, in an attempt to consolidate the
precarious as a collective subjectivity beyond its traditional representations.

In recent years, however, this process of “self-representation” in terms of a
collective narrative is matched by a process of “self-advocacy”: an effective
self-organization of temporary workers to handle the conflict in the workplace.
In a scenario of no confidence in political parties and trade unions in
addressing the issue of precariousness, these movements refuse the delegation
of the conflict, promoting instead a modality of action based on the
organizational form of the network, sharing knowledge and direct
representation. This paper explores two particular movement experiences in
the Italian context."


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]