
'''= a simple browser-based tool for saving any Web page'''

URL = http://www.iterasi.com


=Description=

From http://www.iterasi.com:

We've created a simple browser-based tool for saving any Web page—dynamically generated or otherwise—with the click of a button. With Iterasi, any Web page can be saved, searched, and retrieved anytime, from anywhere, forever.


'''So, how does Iterasi save your dynamic Web pages? We're glad you asked.'''

The Iterasi application lives on your Web-browser toolbar. When you want to save a page follow these steps:

   1. Click Notarize
   2. Click OK

Okay, so that's not much of a list. But, that's all you have to do.

Iterasi will instantly transfer your page to a secure personal account. And, voila! It's saved. Forever.

If you like, you can add additional tags, store it in a folder, or write some notes about why this page is so important to you. You don't have to. But you could.

Now, you have an exact, working copy of the page. Text, links, images, live forms, transactions, receipts, confirmations and, of course, all of your personalized content. Right there, whenever you want it.


'''But how do I retrieve a page?'''

Getting back to your saved Web pages? Just as simple.

Log in from any Web browser. Once you're inside your secure Iterasi account, you'll have access to all of your saved pages. You can view the pages, do a little more organizing, search for that page you saved a month ago, or share any of your saved Web pages.


'''That's all well and good. But I want to automate this whole thing.'''

Settle down, power user. We've got exactly what you need.

We understand that there are some pages you want to save on a regular basis. Without having to come back, day after day, simply to click a button.

That's why Iterasi comes with a built-in scheduler.

With the scheduler, Iterasi will save pages automatically for you. Pick the url and the frequency, and you're done.

When you want to review your saved pages, simply log in and see what's been saved.

We think you can probably do some interesting stuff comparing those pages over time.


= More Information =

Article: http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/dynamic_bookmarking_with_itera.php

Blog: http://iterasi.blogspot.com/

[[Category:Technology]]


[[Category:Resources]]