=Discussion=

Indra Lal Acharja et al. :

"In 1971, Ivan Illich called for shifting away from the traditional concept of schooling. To replace
traditional schooling, he proposed creating a large-scale, non-institutional educational
infrastructure. This infrastructure would be empowered by the information and communication
technologies (the first microprocessor was invented the same year in Silicon Valley). The
educational infrastructure he proposed, the ‘learning’ (Illich 1971: 72) or ‘educational web’ (77),
would consist of four interlocking educational networks to enable learners to achieve their own
goals.

The first educational network would develop around a directory of educational resources,
freely available to learners (Illich 1971). For example, the directory would allow learners and
educators to reserve libraries, laboratories, museums or theatres as well as to visit factories,
airports or farms as apprentices or in off-hours. The second network would develop around an
open directory of people who would list ‘their skills, the conditions under which they are willing to
serve as facilitators for others who want to learn these skills, and the address at which they can be
reached’ (Illich 1971: 79). The third network would develop around a platform in which people
would describe the learning activities they are interested in, with the aim to find other learners
who may wish to collaborate. The fourth network would build on a directory of professional
educators, who would detail their qualifications, services and the terms on which these are made
available (Illich 1971).

After five decades, one may say that Illich’s vision is embodied in initiatives such as the
Khan Academy1 or the P2P University2 and even share Hart’s view that ‘Illich predicted the World
Wide Web’ (Hart 2001: 72; Jandrić 2014). However, the idea of deschooling proved to be wishful
thinking (Cuban and Jandrić 2014). Schools are still around and education remains considerably
institutionalized. But this ‘large scale educational infrastructure’, the Internet and the Web, has
catalyzed the emergence of postdigital phenomena, which may ‘influence power and offer
individuals and communal settings the potential for alternative vernacular practices to emerge in
culture’ (Atasay 2013: 58).

With this article we wish to tell a story of an emerging phenomenon that may offer insights
towards realizing some of the goals and values underpinning Illich’s vision of deschooling society.
Our aim is to cast a radical educator’s eye over ‘cosmolocal production’ or ‘cosmolocalism’
(Schismenos et al. 2020). Cosmolocalism emerges from technology initiatives that are small-scale
and oriented towards addressing local problems, but simultaneously engage with globally
asynchronous collaborative production through the commons."


==From ‘Deschooling Virtuality’ To Deschooling Society?==

Vasilis Kostakis et al. :

"Jandrić (2014) addresses how Illich’s vision of deschooling could be embodied on the Internet in
the form of ‘deschooling virtuality’. He discusses Wikipedia as a flagship case towards deschooling
virtuality, and admits that it is a long way from deschooling virtuality to deschooling society. Such a
shift would require profound social changes and, to begin with, altering the structure of
employment and labor (Jandrić 2014).

According to Illich (1971: xix), the ‘search for new educational funnels must be reversed
into the search for their institutional inverse: educational webs’. Funnels limit people to a minimal
set of educational processes, relations and outcomes. Cosmolocalism may help educators’ and
learners’ search for new educational webs, which could act as prisms and generate a rainbow of
possible choices. Unlike large-scale industrial manufacturing, cosmolocal production is small-scale,
decentralized, and locally controlled with the potential to empower conviviality in the physical
world (Priavolou 2021)." 


=Source=

* '''Kostakis, V., Vragoteris, V., Lal Acharja, I. (2021). ''Can peer production democratize technology and society?'' A critical review of the critiques. Futures, 131'''


=More information=

* [[3Ducation Project]]

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]