
U.S. initiative

URL = http://iyear.us/pages/Home


=Description=

"How can 100 Senators hear our individual voices? Why would our 435 Representatives listen to anyone not contributing to the $3,000 they raise every single weekday? The answer: They can’t, and they won’t. But when 100 or 1,000 of us bring our voices together, public servants are forced to take notice. They have no choice but to account to those who hire them.

Welcome to the Independence Year Project, America’s Internet Town Hall. iYear.US is a non-profit, non-partisan, non-owned, non-commercial public utility amplifying the voices of individual Americans, the true employers of our elected officials. iYear is designed to deliver your influence to our government more easily and quickly than licking a stamp and dropping a letter in the US mail, and – importantly – to bundle our voices together, so that we cannot be ignored.

Today, when so many of us seek real change, Internet-based tools make it genuinely possible to combine our voices, money, and votes. Without our say in how we are governed, there is no true independence. Today, we can physically reassert our interests into the governing process, as originally intended by the founding fathers. Thus, we invite you to celebrate this Re-Declaration of Independence by participating in iYear!

iYear was built by veterans of the first Internet campaign, supported by private donors. iYear is an issues-based network providing access to every Congressional district, Senate seat, and Federal agency. Our ideas and grievances may come together here to form political firepower, aimed straight at the decision makers."
(http://iyear.us/pages/Home)

[[Category:Politics]]