
Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIbmGoWxy9A

=Description=

"In this episode of Voices with Vervaeke, Dr. John Vervaeke and Jacob Hundt discuss Thoreau College's unique educational approach, which addresses the whole person through academics, labor, community, nature, and art. The college's holistic curriculum is inspired by monastic communities, connecting to the cycle of seasons and cultural traditions, and addresses deeper questions of meaning and the structure of time and space.

They emphasize the importance of balancing practical and phenomenological aspects with intellectual and conceptual components in education, drawing from the transformative history of Scandinavian folk high schools. The conversation also touches upon intergenerational learning and human-scale education programs.

Thoreau College's economic model focuses on diversification for financial stability through student contributions, fundraising, and additional income streams from various initiatives. The application process is need-blind, ensuring accessibility to all students. Faculty consists of local guest instructors and visiting scholars with diverse expertise.

Lastly, they discuss Thoreau College's low-tech environment, highlighting the importance of being present and engaging in meaningful face-to-face interactions. The conversation addresses the challenges students face when transitioning back into a technology-driven world and the significance of considering one's theory of human nature when structuring educational environments."

=More information=

Please visit: https://thoreaucollege.org/ for more information on Thoreau College

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]