Video (in French) via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMj1aOPJnmg

If there is indeed 'one global society', already existing or in formation, then the wars taking place should be interpreted as 'inside' this society. Lots of new wars are not internal to a state (see the current conflict in the Congo). If that is true, then the main actors of this war are no longer nation-states.


=Description=

"Jacques Lévy's concept of "Global Civil War at low intensity" refers to a worldwide state of conflict characterized by persistent, widespread violence that doesn't escalate to the level of traditional, high-intensity warfare. This form of conflict is marked by continuous, localized engagements involving state and non-state actors, leading to a pervasive sense of insecurity.

In this context, "low-intensity conflict" describes military engagements that are below the threshold of conventional war, often involving guerrilla tactics, insurgencies, and other forms of irregular warfare. These conflicts are typically protracted, involve various actors, and result in sustained instability without the large-scale battles characteristic of traditional wars. 
WIKIPEDIA

Lévy's notion of a "Global Civil War" suggests that these low-intensity conflicts are interconnected across the globe, creating a continuous state of unrest that transcends national boundaries. This global perspective implies that local conflicts are part of a larger, systemic issue affecting international stability.

The term "low intensity" emphasizes that, while these conflicts may not involve massive military engagements, their persistent nature leads to significant cumulative effects on global security and governance.

For a more detailed understanding of Jacques Lévy's perspective on this topic, you can refer to his book "From Geopolitics to Global Politics: A French Connection," where he explores the implications of globalized conflict and the evolving nature of political geography." 

(comment via chatGPT)

[[Category:Geopolitics]]
[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:Security]]