=Discussion=

Stuart White:

"In 1964 the British economist, James Meade, who went on to receive a Nobel prize, published a short book entitled Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Property. Meade had worked as an advisor to the 1945-50 Labour government and he was in later years to serve as an advisor to the SDP/Liberal Alliance. His ideas fit into a wider current of radical thinking about property which ran through the centre-left of British politics in the mid- to late-twentieth century. While this current has been somewhat eclipsed in recent years – barely visible in the Liberal Democrats – it is worth retrieving to consider what relevance it may have for the future.

...

Narratives of wage or wage-share depression due to ‘capital-biased technological change’ and/or a global increase in the effective supply of labour are of course contested. But for now let’s assume – for the sake of argument – that we do face a scenario of this kind in which there are systemic pressures working to depress wages and the wage share. How ought we to respond?

'''Meade’s 1964 book considers four possible responses: ‘the trade union state’; ‘the welfare state’; ‘property-owning democracy’; and ‘the socialist state’.'''

Under the first heading, Meade means any action, whether through collective bargaining or legislation, to maintain a ‘minimum real wage’. He is sceptical of this approach on the grounds that it will come at the expense of jobs.

Under the second heading, Meade has in mind tax-transfers which shift resources from the capital-holding rich to the wage-earning poor. Again, he is sceptical that this approach can go far by itself. The tax rates necessary, he thinks, could undermine economic incentives.

It is the latter two responses that Meade advocates. If the return to capital is rising relative to labour, then the way to prevent this leading to growing inequality of income is to democratise claims over wealth – over returns to capital. This can be done in two ways.

First, the state can enact policies to encourage a wider dispersion of privately-held wealth. This is what Meade means by ‘property-owning democracy’. Meade himself puts a lot of emphasis on designing an inheritance or accessions tax in a way that will break down large concentrations of wealth and encourage people to give wealth to those who have yet to receive much from this source. One can readily imagine other, complementary policies to help with this goal. In one interesting response to Paul Krugman’s article on the ‘rise of the robots’, Noah Smith argues along Meade-type lines, suggesting the idea of a universal capital endowment as a right of citizenship. (Back to the Child Trust Fund?)

Second, the state can itself build up a stake in national wealth and distribute this as income to citizens. For much of his career Meade was an advocate of what he termed ‘Topsy Turvy Nationalization’. He was not supportive, in general, of the state buying up private sector firms and then trying to manage them. But he did strongly support the creation of a state investment fund. The state would own a portfolio of assets across the economy. The return on these assets could then be returned to the citizenry, e.g., as a uniform social dividend or basic income. One might call this a Citizens’ Trust.

Meade was ambitious for this idea. In his ideal scenario, he envisaged the community owning 50% of national assets as a Citizens’ Trust and using the return to provide a social dividend for all. In Meade’s utopia – or what he himself called his ‘agathatopia’ (a good, if not perfect, place) – a downward shift in the return to labour, e.g., due to automation, has a more limited impact on the overall distribution of incomes. If there is a change in the relative reward of labour and capital, then while one source of an individual’s income (wages) falls in relative terms, other sources of their income (the returns on more widely held private and shared public assets) will correspondingly rise.

Before we reject the very idea of a Citizens’ Trust as wholly utopian, however, it is worth pausing to note that there is at least one place where something like it exists. As Karl Widerquist has discussed, this is exactly what we see today in Alaska where the Alaska Permanent Fund provides every citizen with an annual payment currently of close to $1,000.


Widerquist also points out that:

- ''‘Alaskans don’t have the dividend because they are resource-rich. They have it because some smart Alaskans took advantage of the opportunity. Common resources are being privatized all the time all over the planet. We could tax privatized resources, but the easiest place to start is at the moment of privatization. Every new well that’s drilled is an opportunity to assert community control of resources. So is every new mine that’s dug, every new reserve that’s discovered, every new smokestack that seeks to use the atmosphere as a garbage dump.’'' 



As noted above, Meade’s work fits into a wider current of thought on the centre-left of British politics. From the 1930s, the Liberals adopted the slogan of ‘Ownership for all’. Under this banner, they argued for things like profit-sharing, co-determination in firms, employee share ownership and reforms to inheritance tax.

As Ben Jackson has argued, ideas of a similar kind were also important to the thinking of the ‘revisionist’ wing of the Labour party in the post-war period (Jackson 2005). Labour considered the idea of a state investment fund seriously in the late 1950s. The policy discussion document, Towards Equality (1956), suggested allowing estate tax to be paid in assets thereby enabling the community as a whole to share in the capital gains from rising asset values. But the idea did not really get much traction, being seen as too capitalistic on the party’s left.

In the 1980s, in the milieu of the alliance between the Liberals and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), we see something of a fusion of traditional Liberal and Labour revisionist thinking in this area. Meade was at the centre of this. In 1985 a working group within the SDP set out a proposal to establish a Citizens’ Trust by means of capital dilution (requiring firms to issue new shares each year to a public fund as a fraction of their existing shares, e.g., at a rate of 1.5%, to issue 1.5 new shares to the fund for every 100 existing shares).

In 1986 the SDP became (to my knowledge) the first and only UK party ever to adopt the creation of Citizens’ Trust as official party policy. The party leadership strongly opposed the idea as ‘statist’, but the party’s ruling body between conferences, the Council for Social Democracy, adopted it over the leadership’s opposition.

The idea did not quite disappear when the Liberals and the SDP merged after the 1987 election. In 1989, Paddy Ashdown, leader of the new Liberal Democrat party published a book, Citizens’ Britain, intended to set out his view of the kind of social and political vision the new party ought to have. Ashdown argued that Thatcherism’s claims to be creating a ‘people’s capitalism’ rang hollow. He urged the Liberal Democrats to ‘be much more radical about popular share ownership - we could give every citizen a stake in our economy’ (Ashdown, 1989, p.129). To this end he advocated a proposal drawn up by Meade for a ‘Citizens’ Share Ownership Unit Trust’. The ambition was for the fund to hold 10% of the assets of ‘all private enterprises over a certain size’. This would make for ‘a real, rather than make-believe, citizens’ capitalism...’ (Ashdown, 1989, p.130).

In the following decade, Gerald Holtham argued that social democrats should seek to establish a ‘community fund’ based on public investments as a means of creating an extra source of revenue (Holtham 1999)."

(https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/opendemocracyuk/citizen-ownership-lost-radicalism-of-centre/)
 

=More information=

Ben Jackson, ‘Revisionism reconsidered: ‘Property-owning democracy’ and egalitarian strategy in post-war Britain’, Twentieth Century British History 16 (4), pp.416-440.

James Meade, Efficiency, Equality and the Ownership of Property (London, Allen and Unwin, 1964).

'''* Article: James Meade, public ownership, and the idea of a citizens' trust. By Martin O'Neill and Stuart White. International Journal of Public Policy, 2019, vol. 15, issue 1/2, 21-37'''

URL = https://econpapers.repec.org/article/idsijpubp/v_3a15_3ay_3a2019_3ai_3a1_2f2_3ap_3a21-37.htm

Abstract: James Meade argued that public ownership of productive assets should have a central role in a 'liberal socialist' economy. While somewhat sceptical of the state seeking to run specific firms or industries, Meade argued that the state should own a significant share of a society's productive assets, using the return on the assets to promote a more equal distribution of income (e.g., through payment of a universal social dividend). This paper traces the development of Meade's thinking around this citizens' trust concept; explores its influence in UK policy discussions; and makes the case for the continuing relevance of the proposal in response to contemporary economic developments.

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]