'''Jamendo practices [[Open Music Business Models]] based on free peer to peer downloads of music and Creative Commons licenses.'''

URL = http://www.jamendo.com/en/

=Description=

"jamendo is a new model for artists to promote, publish, and be paid for their music. On jamendo, the artists distribute their music under Creative Commons licenses. In a nutshell, they allow you to download, remix and share their music freely. It’s a “Some rights reserved" agreement, perfectly suited for the new century. These new rules make jamendo able to use the new powerful means of digital distribution like Peer-to-Peer networks such as BitTorrent or eMule to legally distribute albums at near-zero cost. jamendo users can discover and share albums, but also review them or start a discussion on the forums. Albums are democratically rated based on the visitors’ reviews. If they fancy an artist they can support him by making a donation."
((http://www.openbusiness.cc/2005/11/11/jamendo-creative-commons-music-delivered-with-peer-to-peer-technology/)


=Discussion=

==The Jamendo Business Model==

"On every album and artist page there is a link to a tip jar. The artist receives 100% of the donation, minus a small transaction fee. The Web site receives the transaction fee and splits ad revenue with the artist. Jamendo uses the CCpublisher uploading tool (also used on archive.org) and lets people browse genres by folksonomic keywords. (It also lets you bookmark favorites (here, you can view my favorite albums–warning, lots of French pop and Euro-trance!). On the artist page, people can write reviews and even make blog entries about a particular album. While user ratings can affect the visibility of certain music on the site, it is still relatively easy to browse other people’s playlists/favorites and search by keyword. You can view the impressive community (and  statistics about downloads and community size). But the data that drew my attention is the number of donations people are making to individual artists. It’s not a lot so far, but Jamendo is on its way to creating a community that rewards great music without qualms."
(http://www.teleread.org/blog/?p=6138)
=More Information=

#French-language interview with the founder of Jamendo, 
http://www.ratiatum.com/dossier2215_Jamendo_la_musique_libre_prise_au_serieux.html
#See our entries on [[Open Business]], [[Open Business Models]], and [[Open Music Business Models]]
#See also the description of [[Magnatune]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Music]]

[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]