Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fh6RoIvNWOs&feature=youtu.be&t=3025

== Description ==

"Conversation with James Priest, co-founder of Sociocracy 3.0 (S3). The talk focus on:

- Responsibilities at the individual level and at scale.
- Flow of information across teams.
- Decision making.
- Organisational design. 

Also, we touch on the S3 Principles and practical examples related with S3 patterns at the same time that James shares so many great insights about S3 and all the benefits it brings to organisations. James shares his wisdom as well about 'why' collaboration is so important in organisations.

Our favorite quote: “Collaboration is the bedrock for a modern organization.”

Hosted by Javier Camarasa Garcia, Agile Coach at Danske Bank and co-steward of our Team Library."

== Bio of [[James Priest]] ==

"James serves internationally providing organizational development consultancy, learning facilitation and mentoring for people wishing to increase business agility and grow agile and responsive learning organizations where people and company thrive. 

He combines extensive experience of sociocracy with 15 years practice in the fields of holistic organizational development, facilitative leadership and personal and relational transformation. He currently spends most of his time supporting others to learn about Sociocracy 3.0 and working directly with organizations to help them improve productivity and raise engagement, whatever their size."
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fh6RoIvNWOs&feature=youtu.be&t=3025)

== More information ==
* [[James Priest]]
* [[Sociocracy]]
For more information about Sociocracy 3.0: https://sociocracy30.org/

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]