
Podcast via https://cpg.buzzsprout.com/2543607/episodes/17962803-a-social-contract-for-the-planetary-commons-a-conversation-with-james-quilligan

=Description=

“In this episode, we sit down with one of our hosts, James Bernard Quilligan. 
With over three decades of experience in international development and monetary policy—as both analyst and administrator—Quilligan now serves as Senior Research Fellow at the Center for New Critical Politics and Governance. 
In the conversation, we explore key concepts shaping our planetary future—the idea of the planetary commons and the ecological limits of carrying capacity. Quilligan reflects on the importance of distinguishing globalization from planetization, and considers how principles from thermodynamics might shed light on the climate crisis. 
What forms of planetary governance and stewardship could help us navigate these complex challenges? Most importantly, we ask whether embracing a degrowth mindset is essential to building a sustainable future. 
Quilligan argues for the need to adopt a new worldview—a new epistemology and narrative—that can guide us through the planetary transition ahead.”

=More information=

Academic Reference:

* James Quilligan, Hagen Schulz-Forberg; A Social Contract for the Planetary Commons—A Conversation with James Quilligan. Global Perspectives. 10 March 2025; 6 (1): 144292. doi: https://doi.org/10.1525/gp.2025.144292

[[Category:Social Charters]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]