
=Discussion=

Cui Zhiyuan:

"In Meade’s design, outside shareholders own capital share certificates and inside
workers own labor share certificates. The operational mechanism of the program
is roughly as follows:

* the Labour–Capital Partnership, whereby the workers and those who provide
risk capital jointly manage the concern as partners. The capitalists own Capital
Shares in the business, which are comparable to Ordinary Shares in a Capitalist
Company. The worker partners own Labour Shares in the partnership; these
Labour Shares are entitled to the same rate of dividend as the Capital Shares,
but they are attached to each individual worker partner and are cancelled
when he or she leaves the partnership. If any part of the partnership’s income
is not distributed in dividends but is used to develop the business, new Capital
Shares, equal in value to their sacrificed dividends, are issued to all existing
holders of Labour as well as of Capital Shares. These partnership arrangements
greatly reduce the areas of conflict of interest between workers and capitalists,
since any decision which will improve the situation of one group by raising
the rate of dividend on its shares will automatically raise the rate of dividend
on the shares of the other group. (Meade 1993, 85–86)


In addition to this benefit of aligning interests of outside shareholders and insider
workers, Meade’s labor–capital partnership has an added main advantage of
introducing flexibility into the labor market. The current social democracy in the
Western European style suffers from a major problem: the high wage of workers
on the job is maintained at the cost of rigidity of the labor market, thus implying
an inefficient reduction of output and a level of employment below the potential
full employment. When the labour–capital partnership uses a labor share certificate
to replace a fixed wage arrangement, a degree of flexibility is introduced into the
labor market which is formerly characterized by downward rigidity of wages.

'''It is important for the “progressive” forces in China and other post-communist countries not to imitate social-democratic policies pursued in Western Europe.'''

There, the social-democratic parties had long lost their radical inspiration. Instead
of challenging and reforming the institutions of the existing forms of market
economy and representative democracy, the social-democratic program merely
seeks to moderate the social consequences of structural divisions and hierarchies.
We need more radical institutional innovations like the labor–capital partnership
to make up for the deficiencies of conventional social-democratic policies. The
flexibility in the labor market is just one case which illustrates this general point."

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Open Company Formats]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]