

=Bio=

"I am completing a PhD dissertation on the process of socially constructing a commons paradigm to revise the operating assumptions and behaviors of the previous paradigm. This builds on previous research, education, and facilitation regarding citizen engagement processes that address the complexities of community sustainability and climate change issues. I am a member of the Commons Paradigm Think Tank and in an advisory role with the Great Lakes Commons Social Charter committee. I live in Nelson, B.C. Canada"


Long bio:

"The process of socially constructing a commons paradigm capable of revising  the operating assumptions and behaviors of the previous paradigm is the focus of her current PhD research. This builds on 25 years of experience in project design, research, and implementation that supports citizen education and engagement to address the complexities surrounding community sustainability and climate change issues. Much of this work is based on integrating current theory and research in adult development, complexity science, and deliberative democracy. She has presented widely at conferences and published on these topics. Her articles can be found in the Integral Review, World Futures: The Journal of General Evolution, and the International Journal of Public Participation. She has also produced the video: A Crisis of Decision Making: Responding to the Complexities that Underlie Our Inability to Respond to Climate Change. Realizing that even well designed citizen engagement processes are limited if still operating within the beliefs and institutions of the current economic growth paradigm, her focus scaled up to the necessity of developing viable alternatives that support the sustainable co-management of shared local and global resources. This led to inquiry as to how a commons approach could develop in order to provide that viable alternative. She has an MSc in Holistic Science, and a background as an educator, somatic psychotherapist, and artist. She is the director of the Integrative Learning Institute, an associate of Global Commons Trust, a board member of the Canadian Community for Dialogue and Deliberation, and in an advisory role with the Great Lakes Commons Social Charter committee. She lives in Nelson, B.C. Canada."


=Publications=

==Web links:==

* [[Commons Paradigm]] Think Tank    http://www.commonsparadigm.org/ 
* Integrative Learning Institute    http://www.integrativelearninginstitute.com

==Key Articles and Video:==

Evolving to Address Global Climate Change and the Scale of Public Interactions. World Futures: The Journal of General Evolution, special issue on Postformal Thought and Hierarchical Complexity http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02604020802303747

Publicly Created Systemic Responses to Climate Change: An Integral Approach to Civic Engagement. Journal of Integral Theory and Practice 4(4), pp. 67–87. 

Matching Public Interaction Skills with Desired Outcomes  International Journal for     Public Participation. November 2007 

Holistic Democracy and Citizen Motivation To Use a More Holistic Approach to Public. Decision Making.  Integral Review Vol. 7, No. 2. October 2011   http://integral-review.org/documents/Inglis,%20Holistic%20Democracy,%20Vol.%207,%20No.%202.pdf 

A Crisis of Decision Making: Responding to the Complexities that Underlie Our Inability to Respond to Climate Change http://integrativelearninginstitute.com/video.htm 


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Canada]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Research]]