== Description ==

Described in a book by Jane Jacobs, Systems of Survival:


# Systems dependent on the control of monetary resources
#* The 'Commercial Moral Syndrome': 'shun force, respect contracts, be open to innovation'. <br />vs
# Systems dependent on violence
#* The 'Guardian Moral Syndrome': "shun trading, respect hierarchy, loyalty, and obedience to tradition."


From the Wikipedia:

"'''Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics is a 1992 book''' written by American urban activist Jane Jacobs.

It describes two fundamental and distinct ethical systems, or syndromes as she calls them: that of the Guardian and that of Commerce. She argues that these supply direction for the conduct of human life within societies, and understanding the tension between them can help us with public policy and personal choices.

Jacobs uses the term "ethical syndrome" rather than "ethical system". "Syndrome" in her usage does not mean "disease" or "disorder", but merely, from its Greek roots, "set of elements that go together". She argues that each syndrome arose naturally out of different modes of human behavior, but that they can conflict and cause serious problems if not understood.

In the preface, Jacobs explains, “This book explores the morals and values that underpin viable working life. Like the other animals, we find and pick up what we can use, and appropriate territories. But unlike the other animals, we also trade and produce for trade. Because we possess these two radically different ways of dealing with our needs, we also have two radically different systems of morals and values – both systems valid and necessary.” [1]

The book is written in a form of a platonic dialogue where the characters discover and explore the principles that make up each of the two syndromes. Jacobs explains that there are many other moral precepts that are shared by both systems and are not discussed at any length.

One system is the Guardian Moral Syndrome and contains 15 precepts, like “Shun Trading,” and “Adhere to Tradition.” This system arose primarily to satisfy the needs of organizing and managing territories. It became the code for warriors, governments, religions, and some private organizations.

The other system is the Commercial Moral Syndrome and also is made of 15 principles like, “Shun Force,” and “Compete.” It came into being to support human activities around trade and the production of goods."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_of_Survival)

== Characteristics ==
{|
|-
| '''Moral Syndrome A''' 
| '''Moral Syndrome B'''
|-
| 
shun force<br />
voluntary agreement<br />    
be honest<br />           
collaborate<br />                       
compete<br />                    
respect contracts<br />     
use initiative and enterprise<br />        
open to inventiveness and novelty<br />   
be efficient<br />     
promote comfort and convenience<br />       
dissent for the sake of the task<br /> 
invest for productive purposes<br />
be industrious<br /> 
be thrifty<br />                 
be optimistic                 
|
shun trading<br />
exert prowess<br />
be obedient and disciplined<br />
adhere to tradition<br />
respect hierarchy<br />
be loyal<br />
take vengeance<br />
deceive for the sake of the task<br />
make rich use of leisure<br />
be ostentatious<br />
dispense largesse<br />
be exclusive<br />
show fortitude<br />
be fatalistic<br />
treasure honor
|}
Source: [https://fee.org/articles/systems-of-survival-a-dialogue-on-the-moral-foundations-of-commerce-and-politics/]


== Commentary ==

=== 1. From the book review of 'Systems of Survival' by Peter J. Boettke: ===

"The book is an extended argument amongst the group on the implications of Kate’s “discovery.” The book contains a very subtle argument concerning the tension between moral syndrome A (commercial) and moral syndrome B (guardian). The guardian syndrome is the source of much of the stagnation and oppression in the world. However, it is also essential in some areas. Without a proper guardian infrastructure, for example, the commercial moral syndrome could be threatened. Jacobs, though, realizes that commercial life has ways to “police” itself—the discipline of repeated dealings or the historical development of commercial contract law outside of official state channels (such as the law merchant). Jacobs is particularly sharp in her analysis of hybrids of the commercial and guardian syndromes—such as the mafia and the state socialist systems of the former Eastern Bloc.

...

One thing Jacobs is looking for in her search of moral systems is cosmopolitanism. Which syndrome encourages cosmopolitan tolerance of alternative life-styles, beliefs, races, etc.? Her connection of cosmopolitanism and commercial life reminds one of Mises’ statements in Liberalism or Nock’s in his wonderful essay “On Doing the Right Thing.” This is something many on the conservative right in America simply don’t understand. Tolerance does not mean acceptance, but it does mean openness to new ideas and cultures, a willingness to live and let live, and, as Jacobs listed in her syndromes, it values “dissent for the sake of the task.” Commercial life flourishes within an environment that is characterized by liberal tolerance and cosmopolitan virtue, but not within an environment of provincial values bound by tradition. Provincialism can exist within cosmopolitanism, but whenever traditional values assert superiority over cosmopolitanism, innovation is stifled and commercial life stagnates. Liberalism is the only social philosophy that can constrain guardianship within its appropriate limits and unleash the productive and progressive force of commerce."

(https://fee.org/articles/systems-of-survival-a-dialogue-on-the-moral-foundations-of-commerce-and-politics/)

=== 2. From [https://legacy.foresight.org/SrAssoc/BioMcKenTom.html Tom McKendree]; at [https://foresight.org/comparison_of_idealist_commercial_and_guardian_syndromes/ The Foresight Institute] ===

“words added to the characterizations of the syndromes are marked in brackets and italics ''[like this]''—everything else is the words of Jane Jacobs or Pat Gratton. Question marks indicate particularly unsure guesses.”
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Idealist !! Commercial !! Guardian
|-
|Shun force
|Shun force
|''[Rely on force]''
|-
|Shun trading
|''[Rely on trading]''
|Shun trading
|-
|Dedication to the Ideal ''[Demand purity for the sake of the task]''
|''[Seek/accept pragmatic solutions]''
|''[Seek/accept contingent solutions]''
|-
|Exert prowess
|Use initiative and enterprise
|Exert prowess
|-
|''[Be honest?; Respect truth?]''
|Be honest
|Deceive for the sake of the task
|-
|Be unique ''[Dissent for the sake of uniqueness]''
|Dissent for the sake of the task
|Be obedient and disciplined
|-
|''[Be open to inventiveness and novelty]''
|Be open to inventiveness and novelty
|Adhere to tradition
|-
|Shun authority
|''[Shun uncontracted authority]''
|Respect hierarchy
|-
|''[Collaborate easily with strangers and aliens for the sake of the task]''
|Collaborate easily with strangers and aliens
|Be exclusive
|-
|Shun comfort
|Promote comfort and convenience
|Make rich use of leisure
|-
|Be passionate
|Be optimistic
|Be fatalistic
|-
|Ignore ownership
|Invest for productive purposes
|Be ostentatious
|-
|Accept largesse
|Be thrifty
|Dispense largesse
|-
|Respect authorship
|Respect contracts
|Be loyal
|-
|''[Demonstrate the superiority of your own ideal]''
|Compete
|''[Seek a monopoly on force]''
|-
|''[Respect joint authorship]''
|Come to voluntary agreements
|''[Negotiate when necessary]''
|-
|''[Be correct and true]''
|Be efficient
|''[Be superior]''
|-
|''[Respect joint authorship]''
|Be industrious
|Show fortitude
|-
|Honor prowess
|''[Honor success]''
|''[Honor prowess]''
|-
|''["One-up" slights?; Nurse grudges??]''
|''[Write-off sunk costs]''
|Take vengeance
|-
|''[Treasure standing in the subject area community]''
|''[Treasure reputation]''
|Treasure honor
|}

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]