=Discussion=

By Robert Hanna and Otto Paans:

"We  can  also  find  a  long  tradition  in  Japanese  thought  that  emphasizes a ‘qualified form of seeing’. 

For example, it’s salient in Nishi Amane’s philosophical  aesthetics,  in  Ōnishi  Yoshinori’s  account  of  the  notion  of  aware,115and  also  later  on  in  the  work  of  Kitarō  Nishida.  Notably,  Nishida  based  an  important tenet of his philosophy of the notion of ‘pure experience’116 and later on,  developed  it  into  the  notion  of  ‘object  logic’. Concisely  put,  according  to  Nishida  we  erroneously  revert  to  an  ‘object  logic’  or  fragmented  world-picture once  we  suppress  or  deform  our  innate  abilities  for  real  seeing.  Thinking  about  discrete,  manipulable  objects  leads,  according  to  Nishida,  to  a  distorted  world  hypothesis—or   distorted   root-metaphor—about   how   the   world   actually   functions. This distortion stems from the fact that we’ve turned our back on our abilities to comprehend the world as a unity. 

'''Notes:'''

* Aware’ is the Japanese word for a special kind of aesthetic perception. Although it’s a homonym of the  English  term  ‘aware’,  and  even  overlaps  in  meaning  with  the  English  word  slightly,  it  expresses  an  importantly different concept.

* Nishida borrowed and adapted the notion of ‘pure experience’ from William James, and it forms the backbone of much of his early thinking, although he also refined and reworked it over the years. See, e.g., K. Nishida, An Inquiry Into the Good, trans. C. Ives and A. Masao, New Haven, CT, Yale Univ. Press, 1990, pp.  3–10.  See  also  W.  James,  ‘A  World  of  Pure  Experience’,  Journal  of  Philosophy,  Psychology  and  Scientific Methods, 1, 1904, pp. 533–543.

* Nishida’s views on ‘object logic’ are presented in K. Nishida, Last Writings: Nothingness and the Religious Worldview, Honolulu, HI, Univ. of Hawaii Press, 1993.118 J. W. Heisig, Much Ado About Nothingness: Essays on Nishida and Tanabe, Nayoga, Chisokudō Publications, 2016, p. 17.

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/923/1560)

[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Japan]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Cosmobiological]]