'''= U.S. commons advocate and author at the [[On The Commons]] blog'''

URL = http://www.jaywalljasper.com/


=Bio=

Jay Walljasper is the editor of All That We Share: A Field Guide to the Commons. He is editor of Commons Magazine at www.OnTheCommons.org and a Senior Fellow, at On the Commons, a commons movement strategy center. He is also author of The Great Neighborhood Book.  He was editor of Utne Reader for many years and his  writing has appeared in Mother Jones, The Nation, the New Statesman, Ode, Yes!, Huffington Post and Resurgence. 


Long:

"Jay Walljasper is the editor of the book All That We Share: A Field Guide to the Commons. He is a Fellow at On the Commons and co-editor of its website, OnTheCommons.org. He is also a contributing editor of National Geographic Traveler,  Senior Fellow at Project for Public Spaces, an Associate of the Citistates group and the cities channel editor for Shareable.net. He was editor of Utne Reader for fifteen years, during which the magazine was nominated three times for a National Magazine Award for General Excellence. He is author of The Great Neighborhood Book  and co-author of Visionaries. His articles have appeared in Mother Jones, The Nation, the New Statesman (London), Ode, Tikkun, Yes!, Huffington Post, Resurgence, Courrier (Paris), Australian Financial Review, Sunday Independent (South Africa) and Business Craft (Singapore).  Working on issues of the  commons feels like a natural outgrowth of his long interest in environmental issues, social justice and urban livability."


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]