=Webcast=

URL = http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/mediaberkman/2006/11/14/jay-rosen-on-open-source-journalism-2/

"Jay Rosen speaks of the connection between the World Wide Web, collaboration, open source and how they all relate to journalism. The talk refers to the first use of the phrase "open-source journalism" and why the Trent Lott story illustrates the wisdom of the crowd.

This is Part II of a series of edited segments from a talk Rosen gave at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society. The talk centers on his experimental Newassignment.net project. These segments are edited by Leonard Witt from the [http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/mediaberkman/2006/11/14/jay-rosen-on-open-source-journalism-2/ original production] by Colin Rhinesmith."

Here's another [http://stevegarfield.blogs.com/videoblog/2006/11/jay_rosen_on_op.html webcasted interview] of Jay Rosen by Steve Garfield, after the same Berkman presentation.


=Print Interview=

'''Richard Poynder interviews Jay Rosen = Open Source Journalism advocate'''

URL = http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/03/open-source-journalism.html


=Bio=

"Jay Rosen, New York University journalism professor, and long-time campaigner for the press to engage more effectively with the public.

From 1993 to 1997 Rosen was the director of The Project on Public Life and the Press, founded to further "public journalism" — a movement that emerged in the US in the early 1990s to try and encourage the press to take a more active role in strengthening citizenship, improving political debate, and reviving public life.

Public journalism, Rosen argues, failed in its aims. Moreover, the advent of the Web has shifted the discussion from public journalism to citizen journalism, and raised the possibility that the blogosphere will make the press increasingly irrelevant.

Rather than viewing this as a threat, says Rosen, what journalists now need to do is to work with bloggers to create a new form of Open Source Journalism."
(from the profile by Richard Poynder)


Part of the Basement Interview series at 
http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/03/basement-interviews.html

[[Category:Interviews]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]