

=Bio=

"I was born in 1964 near Paris, France. I have a French passport and live in a small village called  La Barben in Provence not far from Aix-en-Provence and the Mediterranean sea.

I am the happiest dad of  Estéban who landed on our planet in August 2001. His mom and I live separately in deep friendship.

A few years ago I decided to follow my spiritual path and dedicate my life to Collective Intelligence, Wisdom and Consciousness (CIWC). I created  TheTransitioner.org , a non-profit R&D organization that gathers pioneers who have embarked towards the next humanity. Transitioners embody the transition between the ‘old’ conventional world and the next one to come.

I travel around the world to give seminars and conferences, and to work on R&D programs. I work on fascinating projects to develop global collective intelligence, I help large organizations and their leaders evolve toward wisdom centered approaches. Everywhere I go I meet and co-create with wonderful human beings.

The discipline I follow as a pioneer and researcher is integral. All planes of the being are involved: body, mind, spirit… The masculine and the feminine, the yin and the yang, the conceptual and the emotional intelligence… Evolution and involution… It goes from eating to approaching sleep, from meditation to creating new empowering invisible architectures.

Any space has become sacred.

I have practiced martial arts for the past 30 years. I teach them during workshops and special sessions. Although this may seem paradoxical to some people, the practice of non-violence and the one of martial arts are two faces of the same coin. I am a vegetarian for that same reason (but not the only one).

Music also plays an important role in my life. I play the piano, I love to improvise. Creation – yet expressed in collective intelligence – is part of who I am. Creating ourselves is creating humanity.

On the social and relational field, I made the choice to live in the gift economy. I have nothing to sell but everything to share. I see myself as a tree offering its best fruits. If fruits are good then people will enjoy them and will provide care for the tree. This is an ecology of relationship built on mutual offering rather than dependency and fear. This creates abundance and joy."
(http://noubel.com/about_me/)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Money]]