URL = https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/in-memoriam-jean-lievens-1957-2016/2016/09/22

==Bio==

Jean Lievens graduated in commercial engineering (Solvay) at the VUB (Free University of Brussels). He was responsible for the internal communication and coordination of the commercial & real estate department of the City of Brussels. Previously he worked as a freelance journalist and copywriter, specialized in business communication. He has several blogs, mainly on politics and peer-to-peer. Jean translated about thirty main articles on P2P by Michel Bauwens and collaborated with Michel Bauwens in writing [http://www.houtekiet.be/boeken/p/detail/de-wereld-redden De Wereld Redden], published in October 2013. 

He curated a ([http://www.scoop.it/t/peer2politics ScoopIt, P2Politics]) on P2P, the sharing economy & transition, and updated it frequently. As an activist with a liberal/social democratic & Marxist background, he was particularly interested in the development of peer-to-peer dynamics as an emancipatory force.

He died on Tuesday, September 6, 2016. See [https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/in-memoriam-jean-lievens-1957-2016/2016/09/22 this blog entry by Michel Bauwens].

==More Information==
* [[Jean Lievens on the P2P Revolution in Media]]
* [[Jean Lievens over P2P]]
* His translations listed in [[Dutch Language]]

Introductory articles written by Jean Lievens (In Dutch/Flemish):

* https://www.dewereldmorgen.be/artikel/2011/12/30/occupy-london-krijgt-bezoek-van-visionaire-belg/
* https://www.dewereldmorgen.be/artikel/2012/01/06/occupy-peer-to-peer-en-marxisme-overeenkomsten-en-verschillen/
* https://www.dewereldmorgen.be/community/zakenwereld-probeert-opkomende-sociale-deeleconomie-te-wurgen-met-reglementen/
* https://www.dewereldmorgen.be/community/het-internet-als-revolutionaire-slokop-of-het-einde-van-de-journalistiek/

Obituaries:
* https://www.marxist.com/a-tribute-to-jean-lievens.htm (English)
* https://www.vonk.org/belgie/afscheid-van-jean-lievens.html (Dutch)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Belgium]]