

=Bio=

"JEAN-CLAUDE GUÉDON was trained in history of science, and now teaches in the Comparative
Literature Department of the University of Montreal. With long-standing interests in
communication technologies, he has written a small book on the Internet published in 1996 by
Gallimard in Paris with a second edition in 2000: Internet: le monde en réseau. He has also written
articles on history of science and technology, museum science, science and literature, etc. From
1994 until 2002, he was involved with the Internet Society (ISOC) and chaired the Inet Program
Committee in 1996, 1998 and 2000. For the last 10 years or so, he has been involved in the Open
Access Movement and has also published on that topic, particularly a paper called ‘In Oldenburg’s
Long Shadow’ which has been translated into several languages and published as a small book in
Italy under the title Per la Pubblicità del Sapere (University of Pisa Press, 2004). He is also involved in
the Free/Libre Software Movement and is completing a second (and last) term as a member of the
French Association for Free Software Users (AFUL). He is a member of the Board of ‘Electronic
Information for Libraries’ (eIFL), an NGO dealing with libraries in poor and transition countries.
Over a year ago, he was elected vice-president (dissemination of research) of the Canadian
Federation for the Humanities and Social sciences." 


=More Information=

Correspondence: Jean-Claude Guédon,
Department of Comparative Literature, University of Montreal, PO Box 6128, Montreal, Quebec
QC H3C 3J7, Canada (jean.claude.guedon@umontreal.ca).



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Cateogory:Politics]]

[[Category:Canada]]