'''= Inside Networked Movements. Interview with Jeffrey Juris. By Geert Lovink'''

URL = http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/inside-networked-movements-interview-with-jeffrey-juris/

On the book: [[Networking Futures]]


=Description=

From the intro:

"Jeffrey Juris wrote an excellent insiders story about the ‘other globalization’ movement. [[Networking Futures]] is an anthropological account that starts with the Seattle protests, late 1999, against the WTO and takes the reader to places of protest such as Prague, Barcelona and Genoa. The main thesis of Juris is the shift of radical movements towards the network method as their main form of organization. Juris doesn’t go so far to state that movement as such has been replaced by network(ing). What the network metaphor rather indicates is a shift, away from the centralized party and a renewed emphasis on internationalism. Juris describes networks as an ”merging ideal.” Besides precise descriptions of Barcelona groups, where Jeff Juris did his PhD research with Manuel Castells in 2001-2002, the World Social Forum and Indymedia, Networking Futures particularly looks into a relatively unknown anti-capitalist network, the People’s Global Action. The outcome is a very readable book, filled with group observations and event descriptions, not heavy on theory or strategic discussions or disputes. The email interview below was done while Jeffrey Juris was working in Mexico City where studies the relationship between grassroots media activism and autonomy. He is an Assistant Professor of Anthropology in the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Arizona State University."
(http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/inside-networked-movements-interview-with-jeffrey-juris/)

[[Category:P2P Futures]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Interviews]]