
Audio talk via http://www.thetakeaway.org/2010/may/20/privacy-time-facebook/


=Summary=

"Facebook executives are preparing for a ‘privacy summit’ to discuss the site’s controversial new default privacy settings (which do little to protect users’ privacy). But in a world of over-sharing online, does privacy even matter anymore? And have our notions of public and private changed so dramatically that we couldn’t reverse things if we wanted to?

Jeff Jarvis is a journalism professor at the City University of New York and author of "What Would Google Do?" He walks us through the history of privacy, and how technology has changed our definitions of what it is over the years.

And Amber Case is a cyber-anthropologist and tech consultant. She explains how social networking sites have redefined privacy, identity, and the way we interact with others."


=More Information=

#On Jeff Jarvis' book: [[Public Parts]]:

"In Public Parts, I’ll argue, as I have here, that in our current privacy mania we are not talking enough about the value of publicness. If we default to private, we risk losing the value of the connections the internet brings: meeting people, collaborating with them, gathering the wisdom of our crowd, and holding the powerful to public account. Yes, I believe we have a right and need to protect our privacy — to control our information and identities — but I also want the conversation and our decisions to include consideration of the value of sharing and linking. I also want to protect what’s public as a public good; that includes our internet."
(http://www.buzzmachine.com/2010/05/20/public-parts/)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]