
'''= author of [[Networking Futures]], i.e. 'the bible of autonomous movements''''


=Bio=

"Jeffrey S. Juris is an Assistant Professor of Anthropology in the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Arizona State University. His research and teaching interests include globalization, social movements, new media, youth cultures, violence, Spain, and Mexico. He received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of California, Berkeley in May 2004, and has also served as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and the Institute for Social Research at the National Autonomous University of Mexico.

Juris is a co-author of Global Democracy and the World Social Forums. His latest book, Networking Futures: the Movements against Corporate Globalization, explores the cultural logic and politics of transnational networking among anti-corporate globalization activists in Barcelona, including their participation in mass actions and transnational networks such as Peoples Global Action and the World Social Forum. Articles on this topic and the relationship between new media and grassroots social movements have also appeared in journals such as Ethnography, Critique of Anthropology, Mobilization, the Journal of Youth Studies, and the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences.

Most recently, Juris has continued his ongoing research on the World Social Forum process, and he is currently conducting new ethnographic fieldwork on grassroots media activism and autonomy in Mexico City. He also serves on the Editorial Board of Resistance Studies Magazine and is a member of several activist research networks, including Sociologists without Borders and the North America Chapter of the Network Institute on Global Democratization.

Juris is an active participant in the Social Justice and Human Rights Masters' Program (MASJHR), where he teaches courses in Grant Writing and Activist Research Methods. He also teaches undergraduate courses such as Globalization, Development, and Resistance; Introduction to Social Movements; Cybercultures; Introduction to Cultural and Social Anthropology; and Ethnographic Methods.
For more about Jeff's book, [[Networking Futures]]: the Movements against Corporate Globalization, please visit: www.networkingfutures.com"
(https://sec.was.asu.edu/directory/person/863914)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Politics]]