
Jinbo Net = provides computer communication services for Korean NGO's


URL = http://www.jinbo.net


=Description=


Jinbonet officially launched in November 1998 as a center for
providing computer communication services, including internet
and training, for Korean NGOs. In addition, Jinbonet itself
is an activist independent organization. Several activists
paved the way for Jinbonet by the action supporting the KCTU
(Korean Confederation of Trade Unions) general strike in
1997. The same year the first Seoul International Labormedia
Conference was held by those who now run Jinbonet. As a
result of inspiring dialogue with International activists
from JCA-NET (Japan), Labornet (USA), Labournet (UK), etc. A
Korean independent progressive BBS (Truenet) proposed the
creation of a 'Korean Progressive Network Center' - later
named 'Jinbonet' - and donated its system and lines. In early
1998, taskforce members for Jinbonet proposed that Korean
NGOs participate in the foundation of Jinbonet by
co-organizing and fund-raising together. Finally the
preparatory Committee for Jinbonet was set up on July 1,
1998. Jinbonet launched into by regular service during
Labormedia Week '98, 'Searching for Alternative Media and
Grassroots Network' which took place November 9∼15, 1998.
Jinbonet has earned a reputation as a credible Internet
Service Provider (ISP) and activist partner of Korean NGOs.


=More Information=

- Website: http://www.jinbo.net 

Contact: PatchA(i@patcha.jinbo.net)

Oh Byoung-il(antiropy@www.jinbo.net) - Tel: +82-2-7744-551 -
Fax: +82-2-7744-553


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:South Korea]]