=Source=

'''* Book: Johannes Heinrichs. [[Value-Levels-Democracy]]. The Reflection-System-Theory of Four-Segmentation. 2018'''

URL =

''"This book is an English adaption of the original German title “Demokratiemanifest” (2005) which is a short version of the author`s “Revolution der Demokratie” (2003/2014). Translation by Joscha Thiele."''


=Description=

From the preface, '''Karl Albrecht Schachtschneider''':

"In this book, Johannes Heinrichs offers a “real utopia”. His theory of
democracy is as fundamental as it is subversive and necessary. It is
fundamental because it rests on an elementary anthropology, namely
his social theory of reflection. It is subversive because it disputes
the ideology of the party state. It is necessary because the freedom
of humanity is the vision of the Enlightenment and the goal of all
politics.

Heinrich’s oeuvre teaches revolution in its proper sense, that is to
say: as the liberation to law and humanity of all people.

Johannes Heinrichs is moved by the conviction that the party state
cannot be the answer to the big question of the Enlightenment, indeed
of humanity: the question of the good life for all. His proposal makes
sophisticated distinctions, but it gives democracy a real chance for
the first time.

'''Heinrichs conceives a four-chamber parliament with independent tasks, independent responsibilities, and independent personnel: ''a
parliament of fundamental values, a culture parliament, a political parliament, and an economic parliament''. The laws passed by these
parliaments are all binding. This requires clearly defined limits of the powers of each parliament and an order of priority between them.'''

Aside from the four-segmentation of the system, fundamental
values, culture, politics, and economics, Heinrichs conceives of a
further structural dimension: the trinity of state, private and public.

While already practiced today, this trinity is not yet supported by an
adequate legal order. Like the four-segmentation of parliament, it is a
structural element of the separation of powers, systemically justified
here for the first time.

Johannes Heinrichs is the best expert in contemporary social
philosophy. He knows of his responsibility for our republic and
submits a well-reasoned proposal for human life in all states of the
world.

Heinrich’s work is a great contribution to political philosophy and
to democratic theory. I will help to lead his revolution to victory."


=Contents=

Chapter 1

Preliminary remarks 7


Chapter 2

Historical orientation: Yesterday’s democracy 17


Chapter 3

The systemic approach: from acting man to a
social systemic 23


Chapter 4

Leap into the great organism:
differentiation of subsystems 31


Chapter 5

The core demand: four heart-chambers of democracy 37


Chapter 6

Consequences aplenty: the non-parliamentary powers 65


Chapter 7

A further architectonic dimension:
the triad of state – private – public 71


Chapter 8

The socio-ethical aspect – social principles and
their evolution 77


Chapter 9

Future-oriented syntheses: tomorrow’s democracy 83


Chapter 10

Strategies and delineations –
Enlightenment as revolutionary praxis 87


Chapter 11

Outlook: Architectures of European and
Global Democracy 97


=Excerpts=

==Social reality can only be constructed spontaneously from below==

The powers of spontaneous association from below cannot flourish
without consideration of the societal framework, of the whole. The
Weimar Republic serves as the perfect example of numerous valuable,
hopeful reformist departures from below (so-called “life reform” in
the aftermath of the Youth Movement). All these good initiatives,
now returned in the form of the green movement, were proven at the
time to be nothing but parlor games on the sinking Titanic, because
they did not take the wider political climate seriously enough. And
because they never properly adopted democracy.

This should have happened in a specifically German manner,
developing classical German philosophy (including Marx), to which
Heinrich Heine ascribed world historical significance, both before and
after the failed bourgeois revolution of 1848. The German authorities
ignored this and built their Empire on power and the industrial
revolution: the German division of power and spirit. In its wake, the
majority of German intelligentsia refrained from politics and declined
the Western democratic offer. “The German spirit is apolitical and will
always remain thus.” (Thomas Mann, Reflections of a Nonpolitical
Man, 1918). Meanwhile, a revolution, proletarian and downright
nasty to the aesthetically-minded bourgeois, “had to” be crushed in
1918/19. Here were at least two spontaneous movements from below
that lacked something to be succeed against the power of the existing
order – and against violence.

Today, 70 years after the end of the war, aren’t we called upon to
contribute to the development of our second, imported democracy,
rather than passively decrying the dangerous growing democratic
decadence of the former example across the Atlantic. That which is
justified in the demand for the spontaneous From-Below is taken up
by the principle of subsidiarity in chapter eight.

But one must not confuse the prerogative of the lower, smaller
social units with supremacy. Said prerogative requires conscious
protection by way of thinking the whole."


=More information=

* Johannes Heinrichs wiki is in German only: https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Heinrichs_(Philosoph) 

 *book link https://www.amazon.com/Integral-Philosophy-Anthropology-Politics-Spirituality/dp/3838211480

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]