
"YouTube - John Taylor Gatto - State Controlled Consciousness"
 

URL = http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ogCc8ObiwQ


=Description=

Paul Fernhout:

In that video, he explains how compulsory schooling in the USA was to create a utopia of abundance by molding most children into factory workers (and sorting out some other types). 


=More Information=

Another longer one, a Pacifica Radio interview:
 
* "John Taylor Gatto: Schooling is not Education - Part 1" http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZKci3_cmlqI
 
* "John Taylor Gatto: Schooling is not Education - Part 2", http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJPRtOq-msc
 
* "John Taylor Gatto: Schooling is not Education - Part 3", http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eo75-8MAEoc

* "John Taylor Gatto: Schooling is not Education - Part 4", http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H1J9KR1_vhk
 
* "John Taylor Gatto: Schooling is not Education - Part 5", http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQpsVBKlQ2o

That interview quotes him on how the term community does not apply to networks. He talks about how when the old and young are locked away, there is not past or future in a community, only a present. He also talks about what the basics are in our society, and they are not what you might expect. In the second section, he talks about issues that relate especially to peer production versus specialization (where he suggests specialization is dehumanizing), and suggesting nothing is very hard to do, and you can help yourself almost all the way. 169 hours in each week 55 hours TV, 56 hours sleeping, school 45 hours coming and going, 3 hours for evening meals, private time for each child in 9 hours (expecting them to fashion a self and unique consciousness in that time). The richer they are, the less TV, but more commercial entertainments. Talks about behaviors like consumerism that are addictions of dependent personalities. Towards the end he talks about links to ecological issues and how we have constructed an economy that is "insane". He says 22.5% of all jobs are guarding jobs. (I'd say the number is higher if you look at aspects of broader jobs like programming where a lot of effort goes into security, or accounting involved with rationing, like the health insurance industry.) He talks about a collapse, but essentially, a socially-caused collapse. At the end of part three, starts a reading of an abridged version of the Seven Lesson Schoolteacher. (http://www.newciv.org/whole/schoolteacher.txt) At the very end (6:40 of the fifth segment) are some comments especially relevant to peer interactions about education."


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]