

=Bio=

Active in the co-operative movement for over twenty years, John Restakis is former Executive Director of the BC Co-operative Association in Vancouver, a position he held since 1998. He is currently Executive Director of Inspiration in Action (IIA) in Vancouver. His professional background includes community organizing, adult and popular education, and co-op development. 

Restakis was Research Co-ordinator on Social Infrastructure and Institutional Innovation for the FLOK Project in Ecuador. He has done consulting work on international co-op development projects, researches and teaches on co-operative economies and the social economy, and lectures widely on the subject of globalization, regional development, and alternative economics. 

Restakis has also been an advisor to Syriza in Greece for the development of a national strategy for the social and solidarity economy. He is also Research Associate for Co-operatives UK.

Restakis earned his BA at the University of Toronto with a Major degree in East Asian Studies and specialist studies in Sanskrit and Classical Greek. 

He holds a Masters Degree in Philosophy of Religion. He is the author of Humanizing the Economy – Co-operatives in the Age of Capital (2010).


=Publications=

Books by John Restakis:

# [[Humanizing the Economy]]: Co-operatives in the Age of Capital, New Society Publishers, 2010
# The Co-op Alternative: Civil Society and the Future of Public Services  Institute of Public Administration of Canada, 2001
#Storylines: Oral Histories for Literacy, Ontario Ministry of Education, 1987


=More Information=
* http://johnrestakis.net/ (his web site)
* restakis@gmail.com
* 778-855-9161 (cel)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Canada]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]