'''= researcher who specializes in organizational studies with a particular bent towards the organizational implications of computer-supported activities '''

URL = http://www.johnseelybrown.com/

==Bio==

"John Seely Brown is currently a visiting scholar at the Annenberg Center at USC. He was the Chief Scientist of Xerox Corporation until April 2002 and also the director of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) until June 2000—a position he held for twelve years. While head of PARC, Brown expanded the role of corporate research to include such topics as organizational learning, complex adaptive systems, micro electrical mechanical system (MEMS) and NANO technology. His personal research interests include digital culture and rich media (both of which he pursues at USC), ubiquitous computing, web service architectures and organizational and individual learning. The recipient of honorary PhDs from Brown University and the London Business School, Dr. Seely Brown is the author of many influential publications on learning, including "Learning in the Digital Age" (2002) and "The Social Life of Learning: How can Continuing Education be Reconfigured in the Future" (2002)."
(https://www.uscpublicdiplomacy.org/users/john_seely_brown)

Picture at http://flickr.com/photos/joi/538156039/

"John Seely Brown left as Director of Xerox-PARC in June 2000, and stepped down as Xerox Corporation Chief Scientist in April 2002. He has published more than 100 papers in scientific journals and was awarded the Harvard Business Review's 1991 McKinsey Award for his article, "Research that Reinvents the Corporation" and again in 2002 for his article (with John Hagel) “Your Next IT Strategy.”

His latest book, The Only Sustainable Edge: Why Business Strategy Depends on Productive Friction and Dynamic Specialization, written with John Hagel, was published in the spring of 2005 by Harvard Business School Press.

Brown is a member of the National Academy of Education and a Fellow of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence and of AAAS, and a Trustee of Brown University, the MacArthur Foundation and In-Q-Tel.

He received an A.B. from Brown University in 1962 in Mathematics and Physics and a Ph.D. from the University of Michigan in 1970 in Computer and Cmmunication Sciences."
(http://mitworld.mit.edu/video/419/)

==More Information==
===Pages on this Wiki===
* [[John Seely Brown on Globalization and Collaboration]]
* [[John Seely Brown on the Long Tail of Learning]]
* [[John Seely Brown on Web 2.0 and the Culture of Learning]]
* [[John Seely Brown on the Social Life of Learning in the Net Age]]
* [[John Seely Brown on Tinkering as a Mode of Knowledge Production]]

===External Links===
* [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Seely_Brown John Seely Brown on Wikipedia]
* [http://www.johnseelybrown.com/ his web site]


[[Category:Bios]]