
=Discussion=

Cui Zhiyuan:

"Few have noticed that [[Petit-Bourgeois Socialism]] was at the heart of the genealogy of the “modern
enterprise system.” In fact, a petty bourgeoisie socialist J.S. Mill was the key figure
to bring one of the main features of the “modern enterprise system” – limited
liability for shareholders – into existence.

It was due to the concern for the development of workers’ cooperatives of his
time that John Stuart Mill started to study the issue of limited liability. He first
analyzed the so-called “en commandites” form of partnership. This special form
of partnership had many proponents in England, the Christian Socialists perhaps
being the most prominent among them. In this form of organization the “active”
partners were subject to unlimited liability, staying with the idea of tying liability
to responsibility, while the “sleeping” partners were subjected to limited liability,
since they were not responsible for running the business. John Stuart Mill
advocated this form of partnership because it would have allowed workers to form
associations to “carry on the business [with] which they were acquainted” and
also allow the “rich to lend to the poor.” 

Mill argued:

- No man can consistently condemn these partnerships without being prepared
to maintain that it is desirable that no one should carry on business with
borrowed capital. In other words, that the profits of the business should
be wholly monopolized by those who have had time to accumulate, or the
good fortune to inherit capital, a proposition, in the present state of commerce
and industry, evidently absurd.

In 1850, Mill testified before the Select Committee on Investments for the
Savings of the Middle and Working Classes of the British Parliament. He proposed
to establish the corporate regime with generalized limited liability for shareholders,
because it would induce the wealthy to lend more freely in support of projects
by the poor. The poor would also benefit by having the opportunity to invest their
savings in producers’ or consumers’ cooperatives. As a result of the efforts of
Mill and others, the British Parliament passed the 1855 Act of general limited
liability for corporations.

This genealogy of limited liability has been almost forgotten by the contemporary economists. The point of retelling this forgotten chapter of economic
history is to highlight that the “modern enterprise system” is not necessarily
capitalist. If shareholders have only “limited liability”, it implies that they are not
taking the full risks as “private owners” are supposed to do; therefore they should
not enjoy all the profits of the enterprises.8 In other words, the shareholders are
not the only risk-bearing group. The employee’s firm-specific human capital also
runs at a risk. Moreover, shareholders can diversify their shareholding through
a portfolio of different firms’ shares, but a single worker cannot work for several
firms all at the same time. In this light, it may be argued that employees’ human
capital runs a higher risk due to the lack of diversification. This opened the door
to our understanding of the widespread institutional innovation in China’s rural
industry – a “shareholding-cooperative system.”

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Open Company Formats]]