

=Source=

Work cited:Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren (Keynes 1963). 

In: '''The Economics of Abundance. [[Sustainable Growth in a Post-Scarcity World]]. By Philip Sadler. Gower, 2010.''' Chapter 2: Sustainable Growth in Consumption, Demand, and the Poverty Penalty.

URL = http://www.ashgate.com/Sustainable-Growth-Post-Scarcity-World-Sadler-Ch2.pdf


=Discussion=

Philip Sadler:

"The needs of human beings, he went on to argue, fall into two classes.
                                   
There are needs that are absolute, in the sense that we feel them whatever the
situation of our fellow human beings may be. There are also needs that are
relative, in that we feel them only if their satisfaction lifts us above or makes
us feel superior to our neighbours. These latter needs, he stated, might well
be insatiable, but this was not so in the case of the former. ‘A point may soon
be reached, much sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when these
needs are satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further energies to
non-economic purposes.’ (He clearly did not anticipate the rise in obesity that
would follow the solving of the economic problem in a number of countries as
far as food is concerned.)

    
Keynes, having reached this conclusion, then asks the question – will
this state of affairs be of benefit? Man has struggled throughout history for
subsistence; this struggle has been his primary purpose. If the economic
problem is solved, how will man occupy his time? Keynes thought with dread
of the problem of readjustment of the instincts and habits of ordinary people,
bred into them over countless generations.
follow such an increase in abundance. He expressed the hope that people
would be free to return to some of the most sure and certain moral principles,
regarding avarice as a vice, usury as a misdemeanour and the love of money
as detestable.
    
Finally, he pointed out that this would all happen gradually; that there
would be ever larger groups and classes of people from whom the problems of
economic necessity have been practically removed."
(http://www.ashgate.com/Sustainable-Growth-Post-Scarcity-World-Sadler-Ch2.pdf)

[[Category:Economics]]