Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vazO36OnGKI

=Description=

"Dr. Vervaeke delves into the importance of strong transcendence within naturalistic terms and proposes extended naturalism as a more comprehensive account of explanation. He outlines his plan to construct meta-convergent arguments to support his claims, including discussions on emergence, emanation, conformity theory, and the relationships between knowing and being."


=Contents=

00:03:00 - Deep consilience as a connection between science and spirituality.

00:04:06 - Defining strong transcendence and its impacts.

00:04:44 - Extended naturalism as a comprehensive account of explanation.

00:11:42 - Generalization-discrimination trade-off and its importance.

00:15:22 - Probability in rolling a die and real information based on differences.

00:19:26 - Hole's argument about living things' causal power.

00:22:30 - Causal signals in living organisms and the need for higher level redundancy.

00:28:36 - Convergence of arguments supporting emergence and emanation framework.

00:32:31 - Where does actualization come from if the bottom level of reality is pure possibility?

00:34:22 - The need for both emergence and emanation in ontology.

00:38:14 - Emergence and emanation as completely interpenetrating.

00:41:34 - Pickstock's argument against gap-preserving distinctions.

00:44:22 - Debunking the theory-data distinction.

00:46:55 - Conformity theory and the interweaving of knowing and reality.

00:52:03 - Transjectivity being more real than subjectivity and objectivity.

00:53:14 - The inherently transjective nature of truth, relevance, life, and perception.





00:57:21 - Strong transcendence within extended naturalism.
01:02:17 - Reductionism as a presupposition causing difficulties in physics.
01:04:35 - Unifying knowledge and consilience for addressing the wisdom famine.
01:08:26 - Complexification of cognition and its relation to complexification in reality.

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]