Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBLZmwlPa8A

=Description=

""It's possible to rehabilitate large-scale damaged ecosystems." Environmental film maker John D. Liu documents large-scale ecosystem restoration projects in China, Africa, South America and the Middle East, highlighting the enormous benefits for people and planet of undertaking these efforts globally."


=Discussion=

Additional details from Grok, April 2025:

"John D. Liu: Ecosystem Restoration Camps and Large-Scale Regeneration
John D. Liu, a filmmaker and ecologist, is renowned for documenting and advocating large-scale ecosystem restoration, notably the Loess Plateau project in China. He founded the Ecosystem Restoration Camps movement to engage communities globally in restoring degraded lands.

Relation to Economic Benefits:

Carbon Sequestration and Climate Resilience: Liu’s Loess Plateau project restored 35,000 square kilometers, sequestering carbon and reducing erosion, which aligns with the IPCC’s view that nature-based solutions could provide 30% of emissions reductions. This mitigates climate-related economic losses (e.g., $54 trillion by 2100).

Job Creation and Poverty Alleviation: The Loess Plateau project lifted 2.5 million people out of poverty by creating jobs in terracing, tree planting, and sustainable farming, supporting Liu’s claim that restoration changes socio-economic functions (). This mirrors the global job creation potential of 395 million by 2030.

Health Cost Savings and Community Well-Being: Liu emphasizes that restoration heals both ecosystems and communities. His camps foster social cohesion and reduce environmental health risks, aligning with WHO’s estimates of billions saved from cleaner air and water.

Tourism and Recreation: Liu’s projects, like those in Spain and Mexico, create biodiverse landscapes that attract eco-tourism, contributing to the 10% of global GDP from tourism.

Example: Liu’s documentary Hope in a Changing Climate showcases the Loess Plateau’s transformation, where restored ecosystems increased agricultural yields and local incomes, demonstrating economic returns far exceeding costs. His Ecosystem Restoration Camps now span six continents, training thousands in restoration techniques, amplifying these benefits globally (,).

Reference: Liu’s work is well-documented in Green Gold and Hope in a Changing Climate (), and his Ecosystem Restoration Camps are detailed at ecosystemrestorationcamps.org (,)."

[[Category:China]]

[[Category:Bioregional]]

[[Category:Sustainable_Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]