== Wikipedia article snapshot of John Henry Holland for P2P wiki refactoring ==

'''John Henry Holland''' ([[2 February]], [[1929]]) is an American scientist and Professor of [[Psychology]] and Professor of [[Electrical Engineering]] and [[Computer Science]] at the [[University of Michigan]], Ann Arbor. He is a pioneer in complex system and nonlinear science. He is known as the father of [[genetic algorithm]]s. 

== Biography ==
Holland was born in [[Fort Wayne (Indiana)|Fort Wayne]] in Indiana in 1929. He studied Physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received a B.S. in 1950, and studied Mathematics at the University of Michigan and received an M.A. in 1954.<ref>http://krasnow.gmu.edu/images/DOM%20Photos/Vita%2007.doc</ref> In 1959 he was the recipient of the first computer science Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. He is now Professor of [[Psychology]] and Professor of [[Electrical Engineering]] and [[Computer Science]] at the [[University of Michigan]], Ann Arbor. 

He is also a member of The Center for the Study of Complex Systems (CSCS) at the University of Michigan, and a member of the Board of Trustees and Science Board of the [[Santa Fe Institute]].

John H Holland is the recipient of a [[MacArthur Fellowship]] and a fellow of the [[World Economic Forum]]. 

== Work ==
Holland frequently lectures around the world on his own research, and on current research and open questions in CAS studies. In 1975 he wrote the ground-breaking book on genetic algorithms, "Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems". He also developed [[Holland's schema theorem]].

== Publications ==
Holland is the author of a number of books about [[complex adaptive systems]], including:
* 1975, ''Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems''
* 1995, ''Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity'' 
* 1998, ''Emergence: From Chaos to Order''

Articles, a selection:
* 1959, "A universal computer capable of executing an arbitrary number of subprograms simultaneously", in: ''Proc. Eastern Joint Comp. Conf.'' pp.&nbsp;108-112.  
* 1960, "Iterative circuit computers", in: ''Proc. Western Joint Comp. Conf.'' pp.&nbsp;259-265.  
* 1962, "Outline for a logical theory of adaptive systems", in: ''JACM'', Vol 9, nr. 3, pp.&nbsp;279-314. 
* 1970, "Hierarchical descriptions, universal spaces, and adaptive systems", in: Arthur W. Burks, editor. ''Essays on Cellular Automata''. University of Illinois Press. 1970
* 1989, "Using Classifier Systems to Study Adaptive Nonlinear Networks", in: Daniel L. Stein, editor. ''Lectures in the Sciences of Complexity''. Addison Wesley. 1989
* 1990, "Concerning the Emergence of Tag-Mediated Lookahead in Classifier Systems", in: Stephanie Forrest, editor. ''Emergent Computation: self-organizing, collective, and cooperative phenomena in natural and computing networks''. MIT Press. 1991
* 1992, "The Royal Road for Genetic Algorithms: Fitness Landscapes and GA Performance", in: Francisco J. Varela, Paul Bourgine, editors. ''Toward a Practice of Autonomous Systems: proceedings of the first European conference on Artificial Life''. MIT Press. 1992
* 1994, "Echoing Emergence: objectives, rough definitions, and speculations for ECHO-class models", in: George A. Cowan, David Pines, David Meltzer, editors. [http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/~susan/bib/nf/c/cowan.htm#7493 ''Complexity: metaphors, models, and reality''], Addison-Wesley. 1994
* 1995, "Can There Be A Unified Theory of Complex Adaptive Systems?", in: Harold J. Morowitz, Jerome L. Singer, editors. ''The Mind, The Brain, and Complex Adaptive Systems''. Addison-Wesley. 1995
* 2000, "Board Games", in: John Brockman, editor. ''The Greatest Inventions of the Past 2000 Years''. Phoenix. 2000.
* 2002, "What is to Come and How to Predict It.", in: John Brockman, editor. ''The Next Fifty Years: science in the first half of the twenty-first century''. Weidenfeld & Nicholson. 2002

== References==
<references/>

== External links ==
* [http://www.cs.oswego.edu/~blue/hx/courses/cogsci1/s2001/section05/subsection5/main.html Biography]
* [http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/~susan/bib/nf/h/holland.htm  Bibliography of John Henry Holland] by Susan Stepney.
* [http://www.santafe.edu/~pth/echo/ ''Echo'' project] of John Holland at the Santa Fe Institute.