


=Bio=

"I’m a web developer, consultant, and strategist through Polycot Associates. I also write about technology, media, and culture.

As a writer and doer, I’ve focused on media, advocacy, politics, sustainability, and future studies, as well as the wisdom and madness of crowds.

I’m President of EFF-Austin, an influential technology policy group founded in 1991. I’m a member of the e-Patients Working Group and a cofounder of the Society for Participatory Medicine. I lead the society’s social media team. I’m on the board of directors for Solar Austin and lead that organization’s Internet team. I’m also a proponent of Project VRM.

In 1991 I cofounded the pioneering online company FringeWare, Inc., the first company to attempt e-commerce. The company published the influential magazine FringeWare Review, which had an international distribution. I was involved in online community and e-commerce projects throughout the 1990s, and worked with bOING bOING (as associate editor for the original paper zine), HotWired, The Whole Earth Catalog, Electric Minds, and many other web and cyberculture projects and endeavors during the World Wide Web’s first decade.

In the late 90s, I was actively involved in the creation of e-commerce and online community initiatives for Whole Foods Market. After leaving Whole Foods, I formed Polycot Consulting, one of Austin’s leading web consulting and development companies through the 2000s. I was involved in the emergence of social technology in the early 2000s, and have been a leader in the use of social technology for political activism. With Mitch Ratcliffe, I co-edited the book [[Extreme Democracy]]."
(http://weblogsky.com/bio-jonlebkowsk/)


=More Information=

* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky

Links:

#Polycot Associates <http://polycotassociates.com>
#Twitter <http://twitter.com/jonl> |
#LinkedIn <http://www.linkedin.com/in/jonlebkowsky>|
#Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/jonlebkowsky>|
#Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky>|
#Blog <http://weblogsky.com> | 
#EFF-Austin <http://effaustin.org>


[[Category:Bios]]