
Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dw3h-rae3uo


=Description=

'Jonathan Zittrain, Professor of Law at Harvard Law School, explores the evolving world of cloud computing. Cloud computing is not just for computing anymore: you can now find as much mindshare as you can afford out in the cloud, too. A new range of projects is making the application of human brainpower as purchasable and fungible as additional server rackspace. What are some of the issues arising as armies of thinkers are recruited by the thousands and millions? A fascinating (and non-scare-mongering) view is offered of a future in which nearly any mental act can be bought and sold."
(http://theory.isthereason.com/?p=2821)


=Discussion=

Kevin Lim:

"What’s so significant about this talk is that it not only encapsulates the buzz I’ve picked up from the transmedia conferences I’ve just returned from, but he recognizes a pattern which finally takes us beyond the material, and into the conceptual. I’m referring to the emergence of shared cognitive power or rather, cloud labor as he calls it.

In his hour long presentation, he discusses…

2:05 Ubiquitous Human Computing or “Minds for Sale”

2:32 The Tween Bot

4:14 Crowdsourcing “The Future of the Internet”

7:36 A tour of the Ubiquitous Human Computing pyramid

8:37 Example 1: The X-Prize

10:24 Example 2: Innocentive

12:08 Example 3: LiveOps

15:43 Example 4: SamaSource

16:16 Example 5: Amazon’s Mechanical Turk

20:13 Example 6: The ESP Game

22:47 Example 7: Human Computing for Electronic Design Automation

24:01 Example 8: Google

25:24 Why Should We be Pessimistic?

26:38 Child Labor on PBS

28:11 Laboring for a Devious Cause

29:23 US Border Webcams

30:05 Smart Drive

30:45 Internet Eyes

32:09 Identifying Protesters

33:21 A Speculative Example

35:05 Mechanical Turking your way to a Fake Reputation

39:36 Mechanical Turking your way to a Political Movement

41:20 Captchas Sweatshops

43:03 “Crowding Out”

44:41 The Future of Crowdsourcing and How to Stop It

47:14 Clickworkers of the World Unite!

50:45 Monetizing Kindness"
(http://theory.isthereason.com/?p=2821)




[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]