
'''* Special JOPP Issue on Alternative Internets. SPECIAL ISSUE EDITORS: FÉLIX TRÉGUER (ISCC-CNRS), PANAYOTIS ANTONIADIS (NETHOOD),, JOHAN SÖDERBERG (GÖTEBORGS UNIVERSITET). JOURNAL OF PEER PRODUCTION, ISSUE 9: SEPTEMBER 2016.''' 

URL = http:///peerproduction.net/issues/issue-9-alternative-internets/

THIS SPECIAL ISSUE ORIGINATED IN THE ALTERNET SEMINAR (LONDON, 15-16 SEPTEMBER 2014). FOR MORE INFORMATION [http:///www.iscc.cnrs.fr/spip.php?article1912]


=Contents=

* SPECIAL ISSUE EDITORS’ INTRODUCTION. ALT. VS. CTRL.: EDITORIAL NOTES FOR THE JOPP ISSUE ON ALTERNATIVE INTERNETS ; Félix Tréguer (ISCC-CNRS),
Panayotis Antoniadis (NetHood), Johan Söderberg (Göteborgs Universitet)

* PEER REVIEWED ACADEMIC PAPERS. IN DEFENSE OF THE DIGITAL CRAFTSPERSON. James Losey and Sascha D. Meinrath

* HACKTIVISM, INFRASTRUCTURES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORKS IN COMMUNITY NETWORKS: THE ITALIAN CASE OF NINUX.ORG ; Stefano Crabu, Federica Giovanella, Leonardo Maccari, Paolo Magaudda

* ENMESHED LIVES? EXAMINING THE POTENTIALS AND THE LIMITS IN THE PROVISION OF WIRELESS NETWORKS: THE CASE OF RÉSEAU LIBRE ; Christina Haralanova and Evan Light

* GOING OFF-THE-CLOUD: THE ROLE OF ART IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A USER-OWNED & CONTROLLED CONNECTED WORLD ; Daphne Dragona and Dimitris Charitos

* GESTURING TOWARDS “ANTI-COLONIAL HACKING” 16 AND ITS INFRASTRUCTURE ; Sophie Toupin

* THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN DECENTRALIZATION AND PRIVACY: THE CASE OF BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGIES ; Primavera de Filippi

* FINDING AN ALTERNATE ROUTE: TOWARDS OPEN, ECO-CYCLICAL, AND DISTRIBUTED PRODUCTION; Stephen Quilley, Jason Hawreliak, Kaitlin Kish

* ALTERNATIVE POLICIES FOR ALTERNATIVE INTERNETS ; by Melanie Dulong de Rosnay


The editors explain:

"In this issue of the JoPP, we present contributions
that explore these questions and shed light on the
blind spots of alternative Internets.

With “In Defense of the Digital Craftsperson,”
James Losey and Sascha D. Meinrath offer a conceptual
framework for analyzing control in Internet
technical architectures along five dimensions: networks,
devices, applications/services, content, and
data. By updating prior analysis regarding threats
to communicational autonomy and to the ability
to tinker with digital technologies, they identify
key challenges and help think systematically about
strategies of resistance.

Stefano Crabu, Federica Giovanella, Leonardo
Maccari, and Paolo Magaudda consider the
bottom of the “network” layer of Losey and Meinrath’s
framework by offering an interdisciplinary
perspective on Ninux, a network of wireless
community networks in Italy. Their paper, “Hacktivism,
Infrastructures and Legal Frameworks
in Community Networks: the Italian Case of
Ninux.org“, benefits from the active participation
of one of the authors in Ninux, and presents
interesting evidence about the limited levels of
decentralization in a network built exactly around
this vision. It is also one of the very few papers
that brings insights on the legal aspects of community
networks, focusing on the question of liability
and different organizational forms that can protect
these networks against legal actions.

Christina Haralanova and Evan Light offer an
insider’s look at a much smaller community
network in Montreal, called Réseau Libre. In their
paper entitled “Enmeshed Lives? Examining the
Potentials and the Limits in the Provision of
Wireless Networks,” they try to understand two
other important contradictions in community
networks. First, they examine their possible role
as both an “alternative Internet provider,” as well
as an “alternative to the Internet all together,”
that is to say a local infrastructure providing local
services for the members of the network. They
also identify the lack of adequate security against
surveillance, despite the fact that many people
cite enhanced privacy and security options as a
reason for their participation in the community. As
the paper shows, even though they might foster
knowledge-sharing around issues such as computer
security, these networks remain “as insecure as
the Internet itself.”

The paper “Going Off-the-Cloud: The Role of Art
in the Development of a User-Owned & Controlled
Connected World” by Daphne Dragona
and Dimitris Charitos also explores various alternatives
of user-owned network infrastructures,
this time focusing on an “alternative to the Internet
all together”, imagined and experimented by artists
and activists. The scale here is much smaller,
with most networks comprised by a single wireless
router acting as a hotspot allowing only local interactions
between those in physical proximity. Such
“off-the-cloud” networks, have been given numerous
telling names like Netless, PirateBox, Occupy
here, Hot probs, Datafield, Hive networks, Autonomous
Cube. According to the authors, these and
many more similar inspiring projects work towards
“new modes of organization and responsibility (…)
beyond the sovereignty of the cloud.”

In “Gesturing Towards ‘Anti-Colonial Hacking’
and its Infrastructure,” Sophie Toupin draws on
a historical example to investigate the opportunities
and limitations for appropriating cryptography
today. Her interviews with some of the key
actors in this glorious moment of hacker politics
is particularly inspiring, as is Toupin’s willingness
to expand our understanding of “hacktivism” by
looking beyond Europe and North America.
Primavera De Filippi’s piece focuses on “The Interplay
between Decentralization and Privacy,”
using blockchain technologies as a case-study. She
shows that while decentralized architectures are
often key to the design of alternative Internets,
they come with important challenges with regards
to privacy protection. Her critical assessment is
particularly timely, as blockchain technologies are
rapidly co-opted by the bureaucratic organizations
there were originally meant to subvert.

In “Finding an Alternate Route: Circumventing
Conventional Models of Agricultural Commerce
and Aid,” Stephen Quilley, Jason Hawreliak and
Katie Kish present a case study on Open Source
Ecology (OSE). OSE started in the United States
but has sprouted similar initiatives in Europe and
South America. It is now developing a series of 
open source industrial machines and publishes the
designs online. One of the primary goals of OSE is
to provide collaboratively produced blueprints for
relatively inexpensive agricultural machinery, such
as tractors, backhoes, and compressed earth brick
presses for constructing buildings. The authors argue
that the proliferation of open source networks
can reshape domains that have traditionally relied
on state and inter-state actors such as international
aid.

Lastly, Melanie Dulong de Rosnay’s experimental
text on “Alternative Policies for Alternative
Internets” raises awareness on the importance of
the terms of use of Internet platforms. By quoting
numerous such policies – from both mainstream
and alternative platforms – on topics like copyright
or data protection, she manages to create a
diverse mix of feelings, all the way from anger to
laughter. Most importantly, this collection warns
us about the legal issues that alternative platforms
have to deal with, and provides inspiration and
useful information on how to address them in
practice."


=Excerpts=

==Editorial==

Félix Tréguer (ISCC-CNRS), Panayotis Antoniadis (NetHood), Johan Söderberg (Göteborgs Universitet):

"The hopes of past generations of hackers weigh
like a delirium on the brains of the newbies. Back
in the days when Bulletin Board Systems metamorphosed
into the Internet, the world’s digital
communications networks – hitherto confined to
military, corporate and elite academic institutions
– were at grasping reach of ordinary individuals.

To declare the independence of the Internet from
nation states and the corporate world seemed like
no more than stating the bare facts. Even encrypted
communication – the brainchild of military
research – had leaked into the public’s hands and
had become a tool wielded against state power.
Collectives of all stripes could make use of the
new possibilities offered by the Web to bypass
traditional media, broadcast their own voice and
assemble in new ways in this new public sphere.
For some time, at least, the Internet as a whole
embodied “alternativeness.”

Already by the mid-nineties, however, states began
to reshape the communications infrastructure into
something more manageable. Through a series
of international treaties, legislations and market
developments, ownership over this infrastructure
was concentrated to a few multinational companies
(McChesney, 2013). On top of this legal and
technical basis, a new breed of informational capitalism
sprang up, where value is siphoned from
deterritorialized “open” flows (Fuchs, 2015). Meanwhile,
the ecological footprint of communication
technologies has come to represent a formidable
challenge (Flipo et al., 2013).

It is in the light of these transformations that the
emancipatory promises inherited from the 1980s
and 1990s must be assessed. With every new wave
of high-tech products, these promises have been
renewed. For instance, when WiFi-antennas were
rolled out in the 2000s, community WiFi-activists
hoped to rebuild the communications infrastructure
bottom-up (Dunbar-Hester, 2014). With the
advent of crypto-currencies, some claimed to
believe that bankers’ control over global currency
flows would be demolished (Karlström, 2014). The
technology at hand might be new, but the storyline
bundled with it is made up of recycled materials.

It basically says: “Technology X has leveled the
playing field, now individuals can outsmart the
combined, global forces of state and capital.”
Underlying this claim is a grander narrative about
(information) technology as the harbinger of a
brighter future. Although progressivism goes all
the way back to the Scientific Revolution, it was
given a particular, informational twist during the
Cold War. In the 1950s and 1960s, disillusioned
US Trotskyists – most notably among them Daniel
Bell – rebranded historical materialism as the
post-industrialism hypothesis. With this remake of
hist-mat, history did no longer culminate in socialism,
but in a global consumer village. Furthermore,
the motor of transition was not class struggle
anymore, but the inert development of technology
(Barbrook, 2007). Though a spark of conflict has of
course survived in the post-industrial hypothesis,
this technological determinism flares up anew
every time hackers and Internet activists rally
behind, say, the inevitable demise of copyright or
the awaiting triumph of decentralised communication
networks (Söderberg, 2013). Determinism
is performative, and never more so than when it is
mobilized in political struggles.

This observation points to the instability of the
meanings invested in computers and in the Internet
itself. It suffices to recall the twin roots of
these technologies, one in the military-industrial
complex (Agar, 2003, Edwards, 1996), the other in
the counter-culture and peace movement (Turner,
2006; 2013). The same undecidedness prevails
today, as exemplified by the global controversies
unleashed by NSA whistleblower Edward
Snowden. The documents leaked by Snowden
revealed the extent to which communications
surveillance has been built into the pipes of a supposedly
flat network, giving rise to unprecedented
mobilisations aimed at resisting it. But paradoxically,
this wave of resistance is now leading to the
legalisation of mass surveillance (Tréguer, 2016).


Because of these persistent ambiguities, it would
be as wrong to denounce the inherent oppressiveness
of the Internet as it would be to celebrate
the alternative essence of this technology. Either
position amounts to the same thing: A foreclosing
of the struggle in which the future meaning of the
technology is determined. Both Alt. and Ctrl. are
possible and competing scenarios. They evolve in
constant interaction.

How can we, as scholars and/or activists, sort out
this complexity and make an assessment of the
balance of forces, while reinvigorating hope for the
future? Can we learn from the past to ward off the
eternal return of a dystopian future? Posing these
questions – and perhaps contributing to answers
– is the task that we have set for ourselves in this
special issue of Journal of Peer Production on “alternative
Internets.”

If the meaning of the “Internet” is instable, then
the definition of “alternative” in “alternative Internets”
is even more so. Alternativeness is never
an absolute. It is relative to something else, the
non-alternative, which must also be defined. In
this respect, Paschal Preston notes that alternative
Internets were found in online applications
that “manage to challenge and resist domination
by commercial and other sectional interests”, in
particular those “operating as alternative and/
or minority media for the exchanges of news and
commentary on political and social developments
which are marginalized in mainstream media and
debates” (Preston, 2001). Likewise, Chris Atton
writes that alternative Internets are “produced outside
the forces of market economics and the state”
(Atton, 2003). As seen from these rather conventional
definitions, alternativeness is measured in
distance from the centres of state and capital.

How can we move past the couple of “useful
others” (the state, the market) to better grasp
alternativeness? The tools, applications and media
that form part of the Internet can be assessed
as composites made up of different dimensions.
Some important parameters include the underlying
funding and economic models, the governance
schemes for taking decisions and allocating tasks,
or the modes of production. Nick Couldy puts
emphasis on this latter dimension when discussing
alternative online media, stressing that the most
important for them is to challenge big corporate
mass media by overcoming ‘‘the entrenched division
of labour (producers of stories vs. consumers
of stories)” (Couldry, 2003:45).

Another crucial line of inquiry for evaluating an
alternative Internet relates to the underlying content
or ideology that it circulates. For Sandoval and
Fuchs, this is the most important dimension, and
anything claiming to be alternative must adopt a
critical stance to “try to contribute to emancipatory
societal transformation” and “question dominative
social relations” (Sandoval & Fuchs, 2009). When
we consider the Internet, ideology is found in the
values that underly the design of a technology or
application, structure its uses or populate the online
social space that this application brings about.
Of course, ideology is also embedded in the discourses
and practices of the many actors trying to
influence its development at the technical, social
or legal level. The Internet is indeed a social space
made up of a myriad of contentious actors such
as hackers, software developers and makers who
hack, code and make, of advocacy groups with
their value-ridden proclamations and legalese,
of Internet users making claims to an enlarged
citizenship, and of course of all the entrepreneurs,
crooks, bureaucrats, agents provocateurs and politicians
they fight against or – less often – coalise
with. All of these actors produce, use or advocate
for particular technologies, fight against or encourage
dystopic trends, work towards or oppose
emancipatory projects, and in doing so produce
political discourses and imaginaries that weigh on
the social construction of the Internet. As such,
they are part of our field of inquiry when we talk
about “alternative Internets.” Their own contradictions
further complicate the analysis. A protagonist
might go to bed as a subversive hacker but wake
up the next day as a piece-rate worker in someone
else’s pension plan, or worse.

This speaks to the more general fact that a socio-technical
dispositif that is “alternative” on one
level tends to be preconditioned by status quo on
some other level. For instance, openness in terms
of software licenses often comes hand in hand
with a closure in terms of technical expertise. To
put it in more general terms, the alternative, if it
is to be effective, is necessarily compromised by
the dominant. Here as elsewhere, a maximising
strategy is paralysing: As the proverb goes, “the
perfect is the enemy of the good.” In this spirit,
Marisol Sandoval and Christian Fuchs have argued
for “politically effective alternative media that
in order to advance transformative political can 
include certain elements of capitalist mass media”
(Sandoval & Fuchs, 2009:147). According to the authors,
subscription fees or even advertising might
be required if a project is to break out of the niche
to reach a broader audience. Assessing trade-offs
is part of the alternative game."


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Articles]]