
'''= For some three years i've been kind of engaged with the "Laboratorio del Procomún" in Madrid, coordinating a research group devoted to aesthetics and politics of the commons.  I've written a number of funny things about enclosures and commons considered as living systems (www.jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com) Lately I've been working in La Tabacalera, a social centre we are building as a P2P social centre or something quite like that.'''

URL = http://www.jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com

=Auto-Bio=

"My name is Jordi Claramonte.  I was born and grew up in Vila-real, one of the most absurd towns in the province of Castellón. I studied Philosophy at the UNED and Electricity at a vocational school for students who had failed their regular courses. I’m pretty good at electricity. 

While I started on the Long March of my doctorate, I found out about “insumisión” (refusal to do military service), which kept me away from academic circles for many years but brought me into spaces for experimentation where artistic and deeply structured political issues were closely related. 

Two friends and I organized "La Fiambrera Obrera" (The Workingman’s Lunchbox), a small group that, over the years, gave us some trouble and the pains of a part of Spanish society that seemed, at that time, to be discovering the possibilities of real estate speculation in the old sections of cities. The first block of La Fiambrera’s works is from that period: www.sindominio.net/fiambrera 

Then came anti-globalization, the Agencies, a child, sccpp.org, another child, yomango.org, my thesis, and a hard-to-calculate number of trees. 

As far as books, at that time I collaborated in publishing a Manual de la Guerrilla de la Comunicación (Virus, 2000) and I coordinated the publication of "Modos de hacer: arte crítico, esfera pública y acción directa" (Universidad de Salamanca, 2001), an essay collection that attempted to address the statute of political agency contained- in a range of areas- in and around artistic practices.

I translated into Spanish and edited John Dewey’s “Art as Experience” and I have just published "Lo que puede un cuerpo. Ensayos de estética modal, pornografía y militarismo", a small, fuzzy, soft book you can download for free at the CENDEAC Web site.

This year, it was time for "La república de los fines", a book about the concept of autonomy and the ways it can be lost.  

My work is focused on what I call Modal Aesthetics (Estética Modal), which aims to think of mediations that serve to simultaneously think –which is what makes it so special- about the formal structure of quite diverse artistic practices and forms of organization of everyday life and the personal relationships which define us. 

If you’ve got the time and the curiosity –those two treasures- you can take a look at jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com, where I have posted some things from my thesis, focused on exploring the potential of the old idea of “autonomy”, and other research on modal aesthetics, the aesthetics of Fascism, and monsters in general."
(http://medialab-prado.es/person/jordi_claramonte)


=More Information=

Compiled by Carolina Botero:

Some english texts on his works on the [[Aesthetic Commons]]

#http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/10/aesthetic-commons.html
#http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/04/modal-aesthetics.html


He is part of medialab prado in the commons lab, at http://medialab-prado.es/person/jordi_claramonte

email via  "jordi uned" <jclaramonte@fsof.uned.es>, 


[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Bios]]