
= 4-part podcast series for the Guardian on the future of technology

=Description=

Magda Skrzypek:

"Are we moving into digital feudalism in our big data world? Should we be concerned about the future of democracy in the digital age? What happens to trust when algorithms take over? How can we take back control of our digital selves?

Journalist Jordan Erica Webber took it upon herself to explore these issues, creating a four-part podcast mini-series for the Guardian. Her Digital dystopia is a timely and multifaceted examination of how technology is transforming society and shaping our collective futures. In particular, it focuses on how "even the technology designed to do good can end up causing harm". The series deserves attention for the way it seeks to combine narrative with argument and analysis, but most importantly, for how it humanizes the conversation around the digital shift that is currently taking place in the world.

...


The mini-series is part of the Guardian’s tech and digital culture podcast show Chips with Everything. Aside from Digital dystopia, its excellent production and an ideal podcast length of 15 to 30 minutes make Chips with Everything a good recommendation for anyone interested in exploring the relationship between technology and society."
(https://www.piqd.com/technology-politics/podcast-are-we-heading-for-digital-dystopia?r=mypiqs)


=Podcast Directory=

Magda Skrzypek:

* In the first episode, Webber focuses on digital privacy, speaking to the cyborg rights activist Aral Balkan, executive director of Privacy International Gus Hosein, and Wired magazine's founding editor Kevin Kelly. [https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2018/jan/12/digital-dystopia-end-of-privacy-tech-podcast]

* In the second episode with Rachel Botsman and Luciano Floridi, two lecturers at the University of Oxford, she explores how technology is transforming trust. [https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2018/jan/19/digital-dystopia-the-changing-face-of-trust-podcast]

* Then, she turns her attention to the topic of democracy together with lawyer Ravi Naik and the Observer’s journalist Carole Cadwalladr, who broke the story on Cambridge Analytica. [https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2018/jan/26/digital-dystopia-democracy-technology-harm-podcast]

* Finally, gathering all the guests from previous episodes, Webber seeks solutions and ways in which citizens can stand up to tech monopolies and governments harvesting their information." [https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2018/feb/02/digital-dystopia-taking-back-control-podcast]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Technology]]