'''José Maria Ramos is an activist of Mexican-American origin, based in Melbourne, Australia, author of a PhD on the nine schools of thought in the [[Alterglobalization Movement]]; is preparing a global documentary on commoners.'''

== Bio ==

José Ramos is originally from California from Mexican American and
Indigenous ancestry, now residing in Melbourne Australia with his wife
De Chantal and son Ethan. An early interest in both environmentalism
and fiction led him to start an environmental group 'Earth Angels' at
his community college, and organize poetry slams in Long Beach.

After living in Japan, while backpacking through Europe a vision quest
led him to the idea of studying the futures. While living in Taiwan,
teaching English and studying Mandarin, he began a friendship with
futures studies scholars at Tamkang University. While in Taiwan, he
fell in love with an Australian (De Chantal) and moved to Melbourne.
He enrolled in a Masters of strategic foresight at Swinburne
University of Technology, and while there wrote two monographs on
Critical and Integral Futures Studies. Later, with colleagues he
co-founded the Melbourne Social Forum, Plug in TV, and has supported
the development of other initiatives such as Oases graduate school.

He recently completed an action research doctoral study focused on how
citizen groups can respond to global challenges and create alternative
globalizations. He currently works as a research analyst for the Smart
Services CRC, edits the Journal of Futures Studies, and is Senior
Visiting Research Fellow at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy
at the National University of Singapore. He also runs futures
workshops through Action Foresight. He understands the 21st century
demands from us innovation, courage and transformational thinking to
address the challenges we face.

(participant in the [[Asia Commons Deep Dive]] workshop, Oct 12-14, 2012; Bangkok, Thailand)

== Publications ==

Ramos, J. (2017). Linking Foresight and Action: Toward a Futures Action Research. In The Palgrave International Handbook of Action Research, 823–842. doi: 10.1057/978-1-137-40523-4

Ramos, J. M. (2014). Anticipatory Governance: Traditions and Trajectories for Strategic Design. Journal of Futures Studies, 19(1), 35–52.

Ramos, J. M. (2015). The Inner Game of Futures. Journal of Futures Studies, 20(1), 91–100. doi: 10.6531/JFS.2015.20(1).S91

Ramos, J., Bauwens, M., & Kostakis, V. (2016). P2P and Planetary Futures. In Critical Posthumanism and Planetary Futures, 193–214. doi: 10.1007/978-81-322-3637-5

Ramos, J., Mansfield, T., & Priday, G. (2012). Foresight in a Network Era : Peer-producing Alternative Futures. Journal of Futures Studies, 17(1), 71–90.

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Australia]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Politics]]