
= ecological economist, favourable to [[Degrowth]]

=Bio=

"Joshua Farley is an ecological economist and Associate Professor in Community Development & Applied Economics and Public Administration. Josh holds degrees in biology, international affairs and economics. He has previously served as program director at the School for Field Studies, Centre for Rainforest Studies, as Executive Director of the University of Maryland International Institute for Ecological Economics, and as adjunct faculty and licensed examiner at the University of the West Indies, Cave Hill.  He recently returned from a Fulbright fellowship in Brazil, where he served as visiting professor at the Federal Universities of Santa Catarina (UFSC) and Bahia (UFBA).

His broad research interests focus on the design of an economy capable of balancing what is biophysically possible with what is socially, psychologically and ethically desirable. More specifically, his research focuses on mechanisms for allocating resources under local control and national sovereignty that generate global public goods, developing transdisciplinary case study approaches to environmental problem solving as an educational tool, ecological restoration of rainforest ecosystems, economic globalization, and the valuation and finance of restoring natural capital.

He is co-author with Herman Daly of Ecological Economics, Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Island Press (2010)."
(https://www.uvm.edu/cdae/?Page=bios/farley.php&SM=bios/biossubmenu.html)


=Publications=

Farley, J., E. Gaddis, W. Rees, and K. VanDis. 2007. Our global footprint: managing global public goods. In J. Aronson, S. Milton, and J. Blignaut (eds.) Restoring Natural Capital: Science, Business, and Practice. Island Press: Washington, DC.

'''Books and Book Chapters:'''

Daly, Herman and J. Farley (2010-August) Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications, 2nd Edition. Island Press: Washington, DC.

Farley, J. (2010) Ecological Economics. In R. Heinberg and D. Lerchv(eds.) The Post Carbon Reader - Managing the 21st Century's Sustainability Crises. On-line: http://www.postcarbon.org/reader

Pascual, U. and R. Muradian (coordinating lead authors), L. Brander, E. Gomez-Baggethun, B. Martin-Lopez, and M. Verma (lead authors), P. Armsworth, M. Christie, H. Cornelissen, F. Eppink, J. Farley, J. Loomis, L. 

Pearson, C. Perrings, S. Polasky (contributing authors) (2010) The economics of valuing ecosystem services and biodiversity. In TEEB, (2010) The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: The Ecological and Economic Foundations. Earthscan Press

Costanza, R., J. Farley, and I. Kubiszewski (2010) Adapting Institutions for Life in a Full World. Pages 85-90 in E. Assadourian (project director), L. Starke, and L. Mastny, editors. 2010 State of the World: Transforming Cultures. WW Norton and Co., New York.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]