
=Description=

"JUBILEE is an initiative by Justin Bennett, Vincent Meessen, Katrien Reist and Katleen Vermeir & Ronny Heiremans with the intention to set up a platform to support (audio-visual) artists, whose practices develop out of long-term and cross-disciplinary research with a discursive output.

Starting from the practice of this core group of artists based in Brussels and The Hague, JUBILEE aims to set up an organizational structure that optimizes the output of its members through joining efforts and equally distributing its collective assets and resources (economic, artistic and social). We wish to explore the resulting specific micro-economy and its potential for extension towards other individuals, organizations and structures – both locally and internationally.

Based on the idea of open source practice, redistribution of accumulated value within a mutual economical system and stimulating the exchange of knowledge – both on an artistic level as well as business administration – JUBILEE researches the challenging trajectories for change towards a new economy, also for the arts.
 
* daily operation

– Productional and administrative support of (individual) artistic research projects of its core members, and also of guest artists.

– Developing an active and transdisciplinary network of scientists, artists and social key figures with a shared interest in social issues that form the core themes of the artists and theorists JUBILEE works with.

– Building of knowledge and skills around the practice of artistic research and the provision of this information to third parties through the website, personal meetings, and publications.
 

* public activities

– Distribution of developed knowledge through discursive public activities, organized in close co-operation with partner institutions within and outside Belgium.

– A future wish would be to maintain a small working and meeting space in Brussels, as a base and hub for international projects and activities of members and guests, such as personal meetings between the artists and their peers, small scale reading rooms, lounges and informal display presentations."
(http://jubilee-art.org/?rd_page=4-2&lang=en)


[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Economic Networks]]