

=Bio=

"Judith Innes is Professor of City and Regional Planning at the University of California, Berkeley. She holds a Ph.D. from MIT's Department of Urban Studies and Planning and an undergraduate degree in English from Harvard University. Her dissertation and first book looked at theory and practice of social indicators use in public policy. She has done research on the processes of planning and decision making across a wide range of substantive topics, including land use and environmental policy, water management, growth management, transportation, human rights, environmental justice and social policy. Her recent interests have focused on '''collaborative policy making''' and action at the state and regional levels. She maintains a continuing interest in how to improve the use of information in planning and public policy. She has taught planning theory for many years, developing ideas through her research on communicative planning. She believes that the next agenda for planning thought and planning practice must be about how to address contemporary challenges to the traditional institutions and practices of decision making and how to develop new concepts of governance to deal with collaboration and with the many voices and competing versions of reality that confront planners today. Her most recent book, Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative Rationality for Public Policy (Routledge/Taylor and Francis, Oxford), with David E. Booher, outlines a new theory and approach to planning."
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c-6mRfuJcRU)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Policy]]