
GlobalBrainInstitute video presentation via 

* part 1, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_lvvsH7j5Ig
* part 2, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ker4YjzY7gg


=Abstract=

"This study focuses collective intelligence and its emergence on crowd-sourcing sites focusing on innovation. Collective intelligence is broadly defined as a group's ability to perform different tasks. Crowd-sourcing refers to outsourcing the tasks traditionally performed by an organization to an undefined crowd, usually trough an open call posted to Internet. It has been claimed that crowd-sourcing facilitates, uses, or benefits from collective intelligence, but instead of thorough analyses, the discussion has been more on the level of metaphors. The goal of this study is to find out, whether crowd-sourcing can really be connected to phenomena that can be considered to be collective intelligence. In addition the aim is to increase understanding on the exact mechanisms that lead to emergence of collective intelligence.

The research approach is multiple case study. Selected crowd-sourcing sites focusing on innovation form the cases to be researched. Data is collected trough participatory ethnography. In practice this means that the researcher participates the sites as a regular user and at the same time collects data trough observation and personal experiences. The collected data is analyzed qualitatively. This is an ongoing research project, and the first preliminary results will be presented at the seminar."


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]