

=Description=

"The Julia Group is a non-profit organisation working for a free and open internet. By a free and open internet we mean a net that is used for whatever people want to use it for, rather than a cut away version that is owned and run by governments and enterprises.

The term openness is of utmost importance to the future society we picture. We believe that the free and open internet is essential to both democracy and economical development. Internet has brought along both an implementation of democratic ideals as well as incredible business opportunities and the development of several new branches. These values – human, public, economical – are threatened when the open internet is threatened.

The Julia Group is a pronounced public opinionator organisation and want to counteract a development where political and commercial forces control the internet. We strive towards a serious debate about why a free internet is so important, and what can be done to make it all work. The Julia Group also wants to work as a unifier in the internet conversation by connecting people who presently maybe barely even know each other but who could do even more exciting things if they worked together. The Julia Group is therefore constantly participating in the ongoing dialogue about the internet and its future. We plan activity within both public opinion and research as well as technological development and juridical counselling. The goal of our seminars is to create fruitful exchanges between academics, politicians, media, the business world and grass roots.

The Julia Group is a cluster with a background within the academy, media and the business world, and our work is meant to cover all these sectors and some more. Our goal is to affect, but also to open up for new discussions, new ways to think about the internet."
(http://juliagruppen.se/lang/en/om-juliagruppen/)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Sweden]]