In the autumn of 2020, the National Agency for Territorial Cohesion, France Tiers Lieux and the 27th Region are launching a regulatory creativity initiative on the legal issues of communes, and more particularly places that create communes.

Born from recent trips to Europe (Enacting the commons), from exchanges with legal experts, and from the numerous forums for reflection on the subject (Legal Laboratory, Agir par les communs), and from the emergence of areas of shared governance for third places, this project is conceived as a creative survey. For 6 months, it will bring the 27th Region, the ANCT and France Tiers-Lieux into contact with 3 territories and 9 places that create common areas, with a team of 4 legal specialists, jurists and lawyers. This engineering of legal creativity will itself be thought out with and for the actors of the communes who will accompany us throughout this adventure.

We are betting on collective intelligence and a mix of expertise. Juristes Embarqués is neither a grouped order, nor an express expertise, nor a legal school for actors in the field. It is the organisation of a discussion between legal specialists and stakeholders from third places, who are the bearers of the premises but also public and private partners.

We are proposing a framework for operational cooperation bringing together commoners, legal specialists and public actors, in order to achieve a twofold objective: to better understand and qualify the legal issues of the places that create commoners and to develop proposals and tools that will be really useful to commoners, a community grouped around the preservation and use of a common good. 

Source (In French): [http://www.la27eregion.fr/9270/ Juristes embarqués : la créativité réglementaire au service des communs urbains]

[[Category:France]]
[[Category:Law and the Commons Project‏‎]]