
'''Book: Just another Emperor? The Myths and Realities of Philanthrocapitalism. Michael Edwards'''


=Introduction=

From the author:

"Just another Emperor? has certainly caused a stir in the sometimes sleepy world of philanthropy, with hundreds of blogs, webzines, meetings, conferences, newspaper articles and opinion pieces responding to its arguments. Of course there have been criticisms and disagreements (see the discussion on the Open Democracy page and at the Nonprofit Quarterly Forum), but by and large the response has been very positive and welcoming. I am delighted that the Global Philanthropy Forum is joining the conversation and look forward to being challenged and enriched by your contributions.

Why has such a small book created such a large response? In part because it articulates a controversial position--that business influence on philanthropy is overblown--a position that a great many people have been thinking about but were reluctant to declare in public, a testament perhaps to most people’s unwillingness to ‘bite the hand that feeds them.’ “Philanthrocapitalism”--harnessing business and the market to the goals of social change--is a powerful but unconvincing movement, and carries with it considerable risks as well as opportunities. This is not exactly rocket science, but by highlighting these concerns in a straightforward way the book has created space for a different kind of conversation, one less dominated by hype and more open to evidence and dissenting voices. And that’s the spirit we need to move forward together in a more constructive way.

The second reason, I think, is that this debate touches on much deeper questions about the future direction of society, the rising cultural and political influence of business and wealthy individuals, and the potential erosion of older traditions of collective action, democratic accountability, and non-market values of service and solidarity. Although on the surface the disagreements may seem to revolve around different approaches to philanthropy (and therefore different metrics, investment strategies and other similar issues), the real question is whether societies can be transformed through philanthrocapitalism, or whether this new movement will simply treat the symptoms of social problems in more effective ways. Given that most of us want to make the greatest possible difference, this is far from an academic question.

In case you are wondering what the fuss is all about, you can download the book for free at this link, or read a ten-page summary, but my basic conclusions can be easily summarized:

The hype surrounding philanthrocapitalism runs far ahead of its ability to deliver real results. It’s time for more humility.

The increasing concentration of wealth and power among philanthrocapitalists is unhealthy for democracy. It’s time for more accountability.

The use of business thinking can damage civil society, which is the crucible of democratic politics and social transformation. It’s time to differentiate the two and re-assert the independence of global citizen action.

Philanthrocapitalism is a symptom of a profoundly unequal world. It hasn’t yet demonstrated that it provides the cure.

Central to these conclusions is my reading of the evidence (such that it is), which shows that--while business and markets can certainly extend access to socially--and environmentally-useful goods and services like vaccines and micro-credit loans--these things by themselves have little impact on the forces that drive social transformation, namely politics, government and social movements strong enough to achieve broad-based changes in the distribution of power and resources and the systems and structures of society.

That’s partly because they over-estimate the degree to which business thinking can improve non-profit performance where it matters most. A recent study of 12,000 environmental non-profits by Stanford University concluded that they are most effective when they are “purest, most radical and most disorganized,” just like the civil rights movement fifty years before. Grit, determination, courage, passion, sacrifice and love--these are the crucial attributes of civil society. Of course it also helps to have a strategic plan, but that’s the icing on the cake.

I realize that these conclusions are provocative and probably overstate the case, the result of writing a book that was intended to kick-start a full-throated public debate. So let me say a word or two about the criticisms I’ve received and the questions they raise for further discussion.

First, “philanthrocapitalism” may be an eye-catching label, but it is a poor description of what is actually happening in the world. My critique is far too generalized, and while it may apply to some forms of venture philanthropy it does not describe the reality of many other experiments, especially in the field of social enterprise, which itself is very diverse.

Second, is the issue really philanthrocapitalism, or philanthropy in general, or the whole system through which societies finance social change? Many of my criticisms might apply to ‘traditional’ foundations too, so perhaps what’s needed is a debate about the future of institutionalized philanthropy as a whole in comparison to tax-based, member-funded and market-driven alternatives.

Third, my critique underestimates the potential social impact of markets, business and economic growth. After all, it’s difficult to achieve the ‘good society’ in conditions of widespread poverty, and market economies are the only proven way to generate a surplus large enough to eradicate poverty and meet social goals.

Fourth, my book gives civil society a pretty ‘free pass’ in terms of its own failures and weaknesses, and is romantic about the possibilities of achieving large-scale change through social movements. There are many examples of non-profits that have increased their social impact by adopting business thinking and working through the market.

There are counter-arguments to each of these critiques of course, but that, as they say, is a matter for debate! Let me close instead by highlighting a couple of questions that I hope will get the discussion going.

1. Which aspects of philanthrocapitalism are healthy for social change, which are neutral, and which might actually be damaging? What are the costs and benefits of raising non-profit revenue through the market, using markets to advance social goals, integrating business principles into philanthropy and non-profit management, providing goods and services through social enterprises, and investing in new business models like ‘commons-based production’? They are probably quite different.

2. What seems most absent from philanthrocapitalism is a respect for older and historically-proven strategies for social transformation like collective action, and the direct empowerment of poor and marginalized people so that they can control their own agendas. Is this true, and if so why? Are there areas, issues or strategies that should be declared a ‘business or market-free zone,’ and if so what might they be? That would make it easier to identify where different approaches might actually complement each-other.

3. How might we carry this conversation forward, across different perspectives and communities, with the necessary degree of honesty and rigor (something that is always difficult when there are large inequalities of power between the participants). Is there anyone out there who might sponsor and support these conversations? Is there a way we can scale back the hype and look more objectively at the evidence of what is being achieved through different approaches to philanthropy and social transformation? Do we actually have the evidence we need to make informed decisions?

That’s the only way to answer the ‘55 trillion-dollar question’ as I call it--the amount of philanthropy that is projected to be created in the United States alone over the next forty years: will we use these vast resources to pursue social transformation, or just fritter them away in spending on the symptoms? The stakes are extremely high."
(http://philanthropyforum.blogspot.com/2008/05/democratic-leaders-lean-on.html)

=Bio=


Michael Edwards is the director of the Ford Foundation’s Governance and Civil Society Program but writes here entirely in a personal capacity. Just another Emperor? is published by Demos in New York and the Young Foundation in London and is available for purchase from Amazon.com and Amazon.co.uk.


=More Information=

Discussion at http://philanthropyforum.blogspot.com/2008/05/democratic-leaders-lean-on.html

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Movements]]