=Bio=

"Graduate in Film Business Administration, born in West-Berlin, Germany.

Jörg Grossmann studied sociology, music and audiovisual communication at the Free
University (FU) and the University of Fine Arts (UdK) in Berlin and completed his degree in
Film Business Administration, Film Production and Film Economy at the Konrad Wolf Film
University Potsdam-Babelsberg.

He has been working as line producer, production manager and producer for fiction and
documentary films for over 20 years. He was a lecturer and production manager at the
German Film and TV Academy in Berlin (DFFB) and offers consulting for new media,
Internet-TV and traditional film production.

Since 2007, Jörg Grossmann has also been managing director of the German-language
Internet TV channel www.green.tv/de, an international media platform for environment and
sustainable development in cooperation with the British www.green.tv.
In 2008, Jörg Grossmann founded greenfilm production, consulting & producing feature
films, documentaries, cross-media and Internet tv (www.greenfilm.eu).

I am planning with Colleagues the „TransOver-Town“ a new Transition Town Project in Brandenburg/Havel with:

More generation housing, free-school, 0- CO2 emission, + energy Houses, no plastic/oil products, music and art center, multimedia e-learning center, eco-farming, own independent biogas and solar energy production, in one word: TransOver- Town will be a model for future City with 100% sustainable live style. Kick off meeting project group start March 2011. For more info’s please ask Jörg Grossmann mail@transover.net"




[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Biofuel]]