
=Research directions=

"There are three areas of my ongoing research that link in with some of the issues
noted in this interview. First, I am continuing to work on the issue of the transformation
from social to economic constitutionalism, focusing more specifically on its implications
for the future of democratic politics. I am particularly interested in exploring what forms
of democratic politics are possible within emerging forms of economic constitutionalism.

Second, I am interested in the issue of the legitimacy of transnational
regulatory regimes, and here I develop the concept of accountability communities noted
in the responses to one of your previous questions. In a related fashion, I am also
interested in teasing out the political and legal implications of the development of socalled
soft law. What does this imply for our understanding of both the law and the state?

Finally, I continue to work on issues of social policy with an emphasis on
experiments to ‘socialize neoliberalism’ in places as diverse as Brazil, China, and South
Africa. This is a continuation of my work on social policy and the politics of social
inclusion."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


=Excerpts on Global Governance=

#[[Transnational State]]‎ 
#[[Transnational Class]]‎ 
#[[Regulatory Regionalism]]‎‎ 
#[[Metagovernance‎]]
#[[Accountability Communities‎]] 
#[[Decentralized Enforcement‎‎]]


=More Information=

* Strongly recommended interview: http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf

==Bibliography==

Jayasuriya, K. 1999. Globalization, Law, and the Transformation of Sovereignty: The
Emergence of Global Regulatory Governance. Indiana Journal of Global Legal
Studies , 6(2): pp. 425-55.

---. 2001a. Globalisation and the Changing Architecture of the State: Regulatory State
and the Politics of Negative Coordination. Journal of European Public Policy,
8(1): pp. 101–23.

---. 2001b. Globalisation, Sovereignty, and the Rule of Law: From Political to Economic
Constitutionalism. Constellations , 8(4): pp. 442–60.

---. 2004. Neoliberalism, Securitisation and the New Transnational Regulatory
Governance. Asia Research Centre , Working Paper No. 108. Online. Available
at: http://wwwarc.murdoch.edu.au/wp/wp108.pdf [Accessed on 27
November 2009].

---. 2005. Reconstituting the Global Liberal Order: Legitimacy and Regulation. London:
Routledge.

---. 2006. Statecraft, Welfare and the Politics of Inclusion. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

---. 2008a. The Strange Death of International Liberalism. South-South Collaborative
Program: Occasional Paper Series , 2. Online. Available at:
http://www.apisanet.com [Accessed on 15 January 2010].

---. 2008b. Riding the Accountability Wave: Accountability Communities and New
Modes of Governance. In Ginsburg, T. & Chen, A. (eds.) 2008. Administrative
Law and Governance in Asia: Comparative Perspectives . London: Routledge.

---. 2008c. Retailing Governance? The Rise of Accountability Communities. Asia
Research Centre Policy Briefs , 2. Online. Available at:
http://wwwarc.murdoch.edu.au/wp/pb2.pdf [Accessed on 23 November
2009].

---. 2008d. Struggle over Legality in the Midnight Hour: Governing the International
State of Emergency. In Ramraj, V. (ed.) 2008. Emergencies and the Limits of
Legality . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

---. 2009. Regulatory Regionalism in the Asia-Pacific: Drivers, Instruments and Actors.
Australian Journal of International Affairs, 63 (3): pp. 335-347.

---. 2010a. Learning By the Market: Regulatory Regionalism, Bologna, and Accountability
Communities. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 8(1): pp. 7-22.

---. 2010b. Fiscal policy crisis may claim some scalps. The Sydney Morning Herald, June
16. Online. Available at: http://www.smh.com.au/opinion/politics/fiscalpolicy-
crisis-may-claim-some-scalps-20100716-10dx5.html [Accessed on 17
August 2010].

Jayasuriya, K. & Robertson, S. 2010. Regulatory Regionalism and the Governance of
Higher Education. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 8(1): pp. 1-6.
[[Category:Governance]]