URL = http://www.itconversations.com/shows/detail1080.html


=Description=

"Trust is fundamental to an understanding of human social networks. In this fascinating talk from MeshForum, Netform's Dr. Karen Stephenson shares her decades of experience in quantitative social network analysis, explaining how the measurement of relationships reveals general principles and patterns that can be seen across organizations. Diagramming the build-up and breakdown of trust networks gives insight for diagnosing management problems, and, better yet, opens the door to designing more innovative models to face our modern challenges. 

Dr. Stephenson begins with a look at her own professional progression from the world of quantum chemistry, where she became intrigued with the social dynamics operating within her research team. Turning this interest to the study of anthropology, she began exploring ways to detect and measure the ancient patterns of human social groups. This work led to algorithms which have since proven highly useful to corporations and governments looking to understand their own inner workings, and manage change. Stephenson argues that trust arises in networks through bonds of similarity and propinquity. These are strong, reciprocal bonds which promote the sharing of tacit knowledge. Trust-based networks often prove to be more robust than purely authoritative or hierarchical systems.

What is the science behind trust? How does trust build, and how does it break down? While it is much easier to measure transactions than trust, Stephenson models the threshold size for networks which contain key nodal elements such as hubs, gatekeepers and pulse-takers. Through numerous examples and business case studies, these analyses begin to give a good grasp on models for healthy networks. Stephenson closes her talk by looking ahead to the challenges of heterachy, the networking of institutions, which now demands an even greater capacity for trust and understanding."
(http://www.itconversations.com/shows/detail1080.html)

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Relational]]