= researcher in peer production, peer economics and P2P financial systems, based in Oslo, Norway (alternative name: Karthik Iyer)


=Bio=

"Karthik is a technology strategist and PhD researcher based in Oslo. He spent the past decade working for
the top four open source companies:Red Hat, SuSE (Novell), terrasoftsolutions (yellow dog linux) and 
Sun Microsystems. Through his work, Karthik assisted fortune 500 companies and governments to adopt
open source and open standards based technologies, he has been an integral part of the digital commons movement right from
its early days and is active in various debates involving open knowledge, open data and governance of the commons.

Karthik is currently pursuing a PhD degree and also holds an MBA from BI- Norwegian Business School and Fudan University, China; 
a Master of Science in Information Technology from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Stockholm, Sweden and
a four-year bachelor's degree in computer engineering from India.

Karthik’s field of expertise is open source, open innovation and other forms of commons
based peer production. His research interests are centered around open source design and
economics where he is researching the governance of open design commons and how it can overcome limitations such as planned obsolescence and limited reuse posed by the existing firm based production model. The second part of his research is centered around the systems and structures of peer / local currencies such as Bitcoin and the Urstromtaler. The third part of his research focuses on open innovation in networked industries, where his unit of
analysis is the management of shared innovation commons in the open source Android project."

Twitter: http://twitter.com/karthix

=Publications=

#Commons Based Peer Production of Mobile Phone Software: An Exploratory Framework for Analyzing Success Factors. Proceedings of the IRIS 2011 Conference, Helsinki, 2011.
#Making sense of software ecosystems : A critical review , The Eleventh International Conference on Electronic Business, Bangkok 2011.
#Tragedy of the commons in the production of digital artifacts , International Journal of Innovation, Management and Technology 2012.

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:India]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Research]]