
'''= Polish commons researcher'''

URL = https://www.facebook.com/Katarzyna-Gajewska-Independent-Scholar-1424563094446010/

==Bio==
"Katarzyna Gajewska, PhD, is an independent scholar and futurist writer. She has been publishing on alternative economy, non-digital peer production, universal basic income and collective autonomy since 2013 and is mainly interested in psychological and emotional aspects of transition to a postcapitalist society." ''http://postgrowth.org/author/katarzynagajewska/''

==Bibliography==

Look for updates [https://www.facebook.com/Katarzyna-Gajewska-Independent-Scholar-1424563094446010/?ref=aymt_homepage_panel here]

* Gajewska, Katarzyna (2017): Citizens as peers complementing government functions: The case of new governance modes in public housing in Warsaw, Poland, Journal of Contemporary Central and Eastern Europe, DOI: 10.1080/25739638.2017.1363987

* Gajewska, Katarzyna (2014): Peer Production and Prosumerism as a Model for the Future Organization of General Interest Services Provision in Developed Countries Examples of Food Services Collectives. World Future Review 6(1): 29-39.

* Gajewska, Katarzyna (2014): Technological Unemployment but Still a Lot of Work: Towards Prosumerist Services of General Interest, Journal of Evolution and Technology 24(1): 104-112.

===Conference papers since 2014===

Gajewska, Katarzyna (2017): Future of work in basic income and post-employment system: scenario of peer production of the public health and a happier society. Conference Paper for 17th BIEN Congress: Implementing a Basic Income, Lisbon, 25-27 September 2017. http://www.rendimentobasico.pt/files/6215/0547/3667/Gajewska_Lisbon_paper_2017.pdf Also presented in Café Coop Grundeinkommen, Berlin on 24 October 2017.

Gajewska, Katarzyna (2014): How Basic Income will transform Active Citizenship? A scenario of Political Participation beyond Delegation. Paper presented at 15th International Congress of the Basic Income Earth Network, Montréal, Quebec, June 27th to 29th. http://www.basicincome.org/bien/pdf/montreal2014/BIEN2014_Gajewska.pdf

===Non-academic publications by topic (selection)===

====Public Health====

Gajewska, Katarzyna (14 February 2017): What would we eat if food and health were commons? – inspiration from indigenous populations. P2P Foundation Blog, https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/eat-food-health-commons-inspiration-indigenous-populations/2017/02/14

Gajewska, Katarzyna interviewed (January 2016) : Beyond temptation: Scholar discusses addiction and basic income – an interview: http://www.basicincome.org/news/2016/01/beyond-temptation-scholar-discusses-addiction-and-basic-income/

Gajewska, Katarzyna (September 2015) : UBI and alcoholism (or other substance addictions): exploring the argument against UBI: http://basicincome.org.uk/2015/09/ubi-and-alcoholism-or-other-substance-addictions-exploring-the-argument-against-ubi/

====Basic Income: public services and work organization====

Gajewska, Katarzyna (9 June 2017): UBI needs peers (part three): Reconquering work – inspiration from People’s Potato. URL: http://basicincome.org/news/2017/06/ubi-needs-peers-part-three-reconquering-work-inspiration-peoples-potato/ .

Katarzyna Gajewska (10 April 2017): UBI needs peers (PT 2): Re-imagine work organization, basicincome.org, http://basicincome.org/news/2017/04/ubi-needs-peers-pt-2-re-imagine-work-organization/

Gajewska, Katarzyna (11 February 2017) UBI needs peers to control services of general interest (part one), http://basicincome.org/news/2017/02/ubi-needs-peers-control-services-general-interest-part-one/

Gajewska, Katarzyna (30 June 2014): There is such a thing as a free lunch: Montreal Students Commoning and Peering food services. P2P Foundation Blog, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/there-is-such-a-thing-as-a-free-lunch-montreal-students-commoning-and-peering-food-services/2014/06/30

Gajewska, Katarzyna (16 May 2014) : UBI and Housing Problem, Basic Income UK, http://www.basicincome.org.uk/ubi_power_relations_and_housing_problems

====Public administration====

Gajewska, Katarzyna (21 October 2013): The real life of law: Polish lessons on housing activism in the postcommunist context. LeftEast,
http://www.criticatac.ro/lefteast/the-real-life-of-law-polish-lessons-on-housing-activism-in-the-postcommunist-context/

====Egalitarian communities====

Gajewska, Katarzyna (9 October 2017): Raising children in egalitarian communities: An inspiration. Post-Growth Institute Blog http://postgrowth.org/raising-children-in-egalitarian-communities-an-inspiration/

Gajewska, Katarzyna (9 June 2017): Exploring Abundance as future: Questions inspired by the experience of an egalitarian community, Acorn. P2P Foundation Blog, https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/exploring-abundance-future-questions-inspired-experience-egalitarian-community-acorn/2017/06/09

Gajewska, Katarzyna (September 2016): Egalitarian alternative to the US mainstream: study of Acorn community in Virginia, US. Bronislaw Magazine, http://www.bronislawmag.com/78-16/kg_eco.php , reposted on PostGrowth.org: http://postgrowth.org/egalitarian-alternative-acorn-community/

Gajewska, Katarzyna (21 July 2016): An intentional egalitarian community as a small-scale implementation of Post-Capitalism. P2P Foundation Blog https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/an-intentional-egalitarian-community-as-a-small-scale-implementation-of-postcapitalist-peer-production-model-of-economy-part-i-work-as-a-spontanous-voluntary-contribution/2014/12/27

Gajewska, Katarzyna (10 January 2016): Case study: Creating use value while making a living in egalitarian communities. P2P Foundation Blog, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/an-intentional-egalitarian-community-as-a-small-scale-implementation-of-postcapitalist-peer-production-model-of-economy-part-ii-creating-use-value-while-making-a-living/2016/01/10

Gajewska, Katarzyna (27 December 2014): An intentional egalitarian community as a small-scale implementation of postcapitalist, peer production model of economy. Part I : Work as a spontanous, voluntary contribution. P2P Foundation Blog, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/an-intentional-egalitarian-community-as-a-small-scale-implementation-of-postcapitalist-peer-production-model-of-economy-part-i-work-as-a-spontanous-voluntary-contribution/2014/12/27

Gajewska, Katarzyna (2017): Kommune Niederkaufungen – jak się żyje w 60-osobowej wspólnocie. [Kommune Niederkaufungen – on living in a 60_person commune], in quarterly Nowy Obywatel [New Citizen].

==More Information==
* [[Peer Production as a Model for the Organization of Public Services Provision]]
* [[Peer Production as a Model for the Provision by Food Services Collectives]]
* [[Peer Production of Public Health]]

* ([https://www.facebook.com/Katarzyna-Gajewska-Independent-Scholar-1424563094446010/ Facebook page])

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Poland]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Women]]