
=Video=

Kevin Kelly presents his book and work at Authors@Google, via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCWR0A3iziE&feature=player_embedded


Description:

"Kevin Kelly will be speaking about his latest book, "What Technology Wants." This provocative book introduces a brand-new view of technology. It suggests that technology as a whole is not just a jumble of wires and metal but a living, evolving organism that has its own unconscious needs and tendencies. Kelly looks out through the eyes of this global technological system to discover "what it wants." Kelly uses vivid examples from the past to trace technology's long course, and then follows a dozen trajectories of technology into the near future to project where technology is headed.

This new theory of technology offers three practical lessons: By listening to what technology wants we can better prepare ourselves and our children for the inevitable technologies to come. By adopting the principles of pro-action and engagement, we can steer technologies into their best roles. And by aligning ourselves with the long-term imperatives of this near-living system, we can capture its full gifts."



=Podcast 1=

Podcast via http://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/audio.wnyc.org/radiolab_podcast/radiolab_podcast10tech.mp3


"Are new ideas and new inventions inevitable? Are they driven by us or by a larger force of nature?

In this conversation recorded as part of the New York Public Library series LIVE from the NYPL, Steven Johnson (author of Where Good Ideas Come From) and Kevin Kelly (author of What Technology Wants) try to convince Robert that the things we make—from spoons to microwaves to computers—are an extension of the same evolutionary processes that made us. And we may need to adapt to the idea that our technology could someday truly have a mind of its own."
(http://www.radiolab.org/blogs/radiolab-blog/2010/nov/16/idea-time-come/)



=Podcast 2=

Jamillah of BBC 5 Outriders chats to the founding executive editor of Wired magazine, and a former editor/publisher of the Whole Earth Catalogue; '''Kevin Kelly about his new book, "[[What Technology Wants]]"''' 

Podcast interview via http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/podcasts/fivelive/pods/pods_20101123-0335a.mp3



=Podcast 3=

"Kelly discusses the technium–a broad term that encompasses all of technology and culture–and its characteristics, including its autonomy and sense of bias, its interdependency, and how it evolves and self-replicates. He also talks about humans as the first domesticated animals; extropy and rising order; the inevitability of humans and complex technologies; the Amish as technology testers, selecters, and slow-adopters; the sentient technium; and technology as wilderness." (http://surprisinglyfree.com/2010/10/19/kevin-kelly/)

Podcast via http://surprisinglyfree.com/podpress_trac/web/2560/0/SFC-040-101004.mp3


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Technology]]