Useful links - http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Blog_Project_of_the_Day

[[P2P Blog Planning Resources]]

This is a public list of items [[User:KevinF|I]] find need updating on the wiki.

The main landing page.

Update - 

http://p2pfoundation.net/Support_the_P2P_Foundation_with_a_Donation_Subscription

* [[Learning More]]

The resources are old and need to be checked as we may have better more up to date content.

* [[Who We Are]]

This whole section needs to change.

* [[Members]]
* [[Founders]]
* [[Wiki Active Contributors]]

The pages haven't been updated since 2010.

Unless someone is willing to update these pages manually on a regular basis they will continually go out of date.

We need a better way to represent the community.

: Seems like we need someone willing to update something and [[wiki]] might be the easiest, seems like a coordination issue.  Let's set up a wiki hack day? ~~ [[User:MDilley|MarkDilley]] ([[User talk:MDilley|talk]])

==Resources==

* [[Events Calender]] (This is out of date "2009" and we need a better way of keeping track of events)
: Have you checked out these yet? [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Simple_Calendar] & [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Calendar] Much better possibly?  Also, there is ActivateHub.org that is a great calendar.  I am running one for Metro Detroit (Activate313.org), and there are a couple more city ones.  For a small feel there are more specific installs or hosts, like: CascadiaClimate.ActivateHub.org  ~~ [[User:MDilley|MarkDilley]] ([[User talk:MDilley|talk]])

==Suggestions by mbauwens==

* there must be a way to cross search sections, for example: give me all the books on p2p agriculture, or all the webcasts on commons economics, eventually with a third factor, country names

Seems like checking into learning more about Semantic MediaWiki would solve this issue. ~~ [[User:MDilley|MarkDilley]] ([[User talk:MDilley|talk]])