This text is written in the context of Neighborhood Economics and the author Kevin Jones calls it the collective turn. But what he describes is a turn towards common stewardship and even property models.


=Discussion=

Kevin Jones:

==I. From Entrepreneurship to Shared Ownership==

"Entrepreneurship remains the spark — but shared ownership is the stabilizer.

- Employee-owned businesses and cooperatives anchor jobs and dignity in place.
- Collective purchasing, tool libraries, and mutual-aid networks build community-level resilience, not just personal gain.
- Perpetual trusts and commons funds make wealth truly intergenerational — public-benefit capital that never leaks away.

Public banking is a movement that plays into this.


==II. From Affordable Housing to Community-Controlled Land==

Our original lens on “more affordable than affordable” housing now expands into shared stewardship of land itself.

- Land trusts, recoverable grants, and faith-owned developments weave moral purpose into ownership.
- The focus shifts from extraction to permanence — homes that stay affordable because ownership itself is reimagined.


==III. From Redlining Repair to Structural Rewrites==

Repairing the damage of redlining isn’t enough.

We’re learning to re-engineer the system itself — appraisal reform, predistribution zoning, credit-score justice, and anchor partnerships that preempt extraction before it begins.


==IV. From Isolated Efforts to the Collective Economy==

Neighborhood economies are networks, not silos.

- Shared-use kitchens, production food hubs, and value-added local food enterprises keep dollars circulating locally.
- Regenerative agriculture and forestry — including non-timber forest products — tie livelihoods to ecological repair.
- This is food-system fairness, not charity: communities owning the means of nourishment.

Collective purchasing, sharing, such as tool libraries in under resourced neighborhoods, and mutual aid also are parts of this.


==V. From Infrastructure Spending to Infrastructure Stewardship==

When public dollars flow, they can either inflate land values for speculators or seed thriving communities.

- Green and blue bonds, value capture, and community-benefit agreements realign civic investment with moral value.
- Infrastructure becomes a commons — broadband, transit, and green space managed for community well-being.


==VI. From Economic to Community Health==

Community health is not a metaphor; it’s the measure.

- Health–wealth partnerships, trauma-informed development, and faith-led healing initiatives are redefining what “return on investment” means.
- The outcome is belonging — the deepest wealth of all."

(https://kevindoylejones1.substack.com/p/the-collective-turn-expanding-the)


[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]