= energy-based currency

URL = http://www.kilowattcards.com/


=Description=

"Kilowatt Cards are paper notes worth 10 kilowatt-hours (kWh) of electricity each. They are backed by a promise to exchange them for the face amount of electricity delivered to any residential utility account  - the "electricity standard." While some people want gold and silver, everybody wants heat or light or transportation. Active Kilowatt Cards have stable value because they are denominated in units of energy, a physical constant, and can be used to pay for electricity bt REDEEMING them at kilowattcards.com/redeem.cfm. 10 kWh equals 10,000 Watt-hours, enough energy run a 100 Watt light bulb for 100 hours. At this time the cards are worth at least $1.00 to $2.00 in trade, depending on your cost of electricity. Since they are good to buy electricity everywhere, they are good to buy anything else.

Before accepting Kilowatt Cards as payment you should AUTHENTICATE them using the form below to verify they are real and active. Enter the last six characters of the serial number. If the card is real and active, two extra characters will be returned for you to write on the card by hand, forming the end of a new six-digit serial number. If you do not write the extra characters on the card it will have the wrong serial number afterwards and no value. Write clearly and cross out the first two characters: then it will have a new six-digit serial number, and no one who held it before can use a copy. Active cards can be traded to anyone and authenticated an unlimited number of times if it is done correctly each time. This process is our way to stop counterfeiting since we can't call in the FBI.

Kilowatt cards can be redeemed to pay for electricity anywhere using this web site.  But power companies do not accept them, we do, then send money to the company in its local currency. Kilowatt Cards have some trading value everywhere, even places without electricity."
(http://www.kilowattcards.com/authenticate.cfm)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Energy]]