'''= "kincentric ecology: weaving human beings back into the wider web of life".''' [https://www.kincentricleadership.org/about-us?]

URL = https://www.kincentricleadership.org/


=Description=

Via ChatGPT:

"Anna Kovasna, co-founder of the Kincentric Leadership initiative, defines kin-centric leadership as an approach that recognizes and honors the intrinsic connection between humans and the more-than-human world. This perspective views all beings—human, animal, plant, and beyond—as kin, advocating for leadership practices that are deeply rooted in this interconnectedness. 


In this framework, leadership extends beyond human-centric concerns to include the well-being of the entire ecosystem. It emphasizes the importance of understanding and integrating the intelligence, agency, and intentionality of non-human entities into decision-making processes. By fostering a sense of kinship with all forms of life, kin-centric leadership aims to cultivate resilience, regeneration, and liberation within communities. 


Kovasna's work, including initiatives like Ecovillage Resilience 2.5+, reflects her commitment to exploring how communities can embody these principles to address challenges such as climate change. Through participatory research and experiential learning, she supports leaders in integrating kin-centric practices into their strategies, promoting a holistic and inclusive approach to leadership. 


By adopting kin-centric leadership, individuals and organizations are encouraged to move beyond anthropocentric viewpoints, embracing a more expansive understanding of community that includes all living beings. This shift fosters a deeper connection to nature and promotes sustainable practices that benefit the entire web of life."

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Ecology]]