

=Description=

Richard Nelson, Solaroof project:

" Do we focus on economy, environment, society, education and technology? What about our SPIRITUAL connection with people, planet, Life and all of Creation? Do you find, as I do, that there are universal truths that reveal the oneness in the diversity of Life, cultures and peoples? Nature demonstrates the power, beauty and majesty of the universe - but beyond this reality that is always changing we "see" the unchangeable, the intangible, the timeless and infinite "intelligence" existing in the order and structure of Creation that is unchanging. Is the human capacity for knowledge and love - at this critical time in human history - sufficient to enable a collective response to the Global Challenges that will result in action to restore balance with nature and harmony within and between our Communities?"
(http://www.solaroof.org/blog/usa2k/kingdombuilders-spirit-led-change)


=Discussion=

Richard Nelson:

'''1.'''

"I pray that I will be one of many Kingdom Builders coming together in a global collaboration for building a human environment that is not only in balance with Nature but is restorative and may heal the damages inflicted by the prevalent life style of ignorance and greed. The vision of such an Eco Habitat has been referred to throughout the history of all cultures and religion and there is an anticipation that people who are aligned with God will live again in a state of divine grace - a return to Eden - a Divine City descended from Heaven - dwellings born of Spiritual knowledge - an environment that provides for all our needs through grace - Kingdom Builders create places where we live in peace with one and all.

Kingdom Living is a guiding principle - it is a vision but there is also a practice that will make this vision a reality - and this is what I am referring to as the mission of Kingdom Builders. There is no doubt that sustainability goals and knowledge of Eco Living are important steps that are essential for progress on the path to building sustainable communities for all. We will collaborate and work on creating a "built environment" that will come to be a reflection of our most inspired vision for Kingdom Living. We can learn by doing and we can be led by Spirit, which takes us beyond the limitations that is imposed by material constraints. When we focus on Life then the natural abundance of ecological systems can supply all the needs of daily life. There is a world of difference when we employ organic and biological systems and turn away from our over-dependancy on mechanical, physical, chemical technology.

This paradigm shift is not based on aversion to technology - but on a newly emerging appreciation that the limitations that we struggle with (the lack of results with goals to eliminate hunger and provide renewable energy) are built into our current absorption with destructive, oxidizing, toxic and extractive/exploitive technology.

We need to understand that there is healthy and unhealthy (a right and wrong) type of technology and the sooner that humanity has learned this lesson - that there can be big short term gain from technology that is unhealthy/destructive, but not long term success - then we can shift the focus to beneficial technology that can sustain life in all diversity and abundance (including the human life). For example, firing forests had the result of expanding grasslands that made deer and other game more abundant. But - on the the long term - these ongoing interventions for grazing and grain mono-crops has cumulatively resulted in destruction of the planet's natural ecological systems. After millennia of destructive human interventions and with our population growth, it is now urgent to implement a paradigm shift to enable food, water and energy abundance produced by emerging breakthroughs for Sola Roof and the W 2 F 4 E technologies, which can be integrated within our built environment - we call this Ecomimicry Architecture for building the Eco Village that is accessible to even the poorest of people.

This paradigm shift is supported by a deeper Spiritual insight leading to a realization of how our life is connected with all life and the complex ecological systems that create the conditions for life to thrive. This Spiritual level of knowing and loving all life is the key to our capacity to learn from our inner super-intelligence, but while our cultures condition people to a blindness and skepticism about our access to inner Truth, then we are held back from this deep knowledge and we are thereby constrained and shackled and suffer loss of freedoms that would otherwise be our natural inheritance.

The conditioning that we struggle with is one that will keep us in a relative state of poverty and those who claim wealth have no capacity to bring true prosperity to the majority of people because they have merely gained power over the prevalent system of exploitation that is not creating abundance but is actually a redistribution of "ownership" of things and materials and even people (as consumers). The ownership of all resources, treated as commodities, is determined by power (force) and is a distortion of the natural right of all people to personal freedoms and dignity and is gained without due regard to Life and the wellbeing of people and planet.

These conclusions are not an attack on what was and is still the prevailing system of exploitative paradigms, but rather has a purpose to focus awareness on the need for change - deep change that will redefine the economic system and create a new dynamic for emergence of patterns that will prosper people for the long term and which are not going to degrade the environment to the point of no possibility of recovery. We need to have regard for the restoration of the ecological carrying capacity of nature because the future generations otherwise cannot survive. This is also a conclusion that calls on our Spiritual connection to the future generation and to support by our action their potential to be happy and prosperous. They have counted on our capacity to perceive and respect the balance of human life with the living planet. This is our mission as Kingdom Builders."
(Crisis-scape.net)


2.

" I would like to make a pivotal contribution to the understanding of the P2P SPIRITUAL domain with this comment on the introductory remarks (assumptions) that are the preface to this presentation about the emergence of Trust Networks. The insight that I offer is subtle but is significant and missing this deeper appreciation of how we got where we are, will limit our thinking about solutions.

The insight is about the technology of agriculture, and the transformation of lives and of the natural world that was inflicted on people and planet by the few people who seized "power-over" others. My proposition is that we need to rewrite our story and name agriculture as weapon of warfare and subjugation, which is intended to degrade the natural bounty of healthy ecosystems and to sustain a contrived poverty of the 99% who are enslaved, which is to say we are "owned". This was not only a tipping point to alter dramatically our physical world (and connection with Nature's provision) but also our Spiritual relationship to the world and to one another.

What Johann Gevers implies is that the people had lived an inferior life in the forest and when the centralized power of the "powerful man" began to dominate our history and create our story of civilization, that the natural people were saved from a life of want and deprivation. Regaining our natural and healthy P2P Spiritual relationship requires that we collectively debunk these habitual way of thinking about how we got here, if we are to find the way out. Here is the necessary shift in our thinking: the "powerful man" is not a kindly saviour and provider; he is an enslaver and exploiter who wins cooperation with force and coercion and holds loyalty and respect not out of love but with fear of what will "happen to us" if his "protection" is revoked. Having taken everything from us (including the security of our loved ones) the king or lord gives us back tokens earned by our inscription to a life of hard labour on his land, service within the city, court and castle surrounding the Keep and the Treasury, or to give our lives in battles for the glory of the king.

This "kingship" is what Jesus refused. The regard for privilege is elevated in our civilization of exploitation and it separates us from each other and from our nature for cooperation and service and our fulfilment and joy that is released when we nurture the children and share and teach. Thus our success in the order of things is set in opposition to the organic flow of life that is the source of our health and wellbeing. Therefore we live in a state of distress and illness rather than wellness is a perpetual condition that leads to addictions to various distractions and self-injury to shift the focus of our pain to "straw dogs".

All of these patterns have been extremely damaging to people and to the earth in the past - but now, with the increased impacts of weapons and technologies for exploitation (exploitation always degrades) we are arriving at a global end-game. While there is apparently unlimited potential to exploit people, our civilization is hitting the limits of the exhaustion of the earth's ecosystems. 

The story of Robin Hood is usually told as a theme of "criminal" redistribution - which puts the focus of the story on the wealthy representatives of the king. The real story is about a family and an intentional community that broke away from enslavement in the deforested "no-man's land" surrounding the castle, where the people could legally live. And here I can return to the theme of the presentation that focuses on the rebirth of Trust Communities that are enabled in the virtual world and which would, in the same way, disrupt the rule of the law of the king. Authentic community has no need (no addiction) to the token wealth of the king (money issued by the treasury) because we rediscover our natural riches that are revealed when we reconnect with nature within and without - in a new way of finding alignment with and synergy that enhances our life and the life around us that then provides abundantly for our essential needs. 

We have all kinds of conditioning, programming and habits/addictions that will tend to reassert the defective and dysfunctional patterns of our civilization - we need to empower ourselves to be free from both coercion and compulsions to reassert patterns of distrust and mutual exploitation. We are conditioned by millenniums of shock & terror to live in fear of life and what it will bring - we need the healing experience of nature's abundance to revive our trust in the fundamental "design of Creation" to know that it is not like the contrived world of scarcity and tears that we know as our "civilization". 

Let us understand that "power-over-us" is now not powerful and that WE, the people are now empowered with shared knowledge that has been tested in an OpenSource community that is a meritocracy - and we now have new technology that Bucky Fuller called: Livingry. These are instruments to amplify the dynamics of life-support-life with the vision of Biomimicry and Ecomimicry innovation and design in the Creative Commons. I agree with the theme of the talk that the new WE have arrived at the tipping point where even the formerly powerful and coercively exploiting corporations will have only the choice to see their business collapse or to bid to supply to the new OpenSource solutions for Livingry. 

My life-long passion is to contribute my invention of the SolaRoof built environment as a catalyst for a paradigm shift that enables everyone, everywhere to let go of the fear of Food/Energy/Water insecurities. Our addiction to consumerism holds us captive to the power of the exploiters. However in a little space in the backyard and schoolyard we can make a better place for you and for me. If you have stayed with me this far, then please consider how your family would do, not if, but when the food crisis hits home? Where will your food and water come from? How do you sustain your quality of life that dependent on fossil energy? You and your neighbours and your community can connect and can reach higher (not lower, which is your fearful, poverty consciousness asserting itself) and WE who gather here (on the internet and in this enabling P2P community) have been so blessed that we must know that it is our mission to breakaway from the historic direction of our global civilization and to find in our hearts the coherence and trust to finally fully commit to disruptive change. If you feel that is what we must do, then I suggest that the answers are all around us. Let us start to strategically, virally, proactively mobilize for learning by doing.

Let us not wait and sit in our comfort zone while the world further degenerates and we may forfeit our precious chance to "be the ones we are waiting for". Let us be aware of how we are all under attack and that if we (or our children) are not perishing of hunger today (as 18,000 are lost to hunger and bad water) then we are suffering in our subjugation to a system that inflicts illness through pervasive toxic (and GMO) food and addictions that get people through the pain of life damaged by deeply rooted "untruths". To everyone I say "the truth will set you free"! Let us trust our collective intelligence and act on it now.

We will all learn and earn a right livelihood together and build the future of our dreams."
(Facebook, July 2014)


==Towards Kingdom Living==

Richard Nelson:

"Among different networks there are terms used to create a common objective and these are important to define our goals and mobilise cooperation and progress from ideas to action.

A key expression is "sustainable development" which was born out the growing consensus that, while the poor countries of the world need economic development it is important that this development is sustainable over the long term. In more recent times the issue is not only that development is economically sustainable but that it is also environmentally sustainable.

However, in recent decades we have greater uncertainty of what model of development can be called sustainable. The focus was on the "undeveloped countries, who were also referred to as "lessor developed countries" that is, an LDC. But as the examination of what is truly environmentally sustainable got more intense, it appeared that among the most unsustainable are the wealthy, industrialized nations. This new perspective came about as a deeper understanding emerged about the problems of our modern "growth" economies that require constant increases in consumption to enable "prosperity" - which includes increasing jobs, incomes and profits. However, this "growth model" was seen to be the source of the greatest challenges to sustainability.

It is the prevalent model of "development" that has failed. Therefore, I noted even back at the time of the second global summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 in South Africa, that the term sustainable development itself required examination. At that time I proposed in letters and in the online forums of the conference, that the more appropriate focus is not development but "living" and I began to write about and focus my attention on the challenges for Sustainable Living.

Then as many others picked up on the term Sustainable Living but seemed to not draw a line under what would be excluded from development under this standard (which in my view must be Chemical Dependent Agriculture) and so, for me the intended distinction in meaning has be destroyed and so I invented another term: Eco Living. I hope that the meaning of Eco Living will not be eroded by use that is unintended. The intention is to speak of homes and communities that are in total balance and synergy with nature, having no dangerous or toxic inputs and no emissions or release of any pollutant or dangerous or damaging affects on the environment, while also enhancing the biodiversity and resiliency of the the local and planetary ecosystems. This standard of Eco Living is possible when homes and communities are designed with the principles of Ecomimicry Architecture, which is a fusion of Closed Ecological Life Support Systems and the built environment.

The above is the scientific approach to the subject - but for those who have an interest in the deeper levels of insight that give rise to my design, I would now like to introduce a new and much more profound concept: Kingdom Living. I will write more about this subject as the inspiration comes upon me. Let me just say for now that tuning in to Nature is more powerful when a person also connects first with the Creator and the unfolding plan for his Creation, which is that we must now enter the Kingdom and live in the light and truth of the Holy Spirit and the spirit will teach us how to live. Should we seek the Kingdom of God first then all our needs will be given to us - even as our Lord has promised.

When our Agri POD and other Eco Living solutions are replicated far and wide, people will be amazed at the wonder of the abundance and out of this experience they will reconnect with the true power and grace of the Father and thus rescued by grace from hunger, poverty, disease and suffering and freely given all hope, evidence of loving provision, and then understanding brings a vast appreciation for the One who is in all and created all.

We will realize that many a person has come between the Father and his children who have claimed ownership over what belongs to the Lord, and these men have made themselves to be gods, lording over the children of God, exploiting the land, destroying and depleting because of their claim. We put off these false lords and accept that our Lord is within and each person is a dwelling place of Glory and Spirit. This is the true Human Spirit - one in God, one in Creation, one in Faith. We are all united and now for the sake of Creation - for the health and life of the planet that is our home - we must now act in global unison to protect our children and the home that is so abundant in LIFE.

In this unison we will find true wealth and no longer will poverty, hunger and thirst exist on earth and our lives will demonstrate the truth of Christ's teaching: when we seek Kingdom Living first, then all we need will be given. Right action now is to put off the pattens of limited, materialistic living and to build up the new City of Light - starting with our homes transformed to dwelling places of life and light that stream with waters and fruits of Nature's abundance and God's love for all people. It is not our infinite God, Author of Creation who has disappointed humanity and brought the people and the whole world to a point of crisis and impending disasters. The Father is not responsible for lack of water and food for his children - such results are the work of men who have put self-interest ahead of the needs of others. What capacity have these men now to put right the wrongs that they have perpetrated? No, they themselves are now the ones declaring their bankruptcy - it is time that we learn to how to DIY - with God's grace we all can prosper and live in abundance.

Kingdom Living is the vision and therefore living as Kingdom Builders is the mission. Success with this mission will open the eyes of many and each may come to appreciate that we have a wonderful and powerful Creator who is the source and spirit in life and in all Nature. The world is prepared by suffering and by revelation to enter the Kingdom on God: His will shall be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Thus, my prayer is for action to pioneer together Kingdom Living."
(http://solaroof.org/wiki/SolaRoofGuy/KingdomLiving)


[[Category:Spirituality]]