

=Description=

"Kingsley L. Dennis BA, MA (distinction), PhD, is a sociologist and writer. He worked as a lecturer in English & American Literature for several years at a university in Istanbul, Turkey. More recently he lectured in Social Theory at Lancaster University and was a Research Associate within the Centre for Mobilities Research (CeMoRe). He co-authored After the Car (Polity, 2009), which examines post-peak oil societies and mobility. This provocative and insightful book examined how several major processes are shaping the future towards a ‘post-car’ and ‘post peak-oil’ world; such as resource depletion; climatic changes; increased digitisation of many aspects of economic and social life; and massive global population increases. Kingsley’s earlier research examined general evolutionary theory in relation to socio-cultural development. He has also published articles on complexity theory, social and military technologies, civil society, and new media communications.

Kingsley earned his Ph.D. in Sociology in 2006 from Lancaster University, with a dissertation on “New Complexities: Converging Spaces of Connectivity, Communication, and Collaboration.” Prior to that he earned his M.A. from Nottingham Trent University with a thesis on “An Evolutionary Paradigm of Social Systems,” and his B.A. from the University of Central Lancashire.

His research interests include complex systems; media & communication networks; social technologies; alternative futures & future forecasting. He also has a deep interest in consciousness studies, the new sciences and how to bridge these areas of research.

As well as academic training Kingsley has also lived and worked for many years overseas, including five years in Turkey. During this time he has travelled widely and has had many varied experiences and contacts. He currently runs several blogsites, one of which is called ‘Between Both Worlds‘ which has attempted for several years to examine different aspects concerning humanity’s conscious evolution.

Kingsley currently lives in Andalusia (Southern Spain) and is the author of the forthcoming book New Consciousness for a New World (2011); as well as The Struggle For Your Mind: Conscious Evolution and the Battle to Control How We Think (2012). He is currently working on new book material and participates in WorldShift events. He continues to research, write, travel, grow his own vegetables, and seek to understand life’s mysteries."
(http://kingsleydennis.com/about/)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]