
=Description=

"KiteGen is a concept developed in Italy for a wind harnessing machine that takes power from high altitude winds. The vertical axis orientation of the rotation is intended to eliminate the static and dynamic problems that prevent the increase in size of conventional wind turbines. The prototype STEM yo-yo is under construction at Berzano di San Pietro (Italy). The KiteGen was originally conceived by an Italian Researcher: Massimo Ippolito. Looking at the kite surfers he noticed the large amount of energy that the kite was able to collect and thought that a similar system could produce electricity. This idea seemed to Ippolito so risky that he put it aside for some years.



=Appeal for Assistance=

Marco Guistini, July 2010:

"In Italy I'm involved as supporter in a project related to not-scarce
renewable energy production. This project is called (Kitegen
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitegen). Actually we're trying with lots
of difficulties to start the first onsite Kitegen (Kitegen Stem) in
the northern Italy.

But the reason why I'm writing here is not technical.

The tecnology behind Kitegen is worldwide patented and he the
inventor, Mr. Ippolito, refused to sell patents to energy
multinationals, because he believes that Kitegen could be a tool to
produce not-scarce energy to free people.

He's aware of attempts to extend the free-software paradigm in the
real world and he could be  interested to eventually give his patents
to a collective entity (i.e. a no-profit foundation), if it will work
to spread widely his technology, balancing profit with commons'
interest.

We created in Italy a public company to support the project that
collected from people  1 million euro, but is not enough. We need
more.

We wish to build something really new, a free (free as in free beer!)
enterprise, commons-based, working on crowdsourcing.

Could you help us to implement a model like this?

Marco "magius" Giustini


=More Information=

Contact via ♫ gmagius@gmail.com



[[Category:Energy]]