'''= [[Crowdsourcing]] for design of prototypes'''

URL = http://kluster.com/

=Description=

From Treehugger:

"projects with a defined goal -- a logo or product design, event, campaign, etc. -- are submitted, and the community users submit their ideas, designs or solutions that meet the goal. '''Broken down into four phases (phases, sparks, amps and watts''' -- more on them in a sec), projects take the best from a handful of brains to create the final product. 

It's key innovation includes the flexibility of the project architecture, focusing on the four key concepts mentioned above:

'''phases''' break down projects into small manageable deliverables. Phases also allow users to define an audience, either public (allowing the entire world to influence the decision) or private (allowing just a select group to participate).

'''sparks''' are ideas or proposed solutions to a phase. sparks can be text, photos, graphics, audio/video, CAD, animation, etc. Users may express themselves however they are most comfortable.

'''amps'''

Community members show support by investing watts into sparks that they believe in. watts are kluster’s internal currency. Members can earn and grow their watts based on sound judgments and positive participation. watts encourage users to participate and stay on target, keeping the community productive. Participants who invest in phases that carry a “reward” have the opportunity to turn their watts into cash."
(http://www.treehugger.com/files/2008/02/kluster_crowdso.php)


=Review=

"The main advantage Kluster offers is incentive: a highly developed system of rewards. Members can earn ‘Watts’ (the local currency) by helping solve problems or suggesting refinements or enhancements. They can also invest their Watts, and can cash out if a project is purchased by a third party. Investments grow along with a project’s value, and a member’s stake is based on how much he or she has contributed. As explained by Kluster: “Watts encourage users to participate and stay on target, keeping the community productive.”

Anyone can initiate a project, and Kluster claims to use complex algorithms to let the brightest ideas surface, not just the loudest ones. Several companies have signed up to engage Kluster’s community and tap into their collective creativity. In the best case scenario, the crowds will help brands create new hit products. At the very least, using Kluster will let them interact with their most dedicated customers. Smaller companies, meanwhile, can use Kluster as an instant research and development lab, enlisting (and rewarding!) the community to help ‘flesh out’ ideas that they might otherwise not be able to develop."
(http://www.springwise.com/style_design/crowdsourcing_platform/)


=More Information=

[[Crowdsourcing]]


[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Design]]