

=Source=

'''* Paper: Knowledge Federation as a Principle of Social Organization of Knowledge Creation and Sharing. Dino Karabeg and  Roy Lachica.'''

URL = http://folk.uio.no/dino/ID/Articles/Karabeg-Lachica-KF08.pdf



=Excerpts=

"We explain  knowledge federation  by comparing it with two familiar principles of 
organization – conventional authoring of documents, and Wikipedia-style knowledge 
unification. We then discuss the advantages of our proposed strategy.


The conventional practice  – authoring documents, without any systemic means for 
organizing the documents and the knowledge they contain into a coherent system, has 
the disadvantage of leaving the following Herculean tasks to the reader:  

• Identifying and assembling the knowledge resources that are required for 
making a qualified judgment about a subject.

• Reconciling the divided or even incompatible opinions in order to arrive at 
an informed conclusion. 

• Keeping the knowledge up to date and securing that it reflects the state of the 
art. 

As the number of authored documents increases, these tasks tend to become 
impossible. To cope, the knowledge workers specialize and divide their domains, 
which leads to the problem described in Introduction. 

An alternative is Wikipedia-style knowledge unification. In the Wikipedia, there is 
only one article associated with any subject. That article represents (an approximation 
of) the consensus position of the global community about its subject and reflects the 
current state of knowledge. 


This principle of organization, however, also has disadvantages:

• The simple social process by which the consensus is reached (overwriting)
obviously leaves room for improvement.

• It is difficult to secure that the authors receive credit for their work.

• It is difficult to show conflicting or contradictory points of view when those 
exist and need to exist.


Recognizing these limitations, Wikipedia disallows the publication of the results 
that have not already been published via conventional channels. But this means that 
the Wikipedia-style organization is suitable only for an encyclopedia, and not as an 
alternative to the conventional practice in the sciences and the media.

We define knowledge federation as the principle of organization that combines the 
advantages of the above two approaches and avoids their disadvantages (we italicize a 
concept when we attribute to it a local meaning, i.e. the one defined in this article). If 
we liken the conventional authored documents to independent states, and Wikipediastyle  knowledge unification to everyone being coalesced into a single state, then 
knowledge federation may be likened to political federation, which aims to reconcile 
the demands for autonomy of the local units with the interests of the larger whole they 
compose together. 

We let  knowledge federation  point at the broad spectrum of social organizations 
that are possible between the conventional document authoring and the Wikipediastyle knowledge unification as simple extreme points.

Knowledge federation is both a social organization of knowledge production, and 
an organization of knowledge resources.



==Domain Map Object==

We make initial progress towards a  knowledge federation system design by 
identifying its three large building blocks. We begin with the domain map object. 

The main purpose of the Domain Map Object is, intuitively, to provide a ‘map’ for 
placing and locating knowledge resources. 

A reader familiar with Topic Maps will need no introduction to the usefulness of 
such maps. Like a topic map, the Domain Map will allow for a subject-centric 
organization of knowledge resources, where each subject points at all the resources 
that are  about that subject. To properly make an article or any other knowledge 
resource known and accessible, its author will not only publish it, but also ‘place it on 
the map.’ 

A significant difference between a topic map and a domain map is that the former 
is only a topical index into a domain, while the latter represents a domain. In this 
regard a domain map is more similar to a geographical map. A domain map should 
not only map the existing knowledge, but also orient research, by showing the areas 
where knowledge is still lacking.

To that end, the Domain Map Object will provide functions for co-creating abstract 
views of a domain. 

Multiple views of a domain will be provided (analogous to geophysical, political, 
climatological and other maps in geography).

The representation of domain maps invites creative use of visual techniques."


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Articles]]