Book: George Siemens. Knowing Knowledge.

= '''about [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/Connectivist_Learning_Theory_-_Siemens Connectivist Learning Theory]'''

URL = http://www.knowingknowledge.com/


=Description=


George Siemens: "Knowledge is changing. It develops faster, it changes more quickly, and it is more central to organizational success than in any other time in history.

Our schools, universities, corporations, and non-profit organizations, need to adapt. We need to change the spaces and structures of our society to align with the new context and characteristics of knowledge.

How we market, how we learn, how we build, how we collaborate - these are all changing. Most organizations are not prepared for the sea change washing ashore. We are conducting business in a manner that is no longer reflective of the market, or society as a whole.

Knowing Knowledge is an exploration of knowledge - what it is, how it is changing, and what it means to our organizations and society. Knowing Knowledge will be available for purchase (or download) in early October 2006."


=Principles of Connectivist Learning Theory=


"the knowledge/learning 'principles of connectivism':

    
* Learning and knowledge require diversity of opinions to present the whole…and to permit selection of best approach.     
    
* Learning is a network formation process of connecting specialized nodes or information sources.    
    
* Knowledge rests in networks.
    
* Knowledge may reside in non-human appliances, and learning is enabled/facilitated by technology.
    
* Capacity to know more is more critical than what is currently known.     
    
* Learning and knowing are constant, on going processes (not end states or products).     
    
* Ability to see connections and recognize patterns and make sense between fields, ideas, and concepts is the core skill for individuals today.
    
* Currency (accurate, up-to-date knowledge) is the intent of all connectivist learning activities.
    
* Decision-making is learning. Choosing what to learn and the meaning of incoming information is seen through the lens of a shifting reality. While there is a right answer now, it may be wrong tomorrow due to alterations in the information climate affecting the decision."
(http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2006/12/13.html#a1724)


=More Information=

Strongly recommended review which also summarizes the main arguments of the book, at
http://kt.flexiblelearning.net.au/tkt2007/?page_id=20

Another good review by Dave Pollard, at http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2006/12/13.html#a1724

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]