
==Contextual Quote==

Knowledge Commoning as Commitment Pooling:

"Commitment pooling is simple: we make clear promises to one another - time, mentorships, apprenticeships, care, materials, and shared knowledge—and place them in a common well. We draw from that well when needed and reseed it after: hosting peer circles, opening new apprenticeships, or publishing what we’ve learned into the commons. Education becomes livelihood and relationship, not purchase and debt.

Education works best as a commitment, not a commodity. When promises are visible and rhythmic, teaching and learning become reciprocal by design. People place clear commitments into a shared well and receive support; those who draw also reseed - hosting peer practice, opening apprenticeships, publishing notes, films, and guides. Wisdom circulates through the commons instead of being fenced behind credentials."

- Will Ruddick [https://willruddick.substack.com/p/touching-the-knowledge-commons]


==Description==

Charlotte Hess:

"The knowledge commons is a vast and complex sector. Most aspects concern
digital information. In many cases knowledge became a commons when it became
digital. It has unique characteristics as a commons. For the most part, it is a renewable
resource.
         
Information has often been cited as a primary example of a pure public good—
nonrival and free to all. In our 2003 article, Ostrom and I made the distinction between
ideas, knowledge and information artifacts (books, articles, etc.) and information
facilities that store the resources (libraries, archives, databases etc.). The distinction is
important when analyzing commons, whether looking at economic goods, property rights
or social dilemmas. Influential voices in the information/knowledge commons arena are
Bollier (2001, 2002a&b, 2004a&b, 2007) looking at gift economies and collaboration;
Boyle (particularly 1996, 2002, 2003b) writing about threats from in the “second
enclosure movement”; Benkler (1998, 2002a, 2004) describing and advocating
commons-based peer production; and Lessig (1999, 2001) illustrating to a general
audience how free culture and information are being eroded by legal restrictions on use;
Ostrom and Hess (2007) and Hess and Ostrom (2006) have provided an analytical
framework for analyzing the knowledge commons.
         
Early writers on the Internet as a commons were Brin (1995), Felsenstein (1993),
Henderson (1995), Hess (1995), Kollock and Smith (1996), and Holman (1997).
Rheingold wrote enthusiastically about the virtual community commons in 1993, but
didn’t yet name them as such. 

Others have written about the ability of the Internet to
build or facilitate commons activities (Rainie and Kalsnes 2001; Haplin et al. 2006).
         
Boyle underscores the complexity of new digital commons when he writes:
<blockquote>
The question that remains to be answered is whether the social harm we should be most
concerned about is underproduction, overproduction, the tragedy of the commons, the
commercialization of an electronic public sphere, the corrosive effect of information
technology on privacy, or merely straightforward distributional inequity.
</blockquote>         
The idea of libraries as commons — a storehouse of democracy — has been
championed by Nancy Kranich. She chose this theme during her year as president of the
American Library Association in 2000 (Kranich 2003, 2007; see also Bailey and Tierney
2002; and Lougee 2007). Waters (2007) argues for preservation of the digital commons;
Cox and Swarthout (2007) describe a digital library commons in practice; Krowne (2003)
discusses building digital libraries using peer production.
        
In the past five-ten years, academic libraries in the US have begun calling their
dedicated online digital service areas “information commons” (Beagle 1999; Duncan
1998). There is a separate “commons” literature dedicated to these types of shared
library-computer spaces, but this literature is outside the focus of this paper.
        
Knowledge is also a global commons particularly in terms of provision, access,
and the dilemmas of intellectual property rights. It is a global commons that needs to be
accessible, equitable, and protected (Lukasik. 2000; Chan and Costa 2005; Holman and
McGregor 2005; Maskus and Reichman 2005; M. Cooper 2006; Hess and Ostrom
2007b). It also includes the issues of the global digital divide (Yu 2002; Chen and
Wellman 2004; Fox 2005). Armstrong and Ford (2005) is an interesting tool aimed at
bridging the African digital divide.
         
There are many action communities that have come together to counteract forms
of information enclosure. The establishment of Creative Commons (2002) [http://creativecommons.org/] 
and more recently Science Commons [http://sciencecommons.org/] 
has had a profound effect in increasing information in the
public domain. Millions of authors through Creative Commons now agree to “some
rights reserved” instead of the traditional “all rights reserved” package for copyrighted
works.
         
The open source movement, particularly Free/libre Open Source Software (FOSS)
is an important type of new commons (see Lessig 1999, 2006; Schweik 2005, 2007; Yu
2007; van Wendel de Joode 2003; van Wendel de Joode et al. 2003; O’Mahoney 2003;
Halbert 2003a; Sawhney 2003; Dorman 2002; Opderbeck 2004; Rao, Wiseman, and
Dalkir 2004; May 2006). The two primary foci are peer production and collective action
initiatives. Interestingly, the founder of the open source movement, Richard Stallman has
renounced Creative Commons for not being open enough. A new movement was recently
been established by the Libre Society called Libre Commons [http://www.libresociety.org]
which offers a set of licenses that “reject the legalistic and ‘culture as resource’ position
of the Creative Commons and instead hope to develop a concept of the creative multitude
through political action and ethical practices” (Berry and Moss 2006).
        
Commons dilemmas on the Internet is the subject of a number of works: email
spam (Melville, Stevens, Plice and Pavlov 2006); congestion (Huberman and Lukose
1997; Bernbom 2000); trust (Rheingold 1993; Kollock and Smith 1996).
        
Some of the writers on the open access and self-archiving movement who
consider the movement and/or free content as commons are Poynder (2003), Cahir
(2004), Hunter (2005); Toly2005; Geist (2007), and Suber (2007).
        
As mentioned earlier, the law literature on intellectual property rights and the
knowledge commons is extensive. There is a large corpus of works on the expansion of
intellectual property rights and/or copyright (Travis 2000; Litman 2001: Boyle 2002;
Gadgil 2002; Cohen 2006; Darch 2001; Halvert 2003; Campbell 2005; Ghosh 2007;
Loren 2007; Pasquale 2006; Reese 1995; Vaidhyanathan 2001; Van Alstyne 2003;
Tavani 2004, 2005; Mitchell 2005). Some are specifically dedicated to the issue of the
“copyleft” movement (Ciffolilli 2004; Hill 1999; Nimus 2006). Cohen (2000) and
Vaidhyanathan (2004) have written influential works on Fair Use after the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act of 1998. Some focus on increased enclosures from the
European Database Directive (David 2000; Boyle 2004). See Runge and Defrancesco
(2006) for a good background on historical enclosures and their relevance for intellectual
property rights.
        
Litman wrote about the intellectual public domain as a commons in 1990:
<blockquote>
The historical development of the public domain began as a straightforward problem in
statutory construction and proceeded through ad hoc articulation in series of cases
decided under successive statutes. Traditional explanations of the public domain have
failed to justify the cases on principled grounds. When the public domain is viewed as a
commons that rescues us from our choice to grant fuzzy and overlapping property
rights in unascertainable material, however, some of the apparent contradictions in
lines of cases become more transparent
</blockquote>
Interest in the intellectual public domain was re-awakened with the Conference
on the Public Domain, Duke 2001. 

James Boyle’s edited issue of Law and
Contemporary Problems 11(2003) is a seminal volume on intellectual property rights,
the knowledge commons, and the intellectual public domain. Other publications on the
intellectual public domain as a commons are Benkler (1999); Boyle (2002, 2003b);
Cohen (2006); Dalrymple (2003); Guibault and Hugenholtz (2006); Haas (2001);
Halbert (2003b); Lange (2003); Rai and Boyle (2007); Shaw (2006), and Aoki, Boyle,
and Jenkins (2006).
          
The issues around patents constitute another large part of the knowledge
commons, and the science commons subsector (Adelman 2005; Mireles 2004; Powledge
2003; Murray and Stern 2005; Shiva and Brand 2005; Horowitz and Moehring 2004;
Janger 2003). The science commons includes the tradition of open science,
microbiological commons, nanotechnology, genetic resources and the genomic
commons; anticommons; and supercommons. Issues include enclosure, collective action,
biopiracy, and overpatenting, sharing taxonomies, grid computing, and collaboratories.

There is a startling large literature on anticommons since Heller’s 1998 article. An
anticommons occurs when there are too many owners holding rights of exclusion, so that
the resource is prone to underuse which results in a tragedy of the anticommons (Heller
and Eisenberg 1998; Hunter 2003; Janger 2003; Mireles 2004; Sim, Lum, and Malone-
Lee 2002; Vanneste et al. 2006).
          
A different kind of science that has been written about as a commons is the
science of magic. Loshing (2007) analyzes the knowledge of magic as a common-pool
resource with a highly developed set of rules and norms.
          
The concept of the “semicommons” has been found useful by a number of
scholars after Henry E. Smith’s (2000) article arguing that semicommons exist “where
property rights are not only a mix of common and private rights, but both are significant
and can interact” (Loren 2007).
          
Another group of works center on the threats and possible enclosure of the open
science tradition (Dysen 1999; Eisenberg and Nelson 2002; Kennedy 2001; Merges 1996;
Nelson 2003, 2004; David 2004; Shulman 2002; Rai 1999, 2001; Reichman and Uhlir

A search of Lexis-Nexis shows two articles on the anticommons before 1998 and 828 articles between
1998 and 2008 (6-12-08).

2003; Dalrymple 2003; Vaidhyanathan 2001, 2002; Uhlir 2003, 2006; Dedeurwaerdere
2005; Kyläheiko 2005; Cook-Deegan 2007). 

An issue of the International Social Science
Journal (June 2006) was devoted to the microbiological commons (Cook-Deegan and
Dedeurwaerdere; Polsky; Srinivas; Hess and Ostrom; and Dawyndt, Dedeurwaerdere,
and Swings). A sixth article in the issue by Daniel, Himmelreich, and Dedeurwaerdere
addresses problems of sharing taxonomies and other forms of information on micro-
organisms. Donald Kennedy, editor of Science magazine devotes a large section to the
commons in his edited volume on the state of the planet (Kennedy 2006: 101-125). A
noteworthy international collaborative project by an IUCN consortium of supporters of
open access to scientific information has been the Conservation Commons [http://www.conservationcommons.org/]. 
It is committed to encouraging “organizations
and individuals alike to ensure open access to data, information, expertise and knowledge
related to the conservation of biodiversity.”
        
The testimonial to the importance of understanding the global gene pool as a
commons is the Porto Alegre Treaty to Share the Genetic Commons. In 2002, Biotech
activists from more than 50 nations gave their support for a treaty “which would establish
the earth’s gene pool as a global commons. Non-governmental organizations’ (NGOs)
leaders say they will challenge government and corporate claims on patents on life in
every country. The treaty is the first globally coordinated campaign among biotech
activists, and already has the support of over 250 organizations.” (See
http://www.ukabc.org/genetic_commons_treaty.htm ). Much of the work on genetic (or
genomic) commons has to do with enclosures or enclosure threats through corporate
patents (Sedjo 1992; Athanasiou and Darnovsky 2002; Aoki 2003; Safrin 2004; Barker
2003; Barnett 2000; Falcon and Fowler 2002; Faye 2004; Helfer 2005; Scharper and
Cunningham 2006); the pharmaceutical industry (Rai 2006, 2007); and biosafety (Jepson
2002).
        
The antithesis of enclosure threats to the knowledge commons is the remarkable
growth of mass collaboration and peer production. Yochai Benkler is the leading voice in
the study of peer production (Benkler 2004; Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006). He argues
that scientific publication is increasingly using commons-based strategies for more global
and equitable distribution to information-poor populations of the world (Benkler 2005:
14). 

In his influential article “Coase’s Penguin,” he explains:
<blockquote>
while free software is highly visible, it is in fact only one example of a much broader
social-economic phenomenon. I suggest that we are seeing is the broad and deep
emergence of a new, third mode of production in the digitally networked environment. I
call this mode ‘commons-based peer-production,’ to distinguish it from the property- and
contract-based models of firms and markets. Its central characteristic is that groups of
individuals successfully collaborate on large-scale projects following a diverse cluster of
motivational drives and social signals, rather than either market prices or managerial
commands. (Benkler 2002)
</blockquote>         

Benkler’s work is placed in the knowledge commons but it also has an important
place in the market commons sector. Benkler’s Wealth of Networks is a seminal book on
mass collaboration and networks. He writes: As collaboration among far-flung
individuals becomes more commons, the idea of doing things that require cooperation
with others becomes much more attainable, and the range of projects individuals can
choose as their own therefore qualitatively increases” (Benkler 2006: 9).
         
Also making a major contribution to the understanding of peer production is
Michel Bauwens. See Bauwens 2005 and his site: 
P2P Foundation: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/?p=470 which is dedicated to “Research, Documenting and
Promoting Peer to Peer Practices. And anyone doing research on networks should also
look at the work of Barry Wellman (2005 and at http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/vita/index.html) 
         
Early studies of online knowledge commons were those done on virtual
communities by Rheingold (1993) and Kollock and Smith (1996). The subsectors in
depicted in the map are groups where people physically or virtually come together to
accomplish some purpose (Uzawa 2005; Purdy 2007; Coombe and Herman 2004).
Rheingold’s Smartmobs13 are types of social commons. Many scientific collaboratories
and grid computing projects are commons-based.
        
Some of the most active de facto commons today are online mass collaborators
who work together contributing to information resources such as arXiv.org, the Digital
Library of the Commons, Wikipedia and wikis, FLICKR; or bookmarking sharing sites,
such as del.ici.ous. Tapscott and Williams’s bestselling book Wikinomics on mass
collaboration is inadvertently on the new commons.
        
An emerging area of study is focusing on “stigmergy” or “stigmergic
collaboration” by those interested in the biological connection to commons-like behavior.

Most notable is Australian Mark Elliott who made it the subject of his dissertation. He
writes:
<blockquote>
“Stigmergic collaboration provides a hypothesis as to how the collaborative process
could jump from being untenable with numbers above 25 people, towards becoming a
new driver in global society with numbers well over 25,000. The term is from French
Biologist’s Pierre-Paul Grasse’s research on termites in the 50’s and “has been applied to
the self-organisation of ants, artificial life, swarm intelligence and more recently, the
Internet itself.”
</blockquote>
See Elliott’s blogs Stigmergic Collaboration http://stigmergiccollaboration.blogspot.com/
and Mass Collaboration http://masscollaboration.blogspot.com/
        
Related terms: collaboratories; collective intelligence, flashmobs; grid
computing; non-market forms of crowdsourcing.
        
Education is a rapidly growing area of commons development. A number of
scholars have written about the commodification and corporatization of higher education
in the past few years (Argyres and Liebeskind 1998; Boal 1998; Hess 1998; Bollier 2002;
Brown 2000; Hall 2001; Strathern 2004; Williams 2005); others are focused on actively
building a global education commons through civic education (Crosby 1999; McMurtry
2001; Hepburn 2004; Huber 2005; Kirp 2004; Arvanitakis 2006; Bowers2006; Levine
2007 ). Hellstrom (2003) addresses the problem of governance in the academic virtual
commons.
        
As with libraries and their “information commons, education is now a field
abundant with “commons.” The Digital Learning Commons (DLC), for instance, “is a
nonprofit organization working to improve access to educational opportunities and
learning resources by providing high-quality educational materials, online courses, and
technology tools to all students and teachers in Washington State.”

http://www.learningcommons.org/. ccLearn was recently established by Creative
Commons to enable the full potential of the Internet to support open learning and open
educational resources (OER). Its mission is to minimize barriers to sharing and reuse of
educational materials—legal barriers, technical barriers, and social barriers.
http://learn.creativecommons.org/. The Open Education Resources (OER) Commons is a
“global teaching and learning network of free-to-use resources—from K-12 lesson plans
to college courseware—for you to use, tag, rate, and review.” http://www.oercommons.org/
(see also Atkins, Brown, and Hammond 2007). The Academic Commons is a community
of faculty, academic technologists, librarians, administrators, and other academic
professionals who help create a comprehensive web resource focused on liberal arts
education. http://www.academiccommons.org/. The Education Commons is a virtual
community of academic systems users, designers and systems implementers sharing
knowledge, experiences and best practices. The goal of the community is to create an
open and transparent system of communication between diverse groups committed to
advancing the state of education worldwide. It's meant to be a virtual commons, where
sharing and participation are key. http://www.educationcommons.org/commons/index.html
         
There are thousands of education commons-related initiatives from all parts of the
globe that are visible on the web. Further study will be needed to separate the wheat from
the chaff."

Source: Hess, Charlotte, [[Mapping the New Commons]] (July 1, 2008). [http://ssrn.com/abstract=1356835] 

==Characteristics==

[[Natalie Pang]]:

"Three salient characteristics of the knowledge commons can be highlighted: 
# resources that are shared and freely available, 
# the generation and use of co-created knowledge, and 
# spaces or facilities that allow for both personal and public discussions.
(thesis, http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/monash:8325 )

==Typology==

===By Content Function===

[[Natalie Pang]] on the Manifestations of the knowledge commons:

"The knowledge commons are constantly changing and mutating. Existing examples
are in a constant state of evolution, and new examples continually appear. It is thus
not possible to describe all the areas where the concept of the knowledge commons
has been manifested. However a selection of key categories of the knowledge
commons would need to include the following.

====The [[Information Commons]]====

"The information commons is a term loosely used to refer to resources on the Internet
(Bollier, 2004; Beagle, 1999; Hess, 2000) and redesigned or newly designed libraries
(Halbert, 1999; Beagle, 1999). It emphasises the free and equitable use of
information resources. 

In the literature there are two main connotations for the term information commons, namely:
* the online environment itself, in which digital services can be integrated and distributed effectively at marginal cost across distances.
* the infusion of technological services in libraries, and used to ‘denote a new type of physical facility specifically designed to organise workspace and service
delivery around the integrated digital environment’ 
(Beagle, 1999, p 82).

In both cases, the purpose is to provide possibilities for access and contribution to
resources, including framework implications such as information architecture design,
the design of spaces and facilities, and so on."<br />
(http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/monash:8325 )

====The [[Learning Commons]]====

"Another widespread term is the learning commons, increasingly used by libraries. In
the learning commons, library services, resources, technologies, and physical spaces
are integrated towards the core purpose of learning. The focus of the learning
commons is on cognitive enrichment through integrated access to information
resources in various media free to the user at the point of use (MacWhinnie, 2003).
Quite often found in academic libraries, the learning commons brings together
various functions of the institution under one roof: such as technological support,
language and learning services, and of course, the library holdings."<br />
(http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/monash:8325)

====Other scholarly commons====

Other applications of the commons include the [[Cultural Commons]], [[Science Commons]] (Levine, 2003), the Academic/Scholarly Commons (Hellstrom, 2003;
Bollier, 2004), or the Student Commons (Butin, 2000); aimed at engaging participants
in creating dialogue around arts, cultural, scientific, anthropological or wider
academic or campus issues. In addition to providing access to onsite topical
information resources, such examples of the knowledge commons, all follow the
collaborative principles and open content licensing frameworks associated with
commons models.

====The [[Creative Commons]]====

Last but certainly not least in this selective listing of contexts in which the knowledge
commons concept is manifested, is the Creative Commons.

The Creative Commons is not a place – it is an open content licensing framework
which seeks to offer a range of access possibilities between demand for full
copyrighted-based payment for every use of information resources and totally
unrestricted free use."

===Authorative vs. Allocative Knowledge Commons Resources===

Natalie Pang:

It may be discerned there are two types of resources within the knowledge commons.

A commons exists because ‘common knowledge’ of a community recognises its
existence, and some level of rules – however informal and fragmentary – are implied
by this recognition. The rules may be as minimal as an understanding of what falls
within or outside the physical or virtual boundary of the commons.

Giddens (1984, p. 33) calls such rules ‘resources’, and sees a distinction between
‘authoritative’ and ‘allocative’ resources. An authoritative resource consists in the
community consensus that a particular social patterning (otherwise called a social
institution) can and should exist – in other words the basic or enabling rule(s).
Giddens ‘allocative’ resource consists in the rules that social institutions follow in
order to share finite goods among people. 

Giddens defined both authoritative and
allocative resources as follows (Giddens, 1984, p. 373):

'''Authoritative resources''': Non-material resources involved in the generation
of power, deriving from the capability of harnessing the activities of human
beings; authoritative resources result from the domination of some actors
over others.

'''Allocative resources''': Material resources involved in the generation of
power, including the natural environment and physical artefacts; allocative
resources derive from human dominion over nature."
(http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/monash:8325 )

== Commentary ==

=== Why Knowledge Networks are the new [[Commons]] ===

Esko Kilpi:

"According to simplistic management thinking stimulus and response processes control human behavior: you get what you measure; you get what you reward. This means that people are understood as having no real connection to what they are actually doing.

A somewhat more modern way of thinking states that human beings actively create meaning in life through attempts to understand their own experiences. Intrinsic motivation – peoples’ relation to what they do, the meaning of work – replaces extrinsic rewards. People connect with what they are actually doing.

A new third way of thinking is enfolding. Since we cannot experience everything ourselves, other people become the co-creators of information, experience and meaning. Relations, connecting with others, create a new, networked way of knowing and learning.

As a result, people can now connect both with what they do and with their peers, their network, making them much more knowledgeable than their colleagues who lack these capabilities.

Information is, paradoxically, simultaneously both social and personal, with multiple, variable goals and constantly negotiated premises. Information creators, publishers and curators, are not the traditional verified experts; rather, information is created by a broad collection of reflexive practitioners sharing in the construction and ongoing evolution of a given field.

Information becomes a process of continuous facilitation and networked negotiation. Information networks are a valuable, shared resource making the interactive movement of thought possible.

These networks are the new commons. Sociologists call such shared resources public goods. A private good is one that the owners can exclude others from using. Private has been valuable and public without much value during the era of scarcity economics. This is now changing in a dramatic way, creating the confusion we are in the midst of today.

On the new commons, people with many ties become better informed and have more signaling power, while those outside and with few ties may be left behind. This may be the new digital divide.

Network inequality creates and reinforces inequality of opportunity.

In the age of abundance economics, public is much more valuable than private."
(http://eskokilpi.blogging.fi/2010/03/28/networks-are-the-new-commons/)

===Herman Daly on the [[Commonwealth of Knowledge]]===

Herman Daly:

"If you stand in front of the McKeldin Library at the University of Maryland, you’ll see a quotation from Thomas Jefferson carved on one of the stones: “Knowledge is the common property of mankind.” Well, I think Mr. Jefferson was right. Once knowledge exists, it is non-rival, which means it has a zero opportunity cost. As we know from studying price theory, price is supposed to measure opportunity cost, and if opportunity cost is zero, then price should be zero.

Certainly, new knowledge, even though it should be free, does have a cost of production. Sometimes that cost of production is substantial, as with the space program’s discovery that there’s no life on Mars. On the other hand, a new insight could occur to you while you’re lying in bed staring at the ceiling and cost absolutely nothing, as was the case with René Descartes’ invention of analytic geometry.

Many new discoveries are accidental. Others are motivated by the joy and excitement of research, independent of any material motivation. Yet the dominant view is that unless knowledge is kept scarce enough to have a significant price, nobody in the market will have an incentive to produce it. Patent monopolies and intellectual property rights are urged as the way to provide an extrinsic reward for knowledge production.

Even within that restricted vision, keeping knowledge scarce still makes very little sense, because the main input to the production of new knowledge is existing knowledge. If you keep existing knowledge expensive, that’s surely going to slow down the production of new knowledge." (http://peopleandplace.net/featured_voices/2010/10/19/sustaining_our_commonwealth)

===Paul B. Hartzog on Openness in the Knowledge Commons===

"'''Human knowledge is stored in the distributed network of individual human minds, and a repository of human knowledge needs to be stored in a distributed fashion as well''', a "knowledge commons," if you will.

What would the Knowledge Commons look like?  Fairly simple, as it turns out.  Imagine a peer-to-peer network in which everyone could contribute pieces of knowledge, and those pieces would be immediately spliced into bits and replicated throughout the system.  Like SETI@home and other distributed computing initiatives, everyone would share the load, so to speak, for the Knowledge Commons.

Importantly, such a system would be open on two fronts:
# Open access:  the system would be open to both input and output.  In other words, anyone could put information into the system, and anyone could obtain information out of the system.
# Open development:  since the core protocol would be open, changes to it would be community-driven.  Furthermore, anyone could develop a client application (or a web application) that would connect to the Knowledge Commons."
(http://onthecommons.org/node/979)

===Ownership and the knowledge commons===

Natalie Pang:

"Bollier viewed the commons as collectively owned by society. In a paper he affirmed
his argument, defining the commons as ‘various physical resources, social
institutions and intangible cultural traditions that we, the members of a society,
collectively own’ (Bollier, 2005, p. 4).

Though not disagreeing that some resources in the commons can be collectively
owned, Levine (2003) maintained that many resources in the commons can be seen
as unowned by anyone. He gave several examples of how the ‘unowned commons’
can work: such as the Internet, books and music where copyrights have long expired,
and software generated under the General Public License. In these examples, the
openness and extent to which they are shared freely contribute to the perceived
absence of ownership."<br />
(http://arrow.monash.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/monash:8325)

==More Information==
* [[Wikipedia: Knowledge commons]]
* [[Mapping the New Commons]] by Charlotte Hess

The quotes above from Natalie Pang are from:
[https://bridges.monash.edu/articles/thesis/The_knowledge_commons_in_Victoria_and_Singapore_an_exploration_of_community_roles_in_the_shaping_of_cultural_institutions/4534418 PhD Thesis: THE KNOWLEDGE COMMONS IN VICTORIA AND SINGAPORE: AN EXPLORATION OF COMMUNITY ROLES IN THE SHAPING OF CULTURAL INSTITUTIONS]. By Natalie Pang. For the Faculty of Information Technology Monash University September 2008.

=== See Also ===
* [[Digital Commons]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Standards]]
[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:Commons]]