
'''= A knowmad is a nomadic knowledge worker –that is, a creative, imaginative, and innovative person who can work with almost anybody, anytime, and anywhere.'''


=The Concept=

John Moravec:

"a nomadic knowledge worker –that is, a creative, imaginative,
and innovative person who can work with almost
anybody, anytime, and anywhere. Industrial society is
giving way to knowledge and innovation work. Whereas
industrialization required people to settle in one place
to perform a very specific role or function, the jobs
associated with knowledge and information workers
have become much less specific concerning task and
place. Moreover, technologies allow for these new
paradigm workers to work within broader options of
space, including “real,” virtual, or blended. Knowmads
can instantly reconfigure and recontextualize their work
environments, and greater mobility is creating new
opportunities. (Moravec, 2008)

In other words, knowmads are extensions of Peter Drucker’s (1992) knowledge
workers concept, embracing the convergence of accelerating technological
change and globalization. In particular, the use of advanced information and
communications technologies enable knowmads to work beyond pre-19th
century notions of nation states, corporate identity, and community identity. For
some, knowmadism is realized through leveraging social media (i.e., Twitter or
blogs) that add an additional layer of social and/or professional activities that
defy the confinement to particular geographies and operational rules they may
have been restricted to as recently as 10 years ago. For others, knowmads engage
in work that is transnational, transcultural, and post-organizational in scope.
And, a few select others may develop and apply such individual expertise that
their work in new context creation enables them to be considered post-national
and postcultural actors in their own right.

Knowmads are valued for the personal knowledge that they possess, and this
knowledge gives them a competitive advantage. Knowmads are also responsible
for designing their own futures. This represents a massive shift from agricultural,
industrial, and information-based work in which our relationships and
responsibilities were static and clearly defined by others."
(https://educationfutures.com/books/knowmadsociety/download/KnowmadSociety.pdf)

==More Information==

* Book: The [[Knowmad Society]]. John Moravec. [https://educationfutures.com/books/knowmadsociety/download/KnowmadSociety.pdf]

=The School=

URL =  http://www.knowmads.nl/

==Discussion==

Francisco Mello Castro:

"“Welcome home”. As you walk through Amsterdam into Knowmads that is the first sign you will put your eyes at. 

Knowmads works around the concept of Learning Spaces, and the ideia that students are capable of taking control of their education. Which means that you must be willing to have the unknown ahead of you, and a very entrepreneurial profile.They have a coworking space, with tools and materials to test and create prototypes, that all “students” have acess to. And give you two of the most important and most negleted gifts education can give you: Tools to build what you love, and freedom to actually do it.

To enter, you must write a motivational letter and go to Amsterdam for a workshop. They call the groups that start the program a tribe, and the main criteria of selection is how well they get along in this workshop. Can you work together with someone to create something amazing? There are only two tribes simultaneously atending the school, and the older one teachs the “freshmen” to take care of the space.

During the program, you will have a lot of workshops, and talks, but don`t expect for them to fall into your lap. There are no teachers in the programa. Everyone stands on the same ground and even the Council, the group of individuals who are responsable for the program, doesn`t consider themselves as superior in any manner. That means that you are entirely responsable for what you learn.

The kind of people you will find attending Knowmads are often the ones looking for a space where they can meet incredible people (and be assured you will find them there) and looking for what they love, or to have a space to develop their passions. If you are conected with amazing people, and have the tools and freedom to do what you love, you will acomplish amazing things. And that translates Knowmads spirit."
(http://educationatw.wordpress.com/2013/09/12/school-6-knowmads-nl/)

==More Information==

* the Knowmads Business School in Amsterdam at http://www.knowmads.nl/about-us/knowmads-in-3-minutes/

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Netherlands]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Labor]]