Abstract of PhD Research "Knowledge Management and Innovation in Virtual Organisations (Open Source Software Communities)"

Author: [http://www.durham.ac.uk/zilia.iskoujina Zilia Iskoujina]

URL = http://www.dur.ac.uk/zilia.iskoujina/research-abstract.htm


=Abstract=

"The aim of my thesis is to assess how and to what extent knowledge is created, shared, and circulated in open source software communities in order to shed light on the innovation processes in virtual organisations. ‘The post-industrial economy’, ‘the service economy’, ‘the post-capitalist society’, ‘the digital economy’, ‘the network economy’, ‘the new economy’, ‘the knowledge economy’ − these diverse terms relate to the evolution of traditional business in an electronic environment that has become possible by the rapid development of information technologies (IT). The Internet, a central feature of IT innovation, has had a revolutionary effect upon firms. According to the recent Internet World statistics, the Internet population increased by 183.4% over 2000 − 2005. Such expansion is also reflected in increased online selling and e-commerce development. According to ClickZ, Internet spending in 2005 increased by 22% compared with 2004. According to e-Marketer, UK retail e-commerce will increase from £19.6 billion in 2005 to £60 billion in 2010. There have been radical changes in the business environment as a result of e-business, which organisations are not able to ignore. The Internet phenomenon has given rise to the evolution of new opportunities and requirements for businesses. It is difficult to find a company that has not used the advantages of the Internet. Together with these advantages, however, in the information era, companies face more risks than before. In the new economy many firms are finding that operating alone puts them at a competitive disadvantage, and that they need to operate with others (networking) in the new environment. The new economy is identified not only by the computer hardware and software, it also identifies by electronic connectivity.

The term "virtual organisation" reflects the emergence of a new organisational form with a record of success in the modern business environment. The key component of a virtual organisation is knowledge. Compared to traditional organisations, where capital is the main resource focus, networks in e-medium are based more on knowledge, relationships, and technology management (Walters, 2002). Although knowledge has been important as long as civilisations have existed, in the knowledge economy, it has taken on a special significance. In some industries of the new economy, especially those producing intangible products, knowledge sharing has become a means by which firms can gain a competitive advantage. Open source software such as Linux is a good example of successful knowledge creation and sharing in the virtual organisation. Although the virtual organisation is not a panacea for all kind of businesses, it is increasingly difficult to find any company which has not got at least some form of ‘virtuality’. Some companies choose a semi-virtual model; other companies opt for a fully virtual existence. In fact, those who produce intangible products, such as open source software, no longer need ‘within-the-four-walls’ physical offices.

Although there are plenty of academic studies on the new economy, dealing with its conditions and the new organisational forms associated with it, there is a need to explore more deeply a number of issues associated with the phenomena. Because of the vitality of knowledge management and increasing importance of knowledge in the virtual organisations, the role of knowledge management within such organisations needs to be studied more specifically. A virtual organisation is a network where communities/individuals collaborate to gain a competitive advantage through knowledge sharing. Open source software is an appropriate example of such network collaboration. This justifies my thesis, which undertakes primary research on open source software communities to find out how and to what extent knowledge is created, shared and circulated in open source software communities. The thesis is intended to shed light on the innovation processes in the virtual organisations, and thereby constitute to our understanding of the role of knowledge management in the virtual organisations context."
(http://www.dur.ac.uk/zilia.iskoujina/research-abstract.htm)


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Business]]