
* Book: The Knowmad Society. John Moravec.

URL = https://educationfutures.com/books/knowmadsociety/download/KnowmadSociety.pdf


=Description=

John Moravec:

"Knowmads diferentiate their jobs from work. Jobs are positions, gigs, or
other forms of employment. Work is longer term in scope, and relates to the
creation of meaningful outcomes. One’s work difers from a career in Knowmad
Society. Whereas a career is something that “carries” a person throughout life,
an individual’s work is a collection of activities that are backed with elements
that are purposive at the personal level. In other words, the results of a knowmad’s
work are that person’s responsibility alone.

Knowmads strive to continually define and refine their work. This can be
expressed through occupying various jobs, apprenticeships, entrepreneurship,
social activities, etc. If the knowmad once made a diference at their job, but
there is little new opportunity for creating change, then it’s time to move on.

Without having a purposive direction to herd one’s various jobs into work, we
must question if that person has found his or her way.

Knowmad Society brings in a futures orientation, projecting not only the
future of our workforce, but also examines the social, educational, and political
implications for developing human capital that is relevant for the 21st century.
We are at a crossroads where we can design a new human renaissance, built
on leveraging our imagination, creativity and innovation – or we can doom
ourselves to repeating the mistakes of our past.


This book builds on the ideas of many others who also observe the rise of
Knowmad Society. 


Intriguing examples include:

• At the 2011 Lift Conference, Yasmine Abbas shared her vision of
neo-nomadism, which she constructed from an urban planning perspective.
Mobility is increasing, spatially, mentally, and electronically. This, in turn,
creates new opportunities and challenges for how we integrate interpersonally
and as organized cities (see Abbas, 2011).

• Digital nomads, as defined in Wikipedia (“Digital nomad,” n.d.), are: “individuals
that leverage digital technologies to perform their work duties, and
more generally conduct their lifestyle in a nomadic manner. Such workers
typically work remotely—from home, cofee shops and public libraries to
collaborate with teams across the globe.” This is an idea that Makimoto and
Manners (1997) explored extensively in their book, Digital nomad.

• 1099 workers – independent contractors (named from their frequent use of
the U.S. Internal Revenue Service form 1099) – are a growing segment of the
economy in the United States (see esp. Kotkin, 2012).

• Richard Florida developed the concept of the creative class of innovation
and context-creation workers, consisting of a super-creative core, traditional
knowledge workers, and new Bohemians (Florida, 2004; Florida, 2005).

• Richard Oliver (2007) discusses purposive drift – a need to connect with
our inner humanness as we explore uncertain futures. Even if we are not
sure where we our lives are going, as individuals, we need to develop a sense
of purpose, or we would be simply lost.

• The U.S. Air Force, in its futures-based research, warns of hyper-powered
individuals, aided by technologies, that may create more harm and havoc
than any nation could in the previous century. The technological elimination
of time and distance barriers means a greater number of individuals and
organizations will play a role in charting future societies (Geis et al., p. xv).
…and so on.


The bottom line: Individual talent is becoming increasingly important in
the 21st century. What one knows and can do with their knowledge in difering
contextual formats drives their employability. In other words, people who can
innovate and generate new value with their knowledge will lead employment
growth. Those who do not will be replaced by machines, outsourced, or be
outmoded by those who can (inspired by Clarke, 1980, p. 96).

In 2010, Cristóbal Cobo and I started the Invisible learning project, which
was intended to result in Spanish and English-language editions of a book freely
available under a Creative Commons license. We got sidetracked when the
University of Barcelona Press contacted us, and indicated that they would like to
publish it – but in Spanish only (as “Aprendizaje Invisible”). They were great to
work with, and allowed us to release a free digital edition of the book in 2011. The
product was a hit and over 50,000 copies were distributed in the first year (that
we could count) – not bad for an education text!"


=Contents=

"The chapters Cobo and I share in this book are the direct descendants from
the Invisible learning project. In the first chapter, I introduce the Knowmad
Society concept in the context of redesigning education. This is a translation
and update of Chapter 1 in Invisible learning, where I describe the transitions
from what I label Society 1.0 through Society 3.0. In the following chapter, Cobo
provides a summary of key points we made elsewhere in the book, with updates,
and more meaningful contextualization for Knowmad Society. While I focus on
theory construction, Cobo connects it with policy studies and perspectives.

The impact of the remixing of places and social relationships on education
cannot be ignored any longer. Students in Knowmad Society should learn, work,
play, and share in almost any configuration. Nevertheless, there is little evidence
to support any claim that education systems are moving toward a knowmadenabled
paradigm. We need to ask ourselves: What are we educating for? Are we
educating to create factory workers and bureaucrats? Or, are we educating to
create innovators, capable of leveraging their imagination and creativity?

Thieu Besselink ofers an aesthetic approach toward re-imagining
teaching in Knowmad Society, where teachers need to refocus from information
delivery and measurements toward one where, together with students, they aim
to build something new and meaningful for everybody. Rather than worrying
about learning in top-down approaches to education, he ofers a pathway for
reinventing teachers as learning choreographers –guides who, “tease out
experiences, sources of inspiration, and energy that can be the building blocks
for the Quest.”

Christel Hartkamp ofers a diferent approach than the policy-driven
schemes Cobo suggests, and argues that for youth to become successful in
Knowmad Society, they must be enabled to find and build their own way, which
requires skill development that is not present in mainstream education. Reflecting
on her own experiences, she presents a case for expanding Sudbury-type
education to best enable children to, “grow up as self-starters, showing initiative
and entrepreneurialism, knowing how to use knowledge, their talents, and how
to make decisions on the basis of their own judgments.”

Pieter Spinder co-founded the Knowmads Business School in Amsterdam in
2009. The school ofers an alternative platform for youth interested in developing
their creative entrepreneurial skills in sustainable, socially innovative contexts.
He jokes that students do not earn a diploma, but they have the possibility of
earning a tattoo when they finish. But, like tattooing one’s self, the school provides
for the possibility for personal design and (re)definition – this individual-level
development and expression is critical for success in Knowmad Society.

Edwin de Bree and Bianca Stokman relate their experiences in flattening
hierarchical organizations. That is, in Knowmad Society, they ask if we need
many layers of management, or can we form organizational structures that
empower people to serve as their own “bosses” and do what is right for the insti-
tution? They provide several examples from their own work in “de-hierarching”
organizations, and discuss the potentials for not only cost savings, but also for
new opportunities provided by an empowered workforce.

Christine Renaud runs a Canadian startup called E-180. Utilizing social
technologies, they are working to take learning out of classrooms and other
formal environments, and instead embedding it into places that are more natural
for humans – namely cofee shops. She reflects on the knowledge-sharing
meetings that her company facilitates, and argues there is a hunger for collaborative
learning that we can embed into society. Education researchers have been
talking a lot about life-long learning, but what about life-long teaching?
Ronald van den Hof has built a business out of supporting knowmads. I
was pleased to meet him in 2009 after we realized that we were both working
with nearly identical “Society 3.0” models (he prefers to label his “Society30”
to match the URL of his recent book, Society 3.0: www.society30.com). His
company, Seats2Meet.com, provides not only co-working spaces for knowmadic
workers, but also blends in technologies that help enable collaboration,
co-creation, and building productive relationships with others. In his contribution
to this volume, he argues that knowmads are an essential component of
“Organization 3.0” – and engaging them in the co-construction of his business
has been very rewarding.

Finally, U.S. Sen. Gary Hart presents an insightful afterword that calls
for policy leaders to wake up to the realities of Knowmad Society, and attend
to its support as a matter of maintaining security among nations. Knowmads
break down barriers rather than create new ones, and we must define new public
responsibilities to provide for positive futures for citizens, nations, and our
planet.

We provide a diverse range of perspectives, but unite under the core notions
that the future is becoming much more unpredictable and old social structures
have less value – especially those connected with education. Above all, we agree
that we can lead with change today.

There is a strong Dutch presence in this book, and it is by no coincidence that
the Dutch are breaking the path in realizing Knowmad Society. They have had a
head start, aided by the geography of the Randstad conurbation, which connects
many smaller cities together in a larger metropolitan-like area. Central to its
success is a reliable rail network. Traveling by train to various cities to work
and meet with others has become an activity as casual as taking the subway
to a regular work place in a regular, concentrated city. In essence, many Dutch
citizens are already nomadic in where they work – and growing into this mode of
work is a natural transition.

Change is naturally frightening for humans, and living in Knowmad Society
implies that the “securities” that we enjoyed in the past are obsolete (e.g.,
life-long employment at an organization, the promise of retirement, and steady
streams of income). Indeed there are many challenges, and they can be construed
as opportunities for knowmadic workers and policy makers to co-create
new solutions. We instead choose to focus on the positive features of Knowmad
Society – and how to generate positive outcomes.

In our approach, we diferentiate little between learning and working.
Knowmadic thinking and individual-level entrepreneurship exposes the fuzzy
metaspaces in between each, opening new opportunities for new blends of
formal, informal, non-formal and serendipitous learning. As in the Invisible
learning project, we focus on educating for personal knowledge creation that
cannot be measured easily. In the business world, this is reflected in flattening
our organizational relationships (“de-hierarchizing”) and attending to the
inherent chaos and ambiguity in knowmadic systems, rather than fighting it
(inspired esp. by Allee, 2003 & McElroy, 2003).

I organized this book to present a spectrum of ideas from the abstract and
academic to the practical. My editing philosophy is not to conform each author’s
chapter to a unitary perspective, but rather to present an ecology of perspectives
– in their own words. When reading this volume, you will read many incongruities
and outright contradictions. They are all intended. Nobody knows the
future, and we do not pretend to have all of the correct answers. What we hope,
however, is that we will provoke you to join the dialogue."
(https://educationfutures.com/books/knowmadsociety/download/KnowmadSociety.pdf)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Books]]