
'''= UK-based group working on knowledge policy'''


URL = http://www.knowledgepolitics.org.uk/


=Description=

"The social, economic and cultural changes being brought about in our society today are huge.  Knowledge Politics is the progressive, independent think-tank dedicated to exploring the implications and possibilities of the development of an ‘information society’, and to influencing the debate over its meaning and future. 

‘Information society policy’ touches many aspects of public policy, including the media, internet, culture, education, intellectual property, eGovernment, technology take-up and research.  The concept itself is also used as a political tool in the hands of policy-makers at the global, regional and national levels.  This is the focus of our research.

We intend to open up debate on the future of the information society.  We reject the determinism of some regarding the direction of change, and contend that a fresh approach to the information society is required.  This approach should emphasise the importance of knowledge and its distribution as the key to a progressive information society.

To achieve this, we work to bring together the disparate strands and perspectives on information society policy in one place, to allow political scientists and public policy researchers to access the best new research and opinion from across the political world.  And we help shape debate by publishing our own high quality research and commenting on new policy developments."
(http://www.knowledgepolitics.org.uk/about.html)


=More Information=

#Wikipedia description at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_Politics
#Intro to their theoretical approach, at http://www.knowledgepolitics.org.uk/introduction.html


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]