= proposed name for '''the economics of common resources''', coined by economist Steve Corneli (and so far used only in some of the writings of Joe Corneli)


=Discussion=

Joe Corneli:

: ''Although our productive strategy may not be commons-based per se, aspects of it are; indeed, "scholarship" as a whole seems to be some kind of commons, and, running with this idea, anything that we want to do that we hope will impact an entire field of human endeavor ought to be informed by a fairly solid understanding of the economic features of the landscape. (Here, more properly koinomic -- having to do with the rules of commons and common property, as distinct from the rules of households and private property, although certainly that is involved.) Commons-based peer production, "systems", and cybernetics are all relevant -- but no doubt there is a lot more. Coming up with a bibliography of koinomics would be a good first step.'' from http://metameso.org/cgi-bin/wiki.pl/Reengineering_Mathematics

It would be very useful to create a "phase diagram" that shows
how one regime adjoins another.  A good place to start
would be with a "concept map".  The resources from the
Category:Economics page might provide some good inputs for a first
draft of that.

It is appropriate to make such a phase
diagram or map a key offering of "koinomics", because it itself would
become a "common resource".  In this sense, I see koinomics as
something like meteorology: we're interested in where resources move,
how they move, how the regimes change from one form to another.  We
can remain (relatively) agnostic as to what the causal factors are
(e.g. profit maximization or planning via central computer)." 

...

It occurred to me in an exchange with [https://wwelves.org/perpetual-tripper elf Pavlik] that ''koinos'' is quite obviously the place where we get the word ''coin'' -- the common currency.  Making koinomics an interesting field for those who want to think about living in a post-money society.  What other systems can serve the same purpose as money, but perhaps do a better job?"


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Commons]]