
=Bio=

"Kristy Milland runs TurkerNation.com, the oldest community for Amazon Mechanical Turk crowd workers, and studies psychology at Ryerson University. She is also a contractor who helps mTurk Requesters and researchers post HITs, analyse data, access the Turker community, and create tools that help Turkers be more efficient workers. She has worked on mTurk for the last 10 years and has experience not only as a crowd worker, but as a Requester who posts micro tasks and a researcher of the Turker community and mTurk itself. Her research interests focus on qualitative analysis of who works on mTurk, why they choose that work, and how they get the work done, but she also investigates mTurk from the Requester perspective, such as when the best time to post HITs is, or what qualifications are the most effective (spoiler: the Masters qualification is garbage!) As community manager of Turker Nation, Kristy has her finger on the pulse of the Turker population, with a deep understanding not only of how to get the best work from them, but the labour issues that surround microtask crowd work. She speaks around the world about the ethics and exploitation of crowd work, how to use Amazon Mechanical Turk effectively while still respecting the workers (spoiler: if you treat workers ethically, the work quality improves), and the importance of regulation of crowd work as more and more jobs are being taken away from skilled, educated workers and given to the crowd (journalists are already feeling the crunch of being replaced by crowd "authors" and algorithms, for example).

This website contains information on campaigns Kristy has been a part of (Projects), her speaking engagements, publications she is an author on, articles written about her and interviews with her, and mentions in the academic literature. Key works include "We Are Dynamo: Overcoming Stalling and Friction in Collective Action for Crowd Workers", a paper awarded Best of CHI 2015 which details the creation of the WeAreDynamo platform, a place where Turkers can organize themselves anonymously in order to fight for changes in their work life. She led a campaign on this platform called "Dear Jeff Bezos" where Turkers wrote letters to Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, telling him who they were, how their Turking helped their lives, and what platform changes they would suggest for the future. As part of the campaign, Kristy has been interviewed for the Wall Street Journal, Engadget, The Guardian, The Globe & Mail, The Daily Beast, Fast Company and Slate. She is also often interviewed for European media, such as BBC Radio 4 and FranceTV.

If you are interested in inviting Kristy to speak at a conference or event, interviewing her, or collaborating on a research project, please use the Contact link in the menu at the top of this page."
(http://www.kristymilland.com/index.html)

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Bios]]