
= an example of value creation with [[Generative Justice]], as described by Ron Eglash.

=Description=

Ron Eglash:

"At  first  it  might  seem  that  the Adinkra  production  system,  while  admirable  for  its  sus-tainability,  is  at best  an artifact  of the  past. But  the  system  took  a  remarkable  turn  in  1993 when  a  traditional  animist  priest,  Nana  Frimpong  Abebrese,  decided  to  organize  cocoa farmers  under  similar principles:  a  collective in  which  the  common pool  of  resources  would benefit the whole. Kuapa Kokoo Ltd (the name means “good cocoa farmer”) obtained a loan from  Twin  Trading,  a  UK  fair  trade  company,  and  set up  22 villages  with weighing  scales, tarpaulins,  gratings  and  other  basics.  Their  mission  is  to  empower  low-income  farmers,  in-crease  women's  participation,  and  to  develop  environmentally  friendly  cultivation.  In  1998, with  the  help  of  Twin  and  other  NGOs,  Kuapa  Kokoo  launched  UK-based  chocolate  com-pany  Divine,  with  the funtunfunefu  and asase  symbols  proudly  displayed  on  the  front wrapper.  Today  Kuapa Kokoo  has 65,000  members  organized  in  about  1400  villages.  Profits  from  their  45%  ownership  in  Divine  chocolate  are  reinvested  in  village projects  for  water,  health,  and  education,  as well  as  preventing  child  labor  and  adapting  to climate  change. When  it  comes  to  low-income  African  farmers  becoming  owners  of  a  multimillion  dollar chocolate  empire,  it’s  hard  to  argue  against  generative  justice."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Ghana]]