

=Discussion=

==Contemporary schools of thought and the problem of [[Labour Algorithms]]==

Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"Despite the fall of actually-existing socialism, the idea of
computerized economic planning continued to be developed by
small groups of theorists, who have advanced its conceptual scope
further than anything attempted by Soviet cyberneticians. Two
schools have been of particular importance: the ‘New Socialism’ of
Scottish computer scientists Paul Cockshott and Alan Cottrell
(1993); and the German ‘Bremen School’, which includes Peter
Arno (2002) and Heinz Dieterich (2006), the latter an advocate of
Venezuelan-style ‘Twenty First Century Socialism’. These
tendencies have recently converged (Cockshott, Cottrell &
Dieterich, 2010). However, because little of the Bremen group’s
work is translated, the focus here will be on the New Socialism of
Cockshott and Cottrell.

The distinguishing mark of the New Socialist project is its classic
Marxist rigor. Accordingly, its twenty-first century super-computer
planning follows to the letter the logic of the late nineteenth century
Critique of the Gotha Program (Marx, 1970), which famously
suggests that at the first, ‘lower’ stage to communism, before
conditions of abundance allow ‘to each according to his needs’,
remuneration will be determined by the hours of socially necessary
labour required to produce goods and services. In the capitalist
workplace, workers are paid for the reproduction of the capacity to
labour, rather than for the labour actually extracted from them; it is
this that enables the capitalist to secure surplus value.
The elimination of this state of affairs, Cockshott and Cottrell
contend, requires nothing less than the abolition of money—that is,
the elimination of the fungible general medium of exchange that,
through a series of metamorphoses of money in and out of the
commodity form, creates the self-expanding value that is capital. In
their new Socialism, work would be remunerated in labour
certificates; an hour’s work could be exchanged for goods taking, on
a socially average basis, an equivalent time to produce. The
certificates would be extinguished in this exchange; they would not
circulate, and could not be used for speculation. Because workers
would be paid the full social value of their labour, there would be no
owner profits, and no capitalists to direct resource allocation.
Workers would, however, be taxed to establish a pool of labour-time
resources available for social investments made by planning boards
whose mandate would be set by democratic decisions on overall
social goals.

Labour time thus provides the ‘objective unit of value’ for the New
Socialism (Cockshott & Cottrell 2003: 3). It is at this point that its
proponents invoke the capacities of information technology. Such a
system would require an enumeration of the labour time expended,
both directly and indirectly, in the creation of goods and services, to
assess the number certificates for which these goods and services can
be exchanged, and to enable the planning of their production. The
basic tool of the input-output table reappears, with special attention
to labour time, both as an input necessary for the production of
goods, and as an output that itself requires the inputs of training and
education. However, here the New Socialists have to confront a
basic objection. Since the fall of the USSR it has been conventionally
accepted that the scale of information processing attempted by its
cyberneticians was simply too large to be feasible. Writing in the
1980s, Nove (1983) suggested that such an effort, involving the
production of some twelve million discrete items, would demand a
complexity input-output calculation impossible even with
computers. This claim was repeated in recent discussions of Red
Plenty, with critics of central planning suggesting that, even using a
contemporary ‘desktop machine’, solving the equations would take
‘roughly a thousand years’ (Shalizi, 2012).

Cockshott and Cottrell’s answer involves new tools, both conceptual
and technical. The theoretical advances are drawn from branches of
computing science that deal with abbreviating the number of
discrete steps needed to complete a calculation. Such analysis, they
suggest, shows their opponents’ objections are based on
‘pathologically inefficient’ methods (Cockshott, in Shalizi, 2012).

The input-output structure of the economy is, they point out,
‘sparse’—that is to say, only a small fraction of the goods are directly
used to produce any other good. Not everything is an input for
everything else: yogurt is not used to produce steel. The majority of
the equations invoked to suggest insuperable complexity are
therefore gratuitous. An algorithm can be designed to short-cut
through input-output tables, ignoring blank entries, iteratively
repeating the process until it arrives at a result of an acceptable order
of accuracy.

The time would be further reduced by massive increases in
computer processing speed yielded by Moore’s Law. Suggesting
high-level economic planning is done on a ‘desktop machine’ is
disingenuous. The issue is supercomputing capacity. According to
an email communication from Benjamin Peters, in 1969, the time of
Red Plenty, the ‘undisputed workhorse’ of the Soviet information
economy was the BESM-6 (‘bol’shaya electronicheskaya schetnaya
mashina’ – literally the ‘large/major electronic calculating
machine’), which could perform at an operating speed of 800,000
flops or ‘floating operations per second’ – that is, at 8 megaflops, or
10^6 flops. By 2013, however, supercomputers used in climate
modelling, material testing and astronomical calculations are
commonly exceeding 10 quadrillion flops or ten ‘petaflops’. The
holder of the crown at the time of writing is Cray’s Titan at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory achieving some 17.6 petaflops (10^15)
(Wikipedia, 2013). Supercomputers with an ‘exaflop’ capacity
(10^18 flops) are predicted from China by 2019 (Dorrier, 2012).
Thus, as Peters (2013) says, ‘giving the Soviets a bit generously 10^7
flops in 1969, we can find (10^18 - 10^7 = 10^11) . . . a
100,000,000,000 fold increase’ by today.

With these capacities, Cockshott and Cottrell’s suggestion that the
computer requirements for large scale economic planning could be
handled by facilities comparable to those now used for
meteorological purposes, seems at least plausible. The ‘calculation
problem’, however, involves not just data processing but the actual
availability of data; Hayek’s claim was not merely that central
planners cannot crunch economic numbers fast enough, but that the
numbers in a sense do not exist prior to price setting, which provide
an otherwise absent measure of production performance and
consumption activity. Again, Cockshott and Cottrell suggest the
answer lies in computers being used as a means of harvesting
economic information. Writing in the early 1990s, and invoking
levels of network infrastructure available in Britain at the time, they
suggest a coordinating system consisting of few personal computers
in each production unit, using standard programming packages,
would process local production data and send it by ‘telex’ to a central
planning facility, which every twenty minutes or so would send out a
radio broadcast of adjusted statistical data to be input at local levels.

This is a scenario too reminiscent of the ramshackle techno-futurism
of Terry Gilliam’s Brazil. To bring the New Socialists up to date we
should instead refer to Fredric Jameson’s iconoclastic vision of Wal-
Mart as ‘the shape of a Utopian future looming through the mist’
(2009: 423). His point is that, if one for a moment ignores the gross
exploitation of workers and suppliers, Wal-Mart is an entity whose
colossal organizational powers model the planned processes
necessary to raise global standards of living. And as Jameson
recognizes, and other authors document in detail (Lichtenstein,
2006), this power rests on computers, networks and information. By
the mid 2000s Wal-Mart’s data-centers were actively tracking over
680 million distinct products per week and over 20-million
customer transactions per day, facilitated by a computer system
second in capacity only to that of the Pentagon. Barcode scanners
and point of sale computer systems identify each item sold, and
store this information. Satellite telecommunications link directly
from stores to the central computer system, and from that system to
the computers of suppliers, to allow automatic reordering. The
company’s early adoption of Universal Product Codes had led to a
‘higher stage’ requirement for Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID) tags in all products to enable tracking of commodities,
workers and consumers within and beyond its global supply chain."
(http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)


=More Information=

* [[Cybernetic Planning]]
* [[Red Plenty Platforms]]


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Economics]]