* book and resource/property format/soil we all depend on

=Book=

* Land. Martin Adams. North Atlantic Books,

URL = [http://www.northatlanticbooks.com/]

"What if we lived in a world where everyone had enough? A world where everyone mattered and where people lived in harmony with nature? What if the solution to our economic, social, and ecological problems was right underneath our feet? Land has been sought after throughout history. Even today, people struggle to get onto the property ladder; most view real estate as an important way to build wealth. Yet, as readers of this book will discover, the institution of land ownership—and our urge to make money from land—causes economic booms and busts, social and cultural decline, and environmental devastation. Land: A New Paradigm for a Thriving World introduces a radically new economic model that promises a sustainable and abundant world for all. This book is for those who dream of a better world for themselves and for future generations."
(https://www.unitism.com/)


==Review==

George Monbiot:

"In his book Land, the community organiser Martin Adams urges us to see the land as something that once belonged to everyone and no one, yet has been acquired by a minority that excludes other people from its enjoyment. He proposes that those who use the land exclusively should pay a “community land contribution” as compensation.

This could partly replace income and sales tax, prevent land hoarding, and bring down land prices. The revenue could help to fund a universal basic income. Eventually we could move to a system in which land is owned by the local community and leased to those who use it."
(https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/despair-mess-commons-transform-society)

=The Land=

==Discussion==

According to [[User Ownership]] theory, Patrick Anderson:

Land is the surface area of the earth, but in economics also means all finite things.  Contrast with [[Capital]].

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_%28economics%29 : ''Land in economics comprises all naturally occurring resources whose supply is inherently fixed (i.e., does not respond to changes in price), such as geographical locations (excluding infrastructural improvements and "natural capital", which can be changed by human actions), mineral deposits, and even geostationary orbit locations and portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. In classical economics it is considered one of three factors of production (along with capital and labor). Income derived from ownership or control of natural resources is often referred to as rent.''

[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Commons]]