

=Contextual Quotes=

Good place-making can provide communities with an important cultural context; a sense of pride and belonging; and a sense of local and national identity. It can provide environments which function well; link well with surrounding settlements and provide attractive areas in which to socialise, to move around and to do business.

– Scottish Government, TFVCC website


 We want to see more of Scotland’s land in the hands of more of Scotland’s people.

– Community Land Scotland's website


=Description=

Schumacher Center:

"In Scotland, half of the country’s privately-owned land is held by just 432 owners.  Responding to this concentration of ownership, Scotland passed a series of Acts (2003, 2015, & 2016) that give “representative community bodies” the right of first refusal to buy land should it come up for sale. In the case of land abandoned, neglected, or causing harm, Scottish ministers can compel a landowner to sell if they decide that the sale will further sustainable development in the area.  

To assist community groups in exercising their options, a Scottish Land Fund of 15 million pounds was established from lottery proceeds.

Community Land Scotland (CLS) was organized to support community groups taking the step to purchase land under the land reform acts. Much like a Community Land Trust, a qualifying organization represents a defined geographic area with membership open to everyone in the region. CLS’s infographic outlines the steps needed to purchase community land. 

Involving the local community is a strong component of a successful bid for land under the acts. The Findhorn Village Conservation Company exercised its option to buy the residual Novar Estates land at the center of the village. The area contains a car park and garage site, meaning the village can now control conditions of their use, balancing residents' needs for much-needed income with those of the many tourists to the area."

(https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_1tyEu0e9T7W5iQo8VNNXCQ)

[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Scotland]]