'''=  Distributed landownership is needed to protect against large landowners lobbying to remove the [[Land Value Tax]]  and also to spread the knowledge of carbon building, biodiversity protecting, sustainable food growing methods amongst the widest groups of people. ''' 


=Discussion=

==How To Share Land==

From an article in shareable.net about emerging land share systems in the US and UK.

By Kelly McCartney:

"When looking through the lens of collaborative consumption or the mesh, it’s easy to see how many of our needs can be met through sharing with others to some lesser or greater degree. Surveying this communally inclined world, we find that our homes, cars, jobs, time, and more can easily be shared. Land is another asset that can and should be shared, one that is in high demand as rising food prices and the desire for healthy food blooms alongside the ‘Grow Your Own’ movement’s current momentum.

In 2009, [[Landshare]] [http://www.landshare.net/] was launched in the UK to do just that — share land. As stated on the website, “The concept is simple: to connect people who wish to grow food with landowners willing to donate spare land for cultivation.” A mere two years later, more than 60,000 people have signed up to share some 3,000 acres of land across every region of the country. At the outset, creator Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall proclaimed it a “food revolution destined to be the next great thing.” The project, and others like it, can be credited with helping solve multiple problems with that one simple concept. Food security, carbon emissions associated with factory farming and food transport, crop diversity, community building, and more find a resolution in Landshare… and land sharing.

With the U.S. boasting its own version of Landshare with a capital L in [[Shared Earth]] [http://sharedearth.com/], collaborative land users had some nice coverage. Then, back in March, the two organizations joined forces to become [[SharedEarth Globally]] and make it that much easier to match growers with land owners."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/how-to-share-land)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons]]