
'''* Conference and Publication: Law 4.0 -Challenges of the Digital Age. The Széchenyi István University Faculty of Law and Political Sciences, 29th March 2018'''

=Description=

Judit Glavanits, Király Péter Bálint et al.:

"On 29th March 2018 the Széchenyi István University Faculty of Law and Political Sciences held a successful conference entitled “Law 4.0 – Challenges of the Digital Age".
The concept of the event was to discuss the current status of regulation of different areas affected by the “Industry 4.0” phenomena. ... The introduction of artificial intelligence in the service sector distinguishes the fourth industrial revolution from the third.

What is the role of legal regulation in this “brave new world”? Is there a Law 4.0 already?"
(https://www.academia.edu/39670805/Law_4.0_-Challenges_of_the_Digital_Age?email_work_card=title)

=Conference Papers=

"The conference papers formulated around the following topics:

'''1. How law should treat artificial intelligence (AI)?'''

In 1969 John McCarthy and Patrick J. Hayes from Stanford University stated that “a computer program capable of acting intelligently in the world must have a general representation of the world in terms of which its inputs are interpreted. Designing such a program requires commitments about what knowledge is and how it is obtained.” How can we describe the world around us in legal terms to help the machines decide right from wrong? How do we teach AI fundamental rights (and should we even do that)?


'''2. Security and privacy issues arising from the digitalization'''

When it comes to data security, most people think of hacking or viruses. But lawyers have additional concerns. Are spreadsheets being traded? What should appear in billing while maintaining client confidentiality? How do you collaborate
without leaving yourself open to a data breach? What data are to be secured while online trading? How does Facebook get the intellectual property rights of the uploaded photos of users? How to protect the privacy of our clients/children? As in the European Union a new regulation on data protection (GDPR) has been adopted, these questions are current.


'''3. Digitalization of the State'''


In the EU the Digital Single Market Strategy announced by the Commission is built on three pillars: 

(1) Access: better access for consumers and businesses to digital goods and services across Europe; 

(2) Environment: creating the right conditions and a level playing field for digital networks and innovative services to flourish; 

(3) Economy & Society: maximizing the growth potential of the digital economy. Every single Member State has to make efforts towards a better digital market, which also contains digitalized state services, and better (digital) access to the central and local governments.

This publication contains some of the selected papers from the conference. The Editors hope that the event was just the beginning of further cooperation and a deepening work on this exciting field of science."
(https://www.academia.edu/39670805/Law_4.0_-Challenges_of_the_Digital_Age?email_work_card=title)

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Articles]]