Lawrence Liang, Indian activist working on applying open source ideas to the cultural sector; monitors copyright issues.

Full updated profile at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawrence_Liang

Picture at https://flickr.com/photos/joi/564334544/

== Bio ==

From Wikipedia:

"Lawrence Liang is an Indian Chinese legal researcher and lawyer based in the city of Bangalore, who is known for his legal campaigns on issues of public concern. He is a co founder of the [[Alternative Law Forum]], and by 2006 had emerged as a spokesperson against the politics of "intellectual property".

Liang's key areas of interest are law, popular culture and piracy. He has been working closely with Sarai, New Delhi on a joint research project Intellectual Property and the Knowledge/Culture Commons. Liang is a "keen follower of the open source movement in software", Lawrence Liang has been working on ways of translating the open source ideas into the cultural domain. Segments of an interview with Liang commenting extensively on copyright and culture are featured in Steal This Film (Two).

Liang is author of "Sex, laws and Videotape: The Public is watching" and "Guide to open content licenses," published by the Piet Zwart Institute in 2004. He is currently working on a book on Law, Justice and Cinema."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawrence_Liang)

Email: lawrence@altlawforum.org

== More Information ==

* Lawrence Liang is the author of the book [[Guide to Open Content Licenses]]. Available online at  https://monoskop.org/images/1/1e/Liang_Lawrence_Guide_to_Open_Content_Licenses_v1_2_2015.pdf
* Listen to [[Lawrence Liang Against Intellectual Property]]

* Watch short interview [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4uTty_undWY on YouTube]

[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:P2P_Law]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:India]]