
Book: Leadership from below. By Trond Arne Undheim.



=Author's introduction=

Leadership from below originates in Scandinavia with work-life
balance, peer leadership, coaching, mentoring, and interdisciplinary
teamwork. Project-based approaches like self-governed groups
were pioneered in Scandinavian companies like Volvo in the 1980s.
Linus Torvalds of Finland, who developed the Linux operating

system, has inspired a growing use of Open Source principles
across the globe. There are also European influences. The World
Wide Web was developed by Englishman Tim Berners-Lee at the
Swiss particle physics lab at CERN. Other influences originate in
Asia, like the principles of ba, Zen, feng shui, kanso, and ki, the
importance of which I will explain in the coming pages. Finally,
multicultural diversity and technological dependence are global
trends that demand constant attention.
The emerging lifestyle of the global knowledge worker can take
a toll on human relationships. This book offers practical,
intellectual, and spiritual guidance.
There are books that talk about how to deal with the impact of
Generation Y – those born between 1970 and 1990. This book, in
contrast, is written from that generation’s perspective, which is
entirely different. Whether you are a manager, a C-level executive,
or a public servant, this book will sting like a bee."



=Excerpts=

"Since Peter F. Drucker popularized the field of management in
the 1950s, no criticism to him intended, the field has become
mostly about leadership at the top or formal leadership -- not
about teamwork or accidental leadership. Hundreds of thousands
of books have been written on management (i.e., how to lead
workers successfully if you are put in charge). The problem is that
most people are not in charge. And even when they are in charge,
they are vastly outnumbered by those who are not. However,
nobody is ever in charge of everything (on this earth, anyway). You
do not control your competitors, your spouse, your kids, or your
neighbors. A decade ago, there was a large power distance1
between leader and disciple or when leaders divided tasks based on
self-evident skills. People spent their whole lives in one
organization, with defined hierarchies and set rules for how to
move up the ladder. Management was dictated by experience.
Respect was given, not earned.

Today’s workplace is different. People move around. They
often possess skills more advanced than their managers. Everyone
reading this book has been in that position: knowing more than the
boss (who usually knows more than his boss). Then the question
becomes, “How do you handle that?” Do you try to manage your
boss, as some management books preach these days? Being told to
take charge is often a curse. Being in charge is not.

Life has many unknowns, professional life, too. What can
successful individuals do to build a meaningful career today? How
\do you successfully work in a team? How do you build
connections? How can you keep up with technology?

I have found that presence is the key to success: be there for
other people; be present in your own life. Our sometimes rushed,
nomadic lives are filled with technologies that make absence
possible, even preferable. In contrast, why not master your
surroundings by actually being there?

Technology should enhance communication, not become what
we talk about. The time spent talking about new cell phone models
-- or fiddling with them -- is time away from both work and play.
We need to stop foreign objects from having an impact our daily
life.

When I realized my cell phone was taking charge of my life, I
quit. I lived without for two full years, from 2004 to 2006, and I
seldom missed it. Now, slowly, it is becoming a part of my life
again -- first as a “Batphone” within the family, and now for close
friends and occasionally for colleagues. But I am keeping close
guard. I have rules now: never pick up during meals, never after 8
pm. Only my boss and my wife overrule this approach.

Dependency is never far away. The telephone interrupts meals,
conversations, and sleep -- even in silent mode. While not
disruptive to others, when you can feel your cell phone vibrating in
your pocket, you feel compelled to answer. E-mail is easier to
momentarily ignore, since its textual narrative is both less imposing
and less immediate than the oral. Even email can become
addictive; in a work context, you cannot ignore it for long. Instant
messaging, of course, comes back and hits you in the head – text
you cannot ignore. While instant communications offer
multifarious opportunities for increased efficiency and efficacy,
they can become a burden. Regardless of media, it would be best
to set limits for its use and follow through. Intel co-founder Andy
Grove said, “Only the paranoid survive.” However, the opposite
may be true, since only the balanced leaders survive (and have
families, work-life balance, hobbies, and friends).

In fact, technologies have politics -- the politics of its designers.

The product designer’s choices -- flat screens, fancy colors, small
buttons -- are what you and I end up taking for granted. Instead,
we should remain in control.

Not that we advocate absolute Luddism – anti-technology
manifestos are counterproductive. Leaders must know technology
– at least enough to take a strategic perspective. The right question
to ask is: What do we need? Then, find the right solution, which
may or may not include technology."



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Books]]