= a proposal by Michel Bauwens and the P2P Foundation



=Description=

Dirk Holemans & Kati Van de Velde:

"The real societal change will only occur if cities work together, not just in loose networks, but really forming a League
of Commons Cities with a shared goal. This can include the
co-development of global open source infrastructures that are
needed to solve systemic issues that affect all cities. As an
example, consider Munibnb or Fairbnb, coalitions developing alternative solutions to Airbnb. FairBnB is at this moment
firstly a community of activists, coders, researchers and designers that wants to offer a community-centred alternative
to commercial platforms, prioritises people over profit and
facilitates authentic and sustainable travel experiences, while
minimising the cost to communities. This is done on the basis
of the principles of collective ownership, democratic governance, social sustainability, transparency and accountability.
Another relevant development is the movement of cities that
want to evolve from fablabs to fabcities. This initiative, Fab
City, aims at a new urban model for self-sufficient cities. The
project, initiated by institutes in Spain and the US, involves
cities such as Barcelona (Spain), Kerala (India) and Shenzhen
(China). Fab City aims to empower citizens with micro factories in every neighbourhood to allow for a drastic reduction
of energy consumption and of transportation of materials
and goods. The goal is to develop locally productive and
globally connected self-sufficient cities by 2054. Hence, cities
produce everything they consume; with a global repository
of open source designs for city solutions."

(https://gef.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/GEF_Article_Urban-Commons_Dirk.pdf)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]