
Essay by Ikka Tuomi.

URL = http://www.meaningprocessing.com/personalPages/tuomi/articles/LearningInTheAgeOfNetworkedIntelligence.pdf


=Abstract=

" Abstract: The article presents ten theoretically substantiated “theses” on future education and learning, highlighting emerging trends that will shape educational systems. The focus is on the impact of innovation economy and knowledge society on learning. Specifically, the article elaborates the changing dynamics of production models since the first industrial revolution, arguing that in the last few years we have been in the midst of a globalization process that is qualitatively different from the earlier ones. This new model has consequences, for example, for skill demands and their regional distribution. More fundamentally, this “third globalisation” makes innovation the key source of economic value, pushing educational systems from adaptive towards creative learning models.

In implementing such creative pedagogies, traditional models of innovation become inadequate. The paper therefore describes recent developments in innovation research, and outlines a new theoretical view on innovation, which connects innovation with social change and learning. This “downstream” innovation model highlights the active and creative role of user communities in making innovations real. As the economic and social importance of “downstream” innovation is becoming increasingly visible, educational institutions and learning activity will change. Policymakers will have to answer the question: Why do we need education in the future?

=Source+

Working draft, the final version appeared in European Journal of Education, 42(2) pp.235-254, June 2007


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Articles]]