
'''* Article: The left and reciprocity. By Stuart White. From: Labour's Future. Soundings Journal & Open Left. Lawrence Wishart, 2010'''

URL = http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/ebooks/Labour%27s%20Future%20(Final).pdf


= Shifting from ‘what they owe us’ to ‘what we owe each other’.


=Excerpt=

Stuart White:

"One of the emerging themes of Labour’s post-election discussion is
the need to ground social policy in the value of reciprocity. Labour
politicians have voiced worries that, in government, the party
adopted an approach to welfare that was too focused on meeting
needs without regard to the duty of citizens to make a productive
contribution back to society. Labour, the argument goes, must
reconnect with common sense values of fairness – centrally, the
norm of reciprocity – if it is to win back support and return to office.
There is a truth in this argument. But it oversimplifies Labour’s
record and underestimates the challenge Labour, and the wider left,
faces. This is not merely to reflect back public attitudes about
reciprocity, but to radicalise these attitudes in the process. The
limited notion of ‘rights and responsibilities’ in the welfare system
must give way to a much wider ideal of what we may term fair
reciprocity in the economy as a whole."


==Reciprocity as a value==


"Reciprocity is indeed a popular value, and one which informs
people’s perceptions of fairness in the welfare state. 


In The Solidarity
Society, Tim Horton and James Gregory looked at how public
attitudes to benefit spending relate to expectations about whether
benefit recipients will work in the future. They found that those who
opposed higher payments to the poor also tended to have a weaker
expectation of their future contribution to society, suggesting that a
perceived lack of reciprocity may be driving opposition to higher
benefits for the out of work.1 They also cite an important study by
Tom Sefton using the British Social Attitudes survey.2 Sefton
identified three groups: 29 per cent of the population are
‘Samaritans’ who support welfare spending altruistically; 26 per
cent are ‘Robinson Crusoes’ who oppose it quite strongly; but 45
per cent are ‘Club Members’, who are willing to support welfare
spending on condition that those who benefit do what they can to
contribute in return. Horton and Gregory found in their survey that
proposals to raise the national minimum wage and to give more
financial support to carers both commanded strong public support
(81 per cent and 85 per cent respectively). They suggest this is
because, in these cases, the higher payments are seen as a legitimate
reward for a valuable social contribution (pp126-7).


Moreover, reciprocity isn’t only a popular value in a statistical
sense. It is also a core value in social-democratic philosophy.
Through the first half of the twentieth century, social-democratic
thinkers in Britain advanced a reciprocity-based theory of economic
justice: citizens are entitled to the income necessary to carry out
efficient productive functions but, in general, entitled to income
only if they are willing to perform such a function. This functionalist
perspective can be traced through the work of New Liberals like
Leonard Hobhouse to later ethical socialists such as R.H. Tawney .3
Recall that Tawney contrasted the ‘acquisitive society’ with the
‘functional society’. The problem of the ‘acquisitive society’, for
Tawney, is not only its inequality but the presence of ‘functionless
property’: property which enables its holder to enjoy an income
independent of performing any productive function. Within this
framework, social democrats argued on the one hand for taxes to
remove ‘functionless’ income payments, e.g. taxes on very high
labour incomes, on inherited wealth, and on unearned increments
to land value. On the other, they argued for a range of welfare state
programmes to ensure citizens appropriate opportunity and
capability to perform a productive function. And they supported a
range of measures – strong trade unionism, wage councils, income
transfers – to ensure that all those making a productive contribution
got a ‘civic minimum’. Feminists such as Eleanor Rathbone adapted
this framework, arguing for ‘family endowment’ policies, in part as a
way of acknowledging the otherwise unpaid productive
contribution of wives and mothers.4 And, as indicated in the quote
at the head of this contribution, one can see a clear echo of this
perspective in the work of more recent political philosophers such
as John Rawls.

So if reciprocity is a popular value and a core social-democratic
value, we appear to have a promising basis for grounding socialdemocratic
policy in common sense notions of fairness."
(http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/ebooks/Labour%27s%20Future%20(Final).pdf)


==Towards fair reciprocity==

However, all is not necessarily as straightforward as this might
suggest.


First, we should bear in mind that New Labour was generally
rather keen on linking welfare to contribution. New Labour did not
speak directly of ‘reciprocity’, but it had for many years a strong
rhetoric of ‘rights and responsibilities’ which conveyed a similar
idea.6 And this wasn’t pure rhetoric. The early flagship policy, the
New Deal for Young People, had a strong element of conditionality.
A lot of Labour’s redistributive effort was channelled through
employment-related tax credits, preserving the link between
assistance and work. New Labour certainly did not generously
increase welfare benefits for all types of welfare recipient. If you
were of working age, childless and out of work, you saw very little
increase in your benefits under New Labour. This may be one
reason why the poverty rate actually went up amongst this group
under New Labour, while it fell for the elderly and for children.

Yet, despite the efforts of New Labour to link welfare spending
to a norm of reciprocity, public attitudes towards welfare became
more conservative during New Labour’s period in office. Analysis of
the British Social Attitudes Survey shows downward trends in
public support for redistribution to the ‘less well off ’ and for
spending more on welfare benefits ‘for the poor’ from 1985 to 2007,
with no apparent slowing in the rate of decline from 1997 (Solidarity
Society, pp39-41). The lesson would seem to be that even if
government builds respect for reciprocity into the design of welfare,
this does not necessarily change a popular perception that there is a
widespread failure of reciprocity in the system. Some suggest that
New Labour’s rhetoric may have helped to reinforce this
perception, thereby contributing to the conservative trend in public
opinion we have seen.

Part of the problem with New Labour’s rhetoric was that it
tended in political practice to frame the issue of ‘rights and
responsibilities’ as being mainly, if not wholly, about the behaviour
of welfare recipients (despite warnings at the theoretical level
against this). The issue of responsibility in welfare became a discrete
issue, bracketed off from wider questions about the fairness of the
economic system. ‘Responsibility’ was about ‘them’ – the welfare
poor – and not about ‘us’, as citizens. The challenge is precisely to
shift from discussion of ‘what they owe us’ to one about ‘what we
owe each other’."
(http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/ebooks/Labour%27s%20Future%20(Final).pdf)


More excerpts under: [[Fair Reciprocity]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]