

=Description=

"Neoliberalism rests on an atomistic picture of the individual as an isolated, competitive profit maximiser. But human beings are social creatures: we need to recognise our interdependency and make a virtue of it. We need a social vision that emphasises solidarity and mutuality. This is the "good society". Concretely, this points to a renewed emphasis on economic equality and collective action, albeit with a stronger role for civil society than in the past. The market must be kept firmly in its place, which is not in the public sector.

Supporters: The Labour MP Jon Cruddas; Jonathan Rutherford, academic and chair of the Compass Good Society working group; Neal Lawson, chair of Compass; and Madeleine Bunting, Guardian columnist and former Demos director.

Guiding spirits: The communitarian philosopher Charles Taylor; figures of the "culturalist" new left such as Raymond Williams; and ethical socialists such as R H Tawney. The emphasis on cultural renewal also suggests a link to Antonio Gramsci.

Texts: Cruddas and Rutherford's NS review of Richard Reeves and Philip Collins's The Liberal Republic; "No turning back", by Neal Lawson (NS, 5 March 2009); Bunting has written sympathetically about another communitarian philosopher, Michael Sandel, who, in his 2009 Reith Lectures, called for religious ideas to be given greater prominence to counter the amoralism of the market."
(http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2009/09/society-guiding-progressive)



=More Information=

3 more progressive sensibilities identified in the UK [http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2009/09/society-guiding-progressive]:

#[[Left Republicanism]] ; [[Centre Republicanism]] ; [[Right Communitarianism]]


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]