

=Description=


Davide Dibitonto:

"Left Accelerationism (L/ACC) ... is the idea of using the technological power immanent in the current capitalist forces to overcome capitalism itself, building a new model of a fully automated society where abundance (a new meaning of common, free and anti-capitalist abundance) will be the material basis for a non-hierarchical, post-statalist global common-based way of life."

(via email, March 2022)


=More information=

==Bibliography==


Capitalist Realism, by Mark Fisher (2007). It is the starting point for left-wing accelerationist literature. It examines the shackles of the imaginary of our time, explaining how this lack of imagination is the reason why capitalism continues to reproduce itself without any change. [The book is attached]

Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics, by Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek (2013). It is a cornerstone of accelerationist literature. It represents a radical critique of the strategies of the contemporary left and a proposition for a new politics capable of navigating with complexity, universalism and technology.

Inventing the Future. Postcapitalism and a world without work, by Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek (2015). It is the book version of the Accelerationist Manifesto. It is a strategic proposition for a new post-capitalist left, based on the idea of using the potential of technology to free humanity from work. [The book is attached]

ACCELERATE. The accelerationist Reader, by Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian (2014). It is the first attempt to understand accelerationist thought throughout history. [The book is attached]

Postcapitalism, by Paul Mason (2015). We think you know this book. It is a milestone for our L/ACC literature because it is the first step in accelerationism to move towards the idea of a society based on the commons.

Fully Automated Luxury Communism, by Aaron Bastani (2019). It's about the heretic imaginary of a Communism based on a new concept of Luxury and Full Automation.

Xenofeminism. A politics for Alienation, by the collective Laboria Cuboniks (2016). It is a manifesto that sets the stage for xenofeminism, that is, the idea of appropriating the political potential of technology to destroy gender and patriarchy.

Xenofeminism, by Helen Hester (2018). It is a book on xenofeminism written by Helen Hester, one of the members of Laboria Cuboniks and an important figure in the construction of accelerationist political theory. 

The Gender Accelerationist Manifesto, by Vikky Storm and Eme Flores (2018). It is a controversial manifesto that radicalizes the conflict of the gender abolitionist movement to a point of Terror.

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Technology]]