= Left-Liberalism embraces as its motto the republican trinity of  ”Liberty, Equality and Fraternity“.  It is only through these principles that justice and the common good – and thus the flourishing life – can be attained.  [http://newleftliberal.wordpress.com/2010/12/18/liberty-equality-fraternity/]


=Discussion=

"How would Aristotelian ideas help shape a new Left-Liberal understanding of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity – one which is sufficiently convincing, compelling, and coherent, to enable us to fight back against the hegemony of amoral crony capitalism?  What follows is an attempt to answer that question.  It is only an initial sketch.  I hope to develop a more detailed and considered answer in future posts.

(a) We should develop a theory of liberty which is based on the common good and on democratic participation in civic and social life, rather than on reductionist individualist materialism. This demands personal liberty, in the form of the constitutional rights and guarantees against oppression.  It also demands freedom from want, ignorance, squalor, idleness and disease, as Left-Liberals have long realised.  More than that, it demands genuine democracy, so that we can be citizens and not merely consumers, and can develop our talents through self-government, office-holding and deliberation.

(b) We should develop a notion of equality which is rooted in the dignity, and the all-too-flawed-reality, of man; which demands that we be able to look one another in the eye as equal citizens, that none are slaves and none are masters. This requires civil and political equality, but it also demands a limit on material inequalities, so that no-one is reduced to dependency on others or to a condition which is undignified, and so that no-one is so wealthy that they can lord it over others. (It does NOT require massive state ownership of industry or the abolition of private property, and here it diverges from Social Democracy as usually portrayed; neither is it satisfied with mere “equality of opportunity”, which does nothing to protect or promote the dignity of those whose talents lie outside of the commercial sphere).

(c) We must recognise the importance of fraternity - the third principle which is too easily forgotten by mechanistic and individualistic theories.  Fraternity acknowledges that we are social and associative creatures, that individual liberty is meaningless if we are locked into the crowded solitary confinement of an atomised, depersonalised existence. In order to be fully human and to be happy we need family, community, village, friends, colleagues, comrades, associates, partners, public spaces, and a good pub.

A new Left-Liberalism which embodies those three principles, understood through an Aristotelian lens and informed by the insights of both the Democratic Republican and Christian traditions, would offer a genuinely radical and humane way forward for the centre-left."
(http://newleftliberal.wordpress.com/2010/12/18/liberty-equality-fraternity/)


=More Information=

==General Readings== 

... on and around Left-Liberalism

Brack, Grayson & Howarth (Eds.) (2009), Reinventing the State: Social Liberalism in the 21st Century.

Hobhouse, L. T. (1911), Liberalism.

Schumacher, E. F.  (1973), Small is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered.


==The Civic Republican Tradition==

Honohan, I. (2002), Civic Republicanism.

Pettit, P. (1997), Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government.

Viroli, M. (2002), Republicanism.

White & Leighton (Eds.) (2008), Building a Citizen Society: The Emerging Politics of Republican Democracy.

Leveller / Radical Tradition

Paine, T. (1791), The Rights of Man.

Woodhouse, A. S. P. (Ed.) (1951), Puritanism and Liberty: Being the Army Debates 1647-9 from the Clark Manuscripts with Supplementary Documents.


==Christian Democracy / The Christian Left==

Wallis, J. (2008), Seven Ways to Change the World: Reviving Faith and Politics.


==Constitutions and Democracy==

Jefferson, T. (1776), Draft Constitution for Virginia.

Lijphart, A. (1999), Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance in Thirty-Six Countries.

Mill, J. S. (1861), Considerations on Representative Government.



[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]