

=Description=

Erik Kaufmann:

"In their landmark work, The Social Construction of Reality, Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann argued that
the dominant ideology in society shapes the way people think about the social world, defining roles, norms, and
expectations. Ideology is central to the social constructionist argument, defining right and wrong, and what constitutes a violation of moral “reality”; that is, the norms and social facts everyone “knows” to be true (even if they
are not based on objective truth).

The dominant ideology in today’s cultural institutions is what I have elsewhere termed left-modernism,
a hybrid worldview that applies socialist theories of conflict to identity categories first developed by liberalism.3
From liberalism comes the idea that majorities are often tyrannical while racial, religious, gender, or sexual
minorities require protection. From socialism comes the notion that society is best understood as a struggle
between oppressive and oppressed groups. Freudianism, with its focus on the subjective, has also shaped leftmodernism through its focus on psychological sensitivity, which has fused with left-modernism’s outlook to
produce demands not only for material but for therapeutic equality and safety.

Religions typically concentrate on a handful of totemic issues. For example, conservative Christian politics has,
over time, focused on causes such as restricting the sale of alcohol, the teaching of evolution, or the provision of
abortion. Left-modernism is instead centered around a trinity of totemic categories: race, gender, and sexuality.
Race stands at the apex of the system, producing what John McWhorter concludes is a religion of antiracism.4 For
Jonathan Haidt, the sacralization of race, sexuality, and gender lies at the heart of the progressive worldview.5
This means that it becomes difficult to objectively assess the scientific validity of claims made about disadvantaged
identity groups, lest one transgress the sacred values of the ideology and even be perceived as having committed
an act of blasphemy.

Moreover, racism itself is not a fixed term. While expanding the range of phenomena covered by a term like
racism can make sense in some circumstances, we are arguably well past that point.

Given the prevalence of left-modernism in the elite institutions of society—universities, much of the media,
large corporations, and foundations—there has been considerable cultural distortion in the definition of racism.
Psychologist Nick Haslam calls the expanding meaning of clinical terms “concept creep,” which applies also to
concepts such as bullying, abuse, trauma, and mental disorder. Left-modernism’s therapeutic ethos, combined
with the centrality of race in its pantheon of sacred values, helps explain this “conceptual stretching” of racism.6
For the writer Coleman Hughes, expanding the meaning of racism is part of an ideological project that seeks to
heighten minority threat perceptions to underpin claims of harm that can justify silencing.7 The endpoint of this
logic is to criminalize such dissent as “hate.”

(https://media4.manhattan-institute.org/sites/default/files/social-construction-racism-united-states-EK.pdf?)

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]