
=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"The version of left-libertarianism defended by contemporary theorists like Vallentyne, Steiner, Otsuka, van Parijs, and Ellerman features a strong commitment to personal liberty—embracing the libertarian premise that each person possesses a natural right of self-ownership—and an egalitarian view of natural resources, holding that it is illegitimate for anyone to claim private ownership of resources to the detriment of others.[12]  On this view, unappropriated natural resources are either unowned or owned in common, believing that private appropriation is only legitimate if everyone can appropriate an equal amount, or if private appropriation is taxed to compensate those who are excluded from natural resources. This position is articulated in self-conscious contrast to the position of other libertarians who argue for a (characteristically labor-based) right to appropriate unequal parts of the external world, such as land.[13]  Most left libertarians support some form of income redistribution on the grounds of a claim by each individual to be entitled to an equal share of natural resources.  A number of left-libertarians of this school argue for the desirability of some state social welfare programs."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-libertarianism0


=Discussion=

Detailed treatment in our entry: [[Market-Oriented Left Libertarians]]


==The Left Libertarian Manifesto==

From the review Gonzo Times, http://www.gonzotimes.com/print/Gonzo%20Times%20V1I1Web.pdf

Proposed by Scott Forster:

"What is Left-libertarianism?

It is libertarianism sythesized with leftism. It is the
awareness that the two are not contradictory or opposites
on a spectrum but properly understood are the same. It
should be clear from the beginning left-libertarians reject
the statism of traditional leftists.Many do not consider
such individuals to be leftist.Merely left-libertarianism
is the understanding that libertarianism leads to leftist
conclusions – that libertarianism is a philosophy from
which to view the causes and solutions to traditional
leftist concerns such as bargaining power,bosses or
corporations. To use Gary Chartier’s phrase it is “socialist
ends by (free) market means”.


Central Tenets Of Left Libertarianism

* ‘Subsidy of History’

Further awareness of how history has had no golden
ages and elites have benefit]ted from statism in past
while average person has suffered due to state e.g. in the Industrial Revolution.


* The political class.

The State has throughout history to present day acted
to artificially privilege the rich, corporations, landlords
and employers (The political class) at the expense of
everyone else particularly the poor, employees, women,
black people, foreigners, tenants, small businesses, the
self employed, unions and the like (the exploited class).
Following from this left-libertarians are on the side of the
downtrodden and the marginalized.


* Two Kinds of Government intervention.

As Kevin Carson says there’s two kinds of government
intervention. Primary which are privileges such as subsidies
to the rich etc. Secondary which the government puts
in place to hide the injustice of primary intervention and
make the system seem humane e.g. minimum wage, welfare
etc yet which remain harmful as ever.


* Concern for the downtrodden

Furthermore concern for the downtrodden follows
from left-libertarian opposition to aggression against
innocents. Those aggressed against- the oppressed- are
just one group of the downtrodden.


* Current Distribution of wealth and land

Following from the previous post the recognition that
current distribution of wealth and land is largely due to
state intervention whether that be barriers to entry or
statist privilege and that just because someone is wealthy
need not mean they achieved it themselves and just
because someone is poor does not mean that they make
bad lifestyle choices.Following from this understanding
we must reject classist prejudices.


* Belief in Anarchist Pluralism

This is a belief that various legal and political
arrangements would exist in anarchy ranging from back
to nature communes,co-ops, collectives to voluntary
socialist federations and so one.No one arrangement
would and should dominate. Anarchist arrangements will
compete and finally truly be put to the test.


* Opposition to Thin libertarianism and belief in Thick libertarianism

Left libertarians are not arguing that there should be a
set moral creed for libertarians but also that morality is
not irrelevant.It is worth discussion in anytime there is
a discussion of rights.We should always keep in mind
that while there may be a right to do X that does not
imply that it is morally right to do X.Even prominent
‘thin libertarian’ Walter Block is really thick.He speaks
of religion as potentially being a bulwark against the
state and that it is important for libertarians to support
it when it does so.This is thick libertarianism.There are
many kinds of thickness varying in degrees and one can
belief in one kind while rejecting another.One kind is
the basic left libertarian position that while opposition
to aggression against innocents is vital and necessary ,it
is not sufficient.Left-libertarians broaden the scope to
include cultural matters such as structures of domination
and dehumanization.


* Belief in ‘Thickness from grounds’

A kind of thickness. This is values which lead you to
libertarianism or are implied as part of it, that lead to a
concern for wider issues.An example of the links here
would be:- concern about aggression leads to general
concern for others .Concern for others leads to concern
about dehumanization.Concern for dehumanization and
about aggression leads to concern for the marginalized
and downtrodden of which the aggressed against are one
group.


* Belief in Thickness from consequences

As Charles Johnson explains it “there may be social practices or
outcomes that libertarians should (in some sense) be
committed to opposing, even though they are not
themselves coercive, because (1) background acts of
government coercion are a causal precondition for them
to be carried out or sustained over time; and (2) there
are independent reasons for regarding them as social
evils.”Examples of this are sweatshops,’contract feudalism
or authoritarianism arising from land ownership.


* Rejection of conservative baggage of traditional libertarianism

Historically classical liberalism defined itself largely in
opposition to state socialism.Libertarianism with it’s
opposition to state socialism during the progressive
era and the cold war has done likewise.This is due
to unfortunate alliances with the old right and
conservatives.Libertarianism has unthinkingly and knee
jerkedly embraced evils in the name of opposing state
socialism as a package.Libertarians have engaged in the
fallacy of package dealing here and in doing so have
accepted evils which socialists of all stripes-statist and
anarchist- rightly oppose.Left-libertarians seek to help
the philosophy of libertarianism shed this baggage.This
baggage can be seen in opposition to leftist language
and concepts or the belief that voluntary socialism is
impossible- an argument that likewise can be turned back
on the arguer.Also this tendency is exhibited in anarchocapitalist
selective re-reading of history to downplay or
exclude elements of classical liberalism/libertarianism
which came close or even were left-libertarian.


* Opposition to Vulgar Libertarianism

Kevin Carson Defines Vulgar Libertarianism as the
tendency to falsely believe that X condition holds because
the actually corporatist we live in is a free market.An
example would be to say workers who have horrible
working conditions should just quit.This ignores the
extent to which workers bargaining power is reduced by
statism.


* Anti-corporate

There are many left-libertarian criticisms of corporations.
But the most basic is that corporations are defined by
(1) state granted limited liability and (2) corporate
personhood. (1) It is an error to think left-libertarians
oppose limited liability per se.More correctly,we oppose
state grants of limited liability which amounts to the
state legally privileging a company owner ,manager
or higher staff (especially corporations) to be exempt
from prosecution.This is not a free market contract
because the state is enforcing this against non agreeing
third parties.It is essentially a kind of social contract.
Now it is true this can sometimes be ignore by the state
when pressing for prosecution but this is rare.(2) Leftlibertarians
oppose corporate personhood which is the
treating of a corporation- an organization as if it is an
individual with rights as an individual.It’s true individuals
in a corporation have rights but the organization
itself does not.This is an epistemological error and
one which should he gross to libertarians who favour
individualism.These two criticisms lead left-libertarians
to the conclusion that corporations are products of
statism and could not exist on the free market or at
very least would be very improbable.Important to note
is that corporations are defined by thesr two privileges,
a company missing the latter one is just a artificially
privileged company not a corporation but left-libertarians
oppose these all the same.


* Separation of management and ownership

At very least, left-libertarians think this can be
problematic and at most think it is immoral or a
violation of rights.


* Unions are not inherently coercive

Unions have been co-opted at times by the state.Leftlibertarians
oppose this.We believe in unions that work
for left-libertarian goals and seek to level the playing field
between employer and employee.
Belief in Strategic Thickness that is values that would
help lead to and maintain a free society.


* Reduced/limited Bargaining power. 

The state limits job opportunities by instituting
barriers to entry such as licenses and monopolies.Thus
workers either cannot be self employed or independent
contractors or the numbers of individuals taking up such
kinds of employment are vastly reduced.This means that
workers do not have much ability to turn down job offers
,look for better working conditions such as hours,oppose
boss petty authoritarianism or argue for benefits such
as child care.Workers are stuck with what there is,so the
employer holds all the power in their relations.The State
is the enemy of the worker.


* Solutions to reduced bargaining power

Possible solutions include Workplace democracy,Worker
Self management, collective bargaining,labour
organizing,work to rule, go slows etc.
Ambiguity in labour contracts allows employers to take
advantage of employees reduced bargaining power and
require things not specified in the contract.


* Contract Feudalism

Reduced bargaining power means that employees can
do little when employers extend their authority into the
private lifes of workers such as preventing criticism of the
company on social networking sites.Kevin Carson calls
this ‘Contract Feudalism’.Employer authority is extensive
and all embracing.


* SweatShops

Due to reduced bargaining power which results in
workers reduced ability to seek better worker conditions
sweatshop workers have limited options.They are not
choosing the second best option nor even the best option
but the best option ALLOWED by statism.


* Poverty

While libertarianism has always emphasised how statism
causes and maintains poverty, left-libertarianism are
strongly in favour of making sure it is not forgotten in
case status quo apologetics or classism enter in.The state’s
cause and maintenance of povety is extensive resulting
twofold:- statist privileges and statist intervention which
holds down the poor.The group most harmed by statism
at any time is the poor.The State is thus the enemy of the
poor.


* Pro-migrant

Culturally, left-libertarians are pro-migrant which follows
from concern for the downtrodden( and opposition to
xenophobia) since often migrants come into a country
due to state created poverty or war.Left-libertarians view
the most flourishing society as one in which their is a
variety of groups and cultures.Left-libertarianism is on
the side of the migrant.


* Opposition to I-it relationships

... which result in dehumanization
-that is treating of individuals as objects, as lacking in free
will and determined by their group- Examples of these
include sexism,racism,classism,xenophobia, transphobia
and homophobia.


* Statism on the side of the bigot

Since we don’t have free markets , to some degree
employers are protected from suffering from loss of
profit due to discrimination because of state reduction of
competition and corporatism.Walter Block is wrong.
Authoritarianism due to land ownership
At minimal concern about how land ownership might
be used to mistreat or control others.At most ,outright
opposition to land ownership for this very reason


* Equality

The Belief that large wealth disparity is due to the mix of
statist privilege and barriers to entry and that minus these
in a free market, wealth and land would be more widely
distributed and wealth would be less inequal.The Free
market is a form of wealth redistribution.It is inherently
corrosive to wealth concentration and inherently leftist.


* Artificially large firms

Firms have two forces involving their size:- economies
of scale and diseconomies of scale. The vulgar libertarian
analysis assumes current size of firms is due to serving
the needs of the masses.This is claimed because it is said
that certain factors reduce production by unit and allow
for increase of firm size.These are economies of scale.
Diseconomies of scale are factors which limit the size of
firms such as costs,transport etc.The vulgar analysis is
mistaken because it assumes a free market which is what
this clear law applies to.The situation as left libertarians
point out is more complex in the current corporatist
atmosphere.An analogy will help illustrate. Imagine a set
of scales.On the right side is economies of scale and on
the left, diseconomies. The way it would work in a free
market ,is the right will become weighted by economies
and the left weighted by diseconomies( both factors are
always in play ) until the left diseconomies outweights
the right economies.But in Corporatism, statist privilege
artificially reduces if not in some cases eliminates
diseconomies on the left side of the scale and adds extra
economies of scale onto the right side.The result of this
is artificially larger firms.Absent these factors in a free
market,firms would have clear diseconomies and thus
would be smaller to some extent than currently.


* Fewer firms

Statist privileges allow firms to grow to artificially large
sizes while barriers to entry reduce smaller businesses
entering the market to compete or prevent their entry in
the firstplace(the unseen of barriers to entry) The result of
this is fewer bigger firms- the traditional leftist complaint.

Thus it follows the solution to this problem is not statism
since it is the cause.


* Prices

Since on a free market, competition tends to result in
lowered prices and better quality goods and services
with statism hampering if not at times eliminating
competition completely then these two tendencies do not
hold currently and we have artificially higher prices and
artificially lower quality goods and services than we could
have.You might say this doesn’t seem to be true.Things
seem to be get better all the time.While it seems this way
,things could be much better in a free market.


* Rent

By artificially creating scarcity via barriers to entry for
example rent control or zoning and statist privilege,
statism results in reduced supply of land while demand
remains the same.The result of this is artificially
increased prices in buying or renting land and artificially
high rents.


* Artificially increased overheads

The state artificially raises overheads.Overheads are the
costs of running a business.The costs are raised by such
things as the cost of filling tax reports, complying with
regulations etc. clearly now to deal with those requires
large bureaucracy in businesses.Smaller businesses and
individuals have a harder time to keep up with these costs
so artificial overheads reduce their amount or actually
exclude them from the market -especially in the case of
the poorest."
(http://www.gonzotimes.com/print/Gonzo%20Times%20V1I1Web.pdf)

=Movements=

==[[Georgism]]==

"Georgists  tend to believe that all humanity rightfully owns all land in common and that individuals should pay rent to the rest of society for taking sole or exclusive use of that land. People in this movement are often referred to as "single taxers," since they believe that the only legitimate tax is land rent. However, they do typically believe that private property can be created by applying labor to natural resources."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-libertarianism)

==[[Mutualism]]==

"Most Left-Libertarians advocate Mutualism as an alternative to capitalism, including Anarcho-Syndicalists though Syndicalists often advocate for the eventual transition into a moneyless society based purely on mutual aid. Most left-libertarians reject capitalism in its current form if not entirely even in its non-statist forms.

Mutualism emerged from early nineteenth-century socialism, and is generally considered a market-oriented strand within the libertarian socialist tradition. Mutualists typically accept property rights, but with brief abandonment time periods. In a community in which mutuality property rules were upheld, a land-owner would need to make (more or less) continuous use of her land; if she failed to do so, her ownership rights would be extinguished and the land could be homesteaded by someone else. A mutualist property regime is often described as one rooted in “possession,” “occupancy-and-use,” or “usufruct.

...

Drawing on the work of Rothbard during his alliance with the left and on the thought of Karl Hess, some thinkers associated with market-oriented American libertarianism came increasingly to identify with the Left on a range of issues, including opposition to war, to social and cultural hierarchies, and to corporate hierarchies and corporate-state partnerships. One variety of this kind of libertarianism has been a resurgent mutualism, incorporating modern economic ideas such as marginal utility theory into mutualist theory. Kevin A. Carson's Studies in Mutualist Political Economy helped to stimulate the growth of new-style mutualism, articulating a version of the labor theory of value incorporating ideas drawn from Austrian economics”
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-libertarianism)


[[Category:Movements]]