
* Report:  LEGAL PRACTICES OF [[DiDIY]] HARDWARE TECHNOLOGIES.

URL = http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf

=Description=

From the Executive Summary:

"We select a series of cases that we consider as good or inspiring practices that can be useful or
inspiring for other projects to learn from. We place the legal aspects in a broader perspective of
DiDIY communities seeking for a sustainable organising model, or an “open business model”. Our
framework has seven main pillars, including licensing, revenue models, production models,
governance, community co-creation, external regulatory framework and impact. We look at some
cases that provide a platform for the sharing of knowledge and designs, projects that produce
machines and projects that produce open (source hardware) designs. Last but not least we also
present some cases which run a community network and others that make use of them,
collaboratively producing and using open data as a data commons. All cases are examples of DiDIY
that maximise the potential for replication, reuse and modification."


From the introduction:

"[[DiDIY]] is a socio-technical phenomenon: for it to thrive we need to take into account a
multidisciplinary approach. When analysing legal practices of technological projects, we should not
only look at the licensing and other legal aspects, but place it in a larger context. We suggest to take
an integral view, considering that this phenomenon is part of a larger socio-economic change, or
transition. What is particularly relevant is to see inspiring practices of projects and communities
that apparently are pioneering this recent phenomenon and successfully so to some extent. We’ll
want to know how come they can share knowledge under open or even free licenses while still
being able to sustain the costs related to the project. Such projects run the risk of being replicated
(forked). How come the community is not walking away to some other (forked) project? How does
the community influence strategic decisions, or in other words: what governance model do they
follow? These and other questions we try to answer for each case, in a structured set of case studies."


=Contents=

1. Introduction......................................................................................................................................5
2. A framework for analysing Open, Commons-oriented Business Models........................................6

3. Case Studies....................................................................................................................................10

* 3.1 Case: Arduino..................................................................................................................................11
* 3.2 Case: Raspberry Pi.............................................................................................................................14
* 3.3 Case: C.H.I.P..................................................................................................................................16
* 3.4 Case: RepRap...................................................................................................................................18
* 3.5 Case: RepRap Barcelona / BCN 3D Technologies.................................................................................21
* 3.6 Case: RepRap – Lulzbot........................................................................................................................23
* 3.7 Case: GoodEnoughCNC........................................................................................................................26
* 3.8 Case: SketchChair..................................................................................................................................29
* 3.9 Case: OpenDesk....................................................................................................................................31
* 3.10 Case: Wikihouse..................................................................................................................................33
* 3.11 Case: Guifi.net...............................................................................................................................34
* 3.12 Case: The Things Network..................................................................................................................37
* 3.13 Case: Flood Network...........................................................................................................................39
* 3.14 Case: OpenTrons..................................................................................................................................41

4. Conclusions and recommendations.



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]