
= find legal constitutions, particularly for organisations in the social sector and creative industries.

=Description=

"We are looking to collect legal documents of any form from anywhere in the world and securely archive them. Our initial focus will be legal constitutions, particularly for organisations in the social sector and creative industries. This will be an open uncurated project, if you have a legal document we will make it easy and secure for you to upload this document, so that you will never loose it again. From there users will be able to embed these documents in their own web sites, or link to them from email, or the wide range of social media.

Concentrating initially on constitutions, this archive will form the basis for a social media project in which users can discuss and analyse the legal clauses in their organisational DNA. We will create a simple online work-flow in, in which individual clauses can be easily selected, customised to the users needs, and combined to create draft online documents.

This web site will form the raw material for more ambitious projects that aim to create software tools that allow the end user to directly create their own legal agreements, while in the short term reducing costs by allowing 90% of the work to be done in constituting a new project. This together with simple online tutorials written in plain English, and video explanations of the principles involved, will help to greatly demystify the process.

The web site will then link directly to legal advice in your local area, creating a simple one stop-shop (with user recommendations), for constitutional legal advice, and lowering the cost, by helping to clarify the basic legal and organisational requirements prior to consulting expert legal advise."
(http://blog.liquidlaw.org/?page_id=7#comment-44)

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Governance]]