

=Description=

James C. Scott:

Legibility refers to

"a state's attempt to make society legible, to arrange the population in ways that simplified the classic state  functions of taxation, conscription, and prevention of rebellion. Having begun to think in these terms, I  began to see legibility as a central problem in statecraft. The premodern state was, in many crucial respects, partially blind; it knew precious little about its subjects, their wealth, their landholdings and yields, their location, their very identity. It lacked anything like a detailed “map” of its terrain and its people. It lacked,  for the most part, a measure, a metric, that would allow it to “translate” what it knew into a common  standard necessary for a synoptic view. As a result, its interventions were often crude and self-defeating.

....

How did the state gradually get a handle on its subjects and their environment? Suddenly, processes 
as disparate as the creation of permanent last names, the standardization of weights and measures, the 
establishment of cadastral surveys and population registers, the invention of freehold tenure, the 
standardization of language and legal discourse, the design of cities, and the organization of transportation  seemed comprehensible as attempts at legibility and simplification. In each case, officials took  exceptionally complex, illegible, and local social practices, such as land tenure customs or naming customs,  and created a standard grid whereby it could be centrally recorded and monitored....

How were the agents of the state to begin measuring and codifying, throughout each region of an entire 
kingdom, its population, their landholdings, their harvests, their wealth, the volume of commerce, and so on? 

...

Each undertaking... exemplified a pattern of relations between local knowledge and practices on one 
hand and state administrative routines on the other.... In each case, local practices of measurement and 
landholding were “illegible” to the state in their raw form. They exhibited a diversity and intricacy that 
reflected a great variety of purely local, not state, interests. That is to say, they could not be assimilated into  an administrative grid without being either transformed or reduced to a convenient, if partly fictional,  shorthand. The logic behind the required shorthand was provided... by the pressing material requirements of  rulers: fiscal receipts, military manpower, and state security. In turn, this shorthand functioned... as not just  a description, however inadequate. Backed by state power through records, courts, and ultimately coercion,  these state fictions transformed the reality they presumed to observe, although never so thoroughly as to  precisely fit the grid."
(http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/James-Scott.pdf)


=Discussion=

==On [[Horizontal Legibility]]==

Kevin Carson:

"One-way communication creates opacity from above; two-way communication creates horizontal 
legibility. 

To quote Michel Bauwens:

- The capacity to cooperate is verified in the process of cooperation itself. Thus, projects are open to all 
comers provided they have the necessary skills to contribute to a project. These skills are verified, and 
communally validated, in the process of production itself. This is apparent in open publishing projects such 
as citizen journalism: anyone can post and anyone can verify the veracity of the articles. Reputation 
systems are used for communal validation. The filtering is a posteriori, not a priori. Anti-credentialism is 
therefore to be contrasted to traditional peer review, where credentials are an essential prerequisite to 
participate.

P2P projects are characterized by holoptism. Holoptism is the implied capacity and design of peer to 
[peer] processes that allows participants free access to all the information about the other participants; not in  terms of privacy, but in terms of their existence and contributions (i.e. horizontal information) and access to  the aims, metrics and documentation of the project as a whole (i.e. the vertical dimension).
 
This can be  contrasted to the panoptism which is characteristic of hierarchical projects: processes are designed to reserve  'total' knowledge for an elite, while participants only have access on a 'need to know' basis. However, with  P2P projects, communication is not top-down and based on strictly defined reporting rules, but feedback is systemic, integrated in the protocol of the cooperative system."
(http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/James-Scott.pdf)

Source: 3 Michel Bauwens, “The Political Economy of Peer Production,” Ctheory.net, December 1, 2005 
<http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499>.

=More Information=

* Book: [[Seeing Like a State]]. James C. Scott.
* Discussion of [[Legibility]] by Kevin Carson at http://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/James-Scott.pdf



[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]