= The Lens, an open global cyberinfrastructure built to make the innovation system more efficient, fair, transparent and inclusive. [http://www.lens.org/about/]

URL = http://www.lens.org/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"The Lens is an extension of work started by Cambia in 1999 to render the global patent system more transparent, called the Patent Lens. 

The Lens, an open global cyberinfrastructure built to make the innovation system more efficient, fair, transparent and inclusive. The Lens is a greatly expanded and updated version of the Patent Lens with vastly more data and greater analytical capabilities. Our goal is to enable more people to make better decisions, informed by evidence and inspired by imagination.

The Lens already hosts a number of powerful tools for analysis and exploration of the patent literature, from integrated graphical representation of search results to advanced bioinformatics tools."

(http://www.lens.org/about/)


'''2. Via J.P. Morgan:'''

"Lens is another system that enables the creation of identifiers in Web3. A key part of someone’s Lens profile is their Lens ‘handle’. A Lens profile enables a user to represent themself on the Lens social graph, and enables others to search for and discover their profile on the various Lens-based applications. Examples include Lenster, a decentralized and permissionless social media application, and Lenstube, a decentralized video sharing social media platform."

(https://www.jpmorgan.com/onyx/documents/Digital-identity-assessing-web3s-building-blocks.pdf)

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Science]]