=Brief Bio:=
Leo Burke is Professor and Director of the Global Commons Initiative at the Mendoza College of Business, the University of Notre Dame.  In this capacity he teaches courses on the commons to undergraduates, MBAs and Executive MBAs.  From December 2000 through June 2008, he served as Associate Dean and Director of Executive Education. Prior to joining Notre Dame, Burke served in a variety of roles at Motorola, Inc., including Director and Dean of the College of Leadership and Transcultural Studies within Motorola University. He was a founding member of philosopher Ken Wilber's Integral Institute.

In 2009 he co-founded, with [[Carolyn Lee]] and Kathy Skerritt, the Anthroposphere Institute (www.a-institute.org), an educational organization that champions the global commons through courses and action-learning initiatives.  '''Fundamental to the work of the [[Anthroposphere Institute]] is an understanding that the commons is fundamentally an expression of prior unity or the a priori indivisibility of all life'''.  

He is also a co-founder with George Por and others of the Commons Knowledge Alliance, an educational and learning resource platform focused on the commons.  He recently authored "A Common Matter," Kosmos Journal, November 2010.

He holds a B.A. in sociology from the University of Notre Dame, a M.A. in Political Science from Indiana University, and a M.S. in Organization Development from Aurora University."

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]
[[Category:USA]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]