'''* Book: Avner Greif, 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade. Cambridge University Press.''' 


=Excerpts=


==Chapter 1 Introduction==

Avner Greif:

"On March 28, 1210, Rubeus de Campo of Genoa agreed to pay a debt of 100 marks
sterling in London on behalf of Vivianus Jordanus from Lucca . There is nothing unusual
about this agreement—in fact, there is evidence of thousands of such agreements in
Europe at the time. But this agreement implicitly reveals why Rubeus lived in a period of
remarkable economic growth measured by such proxies as urbanization, population
growth, capital investment, and changing patterns of trade.

First, this agreement reflects well-functioning markets. The institutional
foundations of these markets were such that merchants trusted agents to handle their
affairs abroad, even without legal contracts. Impersonal lending among traders from
remote corners of Europe prevailed, and property rights were sufficiently secure that
merchants could travel abroad with their riches.

Second, it reflects well-functioning polities. The institutional foundations of
polities throughout Europe during this time induced policies conducive to economic
prosperity. Rubeus made his agreement in the Republic of Genoa, which had been
established about a century earlier but had already pursued policies that made it a bustling
commercial center. To understand why and how such well-functioning markets and
polities came about in various historical episodes and what led to their persistence and
decline, we have to study their institutional foundations.

Studying institutions sheds light on why some countries are rich and others poor,
why some enjoy a welfare-enhancing political order and others do not. Socially beneficial
institutions promote welfare-enhancing cooperation and action. They provide the
foundations of markets by efficiently assigning, protecting, and altering property rights;
securing contracts; and motivating specialization and exchange. Good institutions also
encourage production by fostering saving, investment in human and physical capital, and
development and adoption of useful knowledge. They maintain a sustainable rate of
population growth and foster welfare-enhancing peace; the joint mobilization of
resources; and beneficial policies, such as the provision of public goods." 
(http://www.stanford.edu/~avner/Greif_Instutions/0%201%20Chapter%201%20Introduction.pdf)

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]
[[Category:Neotraditional]]