
'''* Article: Libre-currency for sustainable social change. by CAROLE_FABRE and Sybille Saint Girons. “IV International Conference on Social and Complementary Currencies: Money, Consciousness and Values ​​for Social Change”, Barcelona, 2017'''

URL = https://www.reglesdejeux.com/libre-currency-for-sustainable-social-change/


=Summary=

Sybille Saint Girons and Carole Fabre:

"Libre-currency proposes a self-issuance, or co-creation of units by the people of the monetary

system for the people. Calculated on a mathematical equation with three variables: number of

human members alive, their average lifespan and monetary mass, it ensures symmetry on

space and time. As no material value is absolute in space and time, Libre-currency is rooted on

our unique common value among humans on Earth: being alive on Earth!


Symmetry in space: at a time T, everyone wherever he is, co-creates its part of money at the

same amount. Symmetry in time: an old generation could not co-issue more than the next, and

the next more than the former. Therefore it’s sustainable as it’s valuable for everyone everywhere;

no one can deprive others even next generations. Respect, innocuity and sovereignty are

embedded in the DNA of Libre-currency, as every human member is an equal co-creator of the

currency, independently of its production, unconditionally of its status. People are co-producing

their universal dividend because they are humans alive. Organizations can also be part of the

monetary system but they aren’t co-issuing units, only trading.


As Bitcoin, Libre-currency algorithm generates monetary units. But unlike data mining, here

algorithm relies on the three variables; unlike proof-of-work, it’s people’s proof-of-life that

determines recurrent and periodical creation of units (per day, week, month...). Thus each human

member’s wallet increases evenly according to the universal dividend co-created. Then members,

human or organizations, can use their units to sell and buy among them as any currency. A

blockchain ledger records either recurrent issuances or transactions exchanges.


According to experimentations, issuing money with Libre-currency creates favourable conditions

to behave toward social changes and sustainability, as it’s intrinsically fair, abundant,

transparent and decentralised. People are responsible, equal and free, and Libre-currency insures

durability and reliability.


Moreover each monetary community self-manages its Libre-currency. The only needs are a way to

regularly validate that people are alive meaning having a “proof-of-life” mechanism (e.g. through

web-of-trust-certification process) and a Libre-currency-algorithm-blockchain. Yet Libre-currency is

only solving monetary issuance, other mechanisms have to be set by the members (prices, taxes,

finances, marketplaces...)."

(https://www.reglesdejeux.com/libre-currency-for-sustainable-social-change/)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Articles]]