

=Description=

EMRAH GÜLER:

"Turkey's very own Gezi Protests, are defining  new decade. On  purest and most simple level, the civil uprisings and mass gatherings are revitalizing forgotten communities, creating new ones, and reclaiming public spaces as, well, public spaces.

“Community is nearly impossible in a highly monetized society like our own,” says Charles Eisenstein,  popular speaker, teacher, and  author of “Sacred Economics: Money, Gift & Society in  Age of Transition,” in one of his essays. “That is because community is woven from gifts, which is ultimately why poor people often have stronger communities than rich people.” In his book, and many of his essays, Eisenstein portrays a picture of transformation from a financial system to a gift economy, “better reflecting our emerging sense of interrelatedness.” Many alternatives to today’s market-based, monetized economy have been emerging next to se very markets. Gift economy, sharing economy, crowdfunding, collaborative consumption, and mesh economy are some of se systems gaining more followers each day.  has been home to some innovative organizations and communities, practicing and advocating se alternative economies. 

“There are altogether around 200 listings on our website,” said Bor. “ most lent items are books, sports equipment and electronics.  most wanted items are bicycles and cameras.” Any unusual items? “An online survey we had held revealed that re are some willing to lend a concrete breaker, a welding machine, even a boat,” answered Bor. While   of  was working  sharing ethos before  Gezi protests, “ spirit of Gezi was a dream for everyone who was part of  sharing economy,” said Erdoğdu. “Gezi helped awaken in many of us a sense of sharing and solidarity. It might be  best thing coming out of  protests and  following period.”  exchange markets held in parks, forums and elsewhere regularly in  last month, perhaps, are a testament to that.

An online survey asking 250 users why y signed up to  of  revealed three major reasons; to help reduce  use of natural resources, to help ors, and for displaying a stance against consumption culture."
(http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/sharing-and-gift-economies-bloom-in-.aspx?PageID=238&NID=51124&NewsCatID=344)

=More Information=

* [[Zumbara]], Istanbul Time Bank


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Turkey]]