

=Description=

Derek Markham:

"The lifePOD system is a moveable greenhouse structure with a full array of complementary growing technologies that allows for hydroponic, aquaponic, and aeroponic growing, and can be used year-round to produce local food in quantities to feed many people, especially those in food deserts, where access to healthy and affordable fresh food is not easy to come by.

The system, which can be built to measure anywhere from 150 to 200 square feet, features a number of innovations that can make growing your own food more sustainable, and create a fresh food oasis literally anywhere. In order to get the first lifePOD built and running near Montréal, a crowdfunding campaign is looking to raise about $20,000 for materials, skilled labor, and other supplies. A plot of land has already been donated to the project, which will help feed the community of Notre-Dame-de-L’Île-Perrot and allow for further documentation of the process of building and running the greenhouse in order to guide others in building more of these structures."
(http://ecopreneurist.com/2014/04/24/answer-food-deserts-innovative-greenhouse-system/)

=Discussion=

"Even with global population peaking above 9 billion, we can succeed in our mission to intensively localize food abundance with a common sense solution, lifePOD, that we are co-creating in a global Creative Commons collaboration. However, while the “livingry” innovations are essential, it is equally challenging to birth the new social enterprise relationships of collaboration & cooperation that will empower a local-to-global movement for food security for everyone, everywhere. Together, we can build a viral movement with the power to disrupt the entrenched and powerful agribusiness system and the old world of scarcity, hunger and poverty will be “made history”.
(http://yourmarkontheworld.com/post/83185816362/new-technology-for-growing-food-spurs-movement)


==Richard Nelson on the background to the crowdfunding campaign--

Richard Nelson:

"Some of you may know about my lifelong innovation project called SolaRoof, and are aware that my several patents on this technology have been dedicated to a Creative Commons Public License 3.0 - Attribution; Share-Alike; and for Commercial Users, 1% PayItForward.

The challenge is to build a community of both users and developers so as to plant the seed of the innovation and see it propagate virally around the world. The key is a viral design and application. We likely have the answer to that challenge, with the lifePOD, which is a solution for food security from the backyard and the schoolyard. On a larger scale of use the same design is an enterprise opportunity in the neighbourhood, opening up a vast opportunity for self-employment - creating a vast and global enterprise network (PODnet) of 21st Century Vertical Farms.

We start with the first campaign for a design/build project in Montreal, to build the first version of the lifePOD. We will share our designs and experience with all of our supporters and we anticipate a wave of lifePOD projects to ripple around the world, as some supporters decide to replicate our results.
I appreciate that in this community there is a special interest to support personal (not private, but rather a Creative Commons enterprise) opportunity. Therefore I hope for a positive response as I now share with you our crowdfunding campaign. Many in this community may want to startup a new/next business venture; I say, think lifePOD! That is what I am asking all friends of SolaRoof to do at this time.

lifePOD is a solution for our daily life as a human beings who eat every day. I ask you as a person who cares about food to contribute a small token of support to our vital work - team up in support of our imperative work to co-create a solution to toxic food & hunger. Contribute what you might spend to take me out to dinner or what you might give to a food bank. That is all we ask and if we get many of our friends who really care about food and hunger to do the same (why not, if we ask 'em nicely), then we create a wave of new awareness that the lifePOD in the backyard and PODpioneers in the neighbourhood actually can answer our most pressing challenges: good food for all together with abundant clean energy and pure water.

Please consider making a contribution in the amount that you can afford, but please do not delay or feel that your support is too small or not important."
([https://www.facebook.com/groups/p2p.open/735238153187033/?ref=notif&notif_t=group_comment_reply])"

'''Here is where to make a donation to our work: http://inv.st/449/24 .'''

=More Information=

* Video intro via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GJn0ShQKiE


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Energy]]