[[LiFi]] is a wireless networking technology that uses light, instead of radio waves, to pass data between computers. [[Mesh Networks]] that use LiFi instead of (or as well as) WiFi have the potential to work much more reliably, use less energy, and cause less EMF pollution. At present, LiFi has mostly been tested over very short distances, like within the rooms of a building. But in theory, LiFi transceivers on the top of buildings could be used to network with neighbouring buildings, creating a WAN (Wide Area Network) or MAN (Metropolitan Area Network). If the light used for LiFi networking can be successfully transmitted and received over longer distances, it could be used to connect towns and cities to each other. [[Danyl Strype]]

* "At one end of the tradeoff space, we have LoRa (which stands for Long Range) that uses ultra-low-power transmissions that go up to 10 km but at very low rate. This is ideal for many Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. At the other end, we have LiFi which uses LED-based light for communication and has been shown to achieve upwards of 200 Gbps in the laboratory but cannot penetrate walls. In between we have several well-known technologies. Although 4G/LTE appears to have the best of both worlds, it typically requires centralized equipment, and is costly.
[https://www.inthemesh.com/archive/understanding-mesh-networking-part-ii/ Understanding Mesh Networking, Part II]

"[LiFi] is used to connect fixed and mobile devices at very high data rates by harnessing the visible light and infrared spectrum. Combined, these spectral resources are 2600 times larger than the entire radio frequency (RF) spectrum. This paper provides the motivation behind why LiFi is a very timely technology, especially for 6th generation (6G) cellular communications."
[https://doi.org/10.1364/JOCN.12.00A190 Introduction to indoor networking concepts and challenges in LiFi], Journal of Optical Communications and Networking

* "LiFi networks perform much better in areas with lots of electromagnetic interference. This is thanks to their use of light rather than radio waves to transmit data."
https://solutionsreview.com/wireless-network/is-lifi-light-fidelity-the-wireless-network-of-the-future/

* We have managed to create a LiFi-based mesh network solution which helps in transferring data across long distances. The product makes setting up wireless networks in ground, motion & air possible, where optical cable infrastructure is difﬁcult to implement otherwise.
https://www.velmenni.com/our-story

* "Transform light spots in the streets, in trains stations or airports into an innovative intracity communication network"
https://www.oledcomm.net/applications/smartcity-transportation/