
'''* Article: The Limitations to Economic Environmental Valuation. BIOMOT Policy brief # 1, October 2013'''

URL = http://www.biomotivation.eu/docs/BIOMOT%20Policy%20Brief%201%20-%20official%20version.pdf

=Description=

"The explanation for environmental problems has long
been claimed by environmental economists as lying in
the fact that environmental goods are not priced in the
market, and that therefore the solution to those
problems is to bring environmental goods into the
market. This can be done, it is argued, by either
creating actual markets – such as the EU Emissions
Trading System – or by using valuation methods to
determine ‘shadow’ prices for environmental goods
that are not included in actual markets. These prices
can then be entered into cost benefit analyses. It is
these latter economic environmental valuation (EEV)
methods that are the subject of this policy brief."


=Summary of the Key Arguments=

1. EEV methods fail to secure ecosystem
sustainability.

2. EEV methods mistakenly assume that money can
be used as a neutral measuring rod of people’s
preferences,

3. EEV methods
are grounded in a misguided
approach to decision making.

4. EEV methods misunderstand, and motivate policies
which fail to respect, the way in which people value
nature. 

5. EEV methods may compromise intrinsic motivation
for environmental protection. 

6. EEV methods facilitate the troubling expansion of
market norms into
environmental
valuation
and
decision making

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]