{{WikiSprint-20M
|Name=Linaria
|Language=Spanish
|Main URL=http://www.linaria-ev.de
|Short description=Apoyo para ideas sustentables
|Details='''¬What is Linaria?'''
Linaria e.V. is an registered non-profit charity association committed to community-building and knowledge exchange with a global focus. The core issues addressed are: advancement of sustainable and environmentally friendly methods / technologies; voluntary work in various sustainable projects and communities; and active dissemination of sustainable knowledge of self-sufficient production techniques.<br />
'''Ecology / Agriculture'''<br />
Liniaria is engaged in farming to address (or prevent) the global threat on agriculture and food supply chain disruption (seen in increasing soil nutrient depletion, an encouraged dependency on the seed industry, pest susceptibility in monocultures, proliferation of genetically engineered hybrid seeds, use of farmland for export, food shortages [...]). Their involvement includes a project of self-sufficient food production and supply; education of consequences of the use of hybrid seeds, monocultures and pesticides; learning and applying permaculture systems; and the exchange and the maintenance of seeds.<br />
'''Energy supply'''<br />
Struggles over fossil fuel control, such as wars over oil or the deforestation in the name of coal mining, result in attendant consequences for the human, animal and plant world. To avoid further destruction of the planet, we need new, independent and local energy supply systems, Linaria is therefore concerned with rebalancing power usage in favor of renewable energy.<br />
In this way, the use of limited fossil fuels like coal and oil eventually becomes redundant and power can be supplied without additional CO2 emissions, preventing further contribution to climate change.<br />
Linaria, therefore, focuses on the discovery of new and the dissemination of existing, simple and environmentally-oriented energy systems. Here, the areas of electricity supply by means of renewable energy are covered by: solar, wind and hydropower; hot water & heating systems using solar and geothermal energy, biogas and wood burning; and cooking and wood-firing systems (parabolic / solar mirrors, biogas).<br />
'''Infrastructure'''<br />
Equally important as sustenance and energy, is a strong infrastructure that is integrated into nature. Especially in seasonal climates (rain and dry seasons) like those in the regions of Latin America, particular attention must be paid to the water supply. These include systems of rainwater recovery, various methods of water pumping such as solar, wind, and back pressure pumps; associated piping systems; and the recycling of gray water by means of natural water treatment plants. Another issue to address is the improvement of the often poor hygiene conditions through the installation of composting toilets.<br />
'''Ecological farming'''<br />
Especially in the area of house construction, there are many alternatives to conventional concrete structures with similar thermal insulating properties. To avoid long distance transport and polluting manufacturing processes of building materials , the ideal house consists of locally available natural materials. These can be clay (Adobe, Earthbag, COB [...]), stone, wood or other recycled materials.<br />
Networking & Intercultural Exchange<br />
Linaria aims to bring together people of all ages who are in contact with organic and / or sustainable projects to create knowledge exchange and new knowledge in this area. The portal ecobasa.org is available as an interface for this interaction.
Equally important is an intercultural exchange and a hand-in-hand co-operation with other cultures and people to teach environmental awareness. Thus, as living conditions are improving, similarly, associated problems are avoided. <br />
'''Social Systems'''<br />
When people live and work together, interpersonal differences may arise. Especially for young communities, the biggest challenge is to overcome differences, so that conflicts and disputes are avoided. Linaria is relying on learning, applying and sharing communication tools, such as a forums, nonviolent communication and teamwork.<br />
'''Financing'''<br />
Linaria is a registered charity and is committed to the above objectives. The work of the members in the communities and ecological villages is voluntary. The realization of individual projects will require increased access to financial resources; to be collected from donations and strategically deployed.<br />
You can support the work of Linaria e.V. by<br />
a) one-time donations for specific projects and<br />
b) becoming a member of the association<br />
c) help us with knowledge and workforce<br />

For more information see http://www.linaria-ev.de
|References/Links=http://www.linaria-ev.de
|Contact's person e-mail=info@linaria-ev.de
|Number of participants=5
|Start date=2012/11/05
|City=San Cristobal de las casas, Chiapas
|Country=Mexico
|Location=16.7385777, -92.6332806
|Topics=Ecology, Energy, Science, Technology
|Types=Organizations
|Formats=Articles, Blog
|Categories/Tags=Renewable Energy, sustainability, eco construction, natural building, superadobe, stofes, solar thermal systems, communities
}}
{{MC
|mc1=Non Profit
|mc2=Reproducible
|mc3=Reinforcing the Commons
|mc3e=Nature
|mc4=Grassroots
}}