==Description==
The linguistic commons are the total linguistic artifacts created by humanity: dialects, languages, accents and so on.

==Language Enclosure==
Trademarks, copyright, branding, the legal system and socio-cultural pressures have helped enclose language for private benefit. 

Dictionaries, thesauruses and other "official" documentations of language attempt to standardize. They're backed by a  variety of powerful institutions, often private, that set the prevailing beliefs about spelling, pronunciation, word meanings and grammar. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Descriptive_linguistics Descriptivist] and even some [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_prescription prescriptivist] linguists, among others, see this as a subtle cultural capture or imperialism. #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_purism] #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_imperialism]

The predominate dialect of English in America is called, Standard American. It's grammar, spelling, and pronunciations are mostly drawn from the post mid-century (20th), white, Mid-Western, middle-class dialect. Standard American does draw from other socio-economic-cultural influences. But use of other dialects (or accents) in mainstream cultural channels, is largely frown upon. #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_prescription#Problems] #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_discrimination]

This disproportionally effects the working class and color minorities. Use of non-standard dialectical and grammatical rules can effectively exclude participation in mainstream venues. 

Legalese and trademarks use state power to enforce penalties around language use.

===Programming Languages===
Standardization, enclosure and prescriptivism effect natural languages as well as constructed ones. In computer programming languages, the Lisp language has Common Lisp, and Arc Lisp, a anti-standard variant.

Computer jargon or values compressive beauty; simplistic brevity. This is similar to slang words in natural languages

==History==
Notions of a national "standard" language grew along with the power of the nation-state. #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_linguistic_prescription_in_English#Origins] #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_English_grammars]

==Future==
If trends of relocalization and regionalization hold out, the cultural reorganization will extend to the domain of language. A flourishing of sociolects, idiolects and local slang will thrive along with a less dominating 
standard English. #[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_prescription#Problems]


In the primitivist world, E-Primitive is a variant of English that emphasizes dynamic over static thinking. It does this partly by replacing noun-based thoughts with verb-based ones. #[http://rewild.info/anthropik/2008/03/e-primitive-rewilding-the-english-language/]

Urban dictionary, is a website documenting slang, new phrases, dialects and pronunciations among other things. #[http://www.urbandicitonary.com]

==Links==

[[Category:Culture]]
[[Category:Commons]]