http://www.opendemocracy.net/transformation/robert-w-fuller/curing-poison-of-rankism

http://www.southsouthforum.org ; http://www.I.N.edu.hk/cultural

http://www.opendemocracy.net/transformation/michael-edwards/%E2%80%9Clove-20%E2%80%9D-conversation-with-barbara-fredrickson

http://www.slideshare.net/Frankwillems/social-sourcing-and-lean-leadership-for-european-project-opening-up?from_search=11

Postill, J., Democracy in the age of viral reality. media/anthropology. Available at: http://johnpostill.com/2011/11/02/democracy-in-the-age-of-viral-reality-2/ [Accessed December 20, 2012].

http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/p2p-search-as-an-alternative-to-google-recapturing-network-value-through-decentralized-search/

Movements.org, A Marketplace for Needs and Haves Emerges Organically in Tahrir Square. Available at: http://www.movements.org/blog/entry/a-marketplace-for-needs-and-haves-emerges-organically-in-tahrir-square [Accessed December 11, 2012].

http://www.worthashare.com/give-us-your-limbs/

http://buildingthecommons.org/2012/12/14/the-power-of-outrospection/

Jordan, T., 2009. Hacking and power: Social and technological determinism in the digital age. First Monday. Available at: http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2417/2240 [Accessed December 20, 2012].


For discussions of Red Plenty, see this book seminar, with replies to commentaries by Spufford. http://crookedtimber.org/category/red-plenty-seminar/ 

Collaborative Futures collective, 2010. The Freedom To Merge, The Freedom To Fork. www.booki.cc. Available at: http://www.booki.cc/collaborativefutures/the-freedom-to-merge-the-freedom-to-fork/ [Accessed December 8, 2012].

Deleuze, G. & Foucault, M., 1972. Intellectuals and power: A conversation between Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze | libcom.org. Available at: http://libcom.org/library/intellectuals-power-a-conversation-between-michel-foucault-and-gilles-deleuze [Accessed June 9, 2013].

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/08/05/new-gdp-accounting-makes-a-difference-locally/

Aaltonen, A,. 2008 – Report on the first Social Innovation Camp: '''Organising the moment of self organisation.''' Available at: http://www.alexicon.info/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/aaltonen_report_on_the_first_social_innovation_camp.pdf [Accessed June 9, 2013].

http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/01/07/130107fa_fact_klinenberg

http://www.kosmosjournal.org/articles/sharing-the-worlds-resources-a-dialogue-on-sharing

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/05/15/measuring-the-sustainability-of-business-from-economism-to-earth-systems-science/

for leuphana; democratie evolutive, http://www.yvesmichel.org/product-page/societe-civile/page/2

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/07/09/mapping-the-transition-to-sustainability/

http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/from-free-software-to-artisan-science/

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/07/09/lohas-highlights-love-and-profit-as-motivation-to-sustainability/

http://buildingthecommons.org/2012/11/16/in-the-spirit-of-collaborating/

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/08/12/40597/

Suehle, R., 2011. Telecomix, Anonymous, anarchy, and getting things done through the do-ocracy. opensource.com. Available at: http://opensource.com/life/11/6/telecomix-anonymous-anarchy-and-getting-things-done-through-do-ocracy [Accessed December 8, 2012].

http://seedingfactory.com/2013/04/list-of-open-source-crowdfunding-platforms/ (create wiki page)

http://seekingalpha.com/article/1564112-book-reviews-the-locust-and-the-bee-and-the-collaboration-economy

http://communityrenewal.ca/about-team

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/06/04/pamela-davis-investigates-interviews-hazel-henderson/

http://www.onthecommons.org/people-powered-news-source-puts-local-back-journalism

http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/07/01/asiaiix-capital-markets-for-a-social-good/

http://www.commongood-forum.org/#!programme-list-of-speakers-/c1cq5

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/how-artists-strengthen-communities

"Restorative Commons: Creating Health and Well-being through Urban Landscapes"
http://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/gtr/gtr_nrs-p-39r.pdf

http://buildingthecommonsdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2013/08/2012-mugar.pdf

http://buildingthecommonsdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2013/08/paper_revised-copy-to-post.pdf



http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/connections-community-and-pursuit-commons

Grotesque Plan for Detroit: Fleece Working People to Save the Banks
http://www.alternet.org/economy/detroit-and-pensions

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/12-steps-creating-community-commons

the Alexander von Humboldt Institut für Internet und Gesellschaft (HIIG) at Humboldt University Berlin has a research focus on online participation''' = http://www.hiig.de/en/joint-research-topic-online-participation/

http://www.shareable.net/blog/all-too-present-an-interview-with-doug-rushkoff

http://ieet.org/index.php/IEET/more/scarlett20130811

http://www.democracynow.org/blog/2013/3/25/video_understanding_the_mondragon_worker_cooperative_corporation_in_spains_basque_country

http://stoweboyd.com/post/49386411425/socialogy-interview-with-john-hagel

http://edgeperspectives.typepad.com/edge_perspectives/2013/04/a-contrarian-view-on-resilience.html

http://www.theenergyproject.com/blog/companies-practice-conscious-capitalism-perform-10x-better


** 

From: Brian Korsedal <brian.korsedal@gmail.com>
Date: Wed, Jul 31, 2013 at 11:51 PM
Subject: Inventing house printer

Hi,

I've been working on an invention for a while and could use some help.  We've invented a technology which works like a 3D printer but makes buildings.  We're starting to get some news coverage and could use some help to get up on Reddit. 

Can you upvote us?

http://bit.ly/167MBYj

**

‘Dark Intellectual Property’: Why We Need a Kickstarter for Patents'<http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/07/dark-ip-why-we-need-a-kickstarter-for-patents/>

The more I investigate, the more I'm convinced an open model is actually completely in-line with University goals.  According to this study<http://www.bu.edu/otd/files/2011/02/How-are-US-Tech.-Transfer-Offices-Tasked-and-Motivated.pdf> most universities lose money on their current tech transfer efforts.  In addition, the primary stated goals of ~80% of departments are 1) to provide a faculty service and 2) to bring university research into real-world applications (only 11.5% have 'profit maximization' as their stated primary goal).  I believe that open commercialization stands a good chance at both reducing cost and achieving those goals better than the current day alternative.

**

http://m.phys.org/news/2013-08-evolution-youre-selfish.html

http://www.peers.org/

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ghkl7wJWA98&feature=youtu.be

https://bitcoinstarter.com/projects/142

Pat Murck offers this analysis on BitCoin http://www.cato-unbound.org/2013/07/31/patrick-murck/true-value-bitcoin

http://underminers.org/

http://stop.zona-m.net/2013/01/the-alternatives-to-apple-facebook-c-already-exist-shall-we-package-them/

http://www.shareable.net/blog/natural-anti-capitalism-biospheric-householding-as-the-foundation-of-an-enlivened-economy

http://www.shareable.net/blog/illustrious-region-in-italy-reaches-30-coop-economy?

http://www.shareable.net/blog/profiles-in-sharing-janelle-orsi-the-sharing-economy-lawyer?

http://www.shareable.net/blog/connections-community-the-pursuit-of-happiness?

check energy articles on this blog, http://solarstrategy.com.au/newsletters/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware-2/

Leung and Stevens 2010 paper about motivations of tech transfer in universities - http://www.bu.edu/otd/files/2011/02/How-are-US-Tech.-Transfer-Offices-Tasked-and-Motivated.pdf. 

http://lifeisagraph.net/p2p/p2p-social-net-infrastructure.pdf

http://www.wired.com/autopia/2013/07/open-source-airplane-design/

http://falkvinge.net/2013/07/19/book-launch-swarmwise-the-tactical-manual-to-changing-the-world/

http://www.utne.com/politics/rethinking-work.aspx#ixzz2aXaLrsB0

Awful music (see Willie Osterweil's review on Shareable) but interesting interview, including a lot of stuff in Italy: http://www.together-thedocumentary.coop/

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/student-reporter/21st-century-robin-hood-i_b_3639926.html?

ECC Blog Preparation http://titanpad.com/remixthecommons
http://www.shareable.net/blog/food-rescue-program-spreads-in-colorado?

must publish in blog, http://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf 

http://marcgarrett.org/selected-interviews-by-marc-garrett/(http://georgiebc.wordpress.com/2013/05/24/binding-chaos/)

for off the shelf rules for multi-stakeholder co-ops in the UK see http://somerset.coop/somersetrules - there are now 21 co-ops who have incorporated using these rules (and United Diversity will soon become one too )

http://runthattown.abs.gov.au/

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rif1698fH2E

collective individuation, register at issu, http://issuu.com/instituteofnetworkcultures/docs/unlikeus
...

found via Technicity group
http://www.linkedin.com/groups/What-do-you-think-about-4891998.S.260929936

http://opensource.com/business/13/8/oss-patterns-and-practices

Also have a bunch of docs about multi-stakeholder co-ops in the United Diversity library here:
http://library.uniteddiversity.coop/Money_and_Economics/Cooperatives/Multi-Stakeholder_Co-ops/

http://www.underwoodgardens.com/3415/russian-dacha-gardening-homescale-agriculture-feeding-everyone/

http://www.onthecommons.org/creating-commons-based-solutions-communities-swaziland-minneapolis

http://polyeconomy.info/

http://www.onthecommons.org/work/protecting-drinking-water-preventing-pollution-upstream-communities

https://www.fidbacks.com/ comment aggregator

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/americas-most-enduring-common-ground

http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2013/03/08/173769058/in-open-source-rocket-competition-collaboration-takes-off

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/foodopoly

Space Noah | 지식공유와 커뮤니티를 위한 공간 | A Base Camp for Social Innovators.

http://www.spacenoah.net/

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/potential-partners-we-dont-recognize

http://www.onthecommons.org/magazine/how-artists-strengthen-communities

http://opensystem.org.uk/

* The Possibility of a Pluralist Commonwealth and a Community-Sustaining Economy(pp. 1-25). Gar Alperovitz and Steve Dubb

URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0001
    
* Challenging Corporate Domination: The Public Ownership Approach(pp. 26-43) . Thomas M. Hanna
    
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0026
    

* Returns to Capital: Austerity and the Crisis of European Social Democracy(pp. 44-60). Joe Guinan

URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0044
    

* The Architecture of Enterprise: Redesigning Ownership for a Great Transition(pp. 61-73). Marjorie Kelly
    
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0061
    

* Constitutionalizing Property-Owning Democracy (pp. 74-90)/ Thad Williamson

URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0074
    
* Using State and Local Policies(pp. 91-109). Joel Rogers
    
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0091


get http://www.feedly.com/ as new reader!

urgent to print resilience imperative, https://www.box.com/s/xwdprkxw1mwnboyrpzn0

http://dynamicsofvirtualwork.com/blog/ + check article in their twitter account 

https://twitter.com/costis1202 see http://www.alternet.org/labor/how-google-and-silicon-valley-screw-their-non-elite-workers

http://www.barricade.be/spip.php?article158 ; 

http://www.etopia.be/spip.php?article2133 ; 

http://www.vacarme.org/article2236.html ; 

http://www.associations21.org/Le-festival-des-biens-communs-en

important new concepts in this page, do before july 9, http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/onlife-original-outcome

Infrastructure for the distributed cloud: https://pagekite.net/

Cloud computing: Centralization and data sovereignty: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2167372

Cloud computing: Legal issues in centralized architectures: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2097146


http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HBsnFlkv6mU

http://blogs.20minutos.es/codigo-abierto/2013/05/31/la-comuna-p2p-de-madrid/

solecopedia.org global shared dictionary of solidarity economy and ecological economics. His books on Fair Trade and alternatives to Biopiracy are opensource, and published by Charles Léopold Mayer Editor.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cs8eJBVmYR0

http://www.bordeaux-economie-collaborative.org/

http://marcstumpel.files.wordpress.com/2010/09/stumpel_ma_thesis_the-politics-of-social-media_facebook_control-and-resistance.pdf

whole issue, http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/issue/view/26 * http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/461

Third part of Jonathan's articles o P2P has not been published yet - it's like he waits for my approval :)

I let you know asap what to do

part one & two you find here: (with link to P2P Foundation for definitions)

http://changingsociety.socialistnetwork.org/p2p-and-marxism-revised/#comment-606
&

http://changingsociety.socialistnetwork.org/tag/jonathan-clyne/

http://commonsandeconomics.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/WEB_130515_ProgrCommons_V100_alles1.pdf, check bios one more time ?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUeETylNLmY

http://www.sensorica.co/home/working-space/recent-announcements/michelbauwenspresentsathecmontrealwithsensorica

http://theeconomicrealms.blogspot.co.uk/2013/05/the-third-industrial-revolution-how.html

toolkits like Enabling City, Streetplan’s Tactical Urbanism or The Placemaker's Guide for their ideas on how to create spaces for change. http://enablingcity.com/   ;  http://issuu.com/streetplanscollaborative/docs/tactical_urbanism_vol_2_final   ;   http://www.pps.org/blog/placemakers-guide-streets-as-places/


http://meedabyte.com/2013/05/09/back-from-the-ouishare-fest-emancipation/

http://reconcon.govfutures.org/

http://www.internationalfuturesforum.com/s/remembering-max-boisot

http://tipkin.fr/WordPress3/le-festival-de-leconomie-collaborative/

http://tipkin.fr/WordPress3/le-festival-de-leconomie-collaborative/

http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=NBx493I0W7k

http://www.scribd.com/doc/116463853/DRAFT-The-Edgeryders-Guide-to-the-Future-A-handbook-for-policymakers-and-managers-of-policy-oriented-online-communities

http://screenfly.org/narrative/71/tietotalkoot-lets-build-knowledge-together/

http://www.asia-institute.org/2013/03/03/proposal-for-a-constitution-of-information-asia-institute-report-2/


Internet as a paradigm
> http://www.itu.int/md/dologin_md.asp?lang=en&id=S13-WTPF13-INF-0007!!MSW-E

Defining the Internet
> http://www.itu.int/md/dologin_md.asp?lang=en&id=S13-WTPF13-INF-0008!!MSW-E

characteristics that distinguish the Internet
> http://www.itu.int/md/dologin_md.asp?lang=en&id=S13-WTPF13-INF-0009!!MSW-E

All posted here:
> http://www.itu.int/md/meetingdoc.asp?lang=en&type=newitems&parent=S13-WTPF13&PageLB=0

http://speculativeheresy.wordpress.com/2013/05/14/celerity-a-critique-of-the-manifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics/

A conversation with Thomas W. Malone ( Professor of Management at the MIT Sloan School of Management) at Edge.org

"Pretty much everything I'm doing now falls under the broad umbrella that I'd call collective intelligence. What does collective intelligence mean? It's important to realize that intelligence is not just something that happens inside individual brains. It also arises with groups of individuals. In fact, I'd define collective intelligence as groups of individuals acting collectively in ways that seem intelligent. By that definition, of course, collective intelligence has been around for a very long time. Families, companies, countries, and armies: those are all examples of groups of people working together in ways that at least sometimes seem intelligent."
COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE | Edge.org
edge.org
Michel Bauwens's profile photoJohn Hesch's profile photoGrizwald Grim's profile photoJohn Kellden's profile photo
3 comments
Grizwald Grim
Yesterday 12:16 PM
 
+John Hesch I don't think abstraction means what you think it means. Abstractions are merely recognitions of underlying frameworks of systems. ﻿
John Kellden
Yesterday 11:48 PM
 
Collaborative Sensemaking, part 111: Emergence

"The ''ecological'' view isn't confined to the organic world. Along with it comes a new understanding of how intelligence itself comes into being."
-- Brian Eno
https://plus.google.com/u/0/101010252943098026073/posts/GWWynjfre7M

"This is the interpretation I personally prefer: it may be that what's needed to have an intelligent group is just to have a bunch of people in the group who are high on this social perceptiveness measure, whether those people are men or women."
-- Thomas W Malone
http://edge.org/conversation/collective-intelligence
quote h/t +Dan Durrant 

from Collaborative Sensemaking, part 105: Scenius
https://plus.google.com/u/0/101010252943098026073/posts/dw1F25CwVUd

Collective Intelligence
http://storify.com/TheTransitioner/collective-intelligence

+Michel Bauwens :
”When the sum of all personal intelligences is greater than the sum of its part, because the field has become intelligent.”

+Pierre Levy :
”Collective intelligence and human development are interdependent and the basis of cultural evolution.”

+Jerry Michalski :
”Collective intelligence emerges from our efforts to negotiate personal truths against inconvenient facts:”

Jascha Rohr:
”Collective intelligence is the the emergent quality if individual potential unfolds in deep reciprocal relation to others.”

+Jean-François Noubel :
”Collective intelligence is this extraordinary property of social living that emerges when beings collaborates.”

Genomes of Collective Intelligence
http://io9.com/5962914/the-emerging-science-of-collective-intelligence--and-the-rise-of-the-global-brain
via +Dan Durrant 
https://plus.google.com/u/0/110222099517107483451/posts/hPsWdosghHu﻿

TO DO

Bienvenue Michel si ce n'est pas déjà fait merci de te géolocaliser sur la map GV en envoyant ta demande de localisation à l'adresse mail suivante :
map-gv@outlook.com en indiquant prénom et nom (ou pseudo) et localisation (ville), ainsi qu'un lien de contact (facebook, e-mail, site internet, blog).
http://goo.gl/maps/Mc4Tb

important: http://opensourcehardwarejunkies.com/

http://georgiebc.wordpress.com/2012/11/05/the-problems-with-democracy-2/

read all blog posts systematically in reverse order, print ? http://abilitycapital.com.au/blog/

http://transform-network.net/blog/archive-2010/news/detail/Blog/on-the-accumulation-by-dispossession.html

http://transform-network.net/journal/issue-022008/news/detail/Journal/passive-revolution-and-the-reform-of-the-revolution.html

http://transform-network.net/journal/issue-062010/news/detail/Journal/knowledge-is-a-common-good.html

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/freebeer-1.2.pdf

Peer Production: a New Economic Dawn? http://mohkohn.wordpress.com/2012/09/25/peer_production/



Mayo Fuster Morell 

 
(2012). Composition of 15M Mobilization in Spain: Free Culture Movement a layer of 15M ecosystem movement. ‘Occupy’ special edition. Social Movement Studies,Volume 11, Issue 3-4. Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14742837.2012.710323

(2011). The Unethics of Sharing: Wikiwashing. In W. Sützl & F. Stalder (Ed.). International Review of Information Ethics: Special issue: Ethics of Sharing. Vol. 15 September 2011. Retrieved from http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/015/015-Morell.pdf(2011, October). Rethinking government in the light of the emerging organisational principles of online collective action. In E. Aibar (Ed.) European Journal of ePractice. No 12. ISSN: 1988-625X. (pp. 81-93) Retrieved from http://tinyurl.com/bslp3o7(2012). Special section: A new wave of European mobilizations?. “The season of revolutions: the Arab Spring. Interface: A journal for and about social movements. Issue 4/1. Retrieved from http://www.interfacejournal.net/2012/11/interface-volume-4-issue-2-for-the-global-emancipation-of-labour/(2010). Participation in Online Creation Communities: Ecosystemic Participation?. Conference Proceedings of JITP 2010: The Politics of Open Source (p. 270). Retrieved from http://scholarworks.umass.edu/jitpc2010/1

(2011). An Introductory Historical Contextualization of Online Creation Communities for the Building of Digital Commons: The Emergence of a Free Culture Movement. In Hellmann, S., Frischmuth, P., Auer, S. & Dietrich, D. (ed.). OKCon 2011. Open Knowledge Conference Proceedings of the 6th Open Knowledge Conference Berlin, Germany, June 30 & July 1, 2011. Universität Leipzig, Germany and Technical University Berlin, Germany. Retrieved from http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-739/

(2009) Politics of technology and participation at the Social Forum Process. Panel: Mobilising on the Web: Between old and new practices. European Consortium for Political research (ECPR). Postdam. From 10th to 12th of September 2009. Retrieved fromhttp://internet-politics.cies.iscte.pt/IMG/pdf/ECPRPotsdamFuster.pdf



The end of work: the decline of the global labor force and the dawn of the post-market era http://books.google.nl/books/about/The_end_of_work.html?id=GjGZEVddXSYC&redir_esc=y



=Labor=

http://www.opendemocracy.net/valery-alzaga/justice-for-janitors-campaign-open-sourcing-labour-conflicts-against-global-neo-libera

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/Capital&Class.pdf

http://snuproject.wordpress.com/2013/01/04/the-unmaking-of-the-working-class-and-the-rise-of-the-maker-re-public/

The Making of a Cybertariat: Collected Essays by Ursula Huws, Monthly Review Press, New York and Merlin Press, London, July, 2003 http://www.monthlyreview.org/cybertariat.htm

Immmaterial Labour, from Paolo Virno and Michael Hardy, eds. Radical Thought In Italy: A Potential Politics https://wiki.brown.edu/confluence/download/attachments/73535007/lazzarto-immaterial+labor.pdf

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/TripleC.pdf

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/Science%20Technology%20Human%20Values-2011-Soderberg-423-50.pdf

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/Introduction_to_thesis.pdf

http://www.johansoderberg.net/sub02/scienceasculture.pdf

http://www.networkedlabour.net/2013/04/a-networked-debate-on-new-labour/

http://labor.nycga.net/

http://www.networkedlabour.net/resources/videos/

http://www.networkedlabour.net/program/

http://www.networkedlabour.net/common-blog/






=Democracy Project=

http://wiki.gentilsvirus.org/

http://www.deepdemocracyinstitute.org/rs/deep-democracy-explained.html

faciliterende overheid, http://strategisch-adviseur.nl/, add to p2p state approaches and to feedly

http://sacultivo.com/proyecto/


=Zaq's places=

# http://ena.ecovillage.org/
# http://gen.ecovillage.org/
# http://scha-coops.blogspot.de/
# http://blueridgelibertyproject.com/
# http://rhizomecollective.org/
# http://livingneighborhoods.org/ht-0/bln-exp.htm
# http://www.flsenergy.com/
# http://mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/
# http://easycleanenergy.com/
# http://evolveenergyp.com/
# http://www.urbanfarming.org/
# http://www.verticalfarm.com/
# http://emergentbydesign.com/2012/01/08/93-superhero-schools-collaboratories-incubators-accelerators-hubs-for-social-tech-innovation/
# http://mycelium.is/
# http://www.communitysupportedeverything.org/
# http://tribewanted.com/


=Books=

Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for Transforming Our Communities by J.K. Gibson-Graham, Jenny Cameron and Stephen Healy (Univ. of Minnesotta Press): More and more people are searching for ways to live lives of meaning and contribute positively to humanity and the planet. Through exercises, tools and inspiring examples, Take Back the Economy offers answers to the question, What can I do to make a difference? Taking a bottom-up approach to global transformation, the authors argue that small-scale changes can have a large-scale effect. - See more at: http://www.shareable.net/blog/shareables-top-10-summer-reads?utm_content=michelsub2004%40gmail.com&utm_source=VerticalResponse&utm_medium=Email&utm_term=Read%20more&utm_campaign=Shareable%3A%20Top%2010%20Summer%20Reads%2C%20and%20more%2E%2E%2Econtent#sthash.dvfq2FwB.dpuf



Citizenville: How to Take the Town Square Digital and Reinvent Government by Gavin Newsom and Lisa Dickey (Penguin Press): In Citizenville, Gavin Newsom, the Lieutenant Governor of California, explores how ordinary citizens can reshape government using tech tools, including the Internet and smart phones, to bridge the divide between what we are capable of and government processes that are, “stuck in the last century.” Calling on citizens to help create innovative solutions to problems both local and global, Citizenville uses examples of successful citizen-driven projects as well as interviews with politicians and thought-leaders to demonstrate the potential of individuals to bring about change.

The End of Big: How the Internet Makes David the New Goliath by Nicco Mele (St. Martin's Press): An overview of how technologies are changing the balance of power, The End of Big explores how our ability to stay connected is dramatically changing our world, in ways both seen and unseen. Author Nicco Mele, a Harvard Kennedy School faculty member, argues that traditional institutions are being disrupted in revolutionary ways, which has the potential to bring about far-reaching positive changes. But the disruptions may also bring some unexpected results including the creation of political demagogues, the replacement of investigative journalism with tweets and blog posts and the rise of fringe political forces.

Shareable Futures: The Future Reclaimed as a Commons (Hyperink): In the Shareable ant


==To Read==

http://www.uvm.edu/~gflomenh/ENV-NGO-PA395/articles/Lynn-White.pdf