

'''Linux Distributions = packaged and simplified versions of Linux'''


=Description=



"In the early days Linux and OSS source code was passed around amongst developers, but quite soon companies and volunteer groups began to distribute packaged versions of the Linux kernel with a graphical desktop, a selection of applications and crucially for normal users, a simple installer. These packages are known as 'distributions' or 'distros'. The big names are SuSE, Ubuntu, Mandriva, Debian and Fedora. Also worth a look are Linspire and Xandros, both trying to make Linux more attractive to inexperienced computer users by simplifying installation and selling approved, guaranteed software downloads. You can either buy a boxed set of your preferred distro which will generally come with manuals and some level of support, or download the CD or DVD .iso image files for free. I recommend you buy your first distro and make good use of the manuals and support, once you have a little experience you can download upgrades, or try a different distro.

Most distros include the following...

'''KDE, a desktop environment for UNIX and UNIX-like (inc. Linux) workstations''', similar to the desktop environments on MacOS or Windows. In addition to the desktop, KDE gives you an enormous range of applications for work and play. All KDE programs work together very well indeed, making it the preferred environment for Linux beginners. Includes Kontact, an 'Outlook' clone with mail, calendar, address book, RSS aggregator and PDA synchronization, everything to keep you organised and in touch.

'''Gnome is another desktop environment, provided by the Gnu Foundation'''. It is favored by many Linux enthusiasts over KDE, but not as pretty or as convenient for beginners. Gnome and KDE have both made huge strides over the last few years and now offer the everyday user a real alternative to proprietary operating systems.

'''OpenOffice''' derives from Sun's Star Office suite, released in OSS form a couple of years ago and recently upgraded to version 2. '''Open Office provides all the features any office worker is likely to expect''' and is almost totally compatible with MS Office, the only exception being some esoteric macros. OpenOffice is available for Linux, Mac and Windows."
(http://www.linuxforums.org/misc/linux__open_source_software:_the_present.html)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Business]]