'''* Book: The Listening Society. A Metamodern Guide to Politics. Book One. By Hanzi Freinacht. Metamoderna ApS, 2017'''

URL =


=Description=

From the publisher:

"As we move from the industrial age and its nation state to an internet age with a globalized postindustrial market a question presents itself: What is the next major developmental stage of society after the liberal democracy with a balance between capitalism and welfare state?

In this book Hanzi Freinacht offers a compelling answer to this question. We are reaching the limits of modern society and we must work to achieve a metamodern society, that is, a society which goes beyond modern life and its institutions. The metamodern society of the future is a listening society; a society more sensitive to the inner dimensions of human beings.

Drawing upon an elaborate weaving of psychology, sociology, political science and philosophy this book lands in a positive vision for the future. It shows how a clear description of human psychological growth – how we grow as human beings – can also offer us key insights into how global society can and should evolve in the internet age. A politics that can help humans grow to the later stages of psychological development is also one that can be capable of meeting the staggering challenges of our time.

In the first part of the book Hanzi examines the politics and culture of the Nordic countries and shows how these progressive societies offer a fertile ground for metamodern politics. The basis of such metamodern politics is also described. In the second part of the book he turns to developmental psychology, describing how humans evolve through a series of stages – and how this matters immensely for the happiness and survival of us all.

As this story unfolds – in a uniquely provocative genre breaking manner – you will also glean insight into your own developmental stage and those of people around you."


=Review=

Elke Fein:

'''1. General Comments:'''

"The book is definitely inspiring reading to anyone interested in integrally informed politics and
probably a long overdue wake-up call for postmodernists, with its convincingly laid out claim that
“there is no safe political position” (p. 151) and that it’s time for postmodernism to face its own
inner contradictions. It also contains convincing pieces of analysis when it comes to reinterpreting
the evolution of political governance and socio-economic conflicts over the past 2-3 centuries
(finally an integrally informed sociologist!), as well as numerous worthwhile ideas helping to
conceive ways for transcending the left-right divide and other challenges of metamodern/integral
politics (p. 45). Part of the more concrete sections is Hanzi’s description of the Danish political
party Alternativet (The Alternative) which is trying to put elements of these new approach to
politics into practice since 2013 (chapter 5)."



'''2.Detailed Review:'''

"The term “listening society” refers to the idea of a societal culture of awareness that listens –
and responds to the needs of its citizens in a deeper and more holistic way than the current
materialistic one, including the deeper longings of body, mind & soul. The book spells out elements
of a vision revolving around how we could “create and reproduce a society in which the average
human life experience is more emotionally satisfying and spiritually productive” (p. 95), assuming
that more happiness, in turn, will cause people to give something back to society and thus lead to
better communities, more sustainable economies and a healthier planet. The basis for this is a world
view and epistemology which Hanzi chose to call “metamodern,” drawing on theorizing in the
fields of art, aesthetics, philosophy and culture theory. Even though the book’s major resources
and inspiration come from Ken Wilber’s integral model (as one of the authors acknowledged in his
presentation of metamodernism at the IFIS Online Colloquium in April, 2019), this choice of
terminology is presumably also motivated by the consideration to reach a wider audience in the
academic mainstream this way.

The term “metamodern” is borrowed from the Dutch art scholars Timotheus Vermelen and
Robin van der Akker who noted a new trend of “pragmatic idealism” in arts already two decades
ago. They also describe it as both a product of and a reaction to postmodernism, embracing “doubt,
as well as hope and melancholy, sincerity and irony, affect and apathy, the personal and the
political, and technology and techne." (Levin, 2012). “Hanzi” now sets out to add more specific 
meaning to the term, in particular that of a developmental stage and related philosophy, thereby
aiming at making the concept travel to the social sciences and political practice.

So what is the essence of this socio-political metamodernism and how is similar to or different
from “integral”? To what degree are its contents borrowed from integral or actually go beyond the
latter in substantial ways? Even though these questions are not explicitly addressed in the book,
they were at least ever present in my reading.

Hanzi himself proposes three different definitions of metamodernism (a cultural phase, a
developmental stage, and a philosophical paradigm, p. 362f.). Readers interested in terminological
fine-tuning will have to go into Hanzi’s appendix where he offers a condensed version of his
conception of the metamodern paradigm (p. 363 ff.). My own reading is that metamodernism as
outlined in “The Listening Society” is one possible interpretation, expression and/or application of
integral thinking – even though the author(s) might not subscribe to this reading.

Given the Hanzi authors’ background in the social sciences, what they do offer beyond the
integral model per se are elements and foundations of a vision for a more integral society and some
political choices and changes of perspective that could help to bring it about. On the level of
modeling strictly speaking, there are some interesting terms and categories that one has not seen or
that are used differently in Wilberian models. However, I don’t see these pointing at completely
new dimensions that integral philosophy would not have been aware of before. Hanzi’s
metamodernism rather comes across as a “reframing” of integral for a post-modern (academic)
audience, which it explicitly speaks to in both tone and style, and in view of addressing more
specifically socio-political challenges. That, of course, is of value in its own right, given that much
of the academic mainstream is currently struggling with late forms of modernism (for part of the
sciences) and post-modernism (for the humanities and much of the social sciences), as well as with
their paradigmatic contradictions and limitations preventing more efficient action on pressing
global issues.


...


Giving a complete summary of the book’s rich content would go beyond the limits of this
review. I will nevertheless try to give some insights into Hanzi’s core ideas and some of the
inspirations I have gained from the reading.

The Listening Society is conceived as the first book of an envisioned series of several more to
come. In the book itself, two more volumes were announced, a developmental perspective on
history, including core principles of metamodern politics (n° 2), and a volume on “the Nordic
ideology” (n° 3 – this has actually just been published in May 2019 as number two), featuring
developments in the Scandinavian countries. According to the author, the latter have come
particularly close to a metamodern political culture, and are thus particularly well prepared for
implementing it. Meanwhile, however, the main Hanzi author has also been talking about a series
of up to six books that seem to be taking shape in Hanzi’s mind. Well, let’s see what comes next.

The series’ overall focus is on politics and transforming society based on an integral, or, in
Hanzi’s terms, metamodern paradigm. This includes an analytical perspective on historical and
present socio-economic developments and a multidimensional vision of how (a metamodern)
society could take responsibility for the development of its citizens. As Robert Kegan has coined
the vision of a “Deliberatively Developmental Organization,” The Listening Society spells out the
first steps towards the vision of a deliberatively developmental society.

In this context, considerable space is dedicated to the idea of personal happiness in a broad sense
of the term (p. 73ff.), which is conceived as a worthwhile socio-political goal. This is because
happy people whose immediate and deeper needs are met, are more likely to take responsibility for
others and the society as a whole. “Happy people are more productive in profound and complex
ways” (p. 78). Moreover, the term listening society refers to a new, more complex notion of welfare
– one that by supporting peoples’ development not only facilitates better choices and healthier,
happier lives of its members, but thereby also helps to actually saves costs which would otherwise
be generated for various kinds of treatments and by a considerable number of collateral damages
(p. 84). In Hanzi’s words: By “deliberately and carefully cultivat(ing) a deeper kind of welfare
system that includes the psychological, social and emotional aspects of human beings (…) the
average person (…) becomes much more secure, authentic and happy (in a deep, meaningful sense
of the word); (…) such people can then recreate society in a myriad of ways, solving many of the
complex, wicked problems that we are facing today” (p. 72).

While the book does give some examples as to how this could happen, drawing on happiness
research and an impressive list of references from meditation research documenting meditation’s
multiple benefits (pp. 96-103), it seems to be primarily concerned with laying the groundwork and
seeding the broader, overall vision than with defining concrete strategies and steps."


==The Metamodern Model==

"In a nutshell, the metamodern model is essentially introduced as a combination of four
dimensions that Hanzi presents as independent of each other: cognitive complexity, cultural code,
subjective state and depth. The first two dimensions: personal (individual) cognitive development
and socio-cultural development (or “code”) come across as elements from the Wilberian integral
model. Cognitive complexity is essentially presented based on Michael Commons’ Model of
Hierarchical Complexity (MHC); cultural code appears to be a modified version of Spiral
Dynamics. The two other dimensions, state and depth (p. 158), differ from the Wilberian integral
model to some degree, even if probably less substantially than with regard to their relevance and
positioning in the Hanzi model. (Unfortunately, Hanzi’s model is not visualized anywhere in the
book, so that the reader has to mentally build it up from the text on her own). Let’s look at each of
the dimensions successively, with the two developmental ones going first.

Cognitive Complexity: The fact that Michael Commons’ MHC is given a particularly prominent
place as “the by far most scientifically viable and consistent [model], and the one that indisputably
has the strongest empirical evidence” (p. 171) is less surprising, given that the Hanzi author has
spent several months working with Commons in the US after completing his dissertation. Since the
MHC is well known to IR readers, I will not bother summarizing its merits and contents, but rather
report some of the dissonances I stumbled over during my reading. While there is no doubt about
Hanzi’s assertion about the solidity and mathematical basis of the MHC, I had to read twice when
it comes to some of Hanzi’s other claims. For example that “Commons is the only one that has
discovered one [i.e. cognitive complexity, E.F.] of the [Hanzi’s] four fundamental dimensions of
development” (p. 173) – what about the Piagetian founda
tions of cognitive developmental research
in the 1930s?
Equally irritating is Hanzi’s treatment of essentially “all of the (other) holistic adult development
theories” as “fail(ing) to grasp quite what it [development] is” (p. 172). Without any mention of
the specific goals and approaches of the respective theories, Hanzi somewhat seems to criticize
everything that is not MHC, precisely for not being MHC. For instance, he claims that renowned
researchers of ego development such as Robert Kegan, Jane Loevinger and Susanne Cook-Greuter
“mix things up” or “blend in issues of personality into the different stages and spice it up with a bit
of psychiatric diagnostics (where the lower stages are described as psychopaths, more or less),” p.
173. – Excuse me?! Several similarly bold claims about other authors are based on similarly fluffy
grounds that often raise more questions than they answer.

There is no discussion of the distinction between hard and soft stage models and related debates
on measurement (see Stein & Heikkinen, 2009), nor of their respective merits and limitations. Just
plain judgement. What’s worse, Hanzi claims that “the main problem of many of the adult
development theorists, from Jane Loevinger and Susanne Cook-Greuter to Robert Kegan, stems
from the fact that their authors are at this [the MHC systematic] cognitive stage” (p. 201) (sic!).

...

The second developmental dimension in the Hanzi model of metamodernism is sociocultural
development or, as he puts it, cultural code, evolving through a range of symbol stages from A
(archaic) to G (metamodern). Here again, the author draws heavily on work by preceding
researchers, namely Jean Gebser, Clare Graves and Don Beck/Chris Cowan’s Spiral Dynamics.
Even though he slightly modifies some of Beck/Cowan’s stage names (“Faustian” for “Red” or
“Imperial” and “Post-Faustian” for “Blue” or “Mythic/Traditional” and calls the overall stage
category of the cultural code dimension “meta-memes,” there is no substantially novel quality
claimed for these stages description-wise. Given that the Hanzi model is not based on evidence of
its own, this is not surprising.

At the same time, Hanzi uses and introduce several terms, namely value memes, symbol stages,
“meta memes” and, later in the book, “effective value memes,” the definition – and distinction of
which remains somewhat unclear. While the contents of the seven memes/stages appear to be what
we know from the SD/Wilberian models, the almost synonymous use of some of these terms adds
some conceptual confusion. For clarification, Hanzi, as often in the book, refers to further
forthcoming volumes with a promise of more detail. (In this case, The 6 Hidden patterns of World
History is announced to discuss “the historical development of meta-memes, i.e. the overall
patterns that set the logic for what memes can be expected to show up at a certain stage of societal
development,” p. 213). Later on, we learn that the concept of “effective value meme” is in fact a
new, way more complex variable, first mentioned, but only vaguely explained on p. 174 as an
“overall pattern” generated by the relationship between Hanzi’s four dimensions complexity, code,
state and depth.


...


So let’s now turn to the two other dimensions that are introduced as core elements of the
metamodern model besides cognitive complexity and cultural code: subjective state and
(psychological) depth. To readers familiar with integral modelling, it comes as a surprise that Hanzi
presents these as the “inner dimensions”, as opposed the two former ones. According to the author,
the developmental dimensions describe “a kind of ‘exterior’ reality, meaning that they can both be
intersubjectively recognized and, in some sense, ‘objectively’ studied” (p. 249). While he sees the
two developmental dimensions as referring to “the organism’s behavior”, he refers to state and
depth as “the organism’s own inner experience”. This, then, is suggested as a cure to a claimed
“inner dimensions blindness – the failure to recognize and understand the primary importance that
peoples’ inner lives have in society” (ibid.). 


...


By “subjective state,” Hanzi refers to “higher” and “lower” inner states of being. They are
claimed to be different from emotions, but rather something “more fundamental” that includes
“some kind of sum or totality of how we feel” in each moment (p. 254). As an ordering principle
for subjective states, he then comes up with a scale from 1-13, reaching from lower states (“hell,”
“horrific,” “tortured,” “tormented”) to medium states (“very uneasy” to “joyous, full of light”), up
until the high states (“vast/grand/open,” “blissful/saintly,” “enlightened,” p. 260).

Reading chapter 12 on subjective states, one starts to sense that this (and the following)
dimension are of particular importance to the author for personal reasons, and that these insights
are the product of his own inner growth process. In fact, he does share some biographical and
family background in this regard: “During most of my adult life, I have been followed by a sense
of tragedy, a subtle but pervasive sadness… (…) the aching heart became the main engine of my
life’s work” (p. 6). So while he has a whole backpack of deep difficult experiences here to draw
on, that have apparently not been adequately addressed by other/integral models, Hanzi also
concedes that “these fields have yet to produce a systematic theory of development equaling the
MHC” (which, as mentioned above, he considers as the most scientifically reliable model, p. 249).

Different from the stage descriptions in the first two developmental dimensions of the model,
there is no comparable description of the 13 states, either from personal experience, literary
accounts or other sources. Moreover, Hanzi suggests that one can only really understand states that
one has experienced oneself (p. 272). This, of course, not only makes it difficult to come up with
“objective” scaling and modeling strategies regarding the different states. The author limits himself
to the assertion that “even if my scale isn’t proven, it is certainly testable: you would need to device
a way of measuring physiological correlates and perhaps peoples’ self-described experiences” (p.
395, fn. 129). In any case, the question remains open, on which grounds the 13 state model has
been built by the author. Has “Hanzi” himself – or people he draws on – actually experienced the
full spectrum that he so clearly (yet vaguely) lays out in his book? Or, since at some point, he
admits that he hasn’t, do they come from “common sense,” single intuitive examples, or solid
scientific research? Based on his own premises and standards at least, it becomes close to
impossible to verify Hanzi’s model of 13 subjective states empirically.

But anyway, let’s assume they were meaningful categories. Because we need them to understand
the fourth fundamental dimension of Hanzi’s model, the idea of a spectrum of states that a person
has experiential access to, which he refers to as “depth.” Even though Hanzi claims that the four
dimensions are independent of each other, depth obviously has an immediate relation to subjective
states. He conceives depth as a product of the range (and thus number) of subjective states that one
has experienced out of the above described spectrum. The more states an individual has
experienced, the greater their psychological depth. Depending on whether one’s experience
includes more of the lower or more of the higher states, Hanzi speaks of “dark” versus “light”
depth. Just like for states, he stresses that “we are generally only capable of recognizing the forms
of depth that we have developed ourselves” (p. 298). At the same time, the empirical basis of the
emergence of this dimension of the model remains unclear."

(https://integral-review.org/pdf-template-issue.php?pdfName=vol_16_no_2_fein_review_of_freinacht_the_listening_society.pdf)


==Source==

* INTEGRAL REVIEW  August 2020  Vol. 16, No. 2, https://integral-review.org/pdf-template-issue.php?pdfName=vol_16_no_2_fein_review_of_freinacht_the_listening_society.pdf

[[Category:Integral_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]