Start of draft document.


=By country=

==Austria==

===Franz Nahrada===

f.nahrada(AT)treflex.at, +43 1 278780177  

==Canada==
===[[Tiberius Brastaviceanu]]===

==Finland==

===Petri Kola===

petri.kola@taik.fi, +358505811974, http://twitter.com/pe3

1. Tutkimusparvi - The Research Swarm
http://tutkimus.parvi.fi/index.php/Tutkimusparvi-in-english
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1457233
http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Research_Swarm_-_Finland  - from your wiki :-)

2. Somus - Social Media for Citizens and Public Sector Collaboration
http://somus.vtt.fi/english.html
http://tutkimus.parvi.fi/index.php/Somus-aiehakemus-arkistoitu

Presentation: Tutkimusparvi in the Digital Craftsmanship, seminar 
http://2009.pixelache.ac/events/digital-craftsmanship/

===Juha Kronqvist===

<juhatk@gmail.com> ; juha.kronqvist@taik.fi

===Andrew Gryf Paterson===

url: http://agryfp.info/

contact: agryfp [-at-] gmail .com

===Tanja Shivonen===

[http://vanha.hum.utu.fi/mediatutkimus/tanja_sihvonen_eng.htm Tanja Sihvonen], recently completed her PhD on computer games. She's also active in researching and participating in online cultures and their mixing with real life phenomena 

Email at hope@netster.com

===Tere Vaden===

Tere Vadén is a philosopher living in Tampere, Finland. He teaches art education at Aalto University, Helsinki, and is an editor of the Finnish philosophical journal niin & näin (http://www.netn.fi). He has published several articles on the philosophy of mind and language, as well as the books Wikiworld (with Juha Suoranta; Pluto 2010), and Artistic Research Methodology (with Mika Hannula and Juha Suoranta, Peter Lang 2014). One of Tere's research topics is open source and the various forms of peer production. He is one of the initiators of vertaisrahasto.fi (http://www.vertaisrahasto.fi), a peer fund for anonymous research proposals, and a contributor to the research initiative Statistical Studies of Peer Production (http://surveys.peerproduction.net/), supported by the P2P Foundation. 

#[http://nuvatsia.terevaden.net Tere Vadén]. [http://nuvatsia.terevaden.net/podpress_trac/web/345/0/four-stages-of-freedom.pdf A Critique of Cybercommunism]

===Jarkko Moilanen===
* M.Soc.Sc
* Doctocal candidate (University of Tampere)
* PhD working topic: "Peer Production economy - revolution in design, development and manufacturing". 
* [http://communities.ossoil.com Blog about Open Source development and Peer production communities]
* Developer & Maintainer of [http://surveys.peerproduction.net/ Statistical Studies of Peer Production]
* Email: jarkko.moilanen@uta.fi
* Twitter: [http://twitter.com/kyyberi kyyberi]

===Others===
* Sanna Marttila: sanna.marttila@taik.fi
* Juhana Kokkonen: juhana.kokkonen@gmail.com 
* Pirkka Åman: pirkkaaman@gmail.com
* Anu Määttä, narnua@gmail.com
* Professor Lily Diaz: diaz@taik.fi
Doctoral candidates:
* Mariana Salgado: mariana.salgado@taik.fi
* Blanca Acuna: sanna.marttila@taik.fi
* Joanna Saad-Sulonen: joanna.saad-sulonen@taik.fi
* Juhani Tenhunen: juhani.tenhunen@taik.fi
* Andrea Botero: andrea.botero@taik.fi 

You can see more about some of them here:
http://mlab.taik.fi/people/showgroup?g=doctoral
http://mlab.taik.fi/

==Greece==

See the entry [[Greece]] for an overview of the dynamic presence of P2P Foundation there. [[Vasilis Kostakis]] is the administrator of the Greek branch of [[P2P Foundation]].

==France==

#[http://p2pfoundation.net/User:AuberO Olivier Auber]
#[http://cfeditions.com Hervé Le Crosnier].

==Germany==

#[http://www.oekonux.org/ Stefan Merten]
#[[Siefkes, Christian]]
#Stefan Meretz

== Italy  ==

#Adam Arvidsson [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/ethical-economy/2007/11/19 The Ethical Economy] 
#Cosma Orsi. The [[Political Economy of Reciprocity and the Partner State]]. 
#Bertram Niessen [http://openwear.org/ Openwear (Open Source clothing community)]&nbsp;[http://www.edufashion.org/ Edufashion (EU project for collaborative fashion and life long learning)]&nbsp;[http://b3rtramni3ss3n.wordpress.com/ personal blog (social innovation, media art, sociology and p2p)]

==Spanish State==

* Dr. [[Mayo Fuster Morell]]. European University Institute (Italy). Institute of Govern and Public Policies - Autonomous University of Barcelona. 

==Sweden==

#Johan Söderberg. [[Hacking Capitalism]].

==UK==

#Dr Athina Karatzogianni, University of Hull, author of [[Cyberconflict]], athina.k at gmail.com
#Dr George Michaelides Institute of Work Psychology, University of Sheffield: '''[[Cryptohierarchies]], george.michaelides@gmail.com
#Dr Phoebe Moore [http://socialsynergyweb.com/cgi-bin/wiki2/Temp/download/free_software_free_time.ppt Free Software, Free Time PPT file]
#Andreas Wittel, Nottingham Trent University, andreas.wittel at yahoo.com

==USA==

#[http://PaulBHartzog.org Paul Hartzog]
#[http://blog.socialsynergyweb.com/ Sam Rose]
#[[User:J.M.Pearce|Joshua Pearce]] - [[Open Source Appropriate Technology]] and [[Open source 3-D printing of OSAT]] and [[Building Research Equipment with Free, Open-Source Hardware]]

==Where?==

#Ned Rossiter. [[Economic Options for Organizing Networks in Beijing]]

=By Topic=

==Commons Scholars==

From http://gemeingut.wikidot.com/future-of-the-commons.

===Participants to the "Retreat on the future of the commons", Crottdorf, Germany, June 2009===
    
* Andoni Alonso, Madrid, Spain
* Michel Bauwens, Bangkok, Thailand, is an active writer, researcher and conference speaker on the subject of technology, culture and business innovation. He is the founder of the Foundation for Peer-to-Peer Alternatives and works in collaboration with a global group of researchers in the exploration of peer production, governance, and property. He has been an analyst for the United States Information Agency, knowledge manager for British Petroleum, eBusiness Strategy Manager for Belgacom, as well as an internet entrepreneur in his home country of Belgium. He has co-produced the 3-hour TV documentary Technocalyps with Frank Theys, and co-edited the two-volume book on anthropology of digital society with Salvino Salvaggio. Michel is currently Primavera Research Fellow at the University of Amsterdam and external expert at the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences (2008). In February 2009, he joined Dhurakij Pundit University’s International College as Lecturer in Bangkok, Thailand, assisting with the development of the Asian Foresight Institute. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Bauwens
* Iain Boal, Berkeley, California, USA, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iain_Boal
* David Bollier, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA, (www.bollier.org) is an American author, activist, blogger and consultant who spends much of his time studying the commons as a new paradigm of economics, politics and culture. He pursues this work as an editor of Onthecommons.org and and Fellow at On the Commons, in collaboration with various U.S. and international partners. Bollier is the author of three books on different aspects of the commons: Silent Theft: The Private Plunder of Our Commons Wealth (2002) is a far-ranging survey of market enclosures of public lands, the airwaves, creativity, scientific knowledge, and much else. Brand Name Bullies: The Quest to Own and Control Culture (2005) documents the vast expansion of copyright and trademark law over the past generation at the expense of the public domain. And Viral Spiral: How the Commoners Built a Digital Republic of Their Own (2009) describes the rise of free software, free culture, and the movements behind open business models, open science, open educational resources and new modes of Internet-enabled citizenship. Bollier is Senior Fellow at the Norman Lear Center at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and co-founder and board member of Public Knowledge, a Washington policy advocacy organization dedicated to protecting the information commons.
* Nicola Bullard, Bangkok, Thailand
* George Caffentzis, Portland, Maine, USA, is a member of the Midnight Notes Collective and a coordinator of the Committee for Academic Freedom in Africa. He has taught in many universities in the US and at the University of Calabar (Nigeria). He is presently a Professor of Philosophy at the University of Southern Maine in Portland, Maine, USA. He has written many essays on social and political themes. His published books include “Clipped Coins, Abused Words and Civil Government: John Locke's Philosophy of Money”, “Exciting the Industry of Mankind: George Berkeley's Philosophy of Money”; “No Blood for Oil!” (an e-book accessed at http://www.radicalpolytics.org/). His co-edited books include: “Midnight Oil: Work Energy War 1973-1992)”; “Auroras of the Zapatistas: Local and Global Struggles in the Fourth World War”; “Thousand Flowers: Social Struggles Against Structural Adjustment in African Universities.”
* Massimo De Angelis, London, England
* Andreas Exner, Klagenfurt, Austria, *1973. Academic studies in ecology, research of vegetation ecology, social work. Former militant activist within the ecology movement, former attac-activist, former member of the network for a basic income. Currently crossbench councelor in the chamber of labour for the Green and Independent Unionists in Kärnten (www.grueneug.wordpress.com). Editor of "Streifzüge" (http://streifzuege.org) and member of SINET (http://social-innovation.org). Activist at http://solcom.ning.com, http://transitionaustria.ning.com, http://transitioneurope.ning.com. Books: together with Lauk & Kulterer "The limits of capitalism. How we fail on growth" (Ueberreuter, 2008, in German); together with Rätz & Zenker: "Basic income. Social security without work" (Deuticke, 2007, in German). Main focus of activities: Resources and capital, SolidarityEconomy; present in Facebook.
* Silvia Federici, Hempstead, New York, USA, is a long time feminist activist, teacher and writer. She was a co-founder of the International Feminist Collective, the New York Wages For Housework Committee, the Radical Philosophy Association Anti-Death Penalty Project and the Committee for Academic Freedom in Africa. She has taught at the University of Port Harcourt (Nigeria) and Hofstra University. She has authored many essays on feminist theory and history. Her published books include: "Caliban and the Witch. Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation"; “Enduring Western Civilization: The Construction of the Concept of Western Civilization and its Others” (editor); “Thousand Flowers: Social Struggles Against Structural Adjustment in African Universities" (co-editor). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silvia_Federici
* [[Mayo Fuster Morell]] Ph.D. thesis on governance of digital commons http://www.onlinecreation.info
* Hermann Hatzfeldt, Crottorf, Germany, http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Graf_Hatzfeldt (german)
* Silke Helfrich, Jena, Germany
* Prashant Iyengar, Bangalore, India, is a Technology/IP lawyer, academic and a new media activist based in India. He runs a free database of Indian Supreme Court cases (OpenJudis), and is currently a researcher with the Alternative Law Forum, Bangalore. He has also previously (2006-07) been an International Policy Fellow with the Open Society Institute.
* Rainer Kuhlen, Berlin, Germany, http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainer_Kuhlen (german)
* Peter Linebaugh, Toledo, Ohio, USA, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Linebaugh
* Stefan Meretz, Berlin, Germany, *1962. Ph.D. in material science, diploma in computer science, webmaster at german united services union (ver.di), managing free software projects. Research of political economy of free software and member of the Oekonux (Economy & GNU/Linux) network. Teaching German Critical Psychology. Co-founder of the Keimform blog (http://keimform.de/), a blog investigating germ forms of a new commons-based society. Running several web projects (http://meretz.de/), member of Facebook.
* Pat Roy Mooney, Ottawa, Canada, Executive Director. For more than thirty years, Pat Mooney has worked with civil society organisations (CSOs) on international trade and development issues related to agriculture and biodiversity. Mooney has lived most of his life on the Canadian prairies. The author or co-author of several books on the politics of biotechnology and biodiversity, Pat Mooney received The Right Livelihood Award (the "Alternative Nobel Prize") in the Swedish Parliament in 1985. In 1998 Mooney received the Pearson Peace Prize from Canada's Governor General. He also received the American "Giraffe Award" given to people "who stick their necks out". Pat Mooney has no university training, but is widely regarded as an authority on agricultural biodiversity and new technology issues. Together with Cary Fowler and Hope Shand, Pat Mooney began working on the "seeds" issue in 1977. In 1984, the three co-founded RAFI (Rural Advancement Foundation International), whose name was changed to ETC group (pronounced "etcetera" group) in 2001. ETC Group is a small international CSO addressing the impact of new technologies on rural communities. ETC has offices in Canada, the United States, and Mexico; and works closely with CSO partners around the world. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pat_Roy_Mooney
* Franz Nahrada, Vienna, Austria
* Richard Pithouse, Port Elisabeth, South Africa
* Christian Siefkes, Berlin, Germany, *1975. Ph.D. in computer science from the Freie Universität Berlin; works as a freelance software engineer. Co-founder of the Keimform-Blog (http://www.keimform.de/), a blog investigating how far the potential of commons-based peer production extends: Is a society possible in which peer production is the primary mode of production, and how could such a society be organized? Book: "From Exchange to Contributions: Generalizing Peer Production into the Physical World" (Berlin, 2007, http://peerconomy.org/), German translation: "Beitragen statt tauschen" (Neu-Ulm, 2008).
* Wolfgang Sachs, Wuppertal, Germany, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfgang_Sachs
* Miguel Vieira, São Paulo, Brasil, is a researcher in the field of access to knowledge, currently preparing a master's dissertation on the subject of "Intellectual commons and commodification", at the University of São Paulo (Education Faculty, department of Philosophy of Education). He has graduated in Communications (minor: Publishing) and Philosophy, both also at the University of São Paulo, and has a specialization degree on intellectual property (the course was promoted by UBV, SAPI and OCPI — respectively: Bolivarian University of Venezuela, and the Venezuelan and Cuban intellectual property offices). He has published some texts on the subjects of intellectual property and, more recently, collaborative production and the commons. Other academic interests include philosophy of science and technology, marxism, democratization of communication and the publishing industry. (Although right now focusing exclusively on the graduate studies, pursuing a professional career in the field of publishing.) He is also involved with access to knowledge through political activism. He is part of a brazilian collective called Epidemia, which keeps an eye on the intellectual property-related agenda, and has been active in the planning of the Science & Democracy World Forum (a side event to the WSF 2009) and in the demonstrations against "Projeto Azeredo" (a brazilian proposed law that would endanger privacy and threaten the existence of open wifi).

Source: http://gemeingut.wikidot.com/future-of-the-commons

[[Category:Research]]