

=Source=

Article: '''ARE IPR A BARRIER TO THE TRANSFER OF CLIMATE CHANGE TECHNOLOGY''' ? BY COPENHAGEN ECONOMICS A/S AND THE IPR COMPANY APS. 19 JANUARY 2009

URL = http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2009/february/tradoc_142371.pdf

=Excerpt=

"There are various schools of thought on this subject in the literature, including studies
adopting a comprehensive approach to technologies and modes of transfer, as well as
those examining selected cases more closely, can be found to provide evidence for IPR
functioning either as a barrier and a facilitator.

One strain of literature, represented by ICTSD (2008) and Khor (2008), examines the issue
of IPR protection from a wider perspective, exploring for example different modes of
technology transfer, different kinds of climate change technologies, and provisions in the
TRIPS agreement. Another strain of literature, represented by e.g. Branstetter et al.
(2005) investigates the role of IPR protection in concrete cases of technology transfer, at
particular points in time and places, particular firms, and involving particular technologies.

ICTSD (2008) concludes that “IP is potentially both an incentive and an obstacle to the
transfer of technology”. On the one hand, a certain amount of IPR protection is necessary
to sustain innovation to deliver climate change technologies, but on the other hand too
much protection can hamper transfer due to high costs. Khor (2008) acknowledges that
there is already a range of climate change technologies in the public domain where IPR
protection is not even relevant. And for those technologies covered by IPR, patents do
not automatically constitute barriers to transfer, because the presence of cost-effective
substitutes, high degree of competition among patent holders or low prices may work
against the potential for IPR to become a barrier. Moreover, even in those cases where
IPR does in the end increase the cost to the level where it becomes a barrier – or in cases
where patents are used for a complete denial of access4 – the TRIPS agreement offers
certain mechanisms to overcome these obstacles. Finally, Maskus et al. (2004) point to
the importance of potential barriers created by non-IPR issues, such as lack of institutional
capacity to absorb technologies, preferences of local suppliers or infrastructure deficiencies.

Another strain of literature looks more selectively into concrete examples of technology
transfer, under specific circumstances. Branstetter et al. (2005) have examined technology
transfer within US multinational corporations. They find that IPR reforms that
strengthen protection in a set of emerging economies facilitate technology transfer. This
is illustrated by an increase in royalty revenues from licensing following the implementation
of the reform. Barton (2007) has examined the extent to which four renewable energy
generation technologies are encompassed by IPR. He found that despite the presence
of IPR protection for these technologies, the holders of patents could not demand
higher prices for their products because of international competition and availability of
substitute products. Smith (1999) has found that weak patent rights enforcement prevents
the transfer of US technologies to destination countries where there is a high risk of imitation.
When IPR protection improves in the destinations where the risk of imitation is
high, technology transfers increase. Yi Quian (2007) has examined the effect of IPR reforms
on the levels of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry in 85 countries over 20
years. He finds that patent law reforms have a mildly positive effect on domestic innovation
although the effect is not immediate. Furthermore, there exists an optimal level of
patent protection, beyondwhich the effect on domestic innovation is negative."
(http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2009/february/tradoc_142371.pdf)


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Ecology]]