
=Description=

"There is an increasing amount of Live data in the web. It’s about what are you doing now. Shorter and more posts giving you better feeling of what is going on now. The live web is a social web where it is all about the conversations."
(http://blog.zcapes.com/?p=44)


=Discussion=
 
Posited by Marc Canter as one of the four conditions needed to realize an [[Open Mesh]]

[http://blog.broadbandmechanics.com/2008/04/how-to-build-the-mesh-4-the-live-web Marc Canter]: 

"The Live Web is a commodity. Everybody is gonna have it - so there won’t be any huge tollgates or lock-ins into one particular technology or vendor. Even Skype is finding that out today. By utilizing tcp/ip and http the Live Web benefits from having an infrastructure in place to build on. But the Live Web can only be practical if it’s ALSO connected to the world of POTS and mobile devices.

GSM (the standard for cell phones) is pretty ubiquitous, but there are other forms of cell phone technology out there (CDMA) but nobody seems to worry about that. The different speeds for uploading and moving data (none of which are interoperable) have fragmented the so-called 3G world. But its the handset manufacturers and carrier platform vendors who have hopelessly fragmented the world of cell phones - to the point where there are over 10-15 different development platforms to worry about to ship ‘mobile’ compatible software.

This just makes it that more challenging in connecting the Live Web into the mesh - and enabling any kind of vendor to mesh into that same opportunity - as the Big Boys enjoy today. But it can be done!

The incredible real-time communication vehicle which we call IM, chat or Twittering provides a base platform from which 100’s if not 1,000s of unique solutions and innovative use case scenarios are being born - as we speak.

But the Live Web is more than just communicating.

It is about presence and just knowing if someone if there or not. And the world of 3D immersive virtual reality. Its about a swarm grid of tiny sensors monitoring the status of some factory or city streets and reporting back 20 times a second. Harnessing technology to improve our lives and make a buck - is what its all about."
(http://blog.broadbandmechanics.com/2008/04/how-to-build-the-mesh-4-the-live-web)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category: Technology]]