
From 
From Stan Shroeder at
http://mashable.com/2007/08/23/live-tv-p2p/


"these applications let you setup your own streaming video channel, so it’s just a matter of someone capturing TV broadcast and streaming it to others. Through P2P magic it gets spread amongst thousands of users within minutes. Like most P2P applications, these can be used for much more than merely watching a bunch of pirated movies/TV channels, but in reality, well, that’s pretty much what they’re used for. Here’s a couple of better known applications we’ve tried out.
(http://mashable.com/2007/08/23/live-tv-p2p/)


=Examples=

Compiled by http://mashable.com/2007/08/23/live-tv-p2p/ :

[http://tvants.com/ TVAnts] - application with lots of sports channels, with installation and all commands in English.

[http://www.tvkoo.com/ TVKoo]- an oldschooler among these application, TVKoo has been around for quite some time. Creators claim TVKoo is spyware/adware/malware free.

[http://sopcast.org/ SopCast] - one of the best live P2P TV programs we’ve encountered, SopCast is simple, buffers content pretty fast, and can even be embedded into any browser. A Linux version also exists.

[http://www.pplive.com/ PPLive] - works with WMP11 and Windows Vista, but you might have to use proxies to get it to work.

[http://www.ppmate.com/ PPMate] - might be confusing if you don’t speak Chinese, as the installation and some of the instructions aren’t translated. The channels are, and you might get a laugh from reading some of the translations (war movies are battle movies, and the like). 


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Resources]]