
=Description=


David Korten:

"The corporate ruled global economy isolates people and communities from the sources of their food, energy, water, materials, and manufactured goods, leaving them dependent on corporate controlled global supply chains that are wasteful, unstable, unaccountable, and environmentally and social destructive. The underlying system structure and dynamics are in most every respect mirror opposites of those of the biosphere.

Working in opposition to the biosphere, the global economy is maintained only by unsustainable dependence on a non-renewable fossil fuels subsidy. It is already failing and its ultimate collapse is only a matter of time.

The living economies movement seeks to displace this failed economic system with a planetary system of resilient, self-reliant local economies comprised of human-scale, locally-owned enterprises that use local resources to meet local needs in cooperative alignment with the structure and dynamics of local ecosystems.
The living economies movement seeks to build a planetary system of resilient local economies comprised of human-scale, locally-owned enterprises that use local resources to meet local needs.

Up to this point in time, the living economies movement has focused on the enterprise as the primary unit of production. The [[Living Buildings Movement]] brings in a focus on restoring the household as a unit of food, energy, and water production. Each is an essential contributor to household and community livelihoods in a living future, and each creates opportunities for the other."
(http://www.yesmagazine.org/blogs/david-korten/living-buildings-living-economies-and-a-living-future)


=More Information=

* http://www.yesmagazine.org/blogs/david-korten/learning-from-the-biosphere


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Movements]]