
'''* Report: Local energy ownership in Europe - An exploratory study of local public initiatives in France, Germany and the United Kingdom. Energy Cities, 2017'''

URL = http://www.energy-cities.eu/IMG/pdf/local_energy_ownership_study-energycities-en.pdf

=Summary=

"The study aims to provide an initial exploratory analysis of the local energy ownership momentum in Europe by examining local initiatives in Germany, France and Great-Britain in order to illustrate the influence of national legal contexts. 


The study is divided in four sections:

- The first section aims to clarify and define the concepts used as regards local energy ownership;

- The second is an analysis of the reasons and motivations put forward to support bringing back the operational management of energy systems under local control;

- The third is a review of the main hurdles and risks faced by local authorities wanting to regain control of their energy systems and identifies potential solutions to overcome these obstacles;

- Finally, the last part sums up the main lessons learned and aims to open up avenues worth exploring to go further in developing a local public energy service in Europe."

=More information=

Other reports from Energy Cities:

* Cities heading towards 100% renewable energy - Food for thought and action [http://www.energy-cities.eu/IMG/pdf/publi_100pourcent_final-web_en.pdf]

This report provides guidance and solutions to cities and metropolitan areas anxious to embark on a 100% renewable energy path. It is based on the knowledge and experience of the authors’ networks, as well as on around 30 interviews of councillors and city employees from about fifteen French local governments. It also features 5 European pioneers: Barcelona, Frankfurt, Frederikshavn, Geneva and Malmö.


* The energy transition: new dialogues between cities & local stakeholders, May 2016 [http://www.energy-cities.eu/IMG/pdf/new_dialogues_cities_stakeholders_energy_cities_may2016_en.pdf]

An exploratory study for cities and diverse project leaders desiring to start a sustainable energy transition in collaboration with all stakeholders in their territory.
Energy Cities selected more than ten European energy transition initiatives, as diverse as they are innovative, anticipating new forms of governance and new ways to act and collaborate. The exploratory study does not only describe their process but it also analyses the synergies between the different stakeholders and the role the municipality plays in these initiatives. It identifies the key factors of their success and replication.


* The Energy Transition Chronicles Energy Cities, January 2016 [http://www.energy-cities.eu/IMG/pdf/chroniqueste_complet_en.pdf]

The Proposals for the energy transition of cities and towns (www.energy-cities.eu/30proposals) are illustrated with around a hundred of inspirational examples from all over Europe. In this document composed of five case reports, Energy Cities goes further and tells the tale of energy transition success stories. Because it is important to show that energy transition is “possible”. Why, how, with whom, for what results? We interviewed local players and decision-makers to find out more. Here are their stories…
Download the factsheets for Brussels-Capital (Belgium), Burgenland (Austria), Heidelberg (Germany), Schönau (Germany), Växjö (Sweden).






[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]