'''* Book: The Local Food Revolution. Gord Hume, 2010'''


=Description=

"In a provocative new book, author Gord Hume explores the relationship food has with building strong communities, how it is changing neighbourhoods and local economies, and how food and food-related issues have become critical new challenges for municipal councils. 

“Eating local” and the “100-mile diet” are movements that are impacting our society. Municipalities today are involved with everything from local farmer’s markets to the gigantic suburban big box supermarkets that can dramatically impact traffic patterns and downtown prosperity, while also reshaping suburban development. 

The book offers an unblinking look at how life in rural communities is being disrupted, the pressures on the family farm, and the steadily increasing sprawl of urban centres into green lands. Attention then turns to the shifts in the economy and the business operations of the food industry that are impacting traditional local economies and prosperity. This book also examines our fragile food chain and how vulnerable our society is to cracks in these vital linkages.

Traditional neighbourhoods, often built around the kitchen and the church, are undergoing dramatic changes today. Immigration patterns are a new and difficult challenge for most local councils, and few communities are offering sufficient support for smoothly integrating immigrants into their local community. One of the key factors in this process is ensuring foods familiar to immigrant families are readily accessible, and then teaching new citizens how to cook with local foods and utensils."
(http://www.municipalworld.com/index.php/BookShop/TheLocalFoodRevolution)


=More Information=

Video, [[Gordon Hume on the Local Food Revolution]] via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIiw0mMSbJA&feature=player_embedded

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Books]]