
== Introduction ==


[http://thecitizensmedia.com The Citizens Media® (CM)] is a Global Investment Co-operative connecting and supporting people and communities in the design and distribution of tools that increase their livelihoods. As members, how it invests and evolves is up to you. 

The idea of a '''Prosperity Graph''' came when asked '''"[https://www.facebook.com/ Facebook] creates a Social Graph. What sort of graph would [http://thecitizensmedia.com/ The Citizens Media®] create?"'''

''"The idea behind the Prosperity Graph stems from [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interest_graph interest] and [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_graph social graphs] but they’re not the same thing. The Prosperity Graph is used to trouble shoot meaningful questions that can create opportunity networks for the proliferation of value economies and sustainable change."'' – [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/meet-us?id=867#dtx-caroline-smalley Caroline Smalley], [http://thecitizensmedia.com/ The Citizens Media]

== How It Works ==
 
As [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/community-projects?id=1040 projects] and development of the [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/global-hub?id=1045 Global Hub] progress, we’ll use next generation* data analysis tools to extract, analyze and sort [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unstructured_data unstructured data], such as conversations taking place through mobile texts, comment threads and forums.

Working alongside data analysis groups, such as [http://www.tellagence.com/ Tellagence], we'll use this data to develop a '''Prosperity Graph'''. '''The Prosperity Graph''' will not only provide us with useful information, which can be sold to increase investor returns, but will provide us with the means to influence the platform for increasing community-enabled prosperity throughout the world.

The '''Prosperity Graph''' will be developed by processing data in identifying online activity that represents the evolution of value-driven, sustainable prosperity.

The graph will have utility and value because of the premise that understanding and mapping the path of context and behaviors relating to sustainable prosperity will enable us to identify how we can influence its spread both locally and elsewhere.

==== [http://thecitizensmedia.com/pub/section/data-analysis?id=1175 Learn More] ====


[[Category:P2P Accounting]]