
* Book: Industrial Evolution. Local Solutions for a Low Carbon Future. by Lyle Estill

URL = http://www.newsociety.com/Books/I/Industrial-Evolution [http://newsociety.com/var/storage/blurbs/9780865716742_toc.pdf ToC]


=Description=


"For many people, the word “industry” brings to mind images ofsprawling factories belching toxic emissions in a blighted natural landscape. “Industrial” has become synonymous with pollution, human rights abuse, and corporate greed. In Industrial Evolution, Lyle Estill seeks to reclaim the term, with its original connotations of hard work, diligence and productivity, and to show how community-scale enterprise can create a vibrant, sustainable local economy.

Industrial Evolution is a story of survival. It is about how the small group of committed entrepreneurs introduced in Small is Possible managed to keep their dream alive and thriving through the economic recession,emerging with a model of what a sustainable local economy might look like in a post carbon future. Compulsively readable and seasoned with light humor, this grassroots account demonstrates that ecological stewardship and enterprise at an appropriate scale can lay the foundation for abundance.

Industrial Evolution skips the doom and gloom and is all about solutions. By showing that it is possible to take the big out of industry, this book motivates people to work together in a meaningful way. Filled withinspirational tales of success, failure, perseverance, and real world experiences that anyone can relate to, Industrial Evolution is a must-read for activists, organizers, politicians, and anyone who cares aboutresilient communities."


=Excerpt=

Introduction via http://newsociety.com/var/storage/blurbs/9780865716742_intro.pdf


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Resilience]]