

=Directory=

By Michael H. Shuman & Doug Hoffer:

An Action List for Localization, adapted from the book The [[Small-Mart Revolution]] 

==Tools for Consumers==

(1) Directories of Local Business – Create lists of local businesses for Vineyard
residents and businesses in print, on line, in newspaper ads, and on coffee cups.

(2) Directories of Local Products – Highlight, in print or on line, the many locally
made goods or locally provided services that are available.

(3) Local Labels – Develop a local insignia of local ownership, so that consumers
know if a store is locally owned or if a product is locally made.

(4) Buy Local Days – Designate official days, weeks, months, or seasons, all of which
can provide the basis for a buy-local campaign.

(5) Local Currency – Mobilize the island to print its own “money,” like Ithaca Hours
or BerkShares, that can only be used by local businesses and consumers.

(6) LETS – Create computerized trading systems, especially popular in Europe, that
encourage locals to trade with one another without toughing mainstream money.

(7) Time Dollars – Set up a computerized system for tracking volunteer hours as a
way of legitimizing and expanding such contributions for the community.


==Tools for Investors==

(1) Reduce the Use of Credit Cards – Remind island residents that nearly all credit card
processing is nonlocal, and wasting precious local money on nonlocal high-interest
payments.

(2) Expand Small Business Loan Funds – Mobilize local banks, philanthropists,
foundations, and government agencies to expand the assets of revolving loan funds
for small business.

(3) Create Micro Funds – Consider setting up additional small-business funds in
partnership with the local banks. Several dozen depositors can pony up money,
create a lending pool, and then team up with the bank to administer the loans to
whomever you think is creditworthy.

(4) Invest Local – Encourage island investors, including part-time residents, to invest
more of savings in local business as a cooperative member, as a program-related
investor in a nonprofit, as a limited partner, or as a shareholder.

(5) Local Venture and Hedge Funds – Recruit local securities industry professionals
(perhaps retirees) to help create local investment funds that specialize in highperforming
local businesses.

(6) Technical Assistance for Small Stock Companies – Create a company that helps
small-businesses to issue local stock (i.e., tradable only intrastate), and then to
handle the ongoing reporting and due-diligence requirements.

(7) Local Underwriters – Set up a local investment company that helps successful local
firms create local stock issues, and that then sells the securities intrastate for a fee.

(8) Local Stock Markets – Put together an electronic trading platform to help local
business investors find and trade with one another.

(9) Local Investment Advisers – Set up a firm that specializes in helping investors
evaluate the performance of local business.

(10) Pension Fund Advocacy – Pressure pension funds in the region, whether private
or public, to invest in local real estate, local business, local venture and hedge
funds, and local mutual funds.


==Tools for Entrepreneurs==

(1) BALLE Chapter – Create a local business network (best linked with the Business
Alliance for Local Living Economies) so that you’re not alone. Use the alliance
to promote local purchasing, fight chains, solve problems, secure credit, and learn
skills.

(2) Producers Cooperatives – Join existing producers’ cooperatives or other kinds of
industry-specific affinity groups that collectively purchase, advertise, and lobby
for local members. Or start a new one.

(3) Bazaars – Help set up and participate in local business mini-malls, whether they
are weekend farmers’ markets or dedicated shopping destinations.

(4) Direct Delivery – Create or join a direct delivery service affiliated exclusively or
primarily with local businesses.

(5) Flexible Manufacturing – Form a network of local businesses that is ready and
willing to seize manufacturing opportunities as they arise.

(6) Buyers’ Cards – Team up with other local businesses to create instruments that
promote local purchasing, such as local credit cards, debit cards, loyalty cards,
and gift cards.

(7) B2B Marketplace – Set up a business that links local businesses to one another,
and takes a commission on each local “input” substitution.

(8) B2G Midwife – Create a business that aggregates small businesses into
compelling bids for government contracts and handles the paperwork in exchange
for a fee.

(9) Super-Incubators – Take existing small-business incubators (or start new ones)
and rededicate them exclusively to local business. Restructure them to operate on
a self-financing, venture-capital model.


==Tools for Policymakers==

(1) Indicators – Prepare quantifiable measures of the community’s quality of life
(economic, environmental, social, and political) and update them annually to hold
economic development policies accountable. Conduct public hearings in which
residents decide which indicators are most relevant, and then, put together an
annual report on the best ones, distribute it widely, and place it on a web site.

(2) Assets Analysis – Gather data on assets in the region, especially un- or underused
economic inputs like unemployed labor, deserted land, abandoned buildings, and
idle machinery, all to clarify what’s available for new or expanded small business.

(3) Subsidy Inventory – Perform a full evaluation of all subsidies given in the last ten
years to business (grants, loans, guarantees, tax abatements, capital
improvements, TIFs, or bond issues), and catalogue which, if any, went to local
businesses.

(4) State of the Region Report – Prepare an annual booklet with the latest assessments
of indicators, assets, and imports, as well as other inventories noted below, all to
strategically identify business opportunities with the greatest benefit for the
community.

(5) Community Reinvestment Report – Study which local depository institutions –
and, if any exist, which investment institutions – are reinvesting more than 90%
of their savings/investments locally, especially in affordable local housing.

(6) Pension Fund Analysis – Identify which pension funds, whether public or private,
specialized or mutual, might be capable of reinvesting locally.

(7) Good Communitykeeping Seals – Evaluate the performance of all businesses in
the region, and award a special seal to any firm that is not only locally owned but
also a good performer with workers, consumers, and the environment. This can
now be done through the B-Corporation process (www.bcorporation.net).

(8) Entrepreneurship Programs – Revitalize entrepreneurship programs in public
schools, community colleges, and local universities to emphasize local and small
business. Allocate municipal funds to help other institutions like churches, civic
groups, and small business associations set up entrepreneurship study groups.

(9) Mentorship Programs – Link established businesspeople (especially retirees with
extra time) with young and aspiring entrepreneurs.

(10) Place-based Scholarships – To retain the best and brightest, create a
scholarship fund that extends no interest loans to college-bound kids. (If they
return to and settle in the community after graduation, they enjoy no- or lowinterest
provisions; otherwise, interest rates kick up to market levels.)

(11) The Home-Grown Directory – Prepare a directory of local businesses
organized by product or business type that could help residents buy local. This
could then be distributed in hard copies and over the Internet to consumers.

(12) Regional Directory – Combine your home-grown directory with
neighboring towns around a regional theme.

(13) Selective Public Contracting – Give a 5-10% bidding advantage to local
businesses. Better still, demand that all bidders estimate anticipated multiplier
benefits.

(14) Small Business Bidding Assistance – Set up an office that helps local
business compete more effectively for public contracts.

(15) Broker B2B Deals – Consider replicating the model of the Oregon
Marketplace, which in the 1980s and early 1990s helped local businesses buy
cost-effective inputs from local suppliers.

(16) Local Currency – Support or create a local scrip, since only businesses
and service providers committed to re-spending locally will be interested in
accepting the currency. Pay bonuses or raises to public employees in the scrip,
and accept scrip for partial payment of taxes, both of which Philadelphia did
during the Great Depression.

(17) Invest Local – Begin moving municipal investment, including surplus
revenues and pension funds, into local business either directly or indirectly
through local-business venture, hedge, or mutual funds.

(18) Smart Growth – Revamp zoning to permit more kinds of businesses in
more kinds of places, especially home-based businesses. More fully use
developed land and buildings before grinding up green space or farms.

(19) Smart Schools – Refurbish older, smaller school buildings instead of
building newer, bigger ones. Make it easy and safe for children to walk or bicycle
to school.

(20) Smart Taxes – Phase out taxes on business, income, sales, and property,
and phase in revenue-neutral taxes on energy, nonrenewable resources, pollution,
and nuisances. If more revenue is ever needed, use Henry George property taxes
(on land, not on improvements) to spur business.

(21) Smart Wages – Create a “living wage” to eliminate most working poverty
in the community. Use savings in welfare programs to ease the transition for
burdened small business. Don’t lament, but celebrate, how these scare away
chain stores."

(https://mvcommission.org/sites/default/files/docs/leakagestudy.pdf)

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Localization]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]