
'''* Article: The local food movement in Belgium: from prefigurative activism to social innovations. By Geoffrey Pleyers. Interface: a journal for and about social movements. Volume 9 (1): 123 – 139 (2017)'''

URL = http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Interface-9-1-Pleyers.pdf

=Abstract=

"This article provides an analysis of the action logics and challenges that
underline the evolution of the local food sector in Belgium and the challenges
that these actors face in a new stage of the movement for local, organic and
fair food.

Since 2000, disparate local movements have spread all over Belgium, in the
wave of the alter-globalization movements, critical consumerism and
prefigurative and concrete actions against neoliberalism.

Regional networks of those groups have progressively emerged, and have
become socio-political actors. While prefigurative activism and the original
critical stances towards markets and mainstream economics remain present
in many groups, a rising part of the local food activists now draw on a
confluence of critical consumption, ecological transition, the social economy
and solidarity and local development."
(http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Interface-9-1-Pleyers.pdf)

=Excerpts=

==On the political origins of the movement==

"The current renewal of local food networks in Western Europe, and notably in
France (Zimmer, 2011), Italy (Toscano, 2011) and French-speaking Belgium
finds its roots in the alter-globalization movement in the early 2000. In France,
the new local food network setting, AMAP2, was launched in 2001 by small
peasants and a local section of the alter-globalization network ATTAC and was
directly inspired by the US groups for “Community Supported Agriculture”.

In Liège, two social and cultural centres particularly active in the local alterglobalization
movement were also among the first ones to start direct purchase
groups for local food. The “Beau Mur” hosts both the local section of ATTAC and
one of the larger group of local food consumers in town. It gathers over 80
families every Tuesday. A frontrunner of the local alter-globalization movement
and the heart of the "Social Forum in Liège" in mid-2000s, the autonomous
social and cultural centre "Barricade3" launched its “GAC” as early as 1999. It
organizes a dozen talks a year about food, denouncing the hold of transnational
corporation over food and pointing to concrete alternatives. In 2013, Barricade
was again the main initiator of a new model of local food network: the “Liège
Food-Earth Belt” (“Ceinture Aliment-Terre Liégeoise”, see below). It involves
dozens of actors from different sectors and promotes the production and local
food consumption.

As I have showed elsewhere (Pleyers, 2010: 35-105) Barricade and most of the
local food initiatives emerged in a specific part of the alter-globalization
movement, bathed in a culture of activism4 that focuses on prefigurative
activism, personal subjectivity and a concept of change rooted in everyday life."

==Scaling through swarming==

"Rather than enlarging its various groups, many groups thus opt for “emulation”
(Tarde, 2001) and “swarming” rather than a growing organization (Pleyers, 2010: 93): “We don’t seek to build a big organization but many, many small organizations, each maintaining its specificities.”
By doing so, they hope to maintain convivial and participatory group dynamics and to counter the trend towards institutionalization that usually characterizes civil society organizations and solidarity economy projects. When a group grows, the interpersonal dimension progressively gets lost and the separation between the project entrepreneurs and the more passive “consumers” widens. These actors lead us to reconsider the importance of local level in a globalized world."

=More information=

* [[Collective Food Buying Groups]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Belgium]]

[[Category:Articles]]