
=Description=

Translated from Frédéric Bosqué, via DeepSeek:

"It is a (in our case, digital) currency issued and used within a limited territory, complementing the euro, with the aim of relocalizing the economy, strengthening community exchanges, and promoting durable and essential goods and services for residents. Managed democratically by citizens, LCCs bring meaning back to every transaction by directing spending toward ecological and solidarity-based initiatives. They do not replace the euro but add "a touch of soul to money" and become a practical tool for an economy serving the common good.

In the QRT (Quartier à Réinventer Ensemble) of Lustrac, the Abeille (Bee) was introduced in 2031 to distribute part of the basic income and facilitate local exchanges. This short-circuit circulation ensures that every euro remains within the local economy rather than leaking out to distant multinational corporations."

([https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/pionniers-de-la-ruralit%25C3%25A9-20-comment-en-50-ans-nous-avons-bosqu%25C3%25A9-cfkxe/])

Notes on Translation Choices:

"Monnaie Citoyenne Locale (MCL)" → "Local Community Currency (LCC)" (or "Community Currency" if you prefer a simpler term).

"L’Abeille" → Kept as "the Abeille (Bee)" since it’s a proper name, with an explanation if needed.

"QRT" → Kept as "QRT" (Quartier à Réinventer Ensemble / Neighborhood to Reinvent Together) with a brief clarification in parentheses.

"Revenus d’autonomie" → Translated as "basic income" (or "autonomy income" if it’s a specific local concept).


==Original French-Language Text==

"Monnaie Citoyenne Locale (MCL). C'est une une devise (pour nous numérique) émise et utilisée dans un territoire restreint, en complément de l’euro, afin de relocaliser l’économie, renforcer les échanges de proximité et valorisé les biens et services durables et vitaux aux habitants. Gérées démocratiquement par des citoyens, les MCL redonnent du sens à chaque transaction en orientant les dépenses vers l’écologique et le solidaire. Elles ne remplacent pas l’euro, mais elles apportent « un complément d’âme à la monnaie » et deviennent un outil concret pour une économie au service du bien commun. Dans le QRT de Lustrac, l’Abeille a été utilisée à partir de 2031 pour verser une partie des revenus d’autonomie et régler des échanges locaux : cette circulation en circuit court garantit que chaque euro reste au service de l’économie du cru plutôt que de s’évaporer vers des multinationales lointaines."

([https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/pionniers-de-la-ruralit%25C3%25A9-20-comment-en-50-ans-nous-avons-bosqu%25C3%25A9-cfkxe/])


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Localization]]