
= Any challenge to neoliberalism must go much further than making demands
on the state, argues HILARY WAINWRIGHT. And we must avoid the false
dichotomy between organising locally and on a broader stage

=Discussion=

A contribution by [[Hilary Wainwright]] which appeared in Red Pepper, June-July 2013 issue:

"The power of global connections,’ declares
the first image of a revolving ad for Bank
of America/Merrill Lynch. It shows a
florescent, pulsating line. The following
image is a silhouette of solitary man
on a bicycle, set against a shadowy mountainous
background. His mobility is clearly limited, confined by
territory. The caption here is ‘human capital’.

By implication, the mobility of finance comes to the
rescue to realise the potential of humanity, landlocked
in its local confines. We are meant to imagine that
global finance and humanity are all part of the same
flow moving forward as smoothly as one slide flows
into the next. Imagine the slides replaced by images
of the struggle over the Belo Monte dam on the Xingu
River in Amazonia, where workers and indigenous
people confront the Brazilian government and its
private corporate partners; or of the water wars in
Cochabamaba, Bolivia, where water predator Suez SA
was kicked out and the company taken over by an
alliance of citizens’ organisations; or of local protests by
Boycott Workfare, a UK-wide campaign to end forced
unpaid work for people who receive welfare that has
forced dozens of companies and charities to withdraw
from workfare schemes.


'''A constellation of power relations'''

These alternative images would convey well the
argument of the social geographer Doreen Massey
that localities can best be understood as ‘a distinctive
constellation of social relations and therefore relations
of power, which themselves spread around the world’.
She argues for a concept of power-geometries in which
localities are not simply the victims (at the receiving
end) of globalisation but also the loci of its production
and reproduction.

A corollary of this, she argues, is ‘that places are
differentially located within those geometries. Chad is
in a very different position from the UK; Oldham in a
very different position from London.’ This points to the
importance of investigating the significance for capital
of different localities, different ‘constellations’ of social
and economic relations – rather than thinking of ‘the
local’ as a blanket concept. But this is to leap ahead.

Massey’s focus on the power relations of
place gives us a conceptual tool to move from the
conventional, bounded notion of the local to one that
views the local as a site of power and counter-power in
the context of global capitalism. Her understanding of
the way relationships of place produce and reproduce
capital enables us to avoid both the false binary of
local versus global and the flawed optimism about
the local as a means of escape from corporate and
systemic power.

From Massey’s work, I will draw an understanding
of the local as no more inherently ‘good’ than the
global is inherently ‘bad’ but as a context of changing,
conflictual, unstable relations of power. I will use this
framework to clarify some of the issues that Greg
Sharzer usefully raises but does not consistently
follow through. He tends to abstract the importance of
‘demands on the state’ from the often unpredictable
dynamics of power struggles in and beyond the local.


'''Local sites of counter-power'''

Let’s consider and illustrate different aspects of locality
as a site of potential counter-power. Capital, for all the
mobility that is its distinctive feature, also depends
in important ways on the social relations of place. It
has to invest in some place at some point; it has to sell
somewhere. Though new technology has qualitatively
enhanced capital’s flexibility, it still has to physically
locate at least some of its operations.

Take banks, for example, the very hubs of capital’s
mobility. Many locate in the City of London. Here they
depend on cleaners who live nearby. These workers
have been using this reliance on their labour to win
decent wages against bosses who can earn in a few
days what the cleaners earn in a year. In 2007, these
cleaners got organised through the Unite, Unison
and GMB unions, supported by London Citizens and
the campaign for a living wage. Through a mixture
of guerrilla industrial action and public naming and
shaming, they won a rise. Vital to their counter-power
vis a vis the City were the alliances they had built, with
roots in local sources of power: religious and cultural
associations, sympathetic academics, local union
branches. These alliances were important in building
the confidence, capacity and cohesion of the cleaners
and the strength of solidarity with their action.

The dependence of corporate retailers on local
markets and on the local reputation of their brands
provides another example of where the locality as a
site of reproduction of capital has created an effective
source of counter-power. Concerted campaigns to
block Tesco, and corporate coffee chains such as
Starbucks and Costa indicate how this leverage is
being used. Often they are associated with networks
of independent or social or co-operative retailers.
And although the origins of these campaigns were
often modest, starting from seemingly narrow ‘localist’
sentiments, they are increasingly linking up into a national networks.

The very mobility of capital, and its ability to get
away with closing factories
and taking over public
assets in search of ever
higher profits, depends
significantly on the lack of
information, organisation
and confidence of local
workers and citizens.

Thus, struggles that have
successfully blocked
the closure and asset
stripping of a factory have
usually involved both
militancy in the workplace,
collaboration with sympathetic researchers and
alliances with surrounding communities.

‘When management came to take back the factory,
it was the presence of the local community that
stopped them,’ says Leano Morais, an activist lawyer
describing the ability of the worker-managed takeover
of the Flasco chemical container plant near Sao Paolo
to see off the corporate asset strippers. Similarly,
the concerted attempt by predatory corporations to
privatise water across Latin America was blocked
by trade unions linking up with citizens and
municipalities. In the process, they created a global
network, spreading the lessons of each local struggle.

A similar exercise of locally-organised counterpower
is evident when capital tries to privatise public
space. In 2009, Durban city council tried to sell off the
vast and well-used Warwick Early Morning Market by
Durban’s main station for a shopping mall. This move
was faced with a sustained and eventually successful
resistance of stallholders, organised through Streetnet,
the organisation of informal workers and street
vendors, and backed by the municipal workers’ union.
Streetnet is an interesting hybrid organisation, whose
activities include the development of an alternative,
solidarity economy.


'''The state in a broader context'''

A condition for the nature and impact of the counterpower
asserted in these struggles is not only, or even
primarily, the fact that they are making demands on
state institutions. Greg Sharzer is right to insist on the
importance of demands on the state. But what was
also of critical importance, in all these cases, was the
ability to create organised bases to sustain in daily life
alternative values and social goals.

Here it is important to recognise the repercussions
of the scorched-earth strategies of neoliberal
governments. The traditional, mainly trade-union
bases of the left and its strategies for state power have
been radically weakened. People are everywhere
having to remake or newly create bases of solidarity.

They are building on and connecting all the various
and often new ways in which people come together to
struggle for justice – hence collective food buying and
community gardens, as well as trade union branches,
social centres and informal economic networks. In
combination, they have created resilient sources of
power able to shift the balance in the constellation
of power relations that constitute a locality and its
relation to global capitalism. These in turn provided
autonomous bases for an engagement with the state,
whether local or national or in some form global.

The issue of demands on the state, then, needs to
be understood in a very much more complex context
of plural sources of power than is currently common
currency on the left. Greg Sharzer’s approach, though
containing many insights, tends to fixate on this
important issue of the state at the expense of paying
detailed attention to the particular ways people are
seeking to overcome their subordination. It leads him
to false counterpositions of building capacity and
self-organisation with ‘demands on the state’.
For instance, the website of the Detroit Black
Community Food Security Network depicts not an
‘organisation which assumes, fundamentally, that
resistance is useless’ pitching self-reliance as in itself
sufficient, but one that is engaged in the wider struggle
for social change. It was playing a central part in the US
Social Forum in Detroit, for example, with the network’s
chair, Malik Yakini, insisting how ‘important it is for
all those who share a belief in mass social change to
create alliances and work for that change together’.

That’s not just rhetoric. The DBCFSN was on
the logistics and cultural committees of the forum
and involved in organising tours of Detroit for
its participants. Its policies involve an extensive
engagement with the state to protect the space for
urban gardens from corporate developments; to get
schools and hospitals to buy food from local sources;
and so on.

I recognise from my experiences in the
women’s movement this combination of organising
autonomously for change, around needs unmet or
indeed exacerbated by the dominant insititutions, and
at the same time struggling to control public resources.
This kind of hybrid is becoming increasingly important
as state institutions become hollowed out and people
through collaboration find that they can
create transitional solutions that also feed
into the wider political struggle.

To appreciate the importance of
combining efforts at direct, collaborative
solutions to urgent problems with a wider
political movement, we need a further
set of tools. These can be drawn from
the practice of social movements from
the 1960s onwards and from a critical
realist epistemology that goes beyond
both the positivism associated with the
closed system of the nation state and
the post-modernism that flourished in
the first phases of globalisation and the
decomposition of these certainties.

Distinct meanings of power
One such tool is to make a distinction
between two radically distinct meanings
of power. These are, on the one hand,
power as transformative capacity and,
on the other, power as domination.
Historically, mass social democratic
parties have been built around a
benevolent version of the second understanding. Their
strategies have been based around winning the power
to govern and using it paternalistically.

The understanding of power as transformative
capacity is related to a different understanding of
social change, implicit in much of the practice of
recent movements. Crucial here is the insistence first
on refusing to reproduce relations of oppression and
exploitation. This is associated with struggling to create
spaces for change to illustrate and develop in practice
alternative values – not as an end in itself, but as a basis
for society-wide transformation, shifting the balance of
power and cultural hegemony to this end.

The struggle with the state thus becomes not the
overriding goal but a distinct and very necessary
strategy for control over the means of domination in
order to use these against capital and as a resource for
transformative capacity. This then means it is possible
both to build sources of power autonomous from the
state and to make demands on/engage with the state.
The Syriza experience illustrates this combination,
as well as the unresolved tensions within it. Because
so many of its activists at all levels were shaped by the
social movements of the 21st century, they recognise
the driving importance of transformative capacity.

At the same time as organising for governmental
power – the power of domination – they recognise
that, as Andreas Karitzis, one of Syriza’s key political
coordinators emphasises: ‘It is clear that what is also
decisive is what you are doing in movements and
society before seizing power. Eighty per cent of social
change cannot come through government.’

This points to the importance of developing power
as transformative capacity, which more often than not
is local in its roots, as a key and complex goal of any left
activist or organisation. This in turn indicates a shift in
priorities from those implied by an exclusive struggle for
state power, whether electoral or revolutionary. There
is a need for a certain ‘bending of the stick’ away from
the traditional model of political parties, towards forms
of political organisation able to learn from struggles
occurring in and across local power relations; building
alliances and forms of democratic organisation that have
such learning and feedback at their core; developing
forms of popular education in Paolo Freirian mode to
realise latent capacities; creating contexts for debate
and new levels of politicisation between local actors
– conflict and debate being an important part of the
development of transformative capacity.

This strategic concept of organising for change
now as part of a long-term struggle for future systemic
change has a special relevance today, as capitalism
goes through what David Harvey analyses as a
continuing cycle of decentralisation and centralisation.

As the Merrill Lynch advert implies, capital in its
predatory manner is very interested in what often
begin as local initiatives – from organic food production
through young people creating new musical or artistic
forms, to hubs of open software producers. It’s all
human capital, there to be appropriated to create
financial value to feed the drive to accumulate. If we
are to resist and reverse this, so that all this diffuse
entrepreneurialism becomes part of a process of
social value creation, we need to recognise it as part of
the constellation of power relations to which Doreen
Massey calls our attention.

After 30 years of the right depoliticising the local –
of which ‘localism’ is the latest variant – the key issue
is to understand and open up political debate and
choices about the future of this diffuse and productive
creativity. And we must work at a much deeper seam
than that of ‘demands on the state’."


[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]