'''= LogiLogi Manta is an hypertext web-platform developed for LogiLogi.org by the LogiLogi Foundation. It tries to combine the virtues of good conversations and the written word by providing a form of quick, informal publication and annotation of short texts (so called Logis) via the web.''' [http://www.logilogi.org/pub/doc/app/] 


URL = http://www.logilogi.org/ [http://www.logilogi.org/pub/doc/app/] [http://en.logilogi.org/#/do/logis]


=Definition=

"In LogiLogi (LL) you write entities (logis), short texts and expand in other logis which all together make your point. Each logi has contenders, which are other logis of other users. Logis are ranked by anybody but always within a PeerGroup."
(http://roarmag.org/2011/11/the-global-square-an-online-platform-for-our-movement/)


=Description=

"The project never took off (like wikipedia did) because of critical mass, usability problems, and maybe being ahead of it’s time, but there are very interesting concepts there like MPOV (multiple points of view) in contrast of the NPOV (neutral) of the wikipedia style.

In LogiLogi (LL) you write entities (logis), short texts and expand in other logis which all together make your point. Each logi has contenders, which are other logis of other users. Logis are ranked by anybody but always within a PeerGroup, so you vote from the perspective of a group and when you navigate you also do so from that perspective, and you can change the peergroup to see how different peergroups rated contending logis.

Also your earn power in a peergroup if your logis are well ranked in that peergroup, which means that your vote is more powerfull later on. Anonymous voters have 1 of power versus 10 of registered users, for example.

This project aims to organize information, is not a proposal to take decisions, it’s just a way to organize vast amounts of information quickly by peergroups and balance the power of writers of each peergroup.

I think the main problem of this project not to be popular is that it needs critical mass to actually see it shine, but for now it’s all theory.

This was a very short, simplistic explanation, but LL is the product of many years of work and study (mostly by Wybo) and there are many small bits in it’s code and functioning that are worth taking a look."
(http://roarmag.org/2011/11/the-global-square-an-online-platform-for-our-movement/)



[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]