
Indian epistemological concept referring to people's knowledge.

=Description=

Explanation from Avinash of the India-based Knowledge-sialogue mailing list:


"The term is constituted from two terms 'loka' and
'vidya' which have complex resonances in Indian languages, but the
concept of lokvidya is not something ancient. It was forged in the
process of grappling with the questions of comtemporary politics of
knowledge. In the background of certain debates, what was to be the
Third Congress of Traditional Sciences at Varanasi, India in 1998 was
renamed 'Lokvidya Convention', i,e, Convention on People's Knowledge.

So it is a concept (and a standpoint) in progress, created
specifically to re-position the direction of politics. It acquires a
richness of connotation, because 'lok' has a double meaning - it means
both 'world' and 'people', and these two meanings have existed
simultaneously. Vidya is any kind of knowledge that exists concretely
in society - it can range from specific individual competencies, to
esoteric bodies of knowledge, to art and science and knowledge of
communities like agricultural knowledge of farmers. For example, you
possess Internet vidya or computer vidya, which many people do not
possess. But your vidya is not the same as that of Bill Gates, because
it is informed by a different set of values, maybe even a different
logic, even though you may share some competencies with him.

'People's knowledge' seems to be an appropriate translation, and it
should be seen not completely divorced from the earlier formulations
of proletarian knowledge, traditional non-western knowledge etc. But
it cannot be equated with them. Just as Gramscian 'hegemony' cannot be
equated with 'superstructure' , because it was formulated specifically
to address the limitations of the latter. So my suggestion would be to
use the word 'lokvidya' freely whether in criticising it or
reformulating it. You must have noticed that each one of us tries to
construct it slightly differently. And this should be valued.

Perhaps we can say that it is knowledge in society that exists outside
of the institutinal structures of authority like science or religion.
It has no institutional structures of its own, it sustains itself in
the activities of ordinary life. Of course, none would like to say
that all institutionally created knowledge should be rejected. What is
being argued is that people as epistemic beings should have a free
relation with any authoritative knowledge in society. And people are
bearers of knowledge traditions, which need not be just experiential
or practical, which may have its own organisation. Life of a society
has this substratum of knowledge and activities and any social or
political order which takes away its freedom is tyrannical. Science
excluded this knowledge epistemically and was partisan to a tyrannical
social and political order, especially in non-western societies. The
order that subsequently emerged in the postcolonial societies has
worked out some combination of science and tradition. But the
tradition has been limited to certain institutionalised forms of
authority interpreted anew. People's knowledge or lokvidya remained
excluded. Now in the information age this straturm of knowledge and
activities is recognised in some manner, but the question is whether a
new form of tyranny is taking shape. And whether the management of
knowledge based on ICTs is at the core of this new order. When we
speak of knowledge management we are not speaking of a specific branch
of management, but to an order of knowledge. Unlike science it is not
a static order or a static organisation of knowledge and knowledge
activities but a dynamic machine. And if there is a new knowledge
machine, as part of an emerging global order, how can it be separate
from the other developments like US wars, explosion of media, and the
neoliberal economic order?"


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]