Over 400 libraries in the United Kingdom are under threat due to government cuts. Such vice can become virtue by encouraging volunteer support to expand library use for hosting events, such as discussion and debate, and housing publicly safe physical modes of production, like 3D printing and other craft tools and related materials. 

=Communal Operations=

[http://bishopsgate.org.uk/content.aspx?CategoryID=964 Bishopsgate Institute]<br>
230 Bishopsgate. London. EC2M 4QH<br>
020 7392 9200<br>
learning@bishopsgate.org.uk<br>
www.bishopsgate.org.uk/learning<br>
Monday to Thursday 10.00am - 5.30pm<br>
Friday 10.00am - 2.00pm<br>
Saturday 10.00am - 5.30pm<br>
Closed Sundays

[http://www.lewisham.gov.uk/myservices/libraries/branches/Pages/New-Cross-community-library-service.aspx New Cross Community Library]<br>
[https://trello.com/#board/community-engagement-project-communifying-local-libraries-new-cross/50be058597d6277565006a2d Trello Solutions Interface]<br>
283 285 New Cross Road.<br>
020 8314 8334<br>
libraries@lewisham.gov.uk<br>
Closed: Friday, Sunday, Monday (Volunteer Times :)<br>
10AM-7PM: Wednesday, Thursday<br>
10AM-5PM: Tuesday, Saturday

[http://www.durninglibraryfriends.org.uk/events Durning Library]<br>
Lambeth. Kennington. Durning Library.<br>
friendsofdurning@gmail.com<br>
167 Kennington Lane. SE11 4HF

[http://m.facebook.com/the.mill.e17?id=238438458680&_rdr St. James Street Library / The Mill]<br>
Reformed as a community centre, 'The Mill'<br>
Coppermill Lane<br>
44 20 8521 3211

[http://sydenhamlibrary.wordpress.com Sydenham Library]<br>
Managed by Darren Taylor of [http://www.ecocomputersystems.org.uk/OurServices.htm Eco Computer Systems]<br>
Operating costs covered by selling computers made from donated junk parts.<br>
Sydenham Road. SE 26

List of [http://www.ecocomputersystems.org.uk/contact.asp other communal operations] by Darren Taylor<br>

=Council. Endangered=

[http://soslibrary.blogspot.co.uk Sanderstead Library]<br>
Farm Fields South Croydon. CR2 0HL<br>
020 8726 6900

[http://m.facebook.com/groups/269577509754920 Upper Norwood Library]<br>
41 Westow Hill<br>
020 8670 2551

[http://m.facebook.com/profile.php?v=feed&id=142714125777678&__user=827336664 Robert Jeyes Library]<br>
High Road. Chadwell Heath. RM6 6AS

=To Reopen=

Brent Council closed 6 libraries leading to England's first legal action regarding library closure.

Brent. [http://www.northwesttwo.co.uk/friendslibrary.php Cricklewood Library]<br>
Property Owner: All Souls College, Oxford.<br>
Contact: Sonja & Sally: friendsofcricklewoodlibrary@gmail.com<br>
Pop-up library location: Olive Road<br>

Brent. [http://brentlibraries.wordpress.com/about/ Preston Road Library]<br>
Weekly Saturday meeting at 11am, The Windermeer.<br>
E-mail to confirm time.<br>
saveprestonroadlibrary@gmail.com<br>

Brent. [http://m.facebook.com/groups/222030217853609 Barham Library]<br>
Barham Park Wembley<br>
barhamlibrary@hotmail.co.uk<br>

Brent. [http://www.brent.gov.uk/property.nsf/pages/Former+Tokyngton+Library Tokyngton Library]<br>
Monks Park. HA9<br>
Campaign contact?

=Source=

[http://www.librarycampaign.com/local-groups/ Library Campaign. Local Groups]