=Directory=

According to Matthew McNatt, who posted this lecture series to the P2P Research Clusters Facebook group: “Lonergan's economics offers an explanation for and ‘reasoned way to modulate Kondratiev wave cycles, so this Fordham Lecture Series is also of potential interest to anyone who studies historical cycles.’”

== [http://www.philipmcshane.org/workshops/fordham-university-lectures-economics-2000/ Fordham Lecture Series] ==

1. “[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XjloPZJRN0 This Is Worth a Life]”

McShane begins by quoting Stephen McKenna, who, when he discovered Plotinus and pondered the possibility of translating the Greek into English, said “This is worth a life.”  He then introduces the challenge of identifying the basic variables of economics as an empirical science, providing examples from the emergence of the elementary sciences.


2. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FWO3PAus1uo Reading the Basic Diagram]

McShane lectures on the basic variables and basic diagram of Lonergan’s Economics at Fordham University, January 2000.


3. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jZ77qBizKtU Identifying Exchange Functions]

McShane lectures on identifying exchange functions in a static economy at Fordham University, January 2000


4. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SwLuKmTPmUA Distinguishing Levels and Flows in a Static Economy]

McShane lectures on distinguishing levels and flows in a static economy at Fordham University, January 2000.


5. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTm7QQTSJ28 What is Economic Control?]

McShane lectures on economic control at Fordham University, January 2000.


6. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cpqGGAZXXCI The Relationship Between CWL 15 and CWL 21]

McShane discusses the relationship between Lonergan’s writing efforts in the early 1940s and his later teaching and writing efforts in the late 1970s and early 1980s.


7. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gpkMGMsOYos The Redistributive Function]

McShane lectures on the distributive function and exchanges that are not immediately productive, e.g. mergers, buying/selling houses, buying and selling


8. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nznu4k6yW38 Seeing Manhattan, Systems, and Systematics]

McShane lectures on the challenge of reading the “baseball diagram” into Manhattan and discusses the possibility of a systematics economics.


9. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OY51JZPDEU4 Investments, Savings, and Credit]

McShane lectures on the fundamental meaning of credit and examines the claim that savings are equal to investments.


10. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Du2FRPkrq6c Microeconomic Autonomy]

McShane proposes that in good time there will be local economic advisors and democratic control of local economies. He contrasts this with “unenlightened” government creation of jobs.


11. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QRRuysmHFno Money, Credit, and Communal Promise]

McShane speaks about the non orthodox meanings of money as a dummy and credit as a communal promise.


12. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hKFYpYkIjiQ Education in the Axial Period] {Unlisted}

McShane speaks about rewriting grade school textbooks, efficient metaphysics, linguistics, musicology, and dance in the transition to a “third stage of meaning.”


13. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CghF8afCbx8 Reading For a New Political Economy] (CWL 21)

McShane elaborates on the challenge of reading classic texts and then contrasts the struggle to understand For a New Political Economy (CWL 21) with simple-minded nominalism.  He mentions his own eager efforts at a young age to reach up to Chopin’s meaning and notes that a similar effort with another classic, be it a concerto by Mozart, a painting by Cezanne, or the economics analysis of Lonergan, invites reverence and humility.

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]