=Discussion=

CARLOS A. MALLMANN and GUILLERMO A. LEMARCHAND:

“Intuitively it is rather obvious that '''the appearance of these long-term patterns of social behavior are of an interactive nature'''.

As we show later, there is a large set of empirical work that shows a long-wave pattern
in different indicators that are exogenous to the rules that economists postulate that
govern the economy. We consider that these non-economical long-wave patterns are
indirect '''evidence of the moods of social motivational concerns''' of different societies.

Societies are evolving systems which have their own holistic processes and their
component interacting subsystems such as, for example, the political and economical
subsystems. It is at the holistic level of societies where self-organizing temporal and
spatial patterns emerge which have manifestations in all of its subsystems. Our concep-
tual framework refers to the long-term billow-like dynamic processes at the holistic
level of societies and to their manifestations in its subsystems. 

For De Greene, this sort of evolving macro-psychological system or order parameter expresses the origin,
growth, diffusion, saturation, exhaustion, and decline of collective ideas in diverse
domains, namely: political, military, religious, scientiﬁc, technological, economic, social,
artistic, etc.

We could ﬁnd in these ideas the roots that will allow us to develop a theory capable
of connecting the individua lpsycho-social-motivational rhythms with the collective ones.

'''The individual members of the society contribute through their cultural and economical activities to the generation of a general ‘‘ﬁeld’’''' of societies with cultural, political, religious, social, and economic components. ''This collective ﬁeld determines the socio-political atmosphere and the cultural and economic standard of the society'' and may be considered as an order parameter of the system characterizing the ‘‘rhythm’’ in which the society exists.

'''Reversely, the collective ﬁeld strongly inﬂuences the attitudes and rhythms of  individuals in the society by orienting their motivations''', activities, by activating or
de-activating their latent positive and negative qualities and capabilities, and by extending
or narrowing their scope of thinking and action. One of the features of this sort of 
cyclic coupling of causes and effects is that self-accelerating as well as self-saturating
processes result and can be measured. Our mathematical model explains the
reasons for the oscillatory behavior.”

(https://www.academia.edu/13103863/Generational_Explanation_of_Long_Term_Billow_Like_Dynamics_of_Societal_Processes)

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]