'''=  Lorea, [[N-1]] and [[RedDry]]: Infrastructure for the self-organisation of networks and movements''' 

URL = https://lorea.org/


=Description=

"Lorea is a project to create secure social cybernetic systems, in which human networks will become simultaneusly represented on a virtual shared world.

Its aim is to create a distributed and federated nodal organization of entities with no geophysical territory, interlacing their multiple relationships through binary codes and languages.

… Lorea word comes from the Basque language and means flower…

Our seeds can be planted certainly many different ways. For example, as a federated series.

Right now, individuals or networks of people approaching lorea have the option to participate in any of our social networks, or create their own network. 

Visibility against autonomy.

To begin participating in any social network, simply register and begin experiencing it.

To build your own network, join the mailing list, comment on your intentions and we go.

More information about how to participate in the different layers of the project in this link.

Meanwhile, our nurtured army of fairies will work hard on the experiments, assess the views of users and will conjure spells that are necessary to make our flowers grow increasingly connected and beautiful.

Through the federation of data can exponentially increase the number of synergies that occur between people and information. Each further contribution strengthens the balance between efficiency and resilience of the community.

May come a time in which the platform is fully independent and generate their own resources that members need."
(https://lorea.org/index.html.en)


=Governance=

'Permanent Assembly of the Lorea Project

Its aim is to create a distributed and federated nodal organization of entities with no geophysical territory, interlacing their multiple relationships through binary codes and languages... "
(https://n-1.cc/pg/groups/7826/lorea/)

=Discussion=

FC Forum 2011 transcripts:

"* The basic aim of Lorea, n-1, and  RedDry  is to create free, federated, self-managed social networks. Social networks for the people who work on them.

    
* Lorea aims to become a network of federated networks, “a garden of shared knowledge.” It wants to continue the free software philosophy in the area of services on Web 2.0, which has been dominated by proprietary software and platforms that trade in our personal data. Lorea is developed with w3c standards.

    
* The logic of federation, which has always allowed services like e-mail to work for all users regardless of proprietary issues, falls apart in social network services. Artificial networks have been created in an attempt to secure user loyalty in specific contexts, restricting users’ freedom to relate across networks. Federated, free networks created by the commons break free of that logic.

    
* The paradox of privacy: we want to control our privacy levels, but we sign terms of use without knowing how they affect us. At Lorea, the data flows that we generate belong to all of us. On the other hand, we work with encryption that offers users secure access, Administrators cannot access the information generated by the flow of relationships on the networks. “Digital suicide” is always available so that users can immediately delete their details. These free, federated networks do not engage in data mining, and do not monitor users.

    
* n-1 has grown from 3,000 users to more than 35,000 users.

    
* Its architecture is designed to generate groups that share tools and to work collaboratively (rather than to accumulate friends). The focus is not on creating autonomy but on technological sovereignty, as in fair trade networks. A varied technological ecosystem that generates sustainability.

    
* The cooperativa integral catalana or the colonia de Calafou run using these networks, analogically and digitally promoting social economy models.

    
* We are not a company and we do not have a business plan. We want to promote the “Do-It-Together” philosophy, although we would obviously like to attain economic sustainability for the people who work on Lorea and we try to secure resources so that more people can devote more time to it, in order to speed up development."
(http://www.2011.fcforum.net/en/outcomes11/)



=Video=

# http://vimeo.com/31721092


[[Category:15M Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Spain]]