
=Bio=

"Lorenza Victoria Salati holds a masters degree in Political Sciences (with focus on economic history and visual anthropology) and a specialisation at the School of Cinema and New Media of Milan. She has developed methods derived using visual anthropology as a support to the self-perception of individuals as change makers. Lorenza was formerly a documentary ﬁlmmaker and explored agricultural and ethnic issues in Africa (Burkina Faso, Mozambique, Senegal). Since then she has been considering the new communication needs that have arisen from the opportunities oﬀered by the Web 3.0. She has also investigated new forms of expression and innovative methods of storytelling. She has made many documentaries and is the co-author of several books. Lorenza is the co-founder of the Italian ﬁrm Osun WES and is the co-owner of a German based company specialising in technological tools to support collaborative projects. She is one of the founders and vice-president of R84 Multifactory Mantova."
(https://www.academia.edu/41043179/THE_RISE_OF_COMMUNITY_ECONOMY_From_Coworking_Spaces_to_the_Multifactory_Model)


=More information=

Email: lorenza@osunwes.eu

See the report on: [[Multifactory Models for the Community Economy]]

==Publications==

* G. Focardi, L. Salati, “Co-manufacturing and New Economic Paradigms”, Hershey (PA, USA), IGI Global, 2019, pp. 240G. 

* Focardi, L. Salati, “Multifactory: an Emerging Environment for a New Entrepreneurship”in N. Baporikar ed., “Handbook of Research on Entrepreneurship in the Contemporary Knowledge-Based Global Economy”, Hershey (PA, USA), IGI Global,2016 G. 

* Focardi, L. Salati, “Social Media as Elements of Shared Work-spaces: The Multifactory Case Study”in A. Goel ed., “Product I-novation through Knowledge Management and Social Media Strategies”, Hershey (PA, USA), IGI Global, 2016G. 

* Focardi, L. Salati, “A New Approach to Knowledge Sharing, the Multifactory Model” in O. Terán and J. Aguilar ed.s, “Societal Beneﬁts of Freely Accessible Technologies and Knowledge Resources”, Hershey (PA, USA), IGI Global, 2015


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]