= promoter of a [[Post-Scarcity Economy]]


=Bio=

From the Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Kelso]

"Louis O. Kelso (1913-1991) was a lawyer, investor and economic thinker who
sought to find a way to preserve capitalism from the competition of
communism as an alternative within the context of the early Cold War and is
credited with the creation of the first Employee Stock Ownership Plan
(ESOP). His non-conformist "capitalism" might be compared to the peoples'
capitalism ideas of G. K. Chesterton in which ownership is distributed to as
many people as possible within the economy. Kelso developed the idea of
Binary Economics to explain the need for expanded capital ownership in light
of industrial production and the dominance of capital instead of labor. In
1956 Louis Kelso invented the Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) to put
his ideas into practice. The first ESOP which was used by the employees of
Peninsula Newspapers Inc., based in Palo Alto, California, to acquire the
newspaper chain. Since that time, ESOPs have been used by hundreds of
companies, including Avis, Exxon Mobil, Standard Oil of California and
Atlantic Richfield. In 1958, Kelso collaborated with the philosopher
Mortimer Adler to write The Capitalist Manifesto that is considered the
primary source of his economic theories. Kelso and Adler followed this book
with The New Capitalists (Random House, New York: 1961). Both books are
readable online from the Kelso Institute. Louis O. Kelso had significant
discussions concerning a Basic Income Guarantee with Russell B. Long and
Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Kelso has inspired many economic thinkers
including James S. Albus, Robert Ashford and Norman Kurland."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Kelso)


=Discussion=

Articles mentioning Kelso:

'''1.'''
   
"Louis Kelso's Economic Vision for the 21st Century", via http://www.cesj.org/binaryeconomics/kelsovision.htm

"But Americans have also seen harbingers of troubles to come: the
disappearance of entire sectors of labor as robots, artificial intelligence,
and advanced office machines enter the work place. Globalization has
encouraged the flight of jobs and capital to lower-wage regions of the
world. Blue-collar workers and middle management alike have become targets
for corporate downsizing. Today, six Ph.D. computer scientists from India
can be hired over the Internet for the price of a comparable American.
Thousands of jobs have been lost to a computer chip. Even in the midst of
our prosperity most of us feel powerless to control our own futures or
unable to find meaning in our current condition. There is an economic fault
line running throughout America and the world which today’s economic gurus
seem unable to explain or remedy: the widening wealth and income gap between
a tiny rich elite and multitudes of poor in every country (including the
United States), and between developed and developing nations. Surrounded by
global communications, the global economy, and our global environment, we
cannot help but feel the tremors inside and outside our borders. With the
growing economic imbalances come bloody conflicts, widespread starvation,
international crime and corruption, depletion of the planet’s
non-replenishable resources, unconscionable destruction of the environment
and systematic suppression of human potential and life-enhancing technology.
Seeing through the chaos of our rapidly changing world, one post-scarcity
visionary of the 20th Century, lawyer-economist Louis Kelso, understood the
power of technology either to liberate or dehumanize people. Popularly known
as the inventor of the employee stock ownership plan (ESOP), Kelso observed
that modern capital tools and their phenomenal power to "do more with less"
have offered people an escape from scarcity to shared abundance. As a lawyer
Kelso also saw that the design of our "invisible" institutional environment
and social tools determines the quality of people’s relationship to
technology. Intangibles, such as our laws and financial systems, determine
which people will be included or excluded from sharing of access to equal
economic opportunity, power and capital incomes. Access to capital
ownership, asserted Kelso, is as fundamental a human right as the right to
the fruits of one’s labor. Furthermore, Kelso argued, the democratization of
capital credit is the "social key" to universalizing access to future
ownership of productive wealth, so that every person, as an owner, could
eventually gain income independence through the profits from one’s capital.

...

In the 20th century, many lived lives of quiet desperation, struggling from
paycheck-to-paycheck, or from hand-to-mouth, with no ownership stake in
society’s wealth-producing assets. Most 20th century Americans were limited
to a choice between the wage-systems of capitalism and the wage-systems of
socialism. Many lost hope that they and their descendants would ever share
in the American Dream. Just as Lincoln provided opportunities for
propertyless people in 19th century America to gain a piece of the world’s
shrinking land frontier, 21st century Americans will gain their ownership
share in the limitless technological growth frontier. In the 21st century,
Americans will be given a new choice, a "just third way" opened up by Louis
Kelso, an alternative model of development that transcends both Wall Street
capitalism and all forms of socialism. Choosing this road will lead America
back to its revolutionary roots to a more participatory, unified and
empowering "Second American Revolution" and a more just, free and efficient
market economy. America will then again serve as "the last best hope of
mankind."


'''2.'''

"Making Another World Possible: The Torah, Louis Kelso, and the Problem
of Poverty"

URL = http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1550830707002467

"Why is it that after centuries of concerted efforts to eliminate it, and
decades of unprecedented economic growth that should have accomplished it,
poverty not only is still with us but actually is increasing? Starting with
a passage in the Old Testament, the source of moral behavior for believers
of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, this author argues that the postulation
of the labor theory of value and scarcity by Adam Smith, and accepted as
part of the basic framework of the discipline of economics, has prevented us
from formulating public policies that would enable us to implement the way
the God of the Abrahamic faiths intended the poor to be cared for.
Substituting modifications in economic theory proposed originally by Louis
Kelso, a model acknowledging the independent contribution of capital in the
productive process is proposed that would enable us to formulate policies
for the production and distribution of wealth and that would make the
scourge of human poverty a bad dream of the past." 

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]