

=Description=

David Kim:

"The Love-Driven Politics Collective is a shared project dedicated to exploring the possibilities of love-driven politics as a response to political evil. We hope to promote a conversation that draws on diverse political, intellectual and ethical traditions, to stage intellectual exchanges that will enable us to accompany one another as we fight for social justice in the difficult days that clearly lie ahead. We hope to devise and divine strategies to respond to the callous, cruel, and cynical contempt that dominate contemporary political discourse and political practices. We continue to ask: How do we response ethically and honorably to the violence that rules our world, to the overt acts of war, torture, and police brutality that have become the raison d’être of the state and to the covert violence enacted through politics that promote unemployment, hunger, disease, environmental ruin and interpersonal hatred? How do we rediscover underused archives, traditions, and imaginaries from the past? How do we create the new practices, polities and politics that contemporary crises demand? In an age of cynicism, defeatism, and resignation, how do we assess efficacy and relevance of what Dr. King called “the strength to love”? Which is to ask, how do quicken the sense of urgency our times demand to respond with love and in love?"


=More Information=

* For a brief statement about radical love, here is a TED talk I gave last year: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lt5dgPwaXMs

* Here is a longer interview I did on radical love: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIGuiE8tVCk

* And the online dialogue series I host on Love-Driven Politics: http://meaningoflife.tv/programs/love-driven-politics

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]