
Podcast via: https://boundaryless.io/podcast/lucia-hernandez/

=Description=

"With our team mate Lucia Hernandez we delve into the roots of the regenerative movement and how it links to platform-ecosystem thinking. We look at regenerative design as a mindset and a process focussed around some core principles. We also explore the need to consider context when designing regenerative platform business models.

Lucía is an expert in Platform Economy and New Emerging Trends, and Regenerative Business Lead at Boundaryless. She has participated in research with global organizations and helped to design public policies related to short rental accommodation within the European Commission, IDB, and some local governments.

In the last two years, Lucía has been studying the intersections between regenerative design and platform design in order to help public and private organizations in adopting a regenerative platform-ecosystem mindset.

In this conversation, we delve into the roots of regenerative thinking and why the movement is gaining momentum. We learn from Lucía’s expertise about what we can learn from nature, how regenerative thinking is a process — not a goal, redefining ‘abundance’, and some new organizations that are emerging in the platform economy.

 

Key highlights of the conversation:

* What is regenerative thinking and where does it come from?
* Lucía’s consolidated six key principles of regenerative design
* The ultimate aim of the regenerative thinking movement
* The role of place-based economies
* The abundance versus scarcity mindset
* Community wealth and investing


=More information=
 

To find out more about Lucía’s work:

#Twitter: https://twitter.com/luciahdez3
#Website: https://luciahernandez.co/
#Lucía Hernandez, Regenerative Platform Design Principles: https://luciahernandez.co/2021/12/15/regenerative-platform-design-principles/
#Lucía Hernandez, Regenerative Platform Business Models- The next generation of platforms: https://luciahernandez.co/2021/04/26/regenerative-platform-business-models/

[[Category:Podcasts]]
[[Category:Regenerative Approaches]]