

A movement of revolt against community-disruptive and labor-saving machinary in the UK in the 19th century.


=Discussion=


==In defense of the Luddites==

Blair Boland:

"What both critiques share in common and take for granted is a smugly false and typically misleading disparagement of so-called Luddism. The original, much maligned Luddites are commonly dismissed as cranks, or worse still, "murderous thugs" and the "essential fact" of Luddite "complaint" twisted to serve the ends of propagandists for capital. Ned Ludd and his followers were not necessarily opposed to technological 'change' or 'progress' per se but the social context in which it occurred and the economic consequences it presaged. As Ludd expressed it, "we will never lay down our arms…['til]the House of Commons passes an act to put down all machinery Hurtful to Commonality". They realized that these changes were being undertaken undemocratically for the benefit of a narrow class of economic elites. Luddite anxieties were well founded as was their understanding of the implications for the working class in general, even though they couldn't have foreseen all of the consequences fully. Their protests and resistance was met with the most aggressive and "murderous" suppression by the British government of the day. Thousands of troops were dispatched to put down the rebellion, not only succeeding in ruthlessly exterminating the Luddite uprising but also serving notice to workers in general of the close bonds between the state and industrialists; and the means that could be employed to discipline intractable workers. The dire conditions of the working class in the new "industrial age' that ensued proved Luddite premonitions largely prophetic. These conditions still exist in many parts of the world. So while it's fine to fret over the impact of the net on the reading habits of the affluent, the concerns of the Luddites still haven't gone away. The important principle then as now, is who controls technology and for what ends? Taylor's time/motion practices further tightened the hold of the owners of production technology over the wage serfs operating that technology, again in a very undemocratic and restrictive way, "hurtful to commonality". These, as noted, are the same principles that guide much technological development today and are among the most worrisome aspects of its ultimate applications. "And now we're facing a similar challenge", to see that the latent democratizing abundance of the net is not "shaped" into the greatest expansion of social control and commercial concentration of power the world has ever known."
(http://www.britannica.com/blogs/2008/07/why-skepticism-is-good-my-reply-to-clay-shirky/)


[[Category:Movements]]