

Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EftW7YDTdgU


=Description=

"Jack Murphy sits down with Luke Burgis, author of "Wanting: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life" -  an insightful book that draws on the work of French polymath René Girard to bring this hidden force to light and reveals how it shapes our lives and societies.

Why do you want what you want? And how do we influence what other's want? Once you understand the power of memetic contagion, you'll see it everywhere. 

"A groundbreaking exploration of why we want what we want, and a toolkit for freeing ourselves from chasing unfulfilling desires.

Gravity affects every aspect of our physical being, but there’s a psychological force just as powerful―yet almost nobody has heard of it. It’s responsible for bringing groups of people together and pulling them apart, making certain goals attractive to some and not to others, and fueling cycles of anxiety and conflict. In Wanting, Luke Burgis draws on the work of French polymath René Girard to bring this hidden force to light and reveals how it shapes our lives and societies.

According to Girard, humans don’t desire anything independently. Human desire is mimetic―we imitate what other people want. This affects the way we choose partners, friends, careers, clothes, and vacation destinations. Mimetic desire is responsible for the formation of our very identities. It explains the enduring relevancy of Shakespeare’s plays, why Peter Thiel decided to be the first investor in Facebook, and why our world is growing more divided as it becomes more connected.

Wanting also shows that conflict does not arise because of our differences―it comes from our sameness. Because we learn to want what other people want, we often end up competing for the same things. Ignoring our large similarities, we cling to our perceived differences."

[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Books]]