
'''= RepRap printers "committed to Free Software, Libre Innovation, and Open Source Hardware".'''

URL = https://www.lulzbot.com/

=Description=

DIDIY:

"The Lulzbot printers are developed by the small company Aleph Objects,
Inc. which is committed to Free Software, Libre Innovation, and Open
Source Hardware. Although the printers include some extruded aluminium
railing and other mass-production components it still remains true to
RepRap principles by having many components 3D printable.
Due to its fully Open Source Hardware and Free Software design, the
LulzBot has received the "Respects Your Freedom" certification from the
Free Software Foundation. In addition, the Lulzbot printers are often used
in open-source tool chains on open source projects."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=Characteristics=

DIDIY:

==Community==

The development, assembly and use of the Lulzbot machines is facilitated
by an online community forum, a project development platform
(Phabricator). There is also the Open Hardware Assembly Instructions.


==Licensing==

“Aleph Objects, Inc. – Committed to Free Software, Libre Innovation, and
Open Source Hardware LulzBot® and the LulzBot logo are registered
trademarks of Aleph Objects, Inc. All site content, unless otherwise noted,
is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0 International by Aleph Objects, Inc.”.

Some of the hardware designs are under the GNU GPLv3, while others
are under a CC BY-SA license, all respecting the four freedoms.

The Lulzbot TAZ 6 3D printer is recognised by the Free Software
Foundation with the “Respects Your Freedom” certification, the
10th product by Aleph Objects to receive this certification

The company encourages cloning: “For those wanting to use our hardware
designs and/or software packages, Aleph Objects requires you to:

• Label the product as a clone. It must be clear that it is not a
product from our factory.

• Note that "LulzBot is a registered trademark of Aleph Objects,
Inc."

• Host your own copy of the source files on your own server or
similar, even if they are unmodified. Do not just point to our
existing source."

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)

==Business models==

DIDIY:

Revenue models 

• Sale of physical products built from the Open Source Hardware
designs, spare parts, accessories and filament through their online
store and a global network of distributors.

• Educational programme, exclusive bundle options, and more.


Modes of production 

Aleph Objects produces a large part of their machines inhouse (intrafirm),
buying some of the components on the market – such as the mass
produced aluminium rails. R&D is led by the company, following a Libre
Innovation model, where advances are both shared with and contributed
by the wider Open Source Hardware and Free Software community."
(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


Indicators of impact 

• Aleph Objects, Inc. ranked No. 122 on Inc. Magazine's 35th
annual Inc. 500, a ranking of the fastest-growing private
companies in the United States. Aleph Objects achieved 2,782
percent three-year sales growth

• Google Incoming Links (lulzbot.com): 408.000.

• Alexa Global Rank (lulzbot.com): 105.551.

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)



==Governance models==

DIDIY:

• The project is owned by the company Aleph Objects Inc., founded
in 2011.

• All digital works produced by the project, as well as the
underlying online platforms, are under free licenses and replication
is actively encouraged."

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=More Information=

* let us know about your project! Email information to
support@LulzBot.com.”.

* [[Product Hacking]]

[[Category:3D Printing]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]