
=Description=

The Lycian League, a model of federative plurality, by @tarikcanaytac :

"While Ionian cities practiced [[Isonomia]], their southern neighbors in Lycia pioneered another model: federative plurality.

In the 5th century BCE, the Lycian League united 23 autonomous cities. Representation in the central assembly was proportional to city size large cities had three votes, medium ones two, and small cities one. This innovative system balanced local autonomy with shared governance a distributed model of plural authority. The League also featured a bicameral council and rotating leadership, serving as one of the earliest federal structures in recorded history.

James Madison, in Federalist Papers №9, cited the Lycian Confederation as a model for federated republics, praising its balance between unity and autonomy. This reference has also been highlighted in popular media, including a 2023 BBC article detailing the Lycian influence on American constitutional design (BBC — Ancient Civilisation That Inspired American Democracy).

Meanwhile, in Lydia, the invention of coinage by King Alyattes (late 7th century BCE) transformed economic and social relations. Markets expanded. Trust decoupled from tribal identity and reattached to currency. Sardis became a cosmopolitan node where different languages, gods, and customs coexisted.

These weren’t utopias but they were glimpses. Lydia’s economic innovation and Lycia’s political model represent the first plurality experiments in the Mediterranean.

While Ionian cities practiced isonomia, their southern neighbors in Lycia pioneered another model: Federative Plurality.

In the 5th century BCE, the Lycian League united 23 autonomous cities. Representation in the central assembly was proportional to city size an innovation the framers of the U.S. Constitution would later admire. The League balanced local autonomy with shared governance a distributed model of plural authority."

(https://medium.com/@tarikcanaytac/tribe-to-community-city-state-to-state-now-its-network-state-7010de6f0b6b)


[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:P2P History]]