[[Tero Heiskanen]]:

==Part 1: Principles==

'''Machine of Open Commonities (MoOC)''' is a model of a global system, which I see is the best way to organize mankind in the near future. 

Until today there aren’t any global systems that coordinate resources, world order, energy, goverments etc. There are only hundreds of states and nations that use traditional [[money]] as one the few common tools. MoOC is extraordinary and hypothetical structure, but I see it forming itself in near future with or without human’s favour.

'''MoOC''' is greatly influenced by discources of [[Open Money]] and [[MetaCurrency]]. These discourses although have lacked some key concepts. One of them is self-organization and other one is decision making. Firstly, If open money (or any similar tool) is used widely, there will be self-organization that has massive powers.  Secondly, if open money (or any similar tool) is used widely, it will be key tool in decision making as well. I’ll deepen these issues later. This post is about basics of MoOC.

'''MoOC''' is a complex network of Open Commonities which functions under specific laws. These laws are originated in human nature and human relationship to natural environment. Open commonity is union of humans which has known objective and is open for joining. MoOC is based on Extended theory of [[Optimal Human Cooperation]].

moc3

Upper picture shows basic event of MoOC. There are two humans, other human’s Will meet other human’s Act so they use suitable commonity currency to illustrate this meeting of Will and Act. There is transaction generated and every commonity member see the identities that made this transaction, measure of currenct transacted and possible additional information.

There are numerous Commonities in MoOC. There are several laws concerning the functioning of Commonity:

* Commonity has members three or beyond three
* Commonities born and die
* Commonity has only one currency and one objective
* If objective changes then commonity dies
* Every member of commonity has to realize the use of commonity currency and commonity objective on sufficient level
* Every member has access to transaction history of every member
* Commonity can be linked to other commonities (partly shared objective etc.)
* …

moc

There are three types of commonities: Materia Commonity (mCommonity), Immateria Commonity (iCommonity) and Social commonity (sCommonity). These types are based on different aspects of cooperation. Cooperation relating to Materia is producing, refining, transporting, using etc. scarce resource. Cooperation relating to immateria is any meeting of will and act that doesn’t include scarce resource (media, creating immaterial, anything that can be copied etc.). Cooperation relating to social is anything that happens between few people that can’t be passed on as original. There is yet one form of cooperation and that is decision making. Decision making is included in functioning of commonities, I’ll continue that theme later on. Commonity’s objective reveales the type of the Commonity.

When commonities work as intended, no other spesific organization is needed. No states, no law courts, no parliaments, no goverments, no banks, no administration. There are also no need for traditional money.

One prime aspect is still unsaid. How is ownership arranged in Open commonities? It isn’t. No-one owns anything. Owning is not possible.


==See Also==

*[[Resource-Based Economy]]
*[[Effortless Economy]]


[[Category:Money]]