
'''= "develops open source spaceflight hardware required to support Mach 30's mission of "hastening the advancement of humanity into a spacefaring civilization".'''

URL = http://mach30.org/ [https://opendesignengine.net/projects/m30roadmap]


=Description=

"the goal of human space exploration is to lead humanity to become a spacefaring civilization.  This goal is Mach 30′s mission:

- To hasten the advancement of humanity into a spacefaring civilization through sustainable leadership, open design practices, and a bias toward mature technology

History, as well as the upcoming gap in U.S. human space flight, proves our current space exploration plans aren’t working.  A totally new approach is required.  Rather than wait for the government, Mach 30 is building a community of individuals who, by working together, can take humanity to space."

=Status=

13/09/2014:

"This is the home of the Mach 30 Technical Roadmap describing the technical path of open source spaceflight hardware required to support Mach 30's mission of "hastening the advancement of humanity into a spacefaring civilization."

We are currently working on version 1.0 of the roadmap. The Board of Directors requested the Mach 30 engineering community develop a roadmap focused on launch vehicle technology and free of export controlled projects to last 1+ years. This request supports the engineering community, the marketing team, and the Export Control Task Force (ECTF). The engineering community can use the roadmap for guidance in how it can best spend its time developing open source spaceflight hardware and to measure its progress. The marketing team gets a rallying point to share with Mach 30 fans, spaceflight enthusiasts, open source hardware developers, and makers. And the ECTF can rest assured the engineering community is not in impending danger of running afoul of export control regulations.... "
(https://opendesignengine.net/projects/m30roadmap)

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]