'''* Book: A Futurist for the 21st Century: The Macrohistory of Lawrence Taub (1936-2018). Ed. by Jan Krikke. [http://www.dco.co.th DCO Books] (Proglen Trading), 2024'''

URL = https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/a-futurist-for-the-21st-century-jan-krikke/1146339166?ean=9798224088362 [http://www.dco.co.th]

See also: The [[Spiritual Imperative]].


=Description=

'''1.'''

"This collection of essays is a tribute to
Lawrence (Larry) Taub, the American
macrohistorian and author of the book The
[[Spiritual Imperative]]: Sex, Age, and the Last Caste.

Taub developed a distinctive macrohistorical model that transcends a purely
Western perspective and takes Asian history
into account, resulting in a more holistic, global
view of humanity's evolution.

The book features contributions from six
different authors. Jan Krikke, editor of the
second edition of Taub's book, wrote a
summary of Taub's macrohistory.
Professor Sohail Inayatullah, Chair in
Futures Studies at UNESCO, explains the
distinctions between Taub's caste model and a
similar model from Indian spiritual teacher
R.P. Sarkar.

Bill Kelly, former lecturer in
communications studies at UCLA, who wrote
the foreword to Taub’s book, provides an
intimate essay on Taub’s life and legacy.
Also included is a review of Taub's
macrohistory, written by futurist scholar
Takuya Murata for the journal Futures of the
Hawaii Research Center for Futures Studies at
the University of Hawaii.

We hear Taub's own voice in an interview he
gave to the P2P Foundation and in a summary
of his macrohistory he presented at the 15th
World Futures Study Federation (WFSF)
Conference in Brisbane in 2001.

Lastly, we hear from Masanori Kanda, the
Japanese business management expert who
wrote the foreword to the Japanese edition of
Taub's book. Mr. Kanda captures the unique
personality and character of Lawrence Taub.
The original 11 illustrations from The
Spiritual Imperative are included in this volume."


'''2.'''

"This book is intended an introduction and a tribute to the visionary work of American futurist Lawrence Taub, author of The Spiritual Imperative: Sex, Age, and the Last Caste.

Whether you are a seeker of wisdom, a student of history, or simply curious about humanity's collective journey, Taub provides a new framework for looking at the past, the present, and the future through new eyes. At the heart of Taub's work is his concept of societal "castes"-interpreted not as rigid social hierarchies, but as evolving stages of human development. These stages progress from basic survival and the pursuit of power and wealth to the eventual realization of spiritual purpose.

Taub's thought-provoking macrohistory blends history, psychology, and spiritual philosophy to chart a path for individuals and societies grappling with the complexities of life in the 21st century. This book is intended an introduction and a tribute to the visionary work of American futurist Lawrence Taub, author of The Spiritual Imperative: Sex, Age, and the Last Caste."

(https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/a-futurist-for-the-21st-century-jan-krikke/1146339166?ean=9798224088362)

=Contents=

* Part 1: The Macrohistory of Lawrence Taub 7

* Part 2: P.R. Sarkar and Lawrence Taub 38
**Sarkar’s Contribution to Macrohistory… 44

* Part 3L The P2P Foundation Interview 55

* Part 4: Lawrence Taub: Life and Work 68

* Part 5: The Spiritual Imperative Review 97

* Part 6: Foreword to the Japanese edition


=Excerpt=

From the introduction, Jan Krikke:

"Macrohistorian Lawrence (Larry) Taub wrote
The Spiritual Imperative: Sex, Age, and the Last
Caste while living in Tokyo. The book was
translated into Japanese and quickly climbed to
the top of Japan's bestseller list. It was later
translated into Korean and Spanish. However,
the English edition struggled to gain traction in
the West, likely due to Taub's unique
macrohistorical perspective, which blends the
worldviews of India, Europe, and China.
Most macrohistories focus on a particular
domain—economics, technology, religion, or
ideology. Taub’s work is distinctive in that it
integrates three different “coordinates”—sex
(gender), age, and caste—each representing a
distinct dimension of human development.

At the heart of Taub's macrohistory is the
Caste Model, which should not be confused
with the Caste System. The word “caste” is a
European distortion of the Sanskrit term
varna, which means “color.” In ancient Vedic
literature, varna was central to a prophecy
about the cyclical nature of history.

The Vedic sages identified four key human
traits or natural inclinations—aptitudes we
might today describe as “a born salesman” or 
“a natural leader.” The four varnas are teacher,
protector, trader, and worker. While every
individual possesses elements of all four traits,
one typically dominates in each person,
regardless of gender. The sages predicted that
humanity passes through cycles in which
different varnas hold global prominence. Taub
mapped this varna cycle onto the course of
human history, using his Caste Model to
explain shifts in regional preeminence, such as
the current rise of the East.

Taub was not the first to explore the varna
cycle. The modern Indian spiritual teacher P.R.
Sarkar based his social development theories
on this cycle, and Sohail Inayatullah, Chair in
Futures Studies at UNESCO, incorporates it
into his master classes. Inayatullah also 
collaborated with Australian scholars to
develop the Sarkar Game, a tool used in
corporate training to promote collaboration
across different organizational ranks.

The second key element of Taub's
macrohistory is the Sex Model, which
addresses the role of women in major historical
transitions. According to Taub, the female
principle was dominant in prehistory,
suppressed during the Patriarchal Age, and
reemerged in the 20th century. He predicted
that the 21st century would see the
androgynous integration of the male and the
female principles.

The third component of Taub's
macrohistory, the Age Model, posits that
history evolves in stages of spiritual
development that mirror the life stages of an
individual. Taub suggested that humanity
progressed through phases such as the Age of
Birth, the Age of Infancy, and the Age of Early
Childhood. This idea echoes the evolutionary
theory of “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny”
from Ernst Haeckel, as well as concepts
discussed by Sigmund Freud in Totem and
Taboo. Taub also argued that this model
underpins much of the work of Integral
theorist Ken Wilber. 

Taub believed that the Age Model could be
applied broadly to nations and regions, with
Northern Europe representing the “oldest” or
most mature region, given its advanced social
development and gender equality.

While Taub's predictions were often off by
decades, the strength of his work lies in the
models themselves. They reveal what he called
the “deeper currents” of history—sex, age, and
caste—that shape humanity across cultures,
religions, and ideologies. These currents help
explain many of the seemingly contradictory
developments in today’s world.

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P_Futures]]
[[Category:P2P_Foundation]]
[[Category:Books]]