
=Description=

Joni Baboci:

""An interesting case study in governing small-scale manufacturing is SF  Made in San Francisco. It provides an interesting model in how a  small-scale circular-economy focused group of manufacturers could start  an integrated community through common governance. '''SF Made is a  guild-like member-based community formed by the collaboration and  participation of all of its members, local manufacturers'''. It is a  nonprofit that provides much needed organization and coordination to  artisans and makers with a particular interest in advanced  manufacturing. Interestingly SF Made defines advanced manufacturing as: “not  a new sector of industry but rather a set of digital tools and  conceptual frameworks that can be woven into any manufacturing process.”  From this mindset, advanced manufacturing, 3d printing and other  maker processes are interpreted as a conceptual framework, rather than a  well-defined set of technologies. I think similarly the  circular-economy should be thought of as a strategic framework around  which manufacturing technologies that still haven’t joined the  mainstream can slowly coalesce into the status quo. In terms of urban  manufacturing, SFMade provides another interesting example in how to  kickstart an integrated, co-located, localist maker community. Through  its different partnerships, SFMade was able to amend zoning codes and  construct a new building which hosts most of the participating  businesses. What is termed “inclusionary zoning” is one of the first  examples of allowing light-industrial use to be mixed with other, more  typical urban land uses. Referring back to the triple helix model in the  previous essay, the SFMade ecosystem was further extended with Lime  Lab, a manufacturing academy combining a prototyping studio with an  education center supplying skilled workers to the future of  manufacturing."

(https://triennale.org/en/magazine/governing-futures)

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Places]]