
= project for local cooperative development in Madison, Wisconsin


=Description=

Rebecca Kelme:

"Steering Committee – multiple partners work with fiscal agent (Cooperative Network) to develop processes for authorizing program activity and develop budget. Reporting and evaluation. 

Tools & Resource Development – Website, communications and marketing of project.

Program Delivery Coordination – Develop directory of technical assistance providers and coordinate intake and service delivery.

Program Design & Curriculum – UW Center for Cooperatives works with partners to identify educational resource needs. Individual needs assessment tools."

==Program Goals==

By Rebecca Kelme:

* Capacity building around technical assistance, financing, community organizing and tracking & reporting the impact of cooperative businesses in the City of Madison. 

* Increased number of family-supporting, living wage jobs as a result of worker ownership. This can include new jobs created by new co-ops, jobs retained by the transition of a business to a co-op ownership or unionized co-op models. 

* Community asset building. Technical and financial support for programs that help create ownership of businesses and community owned assets with a focus on communities of color, low wealth communities and communities excluded or exploited within the traditional workforce. 

=Details=

By Rebecca Kelme:


==Program Principles==

* Accountable and representative leadership 

* Clear and careful thinking about goals 

* Establish metrics, evaluation system 

* Communicate to all stakeholders 

* Leverage City funds for private investment in a revolving loan fund 

* Embed cooperative development capacity in a diverse group of organizations: professionals, unions, cooperatives, community orgs, SBDC, lenders 



==Timeline for Cooperative Business Development initiative==

* September 2014: Mayor Soglin announces a 5-year plan for funding the cooperative enterprise development initiative

* November 2014: the Madison Capital Budget includes $1 million/year for 5 years beginning in 2016

* November 2015: the amount is cut to $600,000/year for 5 years

* February 2016: RFP for the program released

*June 2016: Common Council to vote on award of contracts and programming begin


==Request for Proposal Funding==

Two-part RFP released by the City in early 2016:

$300,000 for a high-risk revolving loan fund 

$300,000 for technical assistance, outreach, public education and coalition building

One collaborative proposal was submitted to the City by a broad coalition of financial institutions, cooperatives, labor and community organizations.



=Partners=

==Unions and Labor partners==

#WRTP Big Step (WI Regional Training Partnership) 
#SCFL (South Central Federation of Labor)
#IUPAT (Painters and Allied Trades)
#SMART(Sheet Metal, Air, Rail, and Transportation) 
#UFCW (United Food and Commercial Workers) 
 

==Cooperatives==
 
#[[University of Wisconsin Center for Cooperatives]]
#[[MadWorC]] (Madison worker co-op network)
#[[Madison Interpreters Cooperative]]
#[[Wisconsin Cooperative Network]] (statewide co-op association)
#[[Shared Capital Cooperative]]


==Community financial organizations==

#Madison Development Corporation
#Forward Community Investments
#Summit Credit Union
#Heartland Credit Union 


==Community and activist organizations==

#Young, Gifted and Black
#Freedom, Inc.
#Centro Hispano
#Black Chamber of Commerce
#Latino Chamber of Commerce
#Latino Professionals Association
#Workers Justice Center
#Madison Urban Ministries
#Operation Welcome Home
#Feed Kitchen/Northside Planning Council


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Madison Mapping]]
