==Case Study==

This is an excerpt from chapter 8 of the [[Emerging Ownership Revolution]] from [[Marjorie Kelly]]:

"Something fascinating is at work in the Maine lobster industry. Going
beyond old notions of traditional private property versus state intervention,
a whole range of new economic architectures are in use. Alternative
ownership designs play key roles. But they do so inside a larger frame of
supportive infrastructure—a social ecosystem of generative design.8 The
law operates in the background to help bring this economy into existence
and hold it in place—yet its role is more innovative than top-down regulation.
A panoply of supportive institutions and rules have evolved here
mostly from the ground up—with “ground” meaning the bottom of the
ocean, where lobster live and breed, and from which fi shermen scratch out
a living.

I’d come to Maine to experience two things on this, my fi nal journey
through the commons. First, I wanted to see a living example of the role
of government in supporting a generative economy. Second, I wanted to
see a whole family of generative ownership designs in situ. I wanted to
categorize the various models and see it all operating as a whole system.
I hoped to capture in this one place a sense of the social ecosystem of the
generative economy.


'''THE FISHERMAN SCIENTIST'''

I make a date to talk with Ted Ames, the fi sherman-scientist who won a
2005 MacArthur award (the so-called genius award), and I catch up with
him in his offi ce at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, where he’s serving as
visiting scholar for a year. He is a small man with youthful energy and the
weathered face of someone who’s spent years on the water. In the mid-
1990s, he and his wife, Robin Alden—at the time, commissioner of the
Maine Department of Marine Resources—helped put in place an innovative
plan to protect the lobster industry, which Ted calls “a collaborative,
ecosystem-based approach.”

There was a time, he tells me, when the lobster industry in Maine was
in the same state of collapse as other fi sheries are today. “In the 1930s, the
bottom fell out of lobstering,” he says. Canneries were buying and processing
all sizes of lobsters, and there were no regulations restricting what
could be caught. Small lobsters and broodstock were being taken, which
was decimating the next generation of lobsters. Big boats had also begun
auto-trawling in the Gulf of Maine—a massively extractive approach that
destroyed habitat and damaged traps. Lobstering had become “too efficient, too industrial,” Ted explains, if you wanted to preserve habitat to grow
another crop. A new law was passed in 1947, which in Ted’s words said,
“Thou shalt not catch lobster in Maine with anything but a lobster trap.”

It was part of a series of ecological ground rules that evolved over time
in Maine. The use of traps protects habitat. Other rules prohibit the taking
of egged females, protect juveniles until they are appropriately large,
and protect older lobsters known to be good broodstock. Lobstermen were
instrumental in lobbying for all these rules, some of which evolved out of
best practices already in use.

Yet ecological rules alone weren’t enough. Attention was also needed
to social architectures, for the issue was not only what could be taken but
how and by whom. Tending to such matters was the aim of the 1995 regulations.
As the lobster industry recovered and became steadily productive,
it was under increasing pressure from big boats and new technologies. To
rein that in, in 1995 the legislature passed the zone management law, which
does three things: it establishes individual trap limits; it controls entry into
the industry; and, most innovative, it delegates a good deal of authority to
local lobstermen, through the zone management system.

The law divides the coast into seven zones, each run by a council
elected by licensed lobster fi shermen. The zones contain districts of lobster
license holders who elect representatives to their zone council. These
councils are technically advisory to state authorities, but their recommendations
are generally adopted. They have certain areas of oversight. They
can establish trap limits, differing from zone to zone, as long as they don’t
exceed the state maximum. They help determine rules controlling entry
into the industry, such as educational or apprenticeship requirements.

And they have a voice in other matters dear to a lobsterman’s heart, such
as how many traps can be hung from a single buoy.

“It’s called democracy,” Ted says. “Isn’t that a novel concept?”

It is strikingly novel, in more ways than one. The law stipulates that
lobster fi shing in inshore waters can be done only by owner-operated
boats. Large corporate-owned boats are still needed in offshore waters,
Ted says, because only big boats can operate safely there. But corporate
boats can no longer fi sh for lobster in sensitive coastal waters, where
breeding occurs. It’s a powerful use of ownership design as a tool to
protect both commons and fi shing communities. According to James
Acheson, the ownership rule is explicitly intended to prevent corporations
like Shaftmaster Corporation—which operates out of New
Hampshire, using big trawlers with hired captains and crews tending
large numbers of traps—from coming to Maine and dominating and
destroying lobster grounds.

Big boats like those “could clean out one area and move to another,”
Ted says. “The business plan for that kind of operation is completely different
from the small-scale operator, where boats are invariably owned by
individuals or families.” The ownership rule is supplemented by another
provision requiring an apprenticeship period. No one can obtain a lobster
license without working two years on another lobster boat, where stewardship
traditions and lobstering etiquette are learned.

These rules set the stage for the zone councils. Voting for these councils
is one-person, one vote—very different from the corporate world,
where voting rights are proportional to wealth holdings. This empowers
fi shermen with small and medium-sized operations. As Acheson wrote,
“These men had grown tired of watching ‘big fi shermen’ or ‘hogs’ take a
disproportionate amount of the lobsters and cause huge trap tangles in the
process.” In passing trap limits for their zones, the little guys rein in that
behavior.


'''FRAMING THE GENERATIVE ECONOMY'''

Both lobsters and fi shing families thrive in Maine, because the system
works at many levels to restrain extractive behavior and encourage generative
behavior. There are many kinds of rules here, but operating in the
background, as a kind of wire frame supporting the system, are different
kinds of ownership architectures. 

As Acheson wrote:

- ''According to the law of Maine, all of the oceans, lakes, and rivers are public property. Ocean waters are held in trust by the state for all citizens. All ocean beaches to the high tide mark are owned by the state, and all citizens have legal access to them''.


At this level, the overarching ownership concept is the ancient notion
of trust: holding something in trust for the common good and for future
generations. As trustee, the state of Maine calls on the property concept
known as usufruct—the temporary right to use property belonging to
someone else, as long as the property isn’t damaged—to create rules for
right of access. In a sense, Maine holds the bundle of twigs of various property
rights. And out of that bundle it separates usufruct rights, allocating
certain of those rights to small owner-operators, leaving a different set of
rights to corporate owners.

This law of the ocean is one supportive frame here. Another frame is
provided by various enterprise ownership designs, such as cooperatives,
CDCs, and CDFIs. Because of those sturdy background patterns, Coastal
Enterprises can emerge as a CDC/CDFI, another part of the ecosystem of
support for lobstermen.

CEI, in turn, devised a new contractual form of ownership design with
the working waterfront covenant, which helps keep waterfront property in
the hands of fi shing families. Fishing families themselves join together to
form groups like the North End Lobster Cooperative, which helps them to
thrive in a competitive environment. At various points, these ownership
designs emerge from the background like knots on a fi shing net, shaping
the energies of the system into stable patterns that tend to create generative
outcomes.

What is explicitly restricted in this picture is extractive design. Large
corporate boats can operate only in designated areas. Instead of permitting
limitless liberty to absentee owners for the seeking of wealth—by hired
hands indifferent to local custom—Maine set spinning a new governing
pattern. It operates by generative principles, like the principle that the right
of extraction has limits. That the right to make a living comes before the
right to make a killing. That fairness for the many is more important than
maximizing by the few. That sustaining the prosperity of larger living systems,
both human and wild, is the root condition for the fl ourishing of all.
And that these new economic principles are to be grounded in governance
of, by, and for the community. Fairness, sustainability, community: the
fundamental values of the generative economy are all at work. Through
design.

As a fisherman and the son of a fisherman, Ted Ames doesn’t use such
lofty terms. “It’s worked—that’s the neat part,” he says. “When basic rules
are vetted by fi shermen themselves, you get a different dynamic.” Although
there’s a powerful state role in this social ecosystem, much of what arose
in Maine came from fi shermen, their practices, their lobbying efforts, their
needs—and by extension, from the living needs of lobsters.

The notion of lobster zones has its genesis in a history of territoriality
in the Maine lobster industry that goes back generations. A newcomer
can’t just show up and start throwing traps in the water without incurring
the wrath of locals. By time-honored tradition, lobstermen use small
areas near their home harbor, working waters their families have worked
for decades, which they defend vigorously.

As Acheson wrote, “At some point, usufructory rights strengthened
into a sense of ownership, giving people justifi cation for defending the
areas against the incursions of others.” The lobstering territories were ownership
in embryo. This territorial system, he continued, is “the root institution
governing the lobster industry, making possible the generation of
other kinds of rule systems.” The territorial system, Acheson said, “helped
produce a sense of stewardship and one of the most effective conservation
programs in any fi shery in the industrialized world.”


'''EMERGENCE AS A PATH TO LARGE-SCALE CHANGE'''

In the Maine lobster industry we see a process that systems thinking calls
emergence. Instead of imposing abstract, large-scale concepts from the top
down, the governing policies in this case emerged from the community.
As Fritjof Capra emphasizes, effective change needs to be a living process.

In natural systems, he observes, transformational change happens when
traditional patterns reach “critical points of instability,” creating a crisis
that is resolved by the spontaneous emergence of new ordered patterns. It’s
known as self-organization, or, simply, emergence. “Creativity—the generation
of new forms—is a key property of all living systems,” Capra says.
“Life constantly reaches out into novelty.”

Seeing the emergence of a new economy as a natural process is different
from thinking of the competition of two ideologies vying for dominance,
which is the paradigm of capitalism versus communism. Change
as an emergent process doesn’t mean the absence of crisis or conflict. Both
were present in Maine. And it doesn’t mean that some universally beloved
outcome is reached. Solutions adopted in Maine generally favored one
group at the expense of another. These things are natural in social systems.
What emergence does mean, as an approach to policy, is starting
small, proceeding organically, scaling up existing practice, and trusting
that a creative solution is present in the very circumstances causing a crisis.
Emergence also means that solutions may fi rst appear not in politics but in
business. One role of policy is to formalize and scale up what has emerged."

==More Information==

* [[Fish as Commons]]


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons]]