
'''* Book: Make City. A Compendium of Urban Alternatives. Stadt anders machen
Ed. by Francesca Ferguson, MAKE_SHIFT, 2019'''

URL = https://www.jovis.de/en/books/details/product/make-city.html

=Description=

"Contemporary cities are in thrall to rocketing real estate prices, climate change, and relentless growth. Make City brings together highly diverse positions on urban change: architects, urban planners, municipal decision makers, landscape designers, makers, and civic entrepreneurs. Key juxtapositions shed new light on the strategies and coalitions needed for city making: new social contracts are forged at every level of urban life.
The circular economy begins in cities. Local production—of food, materials, and spaces—is at the heart of urban life cycles, overcoming the current patterns of planned obsolescence that govern our linear economic system. Make City lays out urban alternatives for new architecture, typologies, material flows, and integrative and community-based planning, all grounded in the notions of reusing, densifying, and optimising existing structures. By exploring projects and propositions for making city differently, the what if gives way to the how."


=More information=

==Authors/Contributors==


Contributors include AFF Architects, Anupama Kundoo, Michel Bauwens/P2P Foundation, Francesca Bria SESC, Tessy Britton, Bureau SLA, Frauke Burgdorff, Marco Casagrande, Deadline, Eva de Klerk, De Urbanisten, FAR frohn&rojas, Kraftwerk 1, Wolf Lotter, PPAG, Refunc, Eike Roswag-Klinge, Tina Saaby, Florian Schmidt, Topotek 1, Jean Philipp Vassal, Vestas, Zanderroth Architekten

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]