
'''* WEF White Paper / Report: Making Manufacturing Sustainable by Design. World Economic Forum, 2019'''

URL = http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Making_Manufacturing_Sustainable_by_Design_Report.pdf

=Description=

"Reuse, remanufacturing and recycling – a hidden pathway to a more circular economy

Although more than 50% of the world’s total energy is
consumed by manufacturing-related activities, advanced
manufacturing technologies offer companies dramatic
opportunities to boost productivity and competitiveness
while simultaneously reducing the environmental impact
of manufacturing.

Digital infrastructures enabling efficient manufacturing, longer
product life and practical resource recovery are the backbone
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. A perfect example is the
use of new technologies to allow design processes for reuse,
remanufacturing and recycling (“Re-X”) to complement longer
product lifetimes. Advanced manufacturing technologies
can support Re-X; for instance, additive engineering is being
applied to engine and turbine remanufacture, and robotic
disassembly to components such as automotive transmission
control systems and telecom equipment.

Remanufactured products can save up to 98% of CO2
emissions compared to equivalent new products, and
significantly support our vision of a zero-waste stream.
Encouragingly, as a business, remanufacturing already
represents a €30 billion market in Europe. Yet in the sectors
surveyed, remanufacturing represents approximately 2%
(by value) of the manufacturing equivalent. It is probably
significantly higher than 2% in the defence sector, which,
for reasons of security, is excluded in many analyses. The
2% estimate has been confirmed by a similar earlier study
in the USA. Almost all remanufacturing activity is within the
business-to-business (B2B) sector, which raises the question
of whether the sector can be expanded both within the B2B
sector and in the business-to-consumer (B2C) sector.
The challenge perhaps is how to imitate the effort made
since the 1980s to increase the rate of some specific
material recycling from less than 5% to something closer
to 50% today, which required developments in technology,
education and policy. There are numerous technical
challenges to increasing the level of Re-X associated
with advanced manufacturing. Current products and
manufacturing processes are generally not designed with
any Re-X in mind. Furthermore, at product end-of-life, there
is a lack of reliable tools to assess the product condition
and the potential for Re-X. From a starting point of less
than 2%, it may be possible to make better use of product
value retention through reuse, remanufacturing and material
recycling a more integral aspect of the economic model.
The current paper focuses on the education and policy
aspects of making Re-X an integral part of product design,
manufacturing processes and consumer culture. With
global temperatures remaining on course to likely exceed
the catastrophic 2ºC increase, action by the manufacturing
sector remains too slow. If the remanufacturing opportunity
were seized by companies and policy-makers, the
manufacturing sector would contribute dramatically to the
reduction of CO2 emissions. A key enabler will be a change in
thinking via education, and encouragement of Re-X by policy.

To seize the potential of new technologies and accelerate
the sustainability agenda, the World Economic Forum Global
Future Council on Advanced Manufacturing and Production
(GFC) identified a series of existing programmes that could
be accelerated, and developed a set of recommendations to
help remove existing constraints and provide new incentives
to allow remanufacturing, reuse and recycling to take off."

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Articles]]