'''* Book: The Making Of The Indebted Man. Essay on the Neoliberal Condition. By Maurizio Lazzarato. Semiotexte, 2013.'''

URL =  http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/making-indebted-man-0


=Description=

The debtor-creditor relation, which is at the heart of this book, sharpens mechanisms of exploitation and domination indiscriminately, since, in it, there is no distinction between workers and the unemployed, consumers and producers, working and non-working populations, between retirees and welfare recipients. They are all “debtors,” guilty and responsible in the eyes of capital, which has become the Great, the Universal, Creditor.


Debt—both public debt and private debt—has become a major concern of economic and political leaders. In The Making of the Indebted Man, Maurizio Lazzarato shows that, far from being a threat to the capitalist economy, debt lies at the very core of the neoliberal project. Through a reading of Karl Marx’s lesser-known youthful writings on John Mill, and a rereading of writings by Friedrich Nietzsche, Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari, and Michel Foucault, Lazzarato demonstrates that debt is above all a political construction, and that the creditor/debtor relation is the fundamental social relation of Western societies.
Debt cannot be reduced to a simple economic mechanism, for it is also a technique of “public safety” through which individual and collective subjectivities are governed and controlled. Its aim is to minimize the uncertainty of the time and behavior of the governed. We are forever sinking further into debt to the State, to private insurance, and, on a more general level, to corporations. To insure that we honor our debts, we are at once encouraged and compelled to become the “entrepreneurs” of our lives, of our “human capital.” In this way, our entire material, psychological, and affective horizon is upended and reconfigured.

How do we extricate ourselves from this impossible situation? How do we escape the neoliberal condition of the indebted man? Lazzarato argues that we will have to recognize that there is no simple technical, economic, or financial solution. We must instead radically challenge the fundamental social relation structuring capitalism: the system of debt."

(http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/making-indebted-man-0)


=Contents=

José Ignacio Nazif:

"In essence, Lazzarato argues that within neoliberalism debt is the archetype of social relations. In particular, the creditor–debtor  relationship  ‘shapes  all  social  relations  and  neoliberal  economies’  (p.  35). 

With this main thesis in mind, the core of the book is divided into two parts: 

(1) the genealogy of debt and debtor; and 

(2) the ascendancy of debt and neoliberalism.


In the first part, Lazzarato combines the works of Marx, Nietzsche, Deleuze, Guattari and Foucault in order to theoretically reclaim the importance of debt as both a social object of analysis by itself but, more important, as the element that constitutes neoliberalism. Although one would expect a more nuanced contrast among the ideas of these prominent authors, the author only reintroduces very basic concepts to claim that credit has been overlooked in the analysis of neoliberalism. Lazzarato argues that the creditor–debtor  relationship  is  asymmetrical,  and  therefore  in  order  to  understand  domination  and  the  distribution  of  power  one  needs  to  acknowledge  how  this  relationship  has  emerged and ossified in the past 30 years. His reading of Marx allows him to advance an  alternative  interpretation  of  contemporary  society  because  the  tension  of  capital–labour has been transcended by the creditor–debtor relationship. He particularly stresses  that  the  ‘credit  relation  does  not  mobilize  physical  and  intellectual  abilities  as  labor  does (material or immaterial, it makes no difference) but the morality of the debtor, his mode  of  existence  (his  “ethos”)’  (p.  55).  

This  effort  is  important  because  Lazzarato  unintentionally reminds the reader of the ambiguities of Marx’s concepts, but also sug-gests  that  neoliberalism  is  made  of  complexities  and  therefore  any  attempt  to  under-stand its dynamics should be fully acknowledged. 


In  the  second  part,  he  provides  examples  that  could  be  located  at  both  macro  and  micro levels of analysis: 

(1) at the macro level, how states have had to reorganize and restrict  their  policies  because  they  had  to  follow  ‘recommendations’  provided  by  the  usual suspects (e.g. the International Monetary Fund and/or the World Bank) – debt in this case occupies the centre of his analysis because debtor countries are in weak positions to reject or renegotiate models of repayment; 

(2) at the micro level, how individuals have  reorganized  their  lives  in  order  to  participate  fully  in  neoliberal  society.  Debt  becomes  nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than  the  mechanism  of  individual  integration  within contemporary neoliberal society. Nevertheless, according to Lazzarato, the materialization of the indebted man is only complete when individuals ‘are not expected to reimburse in actual money, but rather in conduct, attitudes, ways of behaving ... the time used for conforming oneself to the criteria dictated by the market’ (p. 104)."

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275458568_Book_Review_Maurizio_Lazzarato_The_Making_of_the_Indebted_Man_An_Essay_on_the_Neoliberal_Condition)

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]