

'''* PhD Thesis: ANNA SERAVALLI. MAKING COMMONS (attempts at composing prospects in the opening of production). Doctoral dissertation in Interaction Design. Malmö University, School of Arts and Communication, Faculty: Culture and Society, 2014'''

URL = http://dspace.mah.se/handle/2043/17232

Author is affiliated witj the MEDEA Collaborative Media Initiative, Malmö 


=Abstract=

"This thesis accounts for a designerly inquiry into the swamp of the opening of production. The “opening of production” refers to the rising of openness, collaboration and sharing in processes through which things are made and service delivered. It is defined as a swamp, because it represents a complex landscape where theory and practice meet and where diverse views and understanding of what openness, collaboration and sharing may entail are intertwined. 
 
 
The interest in exploring such a swamp stems from two concerns. The first is understanding the nature of open, collaborative, sharing production practices and to what extent they can lead to more environmentally and socially sustainable ways of producing things and delivering services.
 
The second concern is how, as a designer, it might be possible to engage in not only envisioning and prototyping, but also in constructing open, collaborative, sharing-production practices.
 
 
In methodological terms, this thesis uses a programmatic approach, which means the way knowledge is produced is in the interaction between the practice and the program that defines the focus of the inquiry; also, in what is to be explored and how to explore it. In regard to practical work, this thesis is based on two long-term engagements: the setting up and running of a makerspace, Fabriken, and the long-term collaboration with an NGO of immigrant women, Herrgårds Women Association (HWA). The program aims at exploring making commons and does so out of an interest in composing prospects. 
 
 
The notion of making commons brings into the work theories and frames from the academic discourses around commons (i.e. collective and collaborative organizational forms) in order to articulate the nature of open, collaborative and sharing practices; it allows for discussion of the engagements, what they produce, and how they do it. It also allows for consideration into how these practices have been initiated, implemented, and carried out over time.
 
 
Composing prospects entails a particular way of exploring alternative futures by engaging in collective and located attempts at constructing them. Thus, it defines a possible way for designers to engage in the making. Further, it provides the possibility to relate the engagements to the expectations and broader scenarios emerging in the opening of production and to articulate what kind of making may be at play in acknowledging hypothetical futures as possible presents.
 
 
This inquiry builds on and addresses the fields of design for social innovation, participatory design, and commons"

=Description=

Anna Seravalli:

"In a nutshell, this work wishes to provide three takeaways:

A context:

The opening of production, a map of the landscape of open, 
collaborative, and sharing-based production practices which weaves 
together practical examples and theoretical discourses around 
commons and heterodox economies. It articulates expectations 
and visions in the opening of production, what they may entail for 
the roles of producers, designers, and users, as well as a number of 
challenges and risks in relation to them.


A designerly approach:

Compositionism entails a specific way to frame and understand 
design when engaging with the making of possible presents rather 
than proposing alternative futures. Compositionism allows both 
articulating a particular way of working in the swamp as well as 
developing a discussion about how and why some futures may become 
presents and other may not. 


A way to frame the outcome and the process of co-production 
processes:

Making commons develops as a two-fold notion, which allows for 
consideration of the design practice as matter of outcome as well as 
process when it comes to co-production.

In the understanding of commons which are making, it considers 
what open, collaborative, and sharing-based practices are generating 
and how they do it by considering their organizational forms, their 
sustainability, and how value is created through them.

In the understanding of commons which are being made, it focuses 
on what kind of design practice may be at play in co-production by 
articulating how commons can be initiated, constructed, continued, 
and left, and how this entails a specific way of performing openness, 
collaboration, and sharing."

=Contents=


==Summary==

The work " is divided into five 
chapters followed by two appendixes.

===Chapter 1 — Entering the swamp.===

This chapter depicts the program of 
the research and how it came to be. It introduces the programmatic 
approach in general terms and then it specifies it as a matter of 
defining what is to be investigated, how to do it, and where the 
inquiry is taking place (i.e. which genealogies it wishes to relate to). 

Then, it discusses the long detour in defining the ’where’ and the 
’what’ of this research and how the theoretical compass of commons 
played a central role in their definition. In presenting the ’how’, the 
second compass is introduced—compositionism—which represents 
both a particular mode of investigation as well as further defining 
the object of the inquiry. The final part addresses the methodological 
consequences of compositionism by relating it to the genealogies and 
articulating validity, relevance, and rigor in relation to this work.

===Chapter 2 — The opening of production.===

This chapter maps the 
swamp in which the inquiry developed and weaves together the 
diverse genealogies. The notion of commons is used to describe the 
different ways in which open, collaborative, sharing-based production 
practices may be at play; it highlights possibilities, but also limits and 
risks related to diverse discourses and expectations about the opening 
of production. Further, it discusses what this phenomenon implies for 
the design field and for the roles of the producer and user. It ends by 
positioning the engagements in the swamp.


===Chapter 3 — Commons and prospects.=== 

This chapter depicts some 
of the insights emerging from the engagements, using the notion of 
commons. It looks at what value was generated by open, collaborative 
and sharing-based practices in Fabriken/STPLN and HWA and how 
such value was produced (i.e. what kind of organizational forms were 
in place). When it comes to Fabriken/STPLN, it also accounts for how 
the commons evolved over time. After reflecting on the nature of the 
engagements as commons, this part looks at what kind of possible 
presents, or prospects, they might represent in relation to the opening 
of production. By reflecting on the process of how Connectivity Lab 
came to be, it also provides some insights on what it might take for 
a prospect to move forward and shift from potentiality to actuality.


===Chapter 4 — Making commons as composing.===

This chapter accounts 
for the insights, which emerged from the engagements in relation to 
initiating, establishing, continuing, and leaving commons. It does so 
by introducing and using an additional set of compasses (boundary 
objects, boundary organization, and trading zones) which allow to 
articulate the design practice as well as to discuss the nature of openness, 
collaboration and sharing as emerging from the engagements. 


===Chapter 5 — Conclusions.===

This chapter sums up the main findings of 
the work  by answering to the research questions. It also provides some 
methodological  considerations in relation to how design practice-based research can be at play in exploring futures and, in relation, 
to how the programmatic approach has been adapted in this work. 
It then brings forward issues that may require further exploration 
when it comes to prospects in the opening of production and design 
for non-consensus-based commons."



==ToC==

Selected from the contents, headings related to peer production and the commons:

2.4 The actual program: Making Commons (attempts at composing prospects in the opening of production)................................55

3 Commons as the first compass .....................................................................56

3.1 In the swampy lowlands of the opening of production: 

a long way for the definition of the ’where’ and the ’what’.....................56

How commons entered this work ....................................................... 58

3.2 Commons as a manifold notion..........................................................60

3.3 Commons, commoning, and infrastructuring in the opening 
of production...

'''xxx'''

'''2. THE OPENING OF PRODUCTION''' ................................................ 87

7. Mapping the opening of production..........................................................88

7.1 Hackers, makers, and freedom for commons-based production......88

Commons-based peer-to-peer goes tangible 

(and maybe also big?) ....................................................................... 91

7.2 Open and democratic innovation, publics and ethical economy ..93

7.3 Sharing economy buen vivir and degrowth ......................................97

7.4 The opening of (re)production: a matter of care ..............................99

7.5 The opening of production: the same old story?............................102

8. What happens to the roles of users, producers, and designers? ..........104

9. Issues and dilemmas in the future of opened production.......................109

9.1 Maintenance and provisioning of the commons............................109

9.2 A very fine line between empowerment and exploitation.............111

9.3 The myth of the amateur? ................................................................112

9.4 Going local and small: the risks of neo-medievalism.....................114

9.5 Infrastructures for commoning: struggling towards economies of scope....................................................................................................114

10. The engagements: two infrastructures in the swamp .................................................................................................116

10.1 Malmö: a city in the opening of production.................................116

10.2 Fabriken and Connectivity Lab: infrastructures for 

tangible production .................................................................................118

10.3 The Neighbourhood and HWA as enabling platforms ..............119


'''3. COMMONS AND PROSPECTS''' ...................................................125

11 Fabriken and HWA as commons in the opening of production............ 126

11.1 What kind of production? ..............................................................126

11.2 HWA as a commons: consensus, collective identity, 
the premises .............................................................................................129

Collective groups versus peer-to-peer networks?.............................130

11.3 Fabriken commons, form 1: transient participation, 

lack of consensus, and the NGO as a partner ....................................132

Issues with transient participation ....................................................135

11.4 Fabriken commons, form 2: from commoning with individuals 

to commoning between organizations...................................................138

Issues with expectations and ownership..........................................140

11.5 Commons sustainability: rivalry and durability and economies 
of scope....................................................................................................142

Nuancing rivalry and durability .......................................................142

Economies of Scope ........................................................................143

11.6 Connectivity Lab a non-commons..................................................145

12. Prospects in the opening of production .................................................146

12.1 Creative communities struggles .....................................................146

When bees and trees do not match.................................................146

Spaces and resources for experimentation and continuity.............148

Supporting the trees? ........................................................................152

12.2 While waiting for the third industrial revolution ...........................152

Commons-based, peer-to-peer production goes tangible: 

articulating openness ........................................................................152

Dealing with material scarcity ..........................................................153

Amateurs, but not necessary entrepreneurs.....................................155

New producers and old producers: alliances in the margins? ......157

13. Which prospects get to travel? 

(Constraints making)...........................158

13.1 The making of CL and the delegitimization of Fabriken...............159

13.2 Others constraints making: regaining legitimacy .........................162

13.3 Shaping ‘matters of fact’, actants, and relationships ...................165


'''4. MAKING COMMONS AS COMPOSING''' ...................................169

14 Commons which gather actors with diverse interests ............................170

14.1 Boundaries, boundary objects, boundary organizations 
and trading zones....................................................................................170

14.2 Engagements: infrastructuring for boundary organizations 
and trading zones....................................................................................173

15 Initiating commons...................................................................................174

15.1 Exploring boundaries: finding common interests and 
articulating differences............................................................................174

15.2 Giving trust, lending/borrowing trust............................................177

15.3 Non-humans mobilizing humans: laser cutters and stories .........178

15.4 Openness as matter of constructing the stakeholder ...................180

16 Unfolding commons.................................................................................183

16.1 From co-design to non-consensus-based commoning ..................184

16.2 Collaborative making without commons?.....................................186

16.3 Co-ownership for long-term commitment ......................................187

16.4 Diverse and non-overlapping interests..........................................189

16.5 Collaboration: trading or bending? .............................................191

17 Continuing commons...............................................................................193

17.1 Control over production ................................................................193

17.2 Sharing as a necessity and (safe) trading zones ........................194

18 Leaving commons.....................................................................................196

19 Design(er) and making commons...........................................................199

19.1 Collective prototyping and making rather than facilitating..........199

19.2 Making power, practicalities and friendly hacking ......................201

19.3 Beyond workshops: other collective forms....................................203

19.4 From strategies and methods to located prudent tactics..............205


'''5. CONCLUSIONS''' ..........................................................................208

20 Summing up contributions .......................................................................210

20.1 Answering the questions................................................................210

What kind of co-production practices are emerging in 
the opening of production?...............................................................210

To what kind of (alternative) futures do they relate? 

Which of them may move forward as possible presents? ..............212

How can design be at play in co-production practices as 
a matter of making possible presents?.............................................214

20.2 Design practice-based approach, as a matter of making 
futures .... ..................................................................................................215

20.3 Reflecting on the programmatic approach ...................................216

Actionable program, knowledge-able experiments, 
a matter of where ..............................................................................216

From experiments to engagements...................................................218

21 Aftermath reflections................................................................................219

21.1 Prospects in the opening of production.........................................219

Community-supported production....................................................219

Makerspaces, meeting-by-making, and learning-by-making ..........220

21.2 Making commons and design .......................................................221

=Excerpts=


==The notion of the [[Opening of Production]]==

Anna Seravalli:

"The opening of production, where the increased accessibility to means of production, and the rising of open, 
collaborative and sharing-based production practices are fostering the emergence of a number of visions and scenarios about the future of  production. 

In such a swamp, I position my two engagements which 
may be looked upon as two possible examples of the growing role 
that openness, collaboration and sharing play in making things and 
delivering services. The broader context and the two engagements 
raise a series of questions which are relevant for the design field, 
but also for academic and practical work concerning alternative, or 
heterodox, economics.

'''1.1 In the opening of production: a matter of alternative futures?'''

The notion of the opening of production accounts for emerging 
practices and understandings of co-production, where openness, 
sharing, and collaboration play a growing role in making goods 
and delivering services. Openness—as the increased possibilities of 
participation for ’end-users’ in processes of value creation, thanks 
to the growing accessibility of means and resources for production. 
Sharing—as the establishment of forms of collective ownership, 
management, and use over resources for production, as well as over 21
processes’ outputs. Collaboration— as forms of collective action that, 
contingently, emerge with openness and sharing.

When it comes to performing value production, the opening of 
production entails a shift from individuals, private property, controlled 
production, and closed innovation processes, toward collectives, 
shared ownership, and distributed and open production processes.

'''The opening of production''' is not a homogenous phenomena; it spans 
from the software field to public services and from food production 
to the media industry. It also presents a number contradictions and 
issues in the way in which openness, sharing, and collaboration work. 

Nevertheless, it '''seems characterized by four distinctive traits''':

- Shuffling of roles—these practices often entail an overlapping of 
roles between end-users, producers and designers and, consequently, 
a profound transformation of the relationships between them.

- Beyond use value—the centrality of sharing and collaboration 
implies that these practices are not only generating products and 
services which respond concretely to a human need, but also social 
connections between the participants, as well as facilitating a 
knowledge exchange between them.

- Alternative production forms—the increasing availability of 
technologies and knowledge about making is boosting the emergence 
(or reinforcement) of marginal practices on the border of capitalist, 
industrial mass-production.

- Diverse forms of commons—where commons have to be understood 
as ways of organizing and performing sharing and collaboration and, 
consequently, entailing diverse modes of openness.


The opening of production is mobilizing and feeding a number of 
possible futures that span from the creation of a post-capitalist mode 
of production based on shared resources, to the idea of collaboration 
and sharing as the new mantra for possible business models and 
startups. An in-depth mapping of the opening of production, the 
possibilities and challenges it entails is provided further on. What is 
important to highlight here is both how it challenges the traditional 
role of the designer and how it seems to open up the possibility of 22 
transforming or reforming the actual production system toward a 
more social and environmentally sustainable one."



[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Sweden]]