'''* Book: Making is Connecting. David Gauntlett. Polity Press, 2011'''

URL = http://www.makingisconnecting.org/


=Description=

"In Making is Connecting, David Gauntlett argues that, through making things, people engage with the world and create connections with each other. Both online and offline, we see that people want to make their mark on the world, and to make connections.

During the previous century, the production of culture became dominated by professional elite producers. But today, a vast array of people are making and sharing their own ideas, videos and other creative material online, as well as engaging in real–world crafts, art projects and hands–on experiences.

Gauntlett argues that we are seeing a shift from a ‘sit–back–and–be–told culture? to a ‘making–and–doing culture?. People are rejecting traditional teaching and television, and making their own learning and entertainment instead. Drawing on evidence from psychology, politics, philosophy and economics, he shows how this shift is necessary and essential for the happiness and survival of modern societies."
(http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/making-is-connecting/2011/04/21)


=Excerpts=

#[http://www.makingisconnecting.org/gauntlett2011-extract1.pdf Chapter 1: Introduction] - introducing the main themes and arguments of the book.
#[http://www.makingisconnecting.org/gauntlett2011-extract2.pdf Extract from Chapter 9]: Conclusion - including brief summary of the book's arguments and 'Five key principles'.


=More Information=

#short video presentation of the main ideas of the book


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]