'''* PhD Thesis: Making Sense of Rifkin's Third Industrial Revolution: Towards a Collaborative Age. McAllum, Michael J C'''

URL = http://research.usc.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/usc:20301 [http://research.usc.edu.au/vital/access/services/Download/usc:20301/SOURCE1?view=true browser version]

Thesis submitted to The University of the Sunshine Coast. Under the supervision of Dr. Sohail Inayatullah
& Dr. Marcus Bussey. Submitted: June 7, 2016


=Description=

"The published works of the global, social and economic theorist Jeremy Rifkin are increasingly influencing planetary debates, yet few have explored his central contentions with a critical eye. In essence, Rifkin asserts humanity must either transform or collapse, with the latter being likely unless there is a significant change in trajectory. In Rifkin’s view this scenario has developed as a consequence of unsustainable ‘entropic debt’ and an economic system that cannot continue to sustain itself, given that it has successfully reduced margins (through technology) to almost zero. However, he maintains that transformation is possible if disruptive (paradigm shifting) energy and networking technologies are adopted in a timely fashion, and a post-capitalist economic system emerges as a consequence of lower transaction costs: the privileging of access over ownership; and the development of Commons based markets. The process of transition Rifkin describes as a Third Industrial Revolution and the new civilisation that emerges from it (the transformation) as a Collaborative Age. The transdiciplinary nature and pan-civilisational scope of Rifkin’s contentions extend beyond conventional (historical, sociological, political and economic) thinking and the applied/empirical frameworks that are central to most Western academic enquiry. Thus a broader framework is required; one that examines not just the litany of the proposed changes, but the deeper patterns that underpin both the transition and the transformation. Consistent with this requirement for a more integrated and holistic perspective, it is asserted that ‘macrohistory’ (the study of the patterns in societies and cultures over the long time) provides the means to frame, interrogate and understand propositions such as the Third Industrial Revolution. Drawing on the insights and writings of selected macrohistorians from diverse historical periods, cultures and worldviews, this thesis identifies patterns in the rise and fall of past civilisations/cultures. These are also evident in contemporary society and are central to Rifkin’s theorisation.
 
It posits that the Third Industrial Revolution represents a decisive technological juncture and cultural evolution that goes beyond a mere artful bundling of a number of smaller shifts, which will at some future time seem mere blips on the radar. Further, it asserts that in this (partially) technologically determined transformation there will be a substantive reframing of both socio-economic relational dynamics, and the notions of time, form and space upon which those relationships depend. However, this thesis argues that in an interconnected world, these different conceptions of reality cannot be constituted inside of those senses of reality currently privileged by modernity and its deconstructed successor, post modernity. It contends that a different kind of (biosphere) consciousness and philosophy (beyond the spectrum of contemporary ‘isms’) is necessary to reconstitute collaborative identities in a networked future. Such a future will be ecological in its relationship models, and complex, chaotic, contradictory and uncertain in its system effects. Consequently, over time, as these different identities interact, a new metanarrative will develop that will define a counter hegemonic ‘beyond the horizon of modernity’ culture. Finally, emerging from this consideration of Rifkin’s work, the work of selected macrohistorians and of those engaged in the contemporary ransformational discourse, this thesis postulates a ‘causally layered’ theory of civilisational revolution, together with descriptors of the emanant ‘relational’ scaffolding and the distinctive social morphology of a Collaborative Age."



=Excerpts=

Michael McAllum:

==Difficulties with critiquing Rifkin==

From the summary of chapter 2:

"At the outset of this chapter, it was argued that there were a number of hermeneutical and
epistemological challenges when contemplating Rifkin’s work and the central questions of
this thesis. Further it has been asserted that the failure to contemplate let alone resolve
these challenges has lead to a surprising lack of critical commentary of Rifkin’s work,
given its scope, influence and implications. What this chapter has sought to demonstrate is
that this has been due in part to a narrative style that places it outside of accepted
disciplinary boundaries, in part because of a lack of understanding and acceptance of
frameworks through which to explore multidisciplinary and pan civilisational contentions,
and in part because of an approach to scholarship that normally privileges ‘applied and
empirical’ discourse over other ways of understanding.

It has been posited in this chapter that the academic convenience of discipline-based
approaches is rarely contested in the modern discourse, yet this approach has been central
to, and largely unquestioned, in both contemporary historical writing and macro-sociological
theory. Moreover at a systemic level, this disciplinary influence has created at
least the illusion of a hermeneutic objectivity, a scientific reality that simply cannot be
sustained under close examination. 


The realisation that interpretation is a consequence of
what Dilthey describes as a hermeneutic circle has seen, as Arnasson suggests:

- [T]he disappearance of plausible models for radical and programmed social change
(variously diagnosed as the end of socialism, the demise of secular religions or the
exhaustion of the idea of progress) and left a void which the positivist movements, among
others, attempted to fill or to conjure away.

Nowhere is this more so than in most contemporary Western historical scholarship; study
that privileges events and critical agency as central to revolutionary theory. Rifkin’s
notions of revolution sit outside of, or at least uncomfortably with, such definitions.

Further, his ideas are presented through a content and stylistic approach that Tilly describes
as a superior narrative; a way of writing that provides contextualisation and enlightenment,
which in turn creates the capacity to see beyond the litany and the system conditions that a
discipline bias often takes for granted. Given this difference in starting points, what this
chapter has argued is that a different typology or framework is needed. One that is capable
of stretching beyond the confines of disciplinary thinking and accepting of alternative
narratives and praxis without compromising, in any way, the quest for intellectual rigor
required for the examination and acceptance of any particular set of ideas.

This chapter then argued that the frameworks used to explore a body of work known as
macrohistory—or, for those with a discipline bias, ‘speculative history’ — provides a way
of framing, synthesising and thus understanding Rifkin’s work. It introduces key elements
of this framework and points to a number of critical questions that the use of such a
framework provides. These will be explored and deconstructed in some detail in Chapter 4
where the work of a select group of marohistorians will be used as reference and
counterpoints.

Finally the chapter posited that Rifkin’s Theory of Revolution cannot be proven in any
applied or empirical sense, and indeed that the quest for proof, by definition, requires use
of the a logic model that privileges those forms of understanding Instead it proposes that
the range of insights that emerge from comparative thinking; translations into alternative
traditions; multidisciplinary framings; explorations of different phenomenologies; how
reality (worldviews) are constructed; and what can be learnt from ‘beyond discourse’
insights help in understanding the inherent discontinuities in the current societal construct,
and the kinds of questions and conversations that societal transitions (revolution) and
potential transformations (the Collaborative Age) require. These understandings are
explored in both Chapter 4 within the macrohistorical framework and Chapter 5 where
Rifkin’s work is ‘situated within the contemporary transformational discourse."


==The Theoretical Underpinnings of Rifkin's work==

"In summary these theories are:

===1. A Theory of Limits.=== 

An argument about the entropic effects of current socioeconomic
arrangements.


===2. A Theory of Discontinuous Change.=== 

Causes of change based on the proposition
that significant changes in energy form and use, together with different
communication technologies, have disruptive and radical effects on the societies
where such changes are realised and expressed.


===3. A Theory of History.=== 

The framing of the history of these discontinuities as a
series of identifiable and sequential revolutions have culminated in the Third
Industrial Revolution and thus might be described as ‘Stages of History’.


===4. A Theory of Empathic Consciousness.=== 

Advocacy of the view that humanity’s
biophysically determined sense of empathic consciousness frames as our
collective sense of time and space and is reframed by our individual
metaphysical choices.


===5. A Theory of Leadership.===

The development of a number of concepts that
interwoven create a ‘sinew of leadership’; a social code that enables networks to
act appropriately and synergistically in ways that can be widely shared and
accessed by many actors in multiple locations. These actors through choice, not
positional power, embed this social code through agency in their activities,
products and services across the civil and private spectrum. Over time those who
understand the need for transformation become widely distributed within and
beyond the established order. They include key policy makers required to create
the frameworks for future infrastructure, scientists and technologists who are
providing the enabling mechanisms, and finally, ‘prosumers’ who are taking
advantage of emergent transformational effects.


===6. A Theory of Post Capitalism.===

This argues that the current system is at its limits.
Further that discourses which privilege the Khunian view of mechanistic
organisation and the US senses of individualism as the basic unit of society
are both incompatible with, and insufficient for, the emerging collaborative
society, as well as the perpetuation of the capitalist model, upon which the
current system rests. If these discourses and the hegemony they have created
(mythology) are prolonged, there is no exit from cumulative entropic effects. On
the other hand the development of a new kind of infrastructure (the Internet of
Things) together with a post capitalist collaborative economy provides the basis
for escape.


===7. A Theory of Transformation.===

Only two possible future scenarios are available as
future options. These are either Transform or Collapse, on the proviso that the
former occurs in a timely manner.

However, a sense of coherence needs to go beyond a litany of applied or
empirical explanations. It requires an understanding of the systemic changes that
are either explicit or implicit in these theories; the worldviews that are privileged
in those systems; and identification of the mythologies, metonymies and
metaphors that underpin those worldviews. For instance, the central role of
mythology and the use of the metonymic ‘hydraulic civilisation’ allusion is
better understood if one accepts, as Rifkin believes, significant shifts in the
mastery of energy and communication technology reframe our sense of space
and time, and that they have been and are, as a consequence, transformative in
nature."


==[[Jeremy Rifkin's Theory of Post Capitalism]]==

"Two of Rifkin’s most important contentions—the effects of entropy on the global
environmental system and the effect of energy efficiencies as drivers of growth—are
largely neglected in conventional economic theory. While his early work, for the most part,
sets out the logic and evidence for these propositions, his later works articulate potential
responses to the challenges these contentions raise. The evolution of this ‘challenge and
response’ process has lead him to a point where he has declared that the essence of the
current economic system (capitalism) “is passing, not quickly but inevitably and that in its
place a new economic paradigm, the Collaborative Commons is in the ascendant”.

Substantiation of this declaration requires Rifkin to: theorise about systemic limits and new
options as alternatives to the current model; identify worldviews alternative to those that
underpin the capitalist ethic; and at least proffer some possibilities for future metaphors
and mythologies.

At the outset it should be noted that, while some would regard Rifkin’s views as ‘of the
left’, he is not a Marxist economist, in the accepted sense of that term. For the Marxists,
the question is not about whether or not to ‘exploit, grown and own,’ rather the issue is
about who controls or has the right to ‘exploit, grow and own.’ In contrast, Rifkin
questions the concept of production and its entropic effects per se. As such, he might be
more accurately characterised as an ‘individualist’ in the European sensibility, where “the
emphasis is on inclusivity, diversity, quality of life, sustainability, deep play, universal
human rights and the rights of nature”393. It is within this context that, in the Zero
Marginal Cost Economy, he notes mixed feelings about the passing of the capitalist era,
and is somewhat surprised that an economic system organised around scarcity and profit
could almost counter intuitively spawn a system of nearly free goods, services and
abundance, that will see its demise. For Rifkin, the emergence of the Collaborative Era
that in earlier works he has described as distributed capitalism and lateral power, provides
the opportunity to reframe world views that if they were to continue would (and still do)
provide the greatest challenge to “the survival of our species in recorded history”.

The strands of Rifkin’s Theory of Post Capitalism litany are several. Firstly, as was
explained in an exploration of his Theory of Limits, he argues that Adam Smith’s
economic model is flawed in two important ways. These include the Newtonian view on
which it is based, and the lack of regard it has for the entropic effects that are consequential
to the growth-and-accumulation imperative inherent in the model. Secondly, he argues that
this same model has reached the outer limits of how far it can extend growth aspirations,
within an economic system deeply dependent on oil and other fossil fuels. He then posits
that the emergence of a new energy and communications infrastructure will reinvent the
way the world does business. By design, in the manufacturing realm, it will shift the way
of life from highly capitalised, giant, centralised factories, equipped with heavy machines,
to economic models that are distributed, modular and personalised in their relationships
between buyer and seller398. Most importantly, through the way it is designed and
constructed, this process must occur with fewer entropic effects.

This realignment of how economic activity occurs also alters the dynamics of relationships
and the exercise of power. It favours lateral ventures both in the social commons and in the
market place on the assumption that mutual interest pursued jointly is the best route to
sustainable economic development. This is a different kind of capitalism; one that is
distributed in its nature and which fundamentally reconfigures the temporal and spatial
orientation of society. It changes the nature and cost of transactions and offers the
possibility of new ways to organise and manage economic activity. As an economic model,
it is systemically different in its modality and therefore, it requires a different kind of
theorising. Moreover, it must be asked: can an economic system, which is systemically
different, be understood through the same lens used to theorise the existing system?
If it is to be considered through the lens of the current system, then it differs in three
important ways. The first is that the logic of a system, contingent on substantive margins
on both the supply and the demand sides—what we call profits or accumulations—cannot
be sustained if those margins are almost zero. The consequence in Rifkin’s view will be
that:

...capitalist markets will continue to shrink into narrow niches where profit-making
enterprises survive only at the edges of the economy...relying on very specialized products
and services.

The second is that the nature of the market function, however that is expressed, changes
from an opportunity for accumulation to an opportunity for exchange. In this model,
capitalism is ‘distributed’, premised on the idea that everybody can trade and exchange,
without the controls that exist in the current proprietary models. In this reformulated
future, and given that markets are, at least in part, an extension of socio-economic identity,
we can assume that an understanding of economic identity for both individuals and
communities is reframed as well. In a real-time, near-term, future world existing market
mechanisms are too slow and “a new economic system will be as different from market
capitalism as the latter was from the feudal economy of an earlier era”. 

Thirdly, with less opportunity for capital accumulation, the ability to ‘own’ property is less available;
‘mine versus thine’ becomes harder to sustain and the focus shifts to an interest in access to
shareable goods and services.

In Rifkin’s later works, the shift from ‘property ownership’ to ‘access’ to goods and
services is a tangible expression of the challenge the Third Industrial Revolution poses to a
highly embedded pattern of economic thought: a worldview integral to the concepts of
capitalism. Nothing, he argues, is more sacrosanct to an economist than property
relations, for these are an explicit representation of a commitment to economic growth.

If the possibility is considered that the idea of property accumulation will be gradually set
aside, this new Age will “bring with it very different conceptions of human drives and the
assumptions that govern human economic activity”. These contemplations of what will
constitute economy are deeply problematic in the current order, yet to limit their
characterisation to being simply components of an economic revolution is too narrow a
lens through which to understand what is, or what might, occur. This is because their
impact is and will be a reflection of different motivations and constitutions of identity.

While having traced the rise and establishment of the private property rights, and the
consequences of those rights, in some detail, in all his works since The European Dream
(for it was not always that way), he contends that, in a collaborative future, social capital
plays an increasingly important role. This is because the accumulation of social capital
enables increased access, rather than ownership, to networks where the cost of
participation is plummeting as communications technologies become cheaper. The
consequence of this rebalancing of capital is “a shift in emphasis from the quantity and
worth of one’s possessions to the quality of one’s relationships [and] requires both a
change in spatial and temporal orientation”406. As such, it is likely to play a far more
significant role in economic life that will increasingly take place in a Collaborative
Commons.

From the systemic shift, and a worldview that reconstitutes property rights as a process of
access not ownership, what emerges is a new series of case studies and metaphors about
collaboration and commonality that reflect the swing from a scarcity to an abundance
mentality. This new mentality is not the kind of abundance that, as Gandhi observed,
provides for every human’s [sic] greed, rather it is an abundance that, anchored in our
ecological footprint, provides enough to satisfy every human’s [sic] need.408 Therefore, it
is a step away from a materialist ethos to one of sustainability and stewardship, where
nature becomes a community to preserve, rather than a resource to exploit409. Rifkin
contends that the absence of the fear of scarcity mitigates against the desire to over
consume, hoard and over indulge, and while not quickly removing the dark side of human
nature, encourages the development of a new cultural social code. This he sees emerging in
at least a portion of younger generations who have “grown up in a new world mediated by
distributed, collaborative, peer-to-peer networks”.

Rifkin therefore argues his Theory of Post Capitalism from three premises. 

The first is that
the system conditions that already exist in the present growth-focused construct make its
continuation impossible. In this sense, these conditions are a reflection of Sorokin’s
principle of immanent change. He also posits that the attributes and ubiquity of the new
infrastructure, known as the Internet of Things (IoT), by design and structure undermines
core principles on which the present capitalist model is based. Secondly, he asserts that
these networked, lateral and distributed arrangements privilege relationships over
ownership, thereby creating conditions for economic activity and social arrangements that
are systemically incompatible with the culture and ethos of the contemporary economy. In
this way, the forces that have been unleashed are “both disruptive and liberating and are
unlikely to be curtailed and reversed”411. Thirdly he submits that economic systems are
situated within larger human systems and therefore, when an economic system changes, so
do philosophies, institutions that exist within those systems, and ultimately social and
cultural conventions. In this way Rifkin’s Theory of Post Capitalism steps beyond the
disciplinary boundaries in which economic theory is normally considered and it links to the
other transdiciplinary (and perhaps uni-disciplinary) theorising critical to the Third
Industrial Revolution contention.

===Macrohistorical Commentary===

The unsustainability of economic systems and their role in civilisational change have
preoccupied all macrohistorians and many contemporary transformational theorists. Unlike
Marx and Gramsci, who theorised over the ownership arrangements of the capitalist
system, perhaps only Sarkar, among the macrohistorians, comes closest to offering an
alternative economic model that is ‘distributed by design’. For Sarkar, like Rifkin,
unabated accumulation and misuse of wealth is a central problem. The goal, in his
narrative, is for a good society to provide all individuals with the basic requirements of life
in the way that Ghandi’s ‘Swadeshi’ defines them, and to ensure that in the process, wealth
is used for benefit and not hoarded. However, for Sarkar, economy and economic growth
has a subordinated role as it only exists “to provide physical security such that women and
men can pursue intellectual and spiritual development”. Spengler also rails against
‘money thought’: “the grand legacy of the Faustian Soul”. He maintains that little
attention has been paid to the presumptions that underpin the thinking of Hume and Adam
Smith: that its privileging of materialism ignores the soul that is at the heart of culture.

The consequence is that “the heroic and the saintly withdraw into narrower and narrower
circles and the cool bourgeois take their place. [Thus] in the frictions of the city, the stream
of being loses its rich form” and the culture inevitably declines. The only way out of this
crisis is for “power to be overthrown by another power”416. The question this assertion
poses is: is a change in system conditions, as described by Rifkin, sufficiently powerful to
effect the revolution Spengler prescribes, or will some other more explicit agency be
required? The linkage or otherwise of economy to ‘soul’ also preoccupied Toynbee. 


He argued:

- Western humanity [sic] has bought themselves [sic] into danger of losing their souls
through their concentration on a sensationally successful endeavor to increase material well
being. If they [sic] were to find salvation they [sic] would only find it only in sharing the
results of material achievement with the less materially successful majority of the Human
Race.

This was not an argument by Toynbee for some kind of socialism; indeed to the
contrary. Rather it is questioning ‘where to next?’ for the ‘psychic energy’ that has been
capitalism’s driving force and which fashioned the industrial revolution, for as Schumpeter
suggests “stabilized capitalism is a contradiction in terms”.

Similar themes to those expressed in Rifkin’s Theory of Post Capitalism are emerging
among some modern transformational theorists. They have, of course, the advantage of
contemplating the contemporary condition in ways that earlier macrohistorians could not.
While their views, in relation to understanding Rifkin, will be explored in some detail later
in this thesis, a number do contemplate the end of capitalism, the emergence of the
distributed or collaborative economy and a future of access, not
ownership. This suggests that Rifkin’s Theory of Post Capitalism has both intellectual
precedent and contemporary support."


==The Role of Technology in Civilizational Transformation==

===Disruptive and Revolutionary Technology===

"This apparent inconsistency, though, in no way denies that technologies can engender
revolutionary effects. Technology that is disruptive at a civilisational scale, occurs when
particular technologies (in the contemporary situation networking, robotic and energy
technologies) reorder, replace and integrate, certain dimensions of human life, while
excluding others previously used to establish ‘meaning’; how we connect, organise,
express culture or enable power. Consistent with this disruptive characterisation Castells
postulates, what these networks are doing is redefining cultural and social meaning, in
ways that hitherto have been defined by ‘place’ on the one hand and the ‘functionality of
wealth and power flows’ on the other. Others like Katz extend exploration of these
technology effects. They assert that just as the ethos of mechanical progress influenced the
2nd Industrial Age, so too the design and the use of the technology has assigned a number
of new meanings to network technology devices, an Apparatgeist, that was never intended
when the technology was created. In a sense, the machines have become us—and for
that matter, more than us—to a point where one of the defining characteristics of
individuality and our age—what we call ‘work’—“will soon come under threat from
forged labourers and synthetic intellects”. So pervasive will be their impact “the future
will be a struggle of assets against people, as the resources accumulated by our creations
serve no constructive purpose or are put to no productive use”629. As the technologies
evolve or are replaced by newer and smarter versions, the revolutionary effects of the never
ending redefinition of meaning permeate ever deeper into the existing fabric, eroding what
is and providing opportunity to establish what might be (a process previously described as
pseudomorphosis).


===Disruptive Technology enables Discontinuous Form===

If technologies enable ‘meaning’ to be redefined, and if such reconstitutions are widely
shared, then the entire social and economic fabric is also rearranged to an extent that it can
only be described as revolutionary. For example, with almost ubiquitous technological
connectedness (a central tenet of Rifkin’s sense of revolution) Perez argues what
distinguishes a technological (network) revolution from the emergence of interesting but
random technologies is the strong interconnectedness and interdependence of the
participating technologies in how they influence markets and societies, together with their
capacity to profoundly transform economies, institutions and society itself. Figure 5.4
suggests that it is at deeper levels of reality that redefinition, due to the introduction of a
particular technology, becomes important. This importance might be measured by the
capacities any particular technology creates, to enable transformation; to redefine society at
a structural level—thereby reframing worldviews and creating new myths and
metaphors—that defines revolution at a scale that is material.


===Why Network Technologies Undermine Continuity===

Almost paradoxically, an understanding that it is the reconstitution of meaning that matters
in transition and transformation assists in understanding the dialectic tension that exists
between the widespread dissemination of network technologies and at the same time the
evident capacity of some of those technologies to undermine the existing system
(particularly capitalist economic systems). While the implications of this tension and the
possibility that it will usher in a post model, will be explored later in this chapter, there are
a number of more generalised effects that might be considered. 

Firstly, they enable a
radical redefinition and rearrangement of transaction costs631. This has profound
implications, for both margins (on both the supply and demand side) and on the formshape-size
of organisations. Secondly, as was alluded to earlier, advances in robotics and
cognitive technologies will see the end of work, as we understand it. If this is as rapid, as
some argue632, then how wealth is socially distributed to allow any kind of economy (be it
for accumulation or exchange) will require a different alternative to work as a wealth
distribution mechanism. The third reframing reflects the tension engendered by
technologies that allow for significant global, and therefore non-state based, economic
activity. This allows particular classes of actors to avoid or go beyond the frameworks of
any particular nation whose policy settings they perceive are not in their best interests,
thereby challenging the close connection that the nation state has with economy. While
each of these contentions is important and are worthy of further exploration within the
context of this study, what they demonstrate both separately and together is that
networking technologies create significant disruption to current arrangements, and the
potential for the reconstitution of an economic system or systems635 that is different from
these arrangements."

===Civilisation Transformation===

The Civilisation Transformists, including Rifkin, can be distinguished from both the
Descent School and Technological Optimists in three important ways. 

The first is their
shared perspective that environmental issues confronting contemporary society are so
severe they not only cannot be resolved inside the current system. Indeed if left in situ,
they will ensure ‘civilisation collapse’ sooner rather than later. Thus, Transformists
argue descent contemplates particular change trajectories that are insufficient, Further that
technological advancement, without concomitant socio-economic shift, merely amplifies
the problems humanity now faces. For the Transformists therefore the societal
arrangements must be constituted in a way that extends beyond the accepted conventions
and assumptions that dominate the contemporary condition. Theirs is an eschatological
proposition, the present or near future a time of profound global discontinuity. Secondly,
they contend this ‘beyond state’ requires fundamental and systemic change. It is the only
hope for a viable future. In other words, to avoid Collapse, a transformation or revolution
is required. Thirdly, they maintain that this revolution will reframe socially accepted
constitutions of reality at multiple levels. As the futurist Polak asserts, this means that the
dynamics of continuous interaction, in all parts of the social and cultural fabric, will result
in the form and shape of most of what we now understand being altered637, thus ushering in
a new civilisational model. The contemporary civilisation transformist discourse therefore
argues for a reframing of reality at multiple levels, in both systems and mentalities and can
thus be defined as revolutionary.

In this definition transformation is both additive (in considering technologies and limits)
and discontinuous and the revolutionary effects it contemplates are deeply embedded in
transformist literature. One of the earliest contemporary revolutionary theorists, Alvin
Toffler in Future Shock, contends humanity is on the brink of a Third Wave, a postindustrial
shift driven by technology and enhanced communications that would be so
distinctly different it would “alter the chemistry in our brains”. The sociologist Wagner
is equally dramatic in asserting that modernity (civilisational shift) is “a distinct rupture of
historical consciousness”. Eisler also argues for a transformation, one that is not just
‘civilisational’ but also ‘relational’ in nature. By this she means that any transformation
that continues to be andocratic merely perpetuates the mythology of domination. To effect
Eisler’s revolution, a future networked society would at a systemic level require
partnership systems where gylany is normative. This argument for philosophical shift is
extended by Henderson, who suggests that moving beyond the competitive model that
characterises what she terms as global economic warfare, is fundamental to the social
architecture of the 21st century. What these descriptors of revolution suggest is that the
transformation being contemplated here is non-event based, multidimensional,
philosophical and multifaceted. It is a revolution whereby understandings of form and
shape reach far beyond the explicit to include the implicit of cultural and behavioural
orientation.

Above all, the Civilisation Transformists can be distinguished by their alternative
narratives, or proposed escapes from the existing condition. In analysing their thinking,

Figure 5.5 has been reordered from previous tables to align common questions/issues in
both Rifkin’s and other Transformist theorising and discourse with (already explored)
various macrohistorical understandings. The intent is to establish where there are shared
and common understandings or extensions to Rifkin’s work.

This sense of revolution frames the comprehension of the real at multiple levels. It
provides a scaffold for a contemporary discourse—one on which Rifkin’s work might be
‘arranged’—and, through which different understandings that have been made visible
through macrohistorical investigation might be explored in the contemporary condition. A
critical outcome of this exploration will be to inform and extend perspectives about a
number of questions central to this thesis. 


Within this ‘situational’ context these are as follows:

o Firstly, are Rifkin’s propositions consistent with other contemporary theorists in
describing the challenges of transforming society, beyond the limits?

o Secondly, does the proposed revolution resolve critical issues in a way that
enables collective humanity to live within the constraints of the planet?

o Thirdly, can either of the above occur without the emergence of a new
philosophical construct? If so, then this discourse must always be contextualised
as ‘contemporary’ rather than ‘modern’, for to consider it otherwise frames
senses of reality that privilege the centrality of modernity, and thus retention of
the system conditions that have created the point of ‘historical rupture’ in the
first place.

Furthermore, it is posited that the macrohistorical and transformation wisdom available to
all of us has an important place in contemporary dialogue. It argues that the Transformists,
however, complete their narrative, and are a ‘creative minority’ whose role is vital in the
rise of a new civilisational idea. 


Toynbee, writing about such roles in either the growth or
dissolution of a civilisations, described them as theorists who:

...have learnt the tricks of the intrusive civilisation’s trade in so far as it may be necessary
to enable their own community, through their agency, just to hold its own in a social
environment in which life is ceasing to be lived in accordance with local tradition
and...more and more in the style imposed by the intrusive civilisation. 

Thus Transformists, including Rifkin, have a critical role in creating an ‘intrusive
pseudomorphosis’ enabled by superior narratives. In the contemporary situation these
narratives enable those who subscribe to transformation to visualise alternatives to the
litany of modernity; a new context “where new kinds of stories arise and [where] tracing
the consequences of adopting those stories rather than others [makes these] in principle
available”644. The question in all circumstances is: do such narratives create the systemic
conditions that will either enable or defeat the possibility of the narrative they visualise?"


==Situating the Post Capitalist Proposition==

Rifkin, in his latest work The Zero Cost Marginal Society, extends his earlier argument that
capitalism will move from a vertical to lateral orientation to assert:


[T]he Capitalist era is passing and although the indicators are still soft and largely
anecdotal, the Collaborative Commons is ascendant and by 2050 it will most likely settle in
as the primary arbiter of economic life.

He contends there are essentially three reasons for this. 

Firstly, with the use of network
technologies the capitalist system is increasingly able to produce constructs of
simplification and efficiency (competitive advantage) that enable near zero marginal cost
and “if that were to happen the lifeblood of capitalism [margins] would dry up”6. This
proposition suggests that this drive for competitive advantage is inherent in the system and,
as each new advantage is obtained, the margins available reduce. Logically, this will reach
a point when there is no margin left and the system is at its limits. When that occurs, then
the only option is to expand the market into areas of what were considered societal
responsibilities (e.g. prisons, health, security) 700 until the same point in the process occurs
again. Secondly, the entropic bill for industrial capitalism has arrived, because the
economic model and its related energy system see environmental effects as unaccountable
externalities. Consequently, the energy systems on which capitalism depends must
rapidly change if Collapse is to be averted, thus “throwing the whole economic model into
question”. 

Thirdly, Rifkin proposes the emerging Collaborative economy is developing
as a viable, perhaps even preferred, alternative to a capitalist model that is, by design,
systemically inequitable.

While some of Rifkin’s propositions are still evolving, a prime concern of this thesis (as
has been stated) is to determine if there is also a contemporary body of literature that
supports his fundamental proposition that the system is at is limits. An exploration of
Rifkin and Transformist contentions is important because an understanding of the
outcomes (not proof!) to these propositions has implications for mentality, philosophy and
narratives of engagement with a global community who currently do not see any viable
alternative to a mythology that argues (in a rephrasing of a Churchillian quote on
democracy) “as a system, capitalism is not perfect but it is far better than the
alternatives”. However, it should be noted that, to date, the use of ‘alternative’ has
always been contained within the boundaries of the contemporary discourse (capitalism v
socialism). ‘Alternative’ as it is used here describes a transformational imperative, one that
stands outside of contemporariness because either the system is at immanent limits, or a
better option is in prospect.


===Capitalism as a system===

While both civilisations and cultures are seen within macrohistory as systems, the question
is: can capitalism also be considered as a system in the contemporary context? If so, then it
is possible to hypothesise that, not only will it have a beginning and an end, but it will also
be subject to forces that affect the system’s condition. The heuristics of capitalism are
complex because the term is frequently conflated with the concept of industrial society or
Enlightenment philosophy. There is further confusion when one understands that the
practice and structures of capitalism are different in various societies. Most often it is
known as ‘free market capitalism’ (USA), but it is sometimes oligarchical (Russia), and
sometimes state-sponsored (China). However, what these capitalist systems have in
common is that they privilege ‘markets for accumulation. ’ It is through this common
definition that this thesis (and Rifkin) explores Capitalism as a System.

Conceptualising capitalism as a system, and existential threats to system integrity, are a
consistent theme in contemporary transformation discourse. Wallerstein, whose World
Systems Theory704 might be considered an interpretative history of the evolution of the
system, is very explicit. In his view (capitalist) systems have laws, which produce
“particular historical configurations of markets and state structures, where private gain by
almost any measure is the paramount goal and measure of success. However, this
system has now “moved too far from equilibrium and no longer permits capitalists to
accumulate capital endlessly”706. As a result, there is a civilisational crisis that, if it is to be
resolved, will require a successor system. This successor will require “the rejection of the
basic objective of economic growth [and the] search for rational balances of social
objectives”. Others, including Kaletsky, support this need for radical systemic
adaptation; to survive there is a requirement for both institutional adaptation and
ideological flexibility to create a mixed economy with governments and business in
partnership, together with a balance of both competitive and controlled markets. 


In a similar vein the Yale economist Thurow asks:

… how does a system that believes it takes competition to make firms within the capitalist
system efficient, adapt to a changing environment and maintain its efficiency if the system
of capitalism itself has no competition?

Still other Transformists locate the system in environmental terms. Taylor argues that the
system problem is its location “in a belief system that does not recognise the need for
limits. It is like a car that has an accelerator but no brakes”. Based on the examples
above, it is suggested all Transformists explore their concerns about capitalism in systemic
terms, and all express the same as evidence of an unsustainable system logic (immanent
change), or irreparable damage from its continuation. In a further distinction,
Transformists, having articulated the position on system (un)sustainability, advance an
alternative system or ‘post capitalist’ propositions.


===Entropic Debt makes Capitalism Unsustainable===

The origins of Rifkin’s imperative to ‘Rethink Adam Smith’ relates to his concern about
unsustainable entropic debt. Other Transformists have similar concerns, and while only
Christian explicitly echoes Rifkin’s thermodynamic thesis, all are concerned about the
effect of capitalism on environmental sustainability. Slaughter goes as far as suggesting
that “the industrial worldview can in fact be seen as an experiment to discuss how far the
(capitalist) constellation of values, ideas and beliefs can go, before they hit their human,
cultural and environmental limits”.
Similarly, Ehrlich contends the foremost challenge facing humanity is our inability to “face
the problems that lie at the heart of two gigantic, complex, adaptive systems; the biosphere
and the human socio-economic system”. Tainter, who has explored the effects of
Collapse in complex societies, notes that, while complex societies are historically
vulnerable—and this fact alone is disturbing to many—the difference between us and
ancient societies is that our world is full and “nothing can ever happen again without the
whole world taking a hand [my emphasis]”. But perhaps it is Klein, whose assertion is
that the economic system is at war with the planet, and that nature will only play by its
own rules715, who almost irrefutably makes the case that it is almost impossible to continue
with an economic system that, by design, asserts its primacy over the biosphere.


===Immanent limits===

The second argument in Rifkin’s theorising is one of immanency. It relates to the
overreach of success in the system. Among the theorists there are several issues
responsible for the system acting against itself. The first is the radical decline in options for
growth, and as a result, the ability to accumulate. The second is the destruction of the
structures and frameworks that support the system because the system, by commodifying
everything, corrupts that on which its existence relies. The final concern relates to the
consequences of connectedness, because this makes evident the inequalities inherent in the
system to those who have been exploited or marginalised through the activities of the
system. In recent times each of these issues is exacerbated by a dominant worldview,
inside the capitalist system, known as neoliberalism (in reality very conservative
economics and philosophy). Neoliberalism, as the Harvard philosopher Sandel notes, now
freed from the constraints of liberal philosophy, privileges markets of accumulation and
the value of money over everything.

As Rifkin notes, while margins are necessary for both growth and accumulation in
Capitalism, the current system has a margin’s crisis. This is because the opportunity for
returns is diminishing, partly because of “declining returns based on our reliance on fossil
fuels”717, and partly because of the emergence of unprecedented levels of sovereign debt.
Both effects reduce the levels of financial circulation, thus slowing the nature of the market
and limiting, once again, the opportunity to profit from exchange. The effect of this
is that “the next generation will be poorer than this one; the old economic model
is broken and cannot revive growth [as we have traditionally understood it], without
reviving financial fragility”
.
This ‘returns on capital’ crisis is exacerbated by the effect of emerging network
technologies. They enable techno-economic paradigm shifts that disrupt not just particular
competitive modalities, institutional contexts and cultures, but also they introduce
opportunities to access almost zero-cost structures, disruptive innovation (e.g. crowd
funding) at the expense of existing players, and new organisational dynamics (lateral v.
vertical power). As Perez opines, this time of ‘shift’ represents the exhaustion of the
current mode of wealth creation, whose actors, in the face of revolution will use
“embedded habits and institutions [to] act as a powerful inertia force, [one that] must be
transformed to enable the next surge”. This, however, is a short-term and limited
strategy that only obscures the profound change that a low margins environment
engenders.

The third dynamic is the assumption that growth will continue. However, as the economic
historian Fischer points out, every previous economic growth model has come to an end,
and there is no reason to suggest that this one will be any different. He argues there is no
historical basis for suggesting that the laws of supply and demand have ever worked, and
that the record of using short-term thinking to fix long-term problems is a dreary run.

Moreover, the sovereign debts that developed as a result of the 2008 ‘Great Recession’
have permanently curtailed the ability of governments to invest in growth, when the market
can or will not do so. Thus the concept of margins and accumulation face a triple threat:
the exhaustion of opportunities within the dynamics that created the Second Industrial
Revolution; the emergence of networking technologies that create a techno-economic
paradigm shift; and the need for a low-growth environment to counteract undesirable levels
of entropic shift.

Faced with these unfavourable dynamics, the literature suggests the neoliberal mindset has
refocused on the monetarisation and commodification of what were previously considered
public goods. The contention is that as this neoliberalism intrudes and acquires what were
previously seen as public goods (e.g. education, security, health, social welfare,
independent arbitration), the stable social fabric on which markets depends (these same
public goods) is progressively destroyed, through “the corruption of the [non monetary]
ideas the [public] practices properly express and advance”. 

This corruption also
undermines the idea of civil society on which the institutional and economic arrangements
were developed. Sandel contends that corruption of the public sphere creates an
unsustainable social inequity where

… people are not truly free to choose and pursue their own values and ends,” [thus
encouraging] “the rich to act only in their own interest and unwilling to obey… while the
poor shackled by necessity and prone to envy are ill-suited to rule.

From a systemic perspective the development of economic practices by the rich to avoid
the obligations of civic society dismantles parts of the social scaffold on which capitalist
modernism has traditionally relied. As the system loses its distinguishing characteristics
(this is Sorokin’s point) there are only three (non exclusive) possible scenarios: the
creation of an even more oppressive, globalised non egalitarian hegemony; the
development of unsustainable conditions for human existence on the planet in the near
future (circa 2050)726; or a rapid evolution into a different civilisational construct.

If this inequity continues and is taken to its extreme conclusion, and has already occurred
in many developing countries, then as the British economist Picketty asserts: “there are no
rational spontaneous processes to prevent destabilising non egalitarian forces from
prevailing permanently”. This literature suggests that the privileging of wealth over
need in civil society creates further inequity and suffering.

Perhaps the greatest tension confronting modern capitalism is that, now those that are on
the wrong side of the inequity ledger are not only acutely aware of their situation (through
access to mobile technologies728), they are not prepared to accept its continuance. The
Indian essayist Roy indicates not only don’t ‘they’ (the elite 1%) know our anger could be
enough to destroy them, but “we want to put a lid on the system that manufactures
inequality” and a “cap on unfettered wealth”. This will mean, among other things: an end
to cross-ownership; an inability to privatise key natural resources and infrastructures; an
allocation of resources so everyone has shelter, education and health care; and perhaps,
most controversially, that “the children of the rich cannot inherit their parent[’]s wealth”729.
Dussel, at a systemic level, posits that this rebalancing requires the discontinuance of
systems that deprive people of their dignity, ‘those who are not’ either within the system or
outside of it. The problem is that, by design, Capitalism argues that inequality is good
as “this is the natural state of humanity, a bunch of individuals competing ruthlessly with
each other”. This is the very antithesis of the Roy/Dussel contention. The difficulty
with this ‘human as competitor’ position is that it is premised on an earlier Western
Enlightenment cosmology that presupposed effort and labour (either one’s own or others)
is semantically interchangeable with ‘competition.’ However, given the inequality, with
respect to capital—which is always more concentrated—is always greater than that with
respect to income from labour, this proposition is rapidly becoming untenable.

This realisation is likely to be further exacerbated as what we now term ‘work’ is
progressively dismantled through an explosion of technologies, both robotic and
algorithmic. These are rapidly replacing human labour, thus creating “superfluous or
displaced humanity”. 

So severe is this emerging disruption, the contention is
increasingly being made that:

- [A] guaranteed income would be a legitimate government policy designed to provide
income against adversity and that the need for this type of safety net is the direct result of
the transition to a more open and mobile society where individuals can no longer rely on
traditional support mechanisms.

Consistent with Rifkin’s theorisation, inequity is therefore amplifying inequity, and in
global dialogues there seems little interest by both those who benefit from the system, and
those who are fixated on benchmarks of national growth, to explore such concerns at a
systemic level. In order for a global inclusion in this emerging dialogue, it needs to exist
outside of frameworks that privilege modernity, where most global power resides.

The scale and scope of systemic issues is therefore of such magnitude that “if Capitalism is
to survive, it needs to do what its own internal logic (and this is precisely Rifkin’s point)
says it does not have to do”735. It needs to: find a way to limit the system to a scale that the
planet can accommodate; set aside rapidly increasing sovereign and private debt; focus on
the development of processes that reduce rather than create inequity (which means a
transfer of wealth from the very wealthy and limits to the process of accumulation); and
accept that little or no growth is a likely future condition. While this is treated as unlikely
and utopian, the system will continue to perpetuate itself unless there is a viable
alternative; one that not only addresses these system issues, but offers something more.
This alternative is generally known as post capitalism.


===The Post Capitalist Option===

As Rifkin’s articulation of his current (evolutionary) understanding of post capitalism
architecture has been detailed earlier in this thesis, what remains unresolved is the support
that it has. Two issues in particular serve as useful points of reference for considering this
support: changes in the dynamics of economic and power relationships, and a repurposing
of markets from accumulation to exchange.

Rifkin contends that a reconstitution of the relationships between the actors is central to the
post capitalist proposition of how value is created and captured. In post capitalist literature
there is explicit support for the proposition that in the current market accumulation model
the emphasis is hierarchical, one of control of labour and capital, whereas in the post
capitalist system the emphasis is on participation and sharing. This is what Rifkin terms
privileging of collaboration over competition. Kostakis and Bauwens describe it as “a
model where the relations of production will not be in contradiction with the evolution of
the mode of production”. This is now possible because network technologies enable
socio-technological arrangements that are not only able to compete (and often outperform),
in terms of transaction costs with hierarchical entities, but by design they create a
framework for social as well as personal benefit.

The explicit rejection of the mechanistic model permits the development of relationship
webs that are unconstrained by previous modes of control as “there is a structural
connection between the key defining properties of commons-based peer production and the
possibility of engagement in creative, autonomous, benevolent and public spirited
undertakings”. The viability of such networks also provides for the development of
alternatives for those Dussel describes as they who are not. 

It allows:

...an internal exodus by which the autonomous production of social life is made
increasingly possible (with non cooperation with the dominant capitalist model) and an
outer movement that can muster resistance and strike at the heart of power.

This different arrangement also reconfigures the investor-producer-consumer relationship;
what Rifkin terms prosumers. These are either citizens or consumers who have an active
role in more than one aspect of the value creation process (hence prosumer) whereas
typically, involvement has been only at the point of purchase. Depending on the nature of
the value creation process this relationship may focus on how work is done (as exemplified
in 3D printing), where and how consumers can give as well as receive (evident in smart
grid power production), or in decision making (e.g. by investing and then buying
particular types of music they like). It is also encouraging a radical rethink in how services
like health are delivered. “The consequence is a new decentralisation of organisation
whose base will, in chosen and spontaneous groups, fulfil certain functions and whose
membership will be overlapping and not exclusive”. The attractiveness of the
‘prosumer’ archetype is near-zero information sharing costs; little fixed cost prior to
production; the ability to customise rather than prototype; no waste, ‘just in time’
production; and the development of relationships that encourage innovation. In essence it
is a disruptive logic that redefines value creation in ways that privilege economies of one
over scale744; can be conceptualised as a ‘space of flows’ across a multitude of public good
and private interactions; and distributes control among the actors in a manner that
encourages collaboration rather than advantage. Finally, the significance of this
technology-relationship congruence in a post capitalist model is that it provides a platform,
consistent with Rifkin’s theorising, through which critical environmental, social and
economic issues might be addressed.

One of the dearly held mythologies of the capitalist model is that the market is a neutral,
non-value driven ‘invisible hand.’ Proponents of markets for exchange, not accumulation,
differ. They argue current markets are capricious, ownership-centric and exhibit all the
system tensions described above. Instead they propose new models of cooperation
(microfinance, co-operative infrastructure, decentralised energy) that operate in
pseudomorphic-like arrangements within the existing system as prototypes of market
commons. These Commons, manifestations of lateral power, are potentially spaces that
“provide opportunities for virtuous behaviour, ones that are more relevant to virtuous
individuals and (therefore) the practice of effective virtuous behaviour may lead to more
people adopting these virtues as their own”746. These are, as Wallenstein suggests, one of
the alternatives for a world in a period of structural chaos747. They point to a future where
the rights of the group, as well as those of the individual, are a permanent feature of
society. This evolution of post capitalism is not simply the adaptive evolution of capitalism
as propounded by Kaletsky748, Picketty749 and Bryjolfsson750, and one that Rifkin in earlier
works termed distributed capitalism. Rather, it represents a systemic break, an acceptance
that the model has little adaptive capacity left. It makes available through access models
what previously could only be owned, be that physical property or knowledge. What
emerges, Mason describes as “new forms of society that (through networks) prefigure what
comes next”, and Rifkin characterises as ‘ zero marginal cost society’ that can take the
human race from an economy of scarcity to an economy of abundance over the course of
the first half of the twenty-first century”.


==Conditions for success of a Post-Capitalist Transformation==

===Conditions for Success===

However, using a macrohistorical framing, this thesis has deconstructed Rifkin’s narratives
into seven theories using CLA as a framework for that deconstruction. It asserts that each
of these theories, acting in ways that reinforce the others, provides a logical and coherent,
but linear, narrative. It also suggests that these theories (of limits, discontinuous change,
stages of history, empathic consciousness, leadership, post capitalism and transformation)
explore layers of reality that, while concentrating the gaze on the near future, require
consideration of reality that is ‘beyond the litany’ of that gaze. It is postulated that these
considerations reveal a range of challenges and tensions that significantly impact both the
transition and transformation Rifkin is proposing.


These include the following:

o The entropic effects (the environmental crisis) of the industrial economy cannot
be resolved inside an economic system that privileges ‘growth’ and ‘quantity of
life’ as prime drivers of society.

o New energy and communication technologies, acting as ‘infrastructure’, are
nomothetic in their nature and influence. As such, they challenge the
continuation of mechanism and vertical power, and they privilege post-carbon
futures, ecological thinking and collaboration.

o At the core of the (theory of) revolution is a reconception of time, form and
space that will have three effects. The first is a contest between competing
senses of reality in the short term (mechanism v collaboration). The second is to
actualise the design of transformed social, economic and institutional fabric so
that it does not recreate the issues that created the ‘crisis of limits’ in the first
place. The third will include in that design an accommodation and acceptance of
multiple senses of time in a way that no one sense of time is more important than
any other, but also in a way that any given sense of time does not imperialise
itself at the expense of these others.

o If a shift in the nature of empathic consciousness is fundamental to the success
of both transition and transformation—that is, from a psychological
(individualistic) sense to a planetary level—then it needs to be complemented by
philosophical approaches that are ‘beyond the horizon’ of modernity: a way of
thinking that does not put the Western episteme, nor the role of humans as
masters-of-nature, at the center of the discourse. This reconstitution of identity
requires a rethinking of ‘presence’ or being-ness.

Given these challenges, the success of any transition and transformation will consequently
be conditional on three dynamics: new kinds of leadership; a different economic model;
and the speed of transition. 


Therefore:

o As a result of the shift from vertical to lateral power, leadership will necessarily
become distributed in scope, and both networked and collaborative in nature (a
new cosmopolitanism that can be localised). By definition it will privilege
partnership over dominator models835, and because of the nature of partnership,
it will have many forms.

o The future will require the development of ‘post-capitalist’ economic models
that replace a contemporary system that cannot either confront the
(unsustainable) limits it has created, nor the consequences of zero margins that
many technologies now enable. This will see markets of accumulation replaced
with ‘post-growth’ markets of exchange; self-reliant models developing in a
revitalised civic sector; and ownership models giving way to ‘access and use’
models.

o The success, though, of this transition will be conditional on its speed. If it fails
to occur in a timely fashion, the entropic effects will rapidly overwhelm
whatever progress has been made towards a new Collaborative Age.


Rifkin’s Third Industrial Revolution is therefore conditional. It is an argument that, whilst
focused on the near-term future, is binary in its options (Transform or Collapse).
Consequently, one of the benefits of placing this narrative within the wider macrohistorical
discourse has been to identify other possibilities that might be between, or even outside of,
the spectrum Rifkin describes.


===Patterns in the revolution===

Critical to an understanding of possibilities that lie beyond the “in-between period, where
very few things seem to make sense” is to search for patterns that frame transformation of
the kind Rifkin is proposing. This is what Inayatullah describes as “contouring the
parameters of the future possible”. In doing so, there are options to start multiple
dialogues in different spaces, and perhaps make heard options that are as yet unseen or
overlooked. Of all the (nomothetic) patterns considered through macrohistorical
exploration, three in particular help in understanding how modernism constitutes its sense
of reality and how alternative (nomothetic) patterns will drive the dynamics of transition
and transformation. These relate to systemic limits; how time, form and shape is
conceptualised; and the symbiosis between how we think (mentality) and how the ethics
informed by that mentality are actualised in economy, infrastructure and other social
arrangements integral to human communities.

Macrohistorians through this thesis have considered that social systems are finite, durable
and limited. Consistent with this view, Rifkin has maintained that issues of entropic debt,
the emergence of almost zero margins as a result of the successful application of
technologies in the economic system, and the inability of the system to support neverending
growth all are examples of systemic limits in the contemporary experiment. There
is therefore a choice in considering Rifkin’s contentions. Either the discourse can begin
through interrogating the litany of his postulations, or it can start at a deeper level of
analysis, one that explores the nature of social systems as finite entities. If the former is
preferred, then there is always the possibility that what is being contended will be managed
or adapted within the existing system, or that the focus is only partial, rather than holistic.
If that were to occur, ‘the present eats the future’ in ways that privilege those whose
interests are served from apparent resolution of those issues, within the present system.

If, on the other hand, the latter is preferred, then there is at least the possibility of a
supervalence effect: something that can be viewed at a distance. This ability to contemplate
at a distance the idea that the system we live in is finite839, affords an escape from the
overwhelming present where the limits are often obscured and in some instances not
recognised at all. It provides the opportunity for sense making and alternative system
design where both the interests of the present and the process of transition from one system
to another are second order questions.

In the capitalist culture of the Second Industrial Revolution, power and privilege is often
determined by the value of a person’s (or institution’s) time: “the time poor are made to
wait, while the temporally privileged are waited upon”840. In the Third Industrial
Revolution, the technologies that will enable it allow the possibility of emancipating
chronological time from the power relationship and in the process creating time
relationships, forms and shapes (morphologies) that reflect that emancipation. Indeed, it is
posited that it is almost systemically impossible to conceptualise a networked and
collaborative society unless this reconstitution of time, form and shape occurs. Its
actualisation will sharply delineate the difference between modernity and the future.

Therefore, given that we define our infrastructure, yet over time it defines us (homo
urbanus), a future networked and collaborative society needs to ensure the next
infrastructure design is premised on the idea that everyone’s time is equally valuable. This
is not to assert that time is reduced to the lowest common denominator, nor that years of
investment in the development of skills and knowledge should not be reflected in how
society values a particular task. Rather, it is to suggest that the exercise of power or wealth
to exploit the time of others should be rejected as a conceptual model for infrastructure and
also as a determinant of priority in accessing those parts of the civic we all require. In other
words the intent should be to balance the power of amplification enjoyed by the
privileged. Conceptually, this has profound implications for the dynamics of how a
society or culture works: the nature of settlement, work and institutional patterns. It would
almost certainly be necessary as a foundational idea for a philosophical view that is not
modernism-centric. Further, describing successive revolutions through the way they
[re]constitute time, form and space helps distinguish the nature of the Third Industrial
(civilisational) Revolution from event, scientific, political or technology revolutions.

However, Rifkin contends humanity cannot step beyond the limits of modernity and its
accepted senses of time, form and space unless there is also a shift in the mentality
(consciousness and philosophy) that privileges those senses. Thus, an alternative future
cannot be realised if it is “constrained by hierarchies, boundaries of exclusion, and a
concept of human nature that places acquisitiveness, self interest and utility at the center of
the human experience”843. A future post capitalist (at its limits) economy, the capacity to
live within the constraints planetary existence imposes, and the nature of a networked
collaborative future must necessarily privilege relationships over contracts, the right for
nature to coexist without exploitation or an assertion of mastery, and a rebalancing and
distribution of acquisition (ownership and growth) within the global family. This is not
socialism as the 20th. Century has constituted it; for that is merely a different method of
controlling the processes of acquisition and time. Rather, it is a new cosmopolitan sociality
that manifests itself as a complete rethinking of what it means to be human (identity). So
different are the ethics of this new sociality that it becomes immediately evident why it
cannot be constituted inside late stage modernity. What remains uncertain is whether the
vested interests in the present system, acting in partial concert (agency), will delay the
inevitable incoming tide of nomothetic effects, perhaps to a point where environmental
collapse becomes the inevitable future for us all. Regardless of how these external and
immanent system threats are understood, they place the global community at a time when
what we have been, what we are and what we need to be “are seen to be correlated in the
process, whereby memorization and an anticipatory narrative of the future relate to the
interpretation of the present and to the semantics of action”.


==Towards a Theory of Civilisational Revolution==

In Rifkin’s normative narrative of the near future, energy and communication technologies,
acting as an indivisible technology infrastructure, will drive a Third Industrial Revolution,
providing there is an extension of empathic consciousness to a biosphere level. Although
this contention is broadly supported within both macrohistorical and contemporary
transformational discourse, exploration of the layers of reality that inform this contention
suggest a more nuanced and extended understanding of the social (civilisational)
revolution he postulates.


This elaboration of the theory of civilisational or cultural revolution might develop in
this way:

If significant discontinuity in both energy and communication is the litany of social
revolution, then changing conceptions of time, form and shape are the structural edifice
(scaffold) on which the actualisation of those discontinuous technologies rest. For
example, the use of steam in the 19th century revolutionised not just Braudel’s ‘floating
through the landscape’ of intercity rail connection, but with dedicated passenger ships, it
redefined intercontinental connection and migration as well. This shift had profound
impacts, particularly in the Americas, where migration before this time was almost
exclusively focused on slavery and indentured labour, mainly in the center and south of the
Americas. For some though, these same changes in time, form and shape represented a
whole range of opportunities (e.g. the development of print media) that were just beginning
to be understood. Almost always they were outside of purview (or perhaps interest) of the
dominant power structures of that time.


If this theorisation is accepted it is possible to reconstitute the narrative of the Third
Industrial Revolution in the following manner:

The development of an Internet of Things, based on a renewable energy infrastructure, a
networked communications infrastructure and a new logistics infrastructure, will reframe,
in a discontinuous fashion, the senses of time, form and shape upon which contemporary
infrastructure depends. It will shift the control of energy creation and management from
point source supply models to close-to-the-source-of-consumption prosumer networks. It
facilitates a variety of arrangements of ‘flow’ not ‘place’ that encourage the development
of cosmo-localised social ecologies, in which the time of every person is more equally
valued, and the control over an individual’s labour remains with them in a collaborative
commons, where knowledge is widely shared. Inherent in their design and the technologies
these ecologies privilege are extremely low transaction costs (when compared to
conventional organisations), and so they often produce more value for less effort in all
those processes which are transaction dependent. As these disruptive business models
emerge in almost every sphere of economy and social service, their value increases as their
network grows. The creation of a radically open identity, based on transparency, cocreation,
sharing and abundance thinking (rather than scarcity) is therefore core to this
process857. While to date some of these new enterprises have in their (transparent)
aspirations capitalist acquisition, the technological, economic and knowledge feasibility
spaces (Commons) that these new ecologies facilitate privilege social products (access not
ownership) and non-exclusivity.


Furthermore, the development of these Commons and the worldviews that underpin them,
in a globally interconnected world, dissolve many of the boundaries that modernity has
erected to protect itself. They provide a platform for a new kind of philosophical dialogue,
and are framing an alternative, sustainable civilisation narrative that is not just different
from the industrial model; it is almost diametrically opposed to it, without creating in that
opposition an exclusion of those who have yet to understand its benefits. What has yet to
emerge is the widespread adoption of a Collaborative Age ‘counter hegemonic, escape
from the planetary abyss,’ narrative that will require those from the Second Industrial Age
to do to themselves what now confronts us all: Transform or Collapse. When this occurs a
new mythology will be created."

==More Information==
* [[Jeremy Rifkin]]

[[Category:P2P Transition]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]