For a list of pages see [[:Category:Malaysia]].

'''Resources related to developments in Malaysia.'''

Check out the Delicious Tag [http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Malaysia P2P-Malaysia]


=Articles=

#Loo, E. (2003) ‘[http://www.hichumanities.org/AHproceedings/Eric%20Loo.pdf Opening Windows to ‘E-democracy’ in Malaysia]’, Hawaii International Conference on Arts and Humanities, Honolulu,


=Blogs=

#[[Open Malaysia]]

=Bibliography=

#Abbott, J.P. (2001) ‘Democracy@internet.asia? The Challenges to the Emancipatory Potential of the Net: Lessons from China and Malaysia’, Third World Quarterly 22(1): 99–114.
#Abbott, J.P. (2004) ‘The Internet, Reformasi and Democratisation in Malaysia’, in E.T. Gomez (ed.) The State of Malaysia: Ethnicity, Equity and Reform, pp. 79-104. London and New York: Routledge.
#Holmes, L. and M. Grieco (2001) ‘The Internet, Email, and the Malaysian Political Crisis: the Power of Transparency’, Asia Pacific Business Review 8(2): 59-72.
#Nain, Z. (2004) ‘New Technologies and the Future of the Media in Malaysia’, in Communicating the Future: Proceedings from the National Conference on the Future of Media in a Knowledge Society: Rights, Responsibilities and Risks, pp. 101-116. Kuala Lumpur: Kinibooks.


=Key Book to Read=

#Book: [http://www.gerakbudaya.com/products-page/asian-studies/blogging-and-democratization-in-malaysia-a-new-civil-society-in-the-making/ Blogging and Democratization in Malaysia] a new civil society in the making. Review at http://www.prachatai.com/english/node/1295



[[Category:Asia]]
[[Category:Country]]
[[Category:Malaysia]]