
= this article takes an the 'imperial' view of the commons, i.e. as those global but unowned global resources, the oceans, space, cyberspace, that are necessary for the global system to function, and to which access and use has to be safeguarded.

'''* Paper: Managing the Global Commons. Abraham M. Denmark. Washington Quarterly • 33:3 pp. 165-182, July 2010'''


=Excerpt=

From the introduction, by Abraham M. Denmark:

"The geopolitical theorist Sir Halford Mackinder once observed that
democracies find it difficult to think strategically in peacetime. It should not be
surprising then that one of the United States’ core peacetime strategic objectives
for more than half a centuryÑthe development of a robust international system
based on free trade, international law, and international institutionsÑwas born
in wartime. The 1944 Bretton Woods agreement laid the foundation for this
system to reconcile and reconstruct the Axis powers and avoid another world
war. This strategy was further developed in 1950 with ‘‘NSC 68,’’ which claimed
that the development of a healthy international community should be pursued
by the United States even without the existence of a Soviet threat.

   
The international system is inextricably interwoven with the continued
openness and stability of the world’s common spaces.2 Open commons allow large
container ships to connect manufacturers to customers all over the world, like-
minded individuals to share information as well as ideas, and global militaries to
coordinate movements over vast distances. These capabilities did not happen by
accident; they are the result of decades of effort by governments and private
corporations to build a ‘‘system of systems’’ that allow for global commerce. These
systems exist within and between the global commons: the sea, air, space, and
cyberspace.
   
Today, over 90 percent of global tradeÑworth over $14 trillion in 2008Ñ
travels by sea.3 Every year, 2.2 billion passengers and 35 percent of the world’s
manufactured exports, by value, travel through the air.4 Governments, militaries,
and corporations around the world rely on space for communications, imagery, and
accurate positioning services. Any computer in the world with access to the
Internet can access and transmit information to any place in the world within
seconds, allowing unprecedented connectivity for global financial transactions,
social networks, commercial enterprises, and militaries.
          
Since the end of World War II, and especially since the end of the Cold War,
the openness and stability of the global commons have been protected and
sustained by U.S. military dominance and political leadership. The U.S. Navy
and Coast Guard have dissuaded naval aggression and fought piracy around the
world, ensuring unprecedented freedom of the seas. The United States led the
creation of international agreements on air transportation, enabling the creation
of a global air industry. Washington also forged an international consensus on
the openness of space, ensuring that all countries with the means to do so
can utilize orbital space for scientific, commercial, and military purposes.
       

Lastly, research funded by the U.S. government led to the creation of a
decentralized network of connections now
called the Internet, which connects physically dispersed markets, capital, and people.
 
For the past 65 years, U.S. power has been derived in part from providing global public
goods that also service vital U.S. interests, including stability in key regions, a vibrant
and interconnected global economy, and open access to the global commons. Leading
American theorist Joseph Nye has argued
that considering the relationship of U.S. power to global public goods helps to
unveil ‘‘an important strategic principle that could help America reconcile its
national interests with a broader global perspective and assert effective
leadership.’’5 Geography made the United States a natural sea power, while
successful exploitation of air, space, and U.S. technological prowess made the
United States a power in the other commons as well. Yet, globalization, by
lowering trade barriers, spreading advanced technologies, and enabling the rise of
new economic powers, has given birth to new military powers capable of
changing the military dynamics within the global commons, heralding a new era
in which unilateral U.S. military power alone will be insufficient to preserve their
openness and stability.
          
To address these changes, the United States must adapt its military and
diplomatic approaches to the global commons. While U.S. hard power is already
being adjusted to account for these threats, Washington has yet to articulate a
diplomatic strategy to sustain access to the commons. Just as the Obama
administration has emphasized ‘‘mutual interest’’ in pushing initiatives from
nuclear nonproliferation to engaging the Muslim world, Washington should now
emphasize the international system’s dependence on the global commons in
order to build support for international regimes and agreements that bolster their
openness and stability"


=Author data=

Abraham M. Denmark is a fellow at the Center for a New American Security (CNAS). He is
the coeditor and coauthor of ‘‘Contested Commons: The Future of American Power in a
Multipolar World’’ (CNAS, January 2010). He can be followed on twitter: @AbeDenmark.



[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]