'''* Article: Managing abundance, not chasing scarcity: the real challenge for the 21st century. Jerome Lewis. Radical Anthropology. No. 2'''

URL = http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf

== Key Thesis ==

"Conservation needs to
get away from the paranoid thinking
that informs the hoarding mentality
underpinning industrial capitalism and
much conservation activity, and cease
to be enslaved to market economics."

== Summary ==

"Lewis pursues a classic anthropological
strategy – to learn something
about ourselves by paying close and
sympathetic attention to how others see
us. In his article for Radical
Anthropology, Lewis considers what
the Yaka hunter-gatherers of Congo-Brazzaville make of Western
‘conservation’ efforts. The clue to the
truth of what ‘conservation’ is all about
is to be found in a simple but puzzling
fact: the Yaka do not discriminate
between the activities of the loggers
cutting down their forest for private
gain – supposedly the main villains of
the piece – and conservationists.

This is not because the Yaka have
made a stupid mistake. It’s because
both loggers and well-meaning
conservationists do in fact work hand
in hand. They both come from a
culture that has already destroyed its
forests and put a safety fence around
the charred ruins that remain. Conservationists
pursue a strategy that makes
sense if what you want is to accept
defeat and preserve the ruins. If, on the
other hand, we truly want a future for
the forests, maybe we should turn for
advice to those who have been its
custodians for millennia. From their
point of view, the forest is not a scarce
resource to be protected, but an
abundant resource to be shared.
As Lewis puts it, the onus is on us to
change our point of view from “one
that endlessly chases and protects
scarce natural resources to one that
sees natural resources as adequate,
even abundant. Seeing that there is
enough for everybody, but it just
needs to be shared properly, is the
lesson that we can learn from the
Yaka”. How the Yaka achieve this
sharing way of life is also touched
upon in Lewis’s brilliant article.

That they have achieved it is not in
any serious doubt, which may come
as a surprise to those who insist that
human nature must militate against
such communist arrangements. This
confidence about what human nature
is and must be is another dominant
feature of Western thought – if you
like, our inherited common sense.
Common sense can be a reliable guide
in our lives – how could we account
for its existence otherwise? But sometimes
it is so disastrously wrong that
we need a way to think beyond it.

We need to know the truth behind
appearances because better knowledge
of our human nature will allow us to
make living arrangements that are in
accord with that nature. We also need
to know the truth if our moral codes
are to be anything more than hot air – what kind of behaviour can we expect
from human animals? And if that
leaves something to be desired,
what social arrangements can we
make so that the darker sides of
our inherited behavioural strategies
can be better managed in the interests
of all? The first question, though,
must be, how are we to acquire the
truth about human nature if common
sense is no guide?"
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)

== Excerpt ==

Jerome Lewis:

"This article explores the cultural
conceptions and observations that
underpin their conflation of what seem
to us opposed activities. The Yaka’s
analysis challenges basic assumptions
underpinning dominant western
approaches to environmental
conservation, particularly current
attempts to assure the future of the
flora and fauna of the Congo Basin
by establishing protected areas.
Somewhat surprisingly, however, the
Yaka’s analysis accords with the
principles behind the latest attempts to
improve forest management through
forestry certification schemes which
allow for sustainable human
exploitation of the forest.

Broadly speaking, people use two
contradictory models to conceive and
understand forest resources in
Northern Congo-Brazzaville. In
general, people coming from
industrialised countries value forest
resources because of their scarcity
whereas those people living in or near
the forest value them because of their
abundance. Here it is argued that
Yaka understanding of how people
can maintain an abundant nature
offers conservation organisations a
new paradigm for conceptualising
their role in the management of
Central African forests, and
establishes the basis for a meaningful
dialogue with local people. Local
conceptions of forest resources as
abundant provide a more appropriate
model for resource management in
Central Africa than the continuing
imposition of Euro-American derived
models based on scarcity.


The Yaka (Mbendjele) Pygmies living
in northern Congo are forest living
hunter-gatherers who are considered
the first inhabitants of the region by
themselves and their farming
neighbours, the Bilo3. Each Yaka
associates her or himself with a hunting
and gathering territory called ‘our
forest’. Here, local groups of Yaka visit
ancestral campsites in favoured places
where they will gather, fish, hunt and
cut honey from wild beehives
depending on the season and
opportunities available. Though many
occasionally make small farms or work
for money or goods, they value forest
activities and foods as superior.

Yaka value travelling through the forest
and camping in different places. Social
organisation is based on a temporary
camp generally containing at most
some 60 people in ten or so quickly but
skilfully built leaf and liana huts.
Camps are able to expand or contract
easily in response to changing
conditions relating to the viability of
hunting and gathering activities or
social events and needs. If Yaka have
difficulty finding game in one area of
forest, they simply move to another
area, allowing game to replenish.
In general, Pygmy peoples use their
mobility and flexibility to avoid or
resolve problems like hunger, illness,
conflict, political domination or
disputes among themselves.

Hunter-gatherers such as the Yaka have
been characterised as ‘egalitarian
societies’, where differences in power,
wealth or authority are systematically
avoided or undermined (Woodburn
1982). This characterisation is based on
an analytical distinction between an
‘immediate-return’ hunter-gatherer
economy and agricultural, herding or
capitalist ‘delayed-return’ economies
that is helpful for understanding the
differences in approach to resource
management and the environment.

In delayed-return societies work is
invested over extended periods of
time before a yield is produced or
consumed. This delay between labour
investment and consumption results in
political inequality because it becomes
necessary to establish hierarchical
structures of authority to distribute
work, yields and control vital assets as
labour matures into a yield. The
majority of contemporary human
societies are based upon delayed-return
economies. Efforts by communist states
to develop more egalitarian structures
inevitably yielded to these fundamental
forces, reasserting new types of
hierarchies and inequalities to manage
the delay between labour and yield.

‘Immediate-return’ hunter-gatherers
such as the Yaka are strongly orientated
to the present. People like to obtain a
direct and immediate return for their
labour – eating most of their
production on the day they obtain it, as
hunters, gatherers and sometimes as
day labourers paid in food. They value
consumption over accumulation and
will share their food with all present on
the day they acquire it. Without the
authority and power derived from the
ability to withhold vital resources,
hierarchy has great difficulty
establishing itself. Thus societies whose
economies are based on immediate returns
tend to be egalitarian societies.

These are common among hunter-gatherers
such as Central African
Pygmies, Southern African San and the
Hadza of Tanzania, as well as among
Orang Asli groups such as the Batek or
Chewong in South East Asia.

Yaka, like other immediate-return
societies, greatly stress obligatory, nonreciprocal
sharing as a moral principle.
A person who happens to have more of
something, such as meat or honey, than
they immediately need, is under a
moral obligation to share it without
expectation of return. In this way
resources taken from the forest are
equitably distributed among all present,
and accumulation is both unfeasible
and impractical. Other camp members
will, if necessary, vociferously demand
their shares from someone with more
than they can immediately consume.
Anthropologists have characterised this
type of sharing as ‘demand-sharing’
and observe that it leads to a high
degree of economic and social equality.
There is a noticeable absence of social
inequality between men and women
and between elders and juniors. Any
individual, man or woman, adult or
child, has the opportunity to voice their
opinion and resist the influence of
others as they see fit. Yaka actively
shun status since it will attract jealousy
that may ruin their success in valued
activities. Thus, in contrast to western
expectations, good hunters will refrain
from hunting too often. They will avoid
anything that could be interpreted as
boasting about their skill or success,
lest their colleagues become jealous and
curse them (see Lewis 2003).

The forest is idealised as the
perfect place for people to live,
in contrast to cleared spaces
such as farms or rivers. Mbendjele
Yaka women like to give birth to their
children in the forest. Everyday
conversations are obsessed with the
forest, with the locations of desirable
wild foods, with different tricks and
techniques for finding and extracting
them, with the intricacies of animal
behaviour or plant botany, on stories
of past hunting, fishing or gathering
trips, or on great feasts and forest spirit
performances. Yaka say that when they
die they go to a forest where Komba
(God) has a camp. They cannot
conceive of their lives, or deaths and
afterlife, without the frame of the
forest around them. They express their
dependency on and the intimacy of
their relationship with the forest in the
proverb, “A Yaka loves the forest as
she loves her own body.”

The Yaka believe that Komba created
the forest for them. It has always been,
and will eternally be there for them.
They, similar to many other forest
hunter-gatherers, as Bird-David
discusses (1990; 1992), have a faith
that the forest will always provide them
with what they need. Abundance is
taken as natural. Should people not
experience abundance, it is not because
resources are diminishing but due to
improper sharing.

The emphasis on sharing as the means
to maintain abundance is peculiar to
egalitarian societies. Conceiving of
resources as abundant can lead to a
variety of approaches to them. To
illustrate this I will describe divergences
between the Yaka conceptions that
inform my argument and those held by
their Bilo neighbours6, and others.

...

From Yaka perspectives conservation,
like logging, makes abundant forest
scarce. By sealing off areas to all except
the privileged (Euro-American scientists
and tourists, important officials and
project workers), conservationists claim
to protect wildlife. This enforced
preservation of forest in some areas
serves to justify the forest’s destruction
elsewhere. International institutions
such as theWorld Bank promote and
finance conservation initiatives at the
same time as promoting, funding, and
even obliging governments to open
their national resources to exploitation
by foreign corporations.

Surprisingly, this contradictory
behaviour only occasionally provokes
outrage. In 2005, for instance, in a
campaign spear-headed by the
Rainforest Foundation and Greenpeace,
theWorld Bank was widely criticised
for appearing to have pushed through
surreptitiously forest legislation that
was advantageous to international
logging interests and international
conservation organisations but ignored
civil society and local forest peoples’
needs. The furore that followed resulted
in a moratorium on new logging
concessions in Democratic Republic of
the Congo and a very criticalWorld
Bank Inspection Panel Report (2007).
Justifying the promotion of industrial
exploitation by providing grants at the
same time to conservation
organisations is not a new strategy.
Already in 1992 Polly Ghazi, writing in
The Guardian, noted how the World
Bank, despite a ‘green forestry policy’,
offered commercial rate loans to boost
Congo-Brazzaville’s timber exports.

...

Both loggers and conservationists are
monopolising what they conceive of as
scarce resources; loggers want control
of precious trees, conservationists of
rare animals and undisturbed forest
areas. The perception of scarcity is the
ideological bedrock of both these
activities, and a driving force in the
industrialisation and capitalisation of
the world’s resources. The Yaka’s
conflation of loggers and
conservationists is more perceptive
than most people realise.

Most conservationists come from
industrialised nations where the
awesome power of industrial
exploitation has devastated the
original environment and turned it
into patchworks of spaces in use by
people in different ways, with the
occasional token to the original
appearance of the land in the form of
well-managed parks. Industrialised nation
conservationists then go out to
non-industrialised nations like Congo
and apply the same model of
development, focusing themselves on
delimiting and protecting small
pockets of faunal and floral resources
from local and industrial exploitation.

The competition for scarce funding
puts pressure on conservation to
appear to be effective; to be seen to
achieve goals and be successful.
Indeed, these pressures are so great
that most conservation organisations
need to be more concerned with
appearances to the rich north than to
the local area where work is being
done. The quickest way of appearing
to be doing something in this context
is to take the protectionist approach
and isolate an area of forest, exclude
locals and enforce protection.

The enforcement and protection of
protected areas becomes a military-like
operation, sometimes described by
conservationist field-workers as a ‘war
on poaching’. Since the mid 1990s
when Eco-guard militias became a
popular conservation tool, I have
recorded a number of cases of serious
human rights abuses, including murder,
by Wildlife Conservation Society Ecoguards
in northern Congo, and
complained to those responsible.

In Central Africa, rather than grasp
what local conceptions can offer,
conservationists constantly seek to
transform how locals understand their
environment. The very notion of
‘endangered species’ judges resources
according to their scarcity. For people
such asMbendjele, this is contradicted
by their experience. To understand
current conservation discourse requires
a dramatic reformulation of their
thinking based on counter-intuitive
claims that they have little reason to do.

The current dominance of the scarcity
model precludes the idea of sharing, it
even encourages voracious
consumption. Conservation needs to
get away from the paranoid thinking
that informs the hoarding mentality
underpinning industrial capitalism and
much conservation activity, and cease
to be enslaved to market economics.

The economic considerations of
multinational corporations and
institutions presently dominate too
much decision-making. Instead
decisions should be based on the
understanding that nature is indeed
abundant and capable of sustaining all
life, if it is shared properly.

...

Forest knowledge, like forest
resources, has been transformed
from being abundant and widely
available into a scarce and controlled
expertise, only recorded in formats
available to those with a northern-style
education – a format that so far
excludes access by Yaka forest people.
If current activities continue in the
Central African forests, the hunter-gatherers’
fate will be sealed by the
continued imposition and dominance
of an ideology of scarcity. Whether
forest resources are over-exploited and
depleted as a consequence of industrial
capitalist extraction methods or sealed
off from local people by zealous
animal protectionists from rich
countries, the result for local people is
the same. There will be no space in the
forest for forest people unless they
become involved in the activities of the
foresters or the animal protectionists.
Their livelihood and resource base
have been swept away from them and
control over it given to multinational
companies and Euro-American animal
protection agencies.

While the forest was in local people’s
control it was considered abundant,
and actually was so. Since Euro–Americans arrived and began to
perceive of forest resources as
scarce, desirable and valuable, so
they have become. Now control
over the future of the forest is vested
in the hands of people with little or no
genuine long-term or generational
interest in preserving it beyond their
limited engagement with it, often for
just a fiscal year or two, or a project
funding cycle.

This tradition of natural resource use
that is based on what was done in rich
countries, if widely applied through the
process of globalisation to other parts
of the world, will result in massive
areas of farmland, urban dwellings and
industrial areas, surrounding the
occasional token to the original
appearance of the land in small and
insignificant protected areas. This is not
a viable model for the future of the
tropical forests of the Congo Basin.

However, there are indications that
when the Forest Stewardship Council’s
Principles are applied rigorously the
hunter-gatherers’ model is being
adopted. The Forest Stewardship
Council approach, although expressed
in very different language, has adopted
similar principles to those of Yaka
forest stewardship.When taken
seriously, the FSC management model
is based on maintaining the forest’s
abundance through socially just and
ecologically sustainable harvesting of
forest resources. This is a modern
idiom for talking about the same issues
that concern [[Ekila]].

Unfettered industrial capitalism is the
real menace to the key world
environments that we all depend upon,
not Yaka hunters seeking food for their
families.While happy to impose
hunting bans on traditional hunter-gatherers
such as Pygmies,

conservationists are surprisingly
reluctant to impose logging bans on
international logging companies. Unless
industrialists can show their methods to
be both environmentally and socially
sustainable they should be prevented
from continuing to exploit the forests
of the Congo Basin. The reluctance to
apply the same standards to rich
northerners as are applied to local
people is the downfall of conservation
efforts in the Congo Basin.

Environmentalists can only expect non-industrialised
nations to stand up to the
forces of capitalism if they do so
themselves, and apply greater pressure
to counter the imperatives of global
capital in the places from where it
originates – in Europe, Asia and
America. There can be no effective
conservation of our planet without
committed political engagement and a
willingness to question the assumptions
that underpin dominant attitudes to
our environment. As is self-evident to
the Yaka, but seemingly not to many
conservationists, humanity is part of
nature, not something that it is possible
to isolate from nature.We need to
move away from seeing natural
resources as scarce commodities to be
controlled by the most powerful and
follow the Yaka lead to realise that
nature can be an abundant provider
and home for all creatures if we share
whatever we take properly, and behave
with consideration and respect to each
other, and the planet that we all depend
upon. This is the real challenge facing
us all in the 21st century."

— http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Articles]]