
URL = http://europeanwater.org/images/pdf/CommonsEuropeManifesto.pdf

=Context=

* Compiled by [[Frederic Sultan]] et al.

The text is the result of discussions by an informal group of people interested to interconnect the Social Economy and Commons issues at the European level. This informal group includes Benjamin Coriat and Fabienne Orsi (researchers), Perez Roland, Pierre Calame, Gaelle Krikorian (European Green), Nicole ALIX and Philippe Herzog, ... It was co-signed by MEP Marie-Christine Vergiat.


=Text=

"Common goods are universal: they belong to everyone and they must not be 
monopolised by private interests. European Institutions, as guarantors of 
fundamental civil liberties, peace, cultural diversity and the rule of law, must 
ensure respect for, and the preservation of, these common goods. 

Common goods, by definition, belong to the community. Water, the 
quintessential common good, should not be privatized or commoditised. Nor 
should this be the case with education and health. They ought not to be treated 
as commodities, but rather us our common heritage, protected and enriched by 
the community. 

In a context of crisis and austerity, where privatisation is often encouraged, a 
political approach based on respect for common goods represents an opportunity 
to establish a new democratic project for European society, one based on citizen 
participation, respect for fundamental rights and cultural, moral and intellectual 
development. 

This is why we propose the recognition of common goods by the European 
Parliament and its integration into European judicial texts. Local governments and 
European citizens are already working to give common goods recognition within 
both legal and administrative frameworks (European Charter of the Commons, 
European Citizens Initiative – Water is a human right!) as well as taking more 
concrete actions, such as the remunicipalisation of water service in big cities like 
Paris and Naples, or the collective management of Theatres in Italy. 

In order to confront the economic, social and environmental challenges that our 
society faces, the European Parliament should adopt a progressive stance, 
creating a judicial framework for common goods, capable of ensuring their fair 
administration and protection, inspired by, but distinct from, the system that 
regulates services of general interests. Common goods must be protected by rules 
established by and for European citizens. These norms have to guarantee 
fundamental rights, as well as citizen participation and cultural, moral and 
intellectual development for all. 

To further this objective, and in accordance with the democratic and 
representative mandate entrusted to Members of the European Parliament, we 
ask for the creation of a cross-party parliamentary group, whose goal will be to lay 
the foundations for judicial and political recognition of common goods within the 
European Institutions."




[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Europe]]