
'''* Book: Goodbye iSlave. A Manifesto for Digital Abolition. Lifting the silicon heel from workers' lives. By Jack Linchuan Qiu. Universityof Illinois, 2016'''

URL = http://www.press.uillinois.edu/books/catalog/77shx5qp9780252040627.html

=Description=

"Welcome to a brave new world of capitalism propelled by high tech, guarded by enterprising authority, and carried forward by millions of laborers being robbed of their souls. Gathered into mammoth factory complexes and terrified into obedience, these workers feed the world's addiction to iPhones and other commodities--a generation of iSlaves trapped in a global economic system that relies upon and studiously ignores their oppression.

Focusing on the alliance between Apple and the notorious Taiwanese manufacturer Foxconn, Jack Linchuan Qiu examines how corporations and governments everywhere collude to build systems of domination, exploitation, and alienation. His interviews, news analysis, and first-hand observation show the circumstances faced by Foxconn workers--circumstances with vivid parallels in the Atlantic slave trade. Ironically, the fanatic consumption of digital media also creates compulsive free labor that constitutes a form of bondage for the user. Arguing as a digital abolitionist, Qiu draws inspiration from transborder activist groups and incidents of grassroots resistance to make a passionate plea aimed at uniting--and liberating--the forgotten workers who make our twenty-first-century lives possible."

=Review=

"Qiu's grim and eloquent book traces parallels between the digital economy and Atlantic slavery--from Congo mines to Foxconn sweatshops to iPhone users' labor. Full of insights, Goodbye iSlave also offers hope, in new forms of social struggle."

-Raewyn Connell, author of Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in Social Science


=More Information=

* Video: [[Jack Linchuan Qiu on Resisting and Reinventing the Gig Economy in Asia‎]]


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Books]]