
URL = http://www.social-banking.org/news/article/nr/750/

=Context=

"This is the first iteration of a Living Manifesto for Social Banking and the Commons.

It is the result of our week-long Summer School bringing together leading experts in the Commons, Social Banking and Alternative Finance with practitioners from around the world, that asked the question: What is the role of Social Banking in supporting a Healthy Commons?


This Manifesto is a first iteration. In the spirit of the Commons and Commoning it can be commented on, revised and transformed by members of the Institute and the wider world. A second iteration will be published as part of the conference report, and the Manifesto will remain as a living document on the Institute’s website."

=The Text=

==Preamble==

"Social Banks value and support the commons as an essential part of a flourishing society and ecology, alongside the private and public sectors.

Social Banks believe in, and actively support, the un-tapped potential of all and our ability to collaboratively develop commons-based ways of organising and living that can help meet the complex ecological, social and economic challenges we collectively face."

==Manifesto==

"A Living Manifesto for Social Banking and the Commons:

* Social Banks have an evolving understanding of commons culture and commons institutions, and listen to and understand the needs and values of the commons.

* Social Banks work to make the commons visible by telling stories about the commons, nurturing empathy and supporting the development of new commons.

* Social Bankers help commoners find each other, and cultivate existing and new clusters of Commons activities, helping for form commons clusters and hubs. 

* Social Banks gather, develop and share open access knowledge as a commons, and in relation to the commons, by freely sharing knowledge and information. 

* Social Banks work to build long-term trust with and between their customers, which begins with a commitment to transparency in their own operations.

* Social Banks help to promote accountability and good governance for the commons by working together to develop, revise, and keep alive good governance practice, supporting and enhancing the commons.

* Social Banks are learning to assess the value of the commons beyond financial value, and are developing new measurements and new understanding of wider value. 

* Social Banks are helping to democratise finance by providing commons-based services for the commons by creating and maintaining appropriate sources of finance. 

* Social Banks bring together financial solutions to meet both individual needs and the needs of the commons – in addition to the services provided by banks.

* Social Banks will play a role in encouraging the wider community and government to respect and value the commons. 

* Social Banks will pool and freely share best practice to support, develop and enhance their ability to support the commons. 

* Social Banks recognise the limits of what they can do, that the commons are strongest locally, and commit to playing their role alongside others: locally rooted and globally connected."
(http://www.social-banking.org/news/article/nr/750/)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Commons]]