=Contextual Quote=

"Continentalization is therefore inevitable (Euroland, Angloland, Latinoland, Afroland, Islamiland, Russoland, Indoland and Sinoland). Angloland, Russoland and Sinoland have already taken a big step forward; if the European Union does not federalize very quickly to finally become Euroland, it will become the doormat of the three leaders in the continentalization race."


=Source=

Excerpts translated by DeepL (first 5k characters, of: Prospective : synthèse 2022

URL = https://www.noetique.eu/billets/2020/prospective-synthese-2022


=Discussion=

Marc Halevy:

"It seems that the coronavirus with its multiple mutative disguises, has perfectly demonstrated the obsolescence of the paradigm of Modernity. It has called into question all the institutions: democratic, governmental, administrative, partisan, union, pharmacological, hospital and, especially, medical. This pandemic was useful because it induced an irreversible shift from the old paradigm to the new one based on frugality, reticularity, continentality, utility and spirituality.

The Economist's prospective study reveals ten ruptures that simply repeat the ten collapses of the modern paradigm (known and described for 30 years in my publications) and the ten manifestations of chaotization that respond to them (idem).

What are these "ten"?

# Collapse of the democratic principle and illiberal chaos.
# Collapse of medical institutions and pandemic chaos.
# Collapse of world finance and inflationary chaos.
# Collapse of the wage principle and telecommuting chaos.
# Mechanical collapse and digital chaos.
# Collapse of central banks and chaos of crypto-currencies.
# Collapse of the biosphere and bioclimatic chaos.
# Collapse of long distance travel and aeronautical chaos.
# Collapse of space peace and space tourism chaos.
# Collapse of sportsmanship and media-political-financial chaos.
 

The last two points are anecdotal. The first eight, however, correspond well to the picture of the "state of the world" today (known for a long time), but say nothing about the construction of the future.

The fundamental sequence: "Collapse - Chaos - Emergence" stops there in the middle of the ford.

 

As expressed above, all the institutions set up by the modern paradigm (for recall: democratic, governmental, administrative, partisan, trade-union, sanitary, energetic, technological, security, humanitarian, media, university, academic, etc...) have become totally incapable of assuring their mission at the scale of the Nation-State. The latter has lost all sovereignty due to the simple fact that the globalization of problems has induced a host of major interdependencies making the very notion of sovereignty obsolete. One cannot be sovereign (master of one's own country) and interdependent (dependent on others for everything) at the same time.

 

Continentalization is therefore inevitable (Euroland, Angloland, Latinoland, Afroland, Islamiland, Russoland, Indoland and Sinoland). Angloland, Russoland and Sinoland have already taken a big step forward; if the European Union does not federalize very quickly to finally become Euroland, it will become the doormat of the three leaders in the continentalization race.

 

One of the dimensions of this indispensable continentalization is the digital networks (more by the noetic networks than by the social media). Each continent must master its own Web, its own algorithms, its own standards, its own rules: the United States, followed by China, have understood this perfectly well. Once again, the European Union is very late.

 

As always in chaotic times, thugs take advantage of this to place their pawns and distill their venom; this is the case with Islamism, Wokism, racialism, indigenism, decolonialism, genrism, eco-leftism, black-bloquism, ultra-feminism, gilet-jaunism, and I'll go on.

And behind all these nauseating movements, the tactics of ostracization (cancel culture), arbitrary censorship and intellectual terrorism (which moribund institutions in disarray ride on to give themselves the illusion that they still exist...) flourish, without any serious response.

We are in the middle of cultural and intellectual chaotic; the principles of truth (notably historical and scientific) and freedom (of thought, expression, image and speech) are cheerfully trampled upon."

(https://www.noetique.eu/billets/2020/prospective-synthese-2022)


==Three Global Problems and the Opportunity of the Digital==

Marc Halevy:

"There are three major problems:

* Demography: by 2200, the Earth will only be able to sustainably support and feed two billion people.

* Resources: when all the earth's material resources (which cover 85% of current needs) will be exhausted, very few of them (in spite of environmentalist incantations) will be (somewhat) replaceable, for strictly thermodynamic reasons.

* Thermal, chemical, plastic, gaseous, microbial, etc. pollution destabilizes and/or destroys many absolutely vital ecosystems.

Faced with these scourges, the answers are: demographic frugality, consuming frugality and polluting frugality. The pleasure of material consumption must be replaced by the joy of immaterial experiences."

 

The digital revolution opens two paths:

* that of the infantile and playful diseases that are social media, streaming, metavers, etc. ... whose sole purpose is to make a lot of money by dumbing down the popular masses; this path is a plague that must be fought by systematically boycotting it;

* that of the notorious amplification of human capacities, both physical (robotic) and mental (algorithmic - we are not talking about this nonsense called "artificial intelligence", but about augmented or amplified human intelligence), with a major consequence: that of the radical transformation and the spectacular displacement of human activities towards the .. non-algorithmisable (and these are immense and inexhaustible fields) Wage employment will almost disappear, telecommuting will become the norm, everyone will become his own business, everyone will be autonomous and responsible for himself."

(https://www.noetique.eu/billets/2020/prospective-synthese-2022)


==The end of 'modern' science and the birth of 'integral' science==

Marc Halevy:

"With the end of the modern paradigm born in the Renaissance, the paradigm of classical science, i.e. mechanistic, analytical, reductionist and deterministic science, which considered the universe as an assembly of elementary bricks, interacting by chance through elementary forces, according to elementary laws within a space and a time independent of what happens there, is closed.

Now, the paradigm of the complex science makes way for an organicist, holistic, constructivist and intentionalist science which will consider the Real as a global process woven of myriads of particular processes, founded on a substantiality, a vitality and a logicity which evolves by successive emergences caused by the need to dissipate too lively tensions between its various poles.

The artificial frontier between "hard sciences" and so-called "human sciences" (which are only conjectures, often ideological) will no longer have any reason to exist: all processes, however complex they may be, such as the mind, history or human communities, will only be particular applicative cases of the complex cosmology."

(https://www.noetique.eu/billets/2020/prospective-synthese-2022)

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Geography]]
[[Category:Politics]]