==Principles==

[[Marjorie Kelly]]:

"we can begin to grasp the principles that we could use to create a generative economy:

1. There is an alternative to capitalism. This is the heresy that the keepers of the temple do not wish us to utter. It is possible to organize a large, sophisticated, modern economy that tends toward fair and just outcomes, benefits the many rather than the few, and enables an enduring human presence on a flourishing Earth.

2. Getting there is not only about regulation but about emergence. As organizational change theorist Margaret Wheatley writes, “emergence” refers to what happens when local actions spring up and connect through networks. Without warning, emergent phenomena can occur, such as the rise of the organic food movement. Such movements rely not on central leadership but on shared vision. 

3. The generative economy is not a legal exercise but the embodiment of an emerging value system. Companies in the generative economy are built around values; the John Lewis Partnership’s core value is fairness, while Organic Valley’s core values are sustainability and community. 

4. Generative values become enduring through the social architecture of ownership. The generative economy is built on a foundation of stakeholder ownership designed to generate and preserve real wealth—resources held and shared by our communities and the ecosystems we live in. These enterprises don’t have absentee ownership shares trading in a casino economy, but ownership held in human hands."<br />
( https://www.yesmagazine.org/issue/end-corporate-rule/2012/04/16/can-there-be-201cgood201d-corporations/ 2012)

==More Information==

* Book: Owning Our Future: The [[Emerging Ownership Revolution]],
* Concept: [[Generative vs. Extractive Ownership]]
* [[Generative vs. Extractive]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Regenerative Approaches]]