
=Summary=

Photo: http://mail.google.com/mail/?realattid=f_f0ipheth&attid=0.1&disp=inline&view=att&th=111f436088bc8eb9 

'Mark Elliott (http://mark-elliott.net) is researching collaboration and developing large-scale collaborative systems and methods for his [http://www.vca.unimelb.edu.au/cfi/pgresearch.html PhD] at the University of Melbourne's Centre for Ideas. As part of his PhD, Mark has recently designed, created and implemented an online collaborative network designed to facilitate and augment the collaborative opportunities of the 200 + students enrolled in the Centre's third year course, Collaborative Contract. Mark is also a project creator, coordinator and site designer of the Australian Bill of Rights Initiative (ABRI) - http://abri.org.au.'

Mark Elliot is also active with the MetaCollab project - http://metacollab.net/ - an open collaborative research project on collaboration.


=Detailed Overview=

==My PhD==
I am currently completing a PhD at the [http://www.vca.unimelb.edu.au/cfi/ Centre for Ideas], Victorian College of the Arts, Melbourne, Australia, researching and developing large-scale collaborative systems and methods with an increasing interest in [http://journal.media-culture.org.au/0605/03-elliott.php stigmergic collaboration]. My primary interest is in the application of such research towards the continued positive development of humanity. By 'positive development' I mean a shared developing awareness of our universe which promotes an integrative, sustainable existence and meets the current challenges of the time.

===Meta Collab===
[http://metacollab.net MetaCollab.net] is a free collaborative encyclopaedia on collaboration which was initially launched as part of my phd on on the Centre for Ideas server and was soon moved to a WikiCity.

===Australian Bill of Rights Initiative===
One of my phd projects is running an online wiki project to collaboratively draft and Australian bill of rights (we're the only common law country that doesn't have one - and we need one!!) called the Australian Bill of Rights Initiative. The site is now up here: http://cfi.vca.unimelb.edu.au/abri/twiki/bin/view/ABRI/WebHome.

==Teaching==
Other than my research & collabarative projects, I teach composition, computing for musicians, guitar and contextual studies for artists at [http://www.unimelb.edu.au/ Melbourne University], [http://www.vca.unimelb.edu.au/ Victorian College of the Arts] and [http://www.sophiamundi.vic.edu.au/ Sophia Mundi Inner City Steiner School].

==Background==
I have a background in music composition - (ugrad & masters) with interests in improv, computer music & live processing - though I compose for traditional instruments as well. I have the performance of a concerto I composed (solo Chinese mouth organ & orch) and an Australian tour coming up next year.


=More Information=

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers]]


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Australia]]