==Description==

Charlotte Hess:

"Sandel 2005 writes “Are there some things that should not be bought and sold,
and if so, why?” This is not far from the question Daly and Cobb asked in 1989 when
they proposed an alternative approach to neoclassical economics, one with more
humanism and an ethical basis. Bollier has written prolifically about the importance of
gift economies, citing the tradition of open science; open source software, donating
blood, and community gardens as good examples of the gift economy in action (Bollier
2002b). Nonini also places the intellectual commons within the realm of the gift economy
stating that it is imperative that this commons be understood as a a non-commodified
social arrangement (Nonini2006b:205).”
        
I have already mentioned Benkler’s commons-based peer production. His work
on this subject could have just as well been put into this sector (see also Cooper 2006).
Purdy (2007: 1107) provides a good quick summary of Benkler’s work on networked
information economy: “Benkler’s work (2003a) argues that digital technology has
changed the capital structure of the production of culture and ideas in ways that create
new opportunities to organize some economic activity by appeals to flourishing rather
than prosperity.”
        
Peter Barnes is a public entrepreneur who advocates revising our form of global,
corporate capitalism to begin incorporating the commons. In Who Owns the Sky (2001),
he proposes a “sky trust” to require companies to bid at auction for the right to release
their carbon emissions into the atmosphere. 

In his 2006 work Capitalism 3.0: A Guide to
Reclaiming the Commons has a more radical proposal of rewriting the basics of
capitalism:

- The key difference between versions 2.0 [current system] and 3.0 is the inclusion in the
latter of a set of institutions I call the commons sector. Instead of having only one
engine—that is, the corporate-dominated private sector—our improved economic system
would run on two: one geared to maximizing private profit, the other to preserving and
enhancing common wealth (p.xiv).

Well-known author, Bill McKibben, also calls a renewal of commons in his new
book called Deep Economy. “But commons that have been weakened can be strengthened
again’ indeed, there are signs of life in many places. In India, for example, the Navdanya
(‘Nine Seeds’) movement protects local varieties of rice and other staples by cataloguing
them, declaring them common property, and setting up locally owned seed banks.”
(p.199-200) McKibben takes issue with the ubiquitous notion that economic growth is the
same as economic success and imagines a new type of economy that focuses on the
health of local communities.
        
There are also some socialist critiques of the current market system calling for the
inclusion of commons (Dyer-Witheford 2001; McCarthy 2005). Others too see “the elitist
economic agenda” (Korten 2004) as antithetical to the good of the commons. Frost and
Morner (2005) write about “corporate commons.”
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1356835)

Source: Charlotte Hess: [[Mapping the New Commons]], 2008


==Discussion==

===[[Ecological Foundations of a Market Commons]]===

Lukas Peters:

"By defining the market as a commons, we assume that economic activities are
primarily to be understood within an ecological framework. The economy is thus
not only understood as a subsystem of society, but also as a subsystem of an even
larger and more encompassing ecosystem. This notion can best be understood by
considering an idea put forward quite recently by Kate Raworth: “doughnut economics” (2017). In order to do justice to the fact that the world’s resources are limited, Raworth pictures economic processes as describing paths that trace out the
shape of a doughnut – in contrast to an ever increasing linear movement. 


Hence, she portrays the economy in the following manner:

In Raworth’s depiction, the commons exist as one segment of the economy beside the household, market and the state. While I find Raworth’s portrayal of an embedded economy accurate on the whole, I have argued here that a democratic
and ecologically sustainable society should expand its commons both in the sphere
of the state and the sphere of the market. Nevertheless, a strength of this model is
that it embeds economics within society and society, in turn, within a larger ecosystem, which is limited. Here, the dynamic reproduction of systems is understood as the metabolic flow of matter and energy within and between systems.
More fundamentally, because matter and energy are limited on planet earth,
economic activities are generally understood as a zero-sum game: some people’s
gains are other people’s losses. The question that results from this problem is how
to minimize the losses and create a relative abundance despite the absolute limitations set by the resources that exist. It is important to bear in mind that when we are talking about a capitalist market, we are talking about both material and
symbolic (monetary) relationships. Moreover, the accumulation of wealth in a capitalist context involves both the monetary accumulation of ‘good’ matter and energy in the hands of a few and the widespread distribution of ‘bad’ matter and energy in
the form of pollution and ecological degradation. In this way, we can understand
profits as the extraction, privatization and accumulation of previously non-commodified goods such as individual labor power (including physical strength and creativity), genomes, water, land or fossil fuels. On a symbolic level, this implies
the unequal distribution of access to resources (matter and energy) through one’s
purchasing power. One form of such an unequal distribution of symbolic wealth is
found in the large asymmetries between creditors and debtors. Similarly, profits
earned through speculation can be understood as gains that increase the costs of
goods (e.g. food) and, in turn, decrease the access to this resource for numerous
other people. The accumulation that results from speculation can thus be interpreted as a form of extraction from other people’s purchasing power and access to a certain good or resource.

In line with this ecological conception of the economy, we might understand
the flow of resources with the help of the metaphor of an irrigation system. This
irrigation system can either be democratically organized according to the needs
of individual users and therefore be very finely tuned in distributing water to all
regions of an ecosystem. Or, conversely, it can be organized according to supply
and demand, purchasing power and the Matthew Principle in which the irrigation
system is modeled with increasingly large levees and dams that contain and accumulate the water for the use of only a few. Using such a metaphor, migration can, for example, be understood as people simply following the metabolic flow of ‘good’
matter and energy on the planet earth. These people are coming to drink from the
dam of accumulated matter and energy. If we take an ecological perspective of this
kind, we have to abandon the belief that economic growth will solve socio-ecological problems, because, as we have seen, accumulation and the highly unequal distribution of wealth inherently lead to socio-ecological conflicts. In the face of
these serious problems, the concept of a market commons provides us with an understanding of markets that attempts to take these ecological limits into account by democratically negotiating the market’s institutional framework and the coordination of its basic activities. Thus, the aim of a democratic market commons is
to transform absolute scarcity into a relative abundance through the mechanisms
of cooperation, sufficiency and conviviality.

The general point of such a market commons, however, is not merely democratic inclusion, but the reconceptualization of the market itself as an institution that must fulfill basic needs such as the provision of decent, respectable and, ideally, meaningful and fulfilling jobs, as well as access to essential goods and services
– within certain planetary boundaries. This is what one group of scholars has described as the “foundational economy” (Bentham et al. 2013), which is “that part of the economy that creates and distributes goods and services consumed by all (regardless of income and status) because they support everyday life” (ibid.: 7). When
we conceptualize the market as a commons, we see that the market’s primary function is not to endlessly increase wealth, but to satisfy needs by bringing people who desire things together with people who produce them. This is the basic function of
markets that was, at least in theory, originally intended to be realized by open and
free markets. Free markets are supposed to fulfill this function better than other
markets and better than other institutions such as the state or the community. Yet,
in contrast to the intellectuals who believe that this can only occur when the market is self-regulating, I would argue instead that it requires the support of democratic governance mechanisms to perpetually adapt the institutional framework
to changing social needs and socio-ecological conditions. Furthermore, a focus on
market commons transforms the overarching and often abstract rules and regulations of an open competitive market into decentralized socio-ecological niches in which the default rules of the institutional framework foster cooperation, fairness
and the sustainable reproduction of socio-ecological systems. We could call this a
type of “democratic experimentalism” (Dorf/Sabel 1998) in economics.

Within the context of open and competitive markets, such strategies are often
pejoratively called protectionist. In this critique, protectionism is conceived of as a
situation in which one party protects its gains while harming others. In contrast,
when the market commons landscape is understood as diverse and contextually
interdependent, the rules of a specific market should always attempt to protect
the sustainable reproduction of its resource system within its interdependent relationships to other socio-ecological overarching systems. The precise aim of the endeavor is to protect sustainable and (re)generative forms of economic activity
that enable the thriving of their members without harming other living beings
elsewhere. Lastly, I would argue that a market commons would shift our focus,
whenever possible, from global commodity chains to local or regional economic
cycles. The relocalization of economic activities and market interactions would not
only have a positive ecological effect due to shorter transportation routes, but could
also provide affected people with greater incentives and opportunities to govern
the institutional framework of their market commons in democratic ways. As with
democracy in the political sphere, the more local the relationships and the shorter
the chains of accountability are, the greater the trust and the more effective mutual
monitoring and sanctioning can be.

Nevertheless, a market commons must not solely focus on the local or regional,
but should enable people throughout the world to codetermine and adapt their economic institutional frameworks through networked forms of governance in order to fulfill their similar yet conflicting needs. That being said, it is important to emphasize that an economy built up from interconnnected market commons requires a larger, overarching political framework that fosters the decentralization of ecological economic activities. But as I have already said in relation to the commons-based provision of basic goods and services such as housing and health care, a market commons cannot simply be implemented top-down from a single center of
authority, but must be demanded and jointly developed by people who take their
own socio-ecological habitats as starting-points."

(https://www.transcript-verlag.de/shopMedia/openaccess/pdf/oa9783839454244.pdf)

==More Information==

* [[Mapping the New Commons]]

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Commons]]