
(includes bibliographic references)


=Discussion=

Mark Whitaker:

"I think 'east vs. west' technology/ethics is a false dichotomy. Japan and China wrecked their own landscapes just fine before Western incursions (Books: The Retreat of the Elephants: An Environmental History of China (2004), by Elvin; The Green Archipelago: Forestry in Preindustrial Japan (1998), by Totman) 

Plus, India has its own humanocentric/Machiavellian tradition in the Arthashastra, like China has its own statist Legalist tradition. It shows "Asians" hardly so different culturally in technology or ecological views than other "Western" areas. In the inverse, Europe's own ecocentric perspective on technology and nature dominated before around 1500 (Book: The Death of Nature (1980), by Merchant). China had the first coal economy in the 1200s. (Book: Coal: a Human History). I think Westerners tend to romanticize how (non!)ecological Asians are or were, when its not true back then or now, and I think westerners tend to discount their own extensive ecocentric traditions as well.

All this should be clear in the attachment of the eight **common** systems dynamics that encourage different technological trends, and (2) should be clear in the below below of mine criticizing 'east vs. west' historiography in general--exchanging it for what I call our "common civilizational problem" with environmental degradation: 

* https://www.academia.edu/19561563/Global_Forum_on_Civilization_and_Peace_2008_Our_Common_Civilizational_Problem_with_Environmental_Degradation_A_Look_at_the_Evidence_and_Perhaps_What_to_Do_About_It_English_Version_?sm=b

(source: LinkedIn communication, August 2024)


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Books]]