=Discussion=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Hard market data about consumer and industry use of personal manufacturing technologies is scarce.

The growth of personal manufacturing technologies for everyday consumer use is
driven by a small but growing worldwide community of
“power users,” self-selected highly skilled enthusiasts.

Online communities of personal
fabrication enthusiasts mingle
on sites such as Make and swap designs
on Google’s 3D Warehouse and
Shapeway’s online marketplace."

There’s no market research firm that tracks consumer machine sales, nor the number
of installed machines, nor what types of services and products the machines are being
used to provide.

We have slightly better data about personal manufacturing technologies in the
industrial space, but again, it’s incomplete for several reasons.

The commercial 3D printer
space offers the most solid
market research data thanks to
the meticulous research
conducted by Terry Wohlers and
compiled in the annual Wohlers
Report, the leading market
research publication for the 3D
print industry. The Wohlers
Report tracks sales, applications
and other news of 3D printing
service providers and machine makers.

The industries that most commonly request 3D
manufacturing services are
consumer products/electronics,
cars, the medical profession and companies that make industrial and business
machines. The 3D printed objects most commonly requested by these industries are
functional models, machine parts, visual aids and patterns for prototype tooling.

The [[Wohlers Report]] data suggests that consumer companies, the auto industry, and
specialized parts companies could someday provide a foundation for a new
manufacturing ecosystem made up of 3D printing services providers that specialize in
rapid prototyping and on-the-fly machine part production services.

In terms of
machine sales, commercial activity and services revenue, the 3D printing marketplace
still belongs to industrial-scale, not personal-scale machines.

Wohlers’ market data offers hints that this may be changing. 

'''In 2009, the biggest companies that made and sold 3D printers together earned a total of about $312 million in machine sales.''' 

Market demand, however, may be shifting towards low-end 3D
commercial printers. Last year, revenue across all reporting 3D printer companies
indicated that 3D printer sales experienced their first-ever decline, dropping 13%
from the year before.9 In the same timeframe, however, the total *number* of 3D
printers sold increased by almost 20%, suggesting that while total sales revenue
earned by 3D printer-makers declined, the number of units sold of low-cost 3D
printers increased significantly. Wohlers’ data could suggest that 3D printers are on
their way to becoming a commodity item, like laptops and other computing hardware.


It’s possible that as market demand increases for smaller, cheaper industrial 3D
printers and the cost of these printers continues to drop, machine manufacturers will
sell higher volumes of lower-cost printers to compensate for shrinking profit margins.

Recently, a leading home-scale 3D
printer company, Bits from Bytes, was
acquired by 3D Systems, an established
industrial 3D printer manufacturer."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]]



[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]