'''* Article: Market-Protocol Fit. By Toby Shorin, Sam Hart, Laura Lotti, The Other Internet, April 17 2020'''

URL = https://otherinter.net/research/market-protocol-fit/ [https://otherinter.net/Market-Protocol-Fit_OtherInternet_2020-04.pdf pdf]


=Contextual Quote=

"The projects with the greatest value and utility today—i.e. Bitcoin, Ethereum, and a few other products of the ICO era—did not follow the traditional product development trajectory at all. These success stories started with the open source ethos and underwent a different journey: they began with a broad distribution of tokens, followed by permissionless product innovation which activated them in useful ways.

In [[Headless Brands]], we called this market-product fit, a dynamic in which token holders generate many competing narratives and use cases, which they explore simultaneously. From our last essay:

How do projects, headless or not, find product-market fit in the Web 3 era? Well, in some senses they don't. In a highly decentralized system, these operations invert such that the community finds product solutions themselves: "market-product fit." Cryptoeconomic protocols are market frameworks looking for potential product applications. The work of exploring parallel narratives, discovering emergent use cases, and testing solutions is distributed among members of the wider ecosystem such that the rising tide lifts all boats.


To update our terminology, market-protocol fit is the most accurate language for this phenomenon. By distinguishing this market-first pattern from the startup playbook, we can clarify our thinking about the token protocol life cycle."

- Toby Shorin, Laura Lotti, Sam Hart [https://otherinter.net/research/market-protocol-fit/]


=Description=

Toby Shorin, Laura Lotti, Sam Hart:

"In the realm of open source permissionless innovation, the traditional product development cycle shows its limitations, because cryptonetworks are not companies. While startups with focused teams can iterate toward product-market fit, decentralized protocols must rely on headless branding and cooperative incentive structures to evolve. We call this market-protocol fit and describe the phases of this challenging process. While product-market fit is concerned with building an agile team to find and fill market demand, market-protocol fit begins with a broad distribution of tokens, followed by permissionless narrative formation and product innovation which activates them in useful ways. We conclude by outlining strategies that projects are using to advance the expansion of their decentralized ecosystems.

...

Marc Andreessen's original formulation of product-market fit describes how startups move from minimum viable product to serving customers. Cryptonetworks instead start with nothing, apart from token-based incentives and narratives, mobilizing developers and contributors to spontaneously coordinate in ways that end-users will ultimately find beneficial.

Only a handful of projects have successfully bootstrapped themselves in this way, many others are still early in this challenging process. In this essay we describe the key phases of market-protocol fit, characterizing the changes that tokens and their underlying blockchains introduce to the innovation life-cycle."

https://otherinter.net/research/market-protocol-fit/


=Characteristics=

Toby Shorin, Laura Lotti, Sam Hart:

"Market-protocol fit can be divided into 3 conceptually distinct phases:

Promise distribution - A compelling idea is sold within a minimally codified open market framework.

Utility discovery - Early community members prototype new uses cases, some of which provide real utility, driving growth.
Ossification - Network effects strengthen value and push the protocol to converge around specific functionality and narrative.
The entire process can be visualized as a football-shaped curve which begins with an initial token distribution event and ends with protocol ossification. The curve width corresponds to narrative variation and experimentation with unique use cases."


=Discussion=

Toby Shorin et al.:

"Like headless brands, market-protocol fit is an art of coordination, requiring the participation of disparate stakeholders. Where headless brands drive consensus around a narrative, market-protocol fit is the process of advancing a set of infrastructure in accordance with that narrative, providing a minimally consistent substrate to continue building upon.

Market-protocol fit is concerned primarily with narrative buy-in, infrastructural build-out, liquidity, and operational expenditure. Once the initial promise has been widely distributed, community and capital are all that matter to propel the expansion of a token ecosystem. While paths to "fitness" will vary with a project's initial direction and community, we can find common patterns in the strategies projects are employing to navigate the phases we've discussed.

* Promises must be compelling, with meaningful stake distributed broadly and fairly to those with whom the promise resonates. This means improving upon and re-imagining the "fair distribution" problem. Over the last few years, airdrops alone have been proven ineffectual to activate a community. Other (headless) strategies need to be in place to channel speculative desire into a protocol—expressed as developer mind share, mining/staking resources, participation in forum debates, meme making, etc.

* Stakeholders must be empowered to experiment and discover meaningful utility. This means formalized support of experiments, and incentives that favor HODLing over speculative selloffs. At this stage, governance and staking can be powerful tools to channel the energy of the community into projects and strengthen the claim that the promise will be fulfilled. Both need to be carefully deployed, so as not to stifle the diversity of initiatives and discourse. Furthermore, there must be strong narratives that spur experimentation and advance ecosystem build-out. Governance and staking are only effective if their purpose is closely coupled to advancing the promise of these networks; their function is to enable people to signal belief—and invest—in a future where they want to inhabit.

* A feedback mechanism must exist to funnel resources and liquidity into promising experiments. Mechanisms for resource staking and collateralization help compound network effects that advance the development of the ecosystem stack. This also means that large stakeholders, particularly investors, must be willing to supply follow-on support as a protocol grows. This already partially occurs through investment strategies such as generalized mining aimed to sustain the supply side of a protocol's internal economy; new initiatives directed at supporting headless development, without overtaking it, and fostering adoption could also prove beneficial to advance toward ossification.

Market-protocol fit is a new phenomenon in the life cycle of technological development where open source code endogenously defines the conditions of exchange, ownership, and stakeholders can permissionlessly participate from the outset.

Market-protocol fit and product-market fit are both competitive dynamics that progressively drive toward a better match between market participants and some functional utility. In this sense, we see market-protocol fit-based strategies as complementary to other approaches, such as progressive decentralization."

Tokens that represent promises are vessels that can accept financial capital, but also attention, skills, ethos, and imagination. Locking value and "values" into a new techno-economic system creates the conditions for headless brands to emerge. From there, it's up to projects to cultivate their memetic potential and activate token holders to build towards a flourishing ecosystem."

(https://otherinter.net/research/market-protocol-fit/)

=More information=

* [[Market-Product Fit]]

* [[Regression to the Code]]

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:Articles]]