

=Description=

"The most important difference is that Marxist-Humanism rejects both the notion that working people are “backward” and therefore need to be led by a vanguard, and the notion that society can be revolutionized solely by means of spontaneous activity from below. The creation of a new society requires not only the destruction of the old one but the creation of totally new social relations. We won’t automatically become free by getting the “rich parasites,” the state, etc., off our backs. We need to overcome the economic laws of capitalism and run economic and social life according to wholly different principles. Spontaneous activity by itself will not work out what these principles are or how they can be implemented. The success of the creative aspect of the revolutionary process requires sustained focus on these issues, ongoing philosophical and theoretical development, ongoing dialogue involving working people, intellectuals, and others, and organizations like MHI that are committed to making sure that these issues do get worked out––not by ourselves alone, by any means.

Another unique aspect of Marxist-Humanism is that it holds that Marx had a unique, humanist philosophy, centered on the development of human capacities as an end-in-itself, rather than as a mere means to achieve external goals, such as the expansion of production. Our organization judges everything in light of this vision of humanity’s possible future. It is the foundation of our own efforts to help work out new principles for social and economic life, as well as the foundation of our day-to-day political activity and commentary. We are trying to help forge a new unity of philosophy and organization, in which mass movements striving for freedom lay hold of Marx’s philosophy of revolution and recreate society on its basis."
(http://www.marxisthumanistinitiative.org/philosophy-organization/faqs-about-the-occupy-movement-and-marxist-humanism.html)


[[Category:Movements]]