=Discussion=

Kojin Karatani:

"Spiritual powers do not only come from mode of exchange C (mb = capitalist markets).

It is also present in gift exchange (mode of exchange A). This is the spirit
that Marcel Mauss called Hau. 

The spirit also haunts the state (mode of
exchange B). It was Hobbes who gave insight into this power that arises
out of mode B. The monster he called Levithan is nothing but a spirit that
enables the exchange of domination-submission (B). 

Moreover, the spirit
manifests itself as a power that overwhelms such spirits. In other words,
the mode of exchange D, which supersedes A, B, and C, appears as a
spiritual power.

The following words from the beginning of The Communist
Manifesto are well known: “A specter is haunting Europe—the specter
of communism”. Of course, this is supposed to be a joke, but that is not
necessarily the case. Rather, it means the following: communism is a
“spirit”. That is, it exists as an ideational “power” that transcends capital-nation-state, that is, as mode D that transcends modes A, B, and C of
exchange.

Speaking of spirits, Jacques Derrida’s Specters of Marx (1995)
is suggestive. In this book, he cites examples such as “the specter of
communism” and writes that Marx was accompanied by many “ghosts”
in his life. The ghosts he refers to range from communism to God, or
to money-capital. Certainly, each of these is spiritual in its own way.
However, Derrida did not try to clarify the difference and relationship
between them. As a result, I feel that the discussion ended up being a
kind of play on words.

Derrida wrote this at a time when “the end of history” (Francis
Fukuyama) was pronounced after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991,
that is, at a time when it was said that Marxism was dead. Considering
this situation, he was presumably trying to say that the ghost of Marx is
still alive. I agree with him. 

'''However, I believe that the various spiritual powers he cited are not mere metaphors, but real powers that originate in different modes of exchange.'''

Marx presented those in Capital. By doing so, he paved the way for
the understanding of money and capital as fetish (spirits), i.e., ideational
powers that arose together with the mode of exchange C. It was at that
point that he professed to be a “pupil” of Hegel, whom he had been
criticizing all along. However, Marx clarified only the “spirit-fetish” arising
from the mode of exchange C. As for the problem of “spirit” arising from
other modes of exchange, there is still room for much further thought.
In his later years, Marx moved toward the problem of mode of
exchange A, specifically, what Morgan called “ancient society”, or clan
society. However, '''Marx did not turn to the spirit of communism. In fact, it was Engels who did so'''.


Shortly after Marx and Engels published The Communist Manifesto in 1848,
revolutions for socialism took place in European countries, but they were
all defeated. It was a strange defeat, however, because the victors adopted
“socialism”. For example, in France, the emperor Bonaparte, a Saint-Simonist, promoted industrial development and supported the workers’
movement. In Germany, Bismarck advocated “national socialism”. Overall,
it can be said that the revolutions of 1848-9 brought about a system in
which the class struggle between capitalists and workers was resolved by
the nation-state. It had a “socialist” element to it. In other words, it was
a system that reduced the class disparity brought about by the capitalist
economy through taxation and redistribution by the state.

Therefore, the revolutions of 1948-9 had the following consequences
for Marx and Engels. 

In 1850, Marx went into exile in London, where he
wrote The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and at the same time
launch his Critique of Political Economy. At that time, he began to think
about “exchange” and found money as a fetish that arises from there. This
work, which resulted in Capital, can be said to have been the beginning of
his “science of capitalism” as I would call it.

On the other hand, Engels’ attention to Thomas Münzer’s
millenarian movement in The German Peasants’ War, which was published
in 1850, can be said to be the genesis, of what I would like to call “science
of socialism”. Engels became known to the public in the 1870s with the
publication of From Utopia to Science. There are some misconceptions
about this book. The idea of “scientific socialism” already existed in the
mid-1840s. In fact, Proudhon advocated “scientific socialism,” and Owen
said something similar. 

'''In that case, “scientific” meant, so to speak, not religious. In other words, it must be rationally planned by human beings.'''

Engels’ idea differs from this. Engels’ praise of the religious revolutionary
leader Münzer in his book The German Peasant War suggests this:

- "His theologic-philosophic doctrine attacked all the main points not
only of Catholicism but of Christianity as such. Under the cloak of
Christian forms, he preached a kind of pantheism, which curiously
resembles the modern speculative mode of contemplation, and at
times even taught open atheism. He repudiated the assertion that
the Bible was the only infallible revelation. The only living revelation,
he said, was reason, a revelation which existed among all peoples
at all times. To contrast the Bible with reason, he maintained, was
to kill the spirit by the latter, for the Holy Spirit of which the Bible
spoke was not a thing outside of us; the Holy Spirit was our reason.
Faith, he said, was nothing else but reason become alive in man,
therefore, he said, pagans could also have faith. Through this faith,
through reason come to life, man became godlike and blessed, he
said. Heaven was to be sought in this life, not beyond, and it was,
according to Muenzer, the task of the believers to establish Heaven,
the kingdom of God, here on earth."

This passage indicates that when Engels thought of communism, he
thought of it in terms of historical materialism (modes of production), but
also grasped it as coming from some “power” different from that. He found
communism in Münzer’s “theological-philosophical doctrine”, but this does
not mean that it comes from Christianity in particular, as “pagans could
also have faith.” In other words, it does not matter if one is pagan or atheist.

What is important is that there is some ideational “power” at work here.
In his view until 1848, the class struggle arose along with the
development of the capitalist mode of production, through which the
proletariat would realize socialism. This would occur only after industrial
capital had developed to a certain stage. In this sense, the class struggle
in England, where industrial capitalism was most developed, should have
been a model example. But what happened in 1848 was not the case.
Rather, with some degree of victory of the proletariat, the movement to
abolish the class itself disappeared. Specifically, with the passage on the
Trade Union Law, the Chartist movement dissolved.

It means the following: socialism that “supersedes class itself”
cannot be explained only in terms of historical materialism, that is, in
terms of modes of production. So how does such socialism arise? After
the defeat of the German Revolution of 1848-49, Engels went back to the
German Revolution of 1255 to discuss the similarities and differences
between these two revolutions."

At that point, Engels had already realized that socialism, as
consciously designed by humans, is only a “utopia”. It may be locally
viable, but it cannot be more than that. If it is to be widely realized, state
power will be necessary. Then, how would it be possible to supersede the
state? It cannot be said that if economic class differences disappear, the
state will automatically disappear as well. In the first place, a state exists
in relation to other states. Therefore, it is not possible for one state alone
to overcome the state form in general.

How, then, is it possible for socialism to be more than a utopianism?
As a matter of fact, this is not sufficiently discussed in his book From
Utopia to Science. Here, Engels merely reiterates the ideas that Marx
expressed in his Critique of the Gotha Program. However, it appears that
he was not satisfied with that. There are traces that he was trying to
examine communism from a different perspective. These can be found in
his studies of primitive Christianity, which he proceeded in his last years.
Incidentally, it was his disciple Kautsky who succeeded this line. It is
ironic that Kautsky was later ostracized as a “renegade” by Lenin, even
though he had inherited Engels’ most important interest.

In my opinion, the “science of socialism” which Engels started is
not impossible to be established. It is to elucidate the mode of exchange
D and the powers (spirits) it brings about, specifically the spirit of
communism. That is what I have attempted in my forthcoming “Power and
Modes of Exchange”."

(https://www.crisiscritique.org/storage/app/media/2021-12-13/cc-82-kojin-karatani.pdf)

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]