

=Description=

"Mary Mellor’s  Economics course - Understanding money, the route to economic democracy and a sustainable planet, is now available to watch online. Mary Mellor is author of ‘The future of money’ and emeritus professor at Northumbria University. She has worked in this area for over 20 years and published widely.
The course is a series of four, approximately one hour lectures. It was filmed in February 2012 and was organised as a collaboration between Professor Mary Mellor, North East Transition Towns Activist Network, Sentient Cities and Newcastle University as part of the regions ongoing shift toward fostering more satisfying, resilient and ecologically sustainable communities."


James Robertson writes:

"‘Mary Mellor’s understanding makes an essential contribution to anyone wanting to know more about how the money system works and what its future could and should be.

She takes the view that money is a public resource that should be used to provision human societies on the basis of social justice, wellbeing and environmental responsibility. A steady state economy would be possible if the money system was not driven by the demands of debt-based money, financial accumulation and profit-driven growth. Money should be reclaimed and democratised for the benefit of the whole of society and the natural world."
(http://www.positivemoney.org/2012/12/understanding-money-prof-mary-mellor-videos/)



=Directory=

* Part 1: What is Money (money creation) [http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=5IZRWQn5jgk]
* Part 2: Money and Banking? [http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=8wpbnYZZaG4]
* Part 3: The crisis of the monetary system [http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=PoIRCHq7Cr4]
* Part 4: The future of money [http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=argEb1tWtt0]


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]