

=Bio=

"Massimo Menichinelli is a designer who researches and develops open, collaborative, and co-design
projects and the systems that enable them since 2005. He uses design tools and processes in order to
help companies, organizations, cities and local communities to develop open and collaborative
processes, business, services, places and projects such as Open Design, Fab Lab and User-driven Open
and Social Innovation initiatives. Massimo has given lectures and workshops in various countries
including Italy, Spain, Finland, Germany, United Kingdom, Mexico, Colombia, South Korea and
Singapore so far. He worked on the development of the Aalto FabLab, co-organized the first Open
Knowledge Festival in Helsinki and co-founded the Open Design Working Group at the Open
Knowledge Foundation. He lectured on Digital Fabrication and Open Design at Aalto University
(Helsinki, Finland) and Open Design at SUPSI (Lugano, Switzerland) and in the Fab Academy
(Opendot and WeMake, Italy). He has recently developed the MUSE Fab Lab (Trento, Italy) and
facilitated the development of the Opendot makerspace/Fab Lab (Milan, Italy). He worked also as a
Director at Make In Italy Italian Fablab & Makers Foundation CDB where he researched and
facilitated Fab Labs and Makers in Italy. He works now as a project manager for research projects at
IAAC | Fab City Research Lab (previously known as Fab Lab Barcelona), especially in the MAKE-IT
Horizon 2020 European project and as project manager of Fablabs.io, the official and open source
platform for the global Fab Lab Network. Massimo has published several scientific articles and books,
and he is currently a doctoral candidate at Aalto University - School of Arts, Design and Architecture -
Department of Media - Media Lab Helsinki."

=Publications= 

"The first book “openp2pdesign.org_1.1″ has been published in Italian, English and Spanish (http://www.scribd.com/openp2pdesign for the digital download and http://stores.lulu.com/openp2pdesign for the print version); it summarizes the first years of this project and the Open P2P Design methodology proposed and shared for its continuous development and redefinition. A methodology developed  in order to design with/for a Community/Locality System a collaborative activity that will generate open and social innovations (Open Innovation / Social Innovation). Design here has not a formal and aesthetic aim but is a tool for facilitating the organization (or MetaDesign) of open systems, processes, projects."

=Publications=

* All my research of the past 8 years on Open Design can be found here: http://www.openp2pdesign.org

* This is the most recent synthesis of my work, with slides and video available:
http://www.openp2pdesign.org/2013/open-design/process-community-business-the-systems-behind-open-design/

* You can also have a look at this publication, it's a bit old but it's in Spanish and still quite complete:
http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/openp2pdesign.org_1.1_castellano




=More Information=

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Italy]]