URL = https://www.mastermindingeden.com

=Description=

Camara Cassin:

"In order to address the metacrisis and change the direction of the future we must think outside the limited scope of our current civilization model and open our minds to a paradigm shift. We need to ask the question “What is the best we can do?” 

We need to pull together aligned ideas on power production, waste elimination and resource recovery, governance, finance, decentralized networks, education, human health, ecosystem restoration and artificial intelligence assistance to name a few.

By combining these puzzle pieces and others, I believe we can create disaster resilient, self-sustaining, regenerative communities that operate not as bunkers against ecological crises, but rather comfortable havens of innovation, health, enjoyment, beauty, and abundance. Replenishing ecosystems instead of destroying them.

Some of the puzzle pieces I’ve found are incredible and seem like technologies that are too good to be true but are absolutely, verifiably, real.

I’m working on putting together a database of technologies, systems, organizations and solutions at MastermindingEden.com but I will share with you some of the ones that stand out most in my mind."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UFqawmQhheh5JGMGrGygY2ei55-5PVbT7HphJUOQRU/edit?tab=t.0])


=Directory=

As suggested by Camara Cassin:

[https://regenitech.earth REGENiTECH] has developed an Earth Power Lodge Earth Regenerator system that produces powerful organic plant food biostimulant and regenerating soil amendments while producing enough power for a community. This can help resolve the soil and food crisis. The tech was showcased in the award winning documentary “The Need To Grow”. I am now a coordinator for the company, helping them scale the business and get units deployed. 

[https://carbotura.com Carbotura] has developed a powerful waste elimination technology called Regenesis that can eliminate the need for landfills, and can mine existing ones for resources, creating a circular resource stream. The waste is atomized and sorted into its base elements that can then be re-used in manufacturing processes. The machine powers itself. These units are designed to process 100 tonnes+ of waste per day. It can also destroy forever chemicals like PFOS that are causing major endocrine disruptions in all earthlings. 

[https://lanzatech.com/ Lanzatech] has a technology that turns waste CO2 and CO from industrial process stack gasses into ethanol and ethylene. - They have partnered with Virgin Airlines to make carbon-captured jet fuel, and other companies making carbon-captured plastic products. They also have a by-product of protein that can be fed to fish!

[https://threefold.io Threefold] has created a quantum safe, high efficiency decentralized internet network, blockchain and sovereign virtual twin identity technology. This takes our network infrastructure and the way we conduct online data exchange to a level necessary for an advanced civilization. They have also signed an agreement with the government of Zanzibar for a digital freezone. I am affiliated with Threefold as we have linked this technology into the REGENiTECH EPL and they are designing a model using the unit to power internet servers to provide access for remote communities in Africa.

[https://www.verses.ai VERSES AI] is a cognitive computing company that is advancing the concept of the Spatial Web, which is designed to integrate the physical and digital worlds through a network of interconnected AI systems, humans, and machines. This new framework, also known as Web 3.0, builds on standards like the Hyperspace Modeling Language (HSML) and the Hyperspace Transaction Protocol (HSTP), both approved by the IEEE. These standards provide a common language and protocols for intelligent agents and systems to interact seamlessly across various platforms and environments, ensuring interoperability, security, and ethical governance.
The Spatial Web aims to shift the traditional internet from a screen-based experience to an environment where information is embedded within physical objects and spaces. It leverages technologies like AI, IoT, AR/VR, and blockchain to create a unified ecosystem where data can be processed and shared contextually, leading to more intelligent, responsive environments. VERSES AI’s platform, Genius, uses these standards to develop AI agents capable of learning, reasoning, and adapting in real-time. This next-generation AI system is designed to support a wide range of applications, from smart cities to autonomous machines, while adhering to ethical and social standards for AI governance​.

Engineers at MIT have developed a supercapacitor using concrete and carbon black that can turn the foundations and walls of structures into affordable and widely accessible energy storage. This will further the renewable energy movement as batteries have been a barrier to access and the rare minerals required to produce them require mining that causes environmental damage and human rights concerns.

Green cement is now a thing and companies like Biomason are using biology to produce cement commercially. They use natural microorganisms to grow structural Biocement® in ambient temperatures, harnessing the power of biotechnology to reinvent traditional cement and offer a more planet-friendly alternative. Creating a super strong building material with a serious reduction in carbon emissions.

'''Residential designers around the world including Issho, The Isotopic Housing Project, Biotonomy,  Mars City Design have all created designs for self-sustaining autonomous housing.''' They each designed a home that stands alone and requires no infrastructure whatsoever for water, electricity, or sewage treatment making it completely independent. It is designed to provide all the basic needs a person or family would require including the production of one’s own food.

Organizations developing economic and societal models like The Auravana Project,  the Fairshare Commons and Recommons Regenerative Community Land Trusts are committed to a world that is equitable and abundant for everyone.

Then we have pioneers in impact funding, connection and incubation driving innovation towards an ecological civilization such as Blue Dot Project,  Liminal Future Group and Visionary Fund, which is the crowdfunding platform that I built."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UFqawmQhheh5JGMGrGygY2ei55-5PVbT7HphJUOQRU/edit?tab=t.0])


=Discussion=

Camara Cassin:

"'''Why design a city?'''

The evolution of humans into tribes and into cities has resulted in technological innovation, fields of specialization and the availability of a diverse gene pool. A community cannot be truly self-sustaining if it cannot grow, harvest and process food, produce its own power, have a circular resource economy and be able to make and build everything it needs within its own system. Can you fix a turbine? How about build an iphone or a computer from scratch? This requires a larger population with specialization and high technology. 

We have made remarkable strides in the advancement of technology. With the coming adverse weather events it is essential that our communities must be truly self-sustaining. The only project I see potentially taking this seriously is NEOM in Saudi Arabia - and information about their integrated systems is remarkably hard to come by. It’s also got a vibe that doesn’t quite resonate with me. It seems to be for the ultra rich. Please correct me if I’m wrong. 

To harness the collective intelligence of those mentioned above and more I have initiated the Masterminding Eden Event for July 2025 in Interlaken, Switzerland."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UFqawmQhheh5JGMGrGygY2ei55-5PVbT7HphJUOQRU/edit?tab=t.0])


[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Conferences]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]