
'''= "allows a large group of people to work on a project and share the profits. The project lead can add people to the equity pool via the app".'''

URL = https://mast.ly/

=Description=

(from a Shareable interview by Ruby Pratka)

Casey Fenton:

"Mastly allows a large group of people to work on a project and share the profits. The project lead can add people to the equity pool via the app, they can record the work they're doing and see the amount of their equity growing in real time. The more people work, the more equity they get, and it gives people a real sense of ownership. Most equity systems operate on trust and cost thousands of dollars in legal fees to put together. It's also not very motivating — if you agree to have part of your salary paid in equity, you sign papers, which you put in a drawer and then forget about.

With Mastly, startups can free up thousands of dollars to invest in other costs, because we've done the legal work and because by offering employees, contractors, and advisors the option to be paid in equity, they free up a part of their short-term payroll. It can be used for small and large companies in the U.S., and we'll be able to roll it out soon in Australia.

We're working with attorneys around the world and we're hoping to have it available in more than 60 countries. In the past, when you had a book that you wanted to get out there, it was hard to get people on board, because there was no good way to compensate people. With Mastly, when a business crowdfunding campaign succeeds, the contributors succeed."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/couchsurfing-founders-new-approach-to-pay-contributors-and-promoters-of-upcoming-book)

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Australia]]