
'''= the 'MEI Model''''

=Description=

Andrea Farias:

"At a fundamental level, technologies can be understood as operating through the dynamic interplay of three key elements:

'''* Materials''': The building blocks that are transformed through various processes to create functional artifacts. In biological systems, materials like oxygen and nutrients are delivered to cells. In technological systems, raw materials are transformed into components and products.

'''* Energy''': The fundamental driver that powers physical processes, material transformations, and information flows. In biological organisms, energy from nutrients supports bodily functions. In technological systems, energy powers machinery and transportation.

'''* Information''': The blueprint and control mechanism, organizing how energy and materials are used. In biological systems, sensory information and neural signals regulate bodily functions. In technological systems, market data and institutional frameworks guide production and distribution.


Understanding the MEI model involves recognizing how these elements interact dynamically within any system. For instance, in the cardiovascular system, sensory information about the body's needs is used to regulate energy expenditure in pumping blood, ensuring that materials (oxygen and nutrients) are delivered efficiently. Similarly, in the smartphone supply chain, financial information guides the flow of materials through various production stages, with energy driving each step of the process."

(https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/MEI+Model)


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]

[[Category:Complexity]]