

=Text=

Lionel Sims:

"Rough equality among men in patrilineages sits upon systematic
inequality between men and women.This is the first inequality out
of which all later inequalities spring – this is Engels’ basic
argument. The imbalances that can occur within this relation of
inequality are like a proto-class out which all later classes evolve.


The main imbalances suggested in the scholarly literature are:

*  Cattle herders also hunt and garden, therefore there are three
dimensions for ‘chance’ inequalities to arise.

* Political authority (chiefs, kings, etc) can grow as the reversedominance
structures of matrilineal/matrilocal organisation
weaken (see, for example, Hierarchy in the Forest:The Evolution of
Egalitarian Behaviour by Christopher Boehm).This can have
economic consequences, eg, monument building.

* Agricultural labour services, except plough agriculture which
uses oxen, are the province of women, and variable opportunities
for wealth inequalities exist with multiple wives (see, for example,
Guns, Germs and Steel by Jared Diamond).

*  Before cattle-herders there were the complex hunter-gatherers
of the Mesolithic, something like the NW coast American Indians.
Most of these were slave-owning misogynist warriors who
vigorously defended territory. As there were at least 4,000 years of
the Mesolithic which preceeded NW European Neolithic
monument building, we would expect some degree of gender
inequality and ranking among men before cattle-herding.

* Brian Hayden of Columbia University has suggested an
‘accumulator-feasting’ complex to explain ‘potlatch’ type rituals.
These involve the conspicuous display and destruction of wealth,
and the profligate consumption of luxury foods.They are run
competitively by ‘big men’ ‘financed’ by calling in debts.This
increases ranking differences among men in the midst of plenty.

*  ‘Trade’ in, for example, stone axes, flint cores and artefacts, and
in the early bronze age in copper and bronze, had a restricted
circulation linked to rank.Variable trading opportunities are
therefore a source of inequality.

*  Exotic luxury goods, such as types of stone, silver, gold, confer
unequal power on those who control their circulation. For
example, a Zulu bride can be purchased with a brass ring: see
Eileen Krige, The Social System of the Zulus.

*  Napoleon Chagnon’s social circumscription theory suggests
that, when there are fewer opportunities to flee from intra-group
problems, this intensifies the emergence of rank inequalities.

* The spoils of raiding and war – from revenge to cattle raiding to
territorial defence– create inequalities.

* Resource stress.

* Migration.

* Colonialism.

There is evidence for the first nine of these factors operating in the
prehistory of the British Isles and north Europe."
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]