==Bio==

MATHIEU O’NEIL is Associate Professor in Communication at the University of Canberra and Adjunct Research Fellow in the School of Sociology at the ANU. His interests are the sociology of fields and controversies, social network analysis, and labour and organization studies. He is currently investigating waged and volunteer labour in F/OSS projects thanks to a grant from the Sloan Foundation. Mathieu’s research has been published in Social Networks, Information, Communication and Society, Réseaux, and Organization Studies, amongst others. In 2006 he contributed to the founding of the Virtual Observatory for the Study of Online Networks, a world leader in e-social science, and in 2010 he founded the Journal of Peer Production.<br />
( https://en.itu.dk/about-itu/calendar/events/2019/the-long-now-of-the-commons--people-infrastructures-and-dilemmas )

"Mathieu O’Neil lectures in American Civilization at the Université Paris Sorbonne – Paris
IV and is Adjunct Research Fellow at the ANU’s Australian Demographic and Social Research
Institute, where he co-founded the Virtual Observatory for the Study of Online Networks in 2005.
He also worked as a magazine editor and designer, and exhibition curator. His PhD, completed
in 1996, surveyed zine networks in the San Francisco Bay Area. In 2009 he published his book
Cyberchiefs: Autonomy and Authority in Online Tribes and he founded and became the editor of
the journal Critical Studies in Peer Production. In 2010 he joined the board of Les Amis du Monde
Diplomatique." (2010)

==More Information==

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Governance]]