

=Discussion=

William Irwin Thompson:

"Recently in Phoebe Eaton’s article on Courtney
Ross and the Ross School in the April, 2007 issue of The New York
Magazine, Harvard’s Professor of Education, Howard Gardner, was
quoted as criticizing the curriculum that I had designed for the school
by saying ‘that there is no historical evidence that a prehistoric
matriarchal culture ever existed’. Matriarchal, certainly never; but
matristic, most certainly. Matriarchy is a fearful male projection and is
simply the mirror-image of a patriarchal, military state with a nightmarish image of an Amazon woman at its head. A matristic culture is a
culture of symbolic authority, not military power, with a council of
O’Mas at its head. We see this sort of culture still surviving in
contemporary sub-saharan Africa. The arm of defence is the mother’s
brother and not the father. We see can detect this archaic formation
present in Plutarch’s retelling of the myth of Osiris, Isis, Seth, and
Horus. This myth is all about the shift from the mother’s brother to the
father and the emergence of paternal dynastic succession. But the
problem comes from the fact that behavioural scientists like Howard
Gardner and Steven Mithen are not poets with an understanding of the
mythopoeic mentality. 

For example, Professor Mithen, in After the Ice
(2006), claims that there is no evidence of the imagery of the Goddess
at Göbelki Tepe. This is an outright falsification, for on one of the
stone plinths there is an engraving of the Goddess spreading her legs
in an act of urination that produces the rivers. James Joyce would have
understood instantly what this image means, for he uses the image of
the Goddess in micturation as the emblem of his Great Goddess, Anna
Livia Plurabelle in Finnegans Wake. ‘Great-Bladdered Emer’ is a
kenning in ancient Irish literature and, as well, in the poetry of
William Butler Yeats. When Mithen goes on to discuss the religious
imagery of Çatal Hüyük, he actually freaks out, and most unscientifically, calls it ‘a neolithic hell’, and projects his personal hang-ups on
us and gives us a cultural historical narrative that is biased against
women. James Mellaart and Marija Gimbutas were Mithen’s opposite; they were imaginative and knew how to read images (Mellaart,
1967; Gimbutas, 1989). Mellaart was quick and intuitive, and saw in
the Twin Goddess of Matron and Maid at Çatal Hüyük, the neolithic
prototype for the Greek Demeter and Persephone. Todd and Hoddart
have spent two generations at work on Çatal Hüyük since Mellaart,
but they are more conservative in making generalizations and merely
report on artifact X and stratum level V; they seem to fear the archaeologists’ disease of Schlieman’s Syndrome — named after the wildly
imaginative and amateur businessman who dug up ancient Troy —
and refuse in their self-inflicted aphasia ever to make a generalization.


There is plenty of evidence for a prehistoric matristic culture, but
you have to know how to read poetry and myth. I suspect that Howard
Gardner probably had lunch once in the Harvard Faculty Club with
Harvard’s reductionist evolutionary psychologist, E.O. Wilson. Wilson
probably dismissed my book, The Time Falling Bodies Take to Light
and its criticism of him with the words, ‘Thompson’s a romantic’— as
he did so later in print. The sneering use of the word ‘romantic’ is a
behavioural scientist’s dismissal of the poet and his ability to read
literature. If the word ‘romantic’ was meant by Wilson to lump me in
the company of Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, Goethe and Beethoven,
then I would be honoured. But I think the final word about me in the
old boy’s club of Harvard was that I was not to be taken seriously, but
was ‘New Age’. However, if one cares to read the Babylonian Enuma
Elish, the Egyptian myth of Osiris and Horus, Aeschylus’s Oresteia
and Plato’s Timaeus, one will find ample evidence of the presence of a
prehistoric matristic society.

...

Closer to the Palaeolithic side of this transformation, we are confronted with a mythological reconstruction of human sexuality. The
shift from oestrus to menstruation is emphasized with a mythological
system of ‘the wound that heals itself’, and the colour red, is highlighted first with menstrual blood, then symbolically with red ochre.
The menstrual cycle — and the likely menstrual synchrony in which
all of the women of the band express menstruation together, probably
with menstruation at the dark of the moon, and ovulation at the new
moon — sets down the foundation of matristic authority. A mythological system is imagined in which the female is the symbol of enduring
time — the classicist Nietzsche’s Eternal Return of the prehistoric
Goddess — and the male, with the shorter time of the rise and fall of
the penis — is reconstructed as the phallus. Since crescent sickles
were used by women for gathering wild grains in the foothills of the
Zagros Mountains, the association of the lunar crescent, ovulation,
and the mysteries of childbirth and food-production would have been
further energized. The androgynous figure that can exist in the gap of
the contradiction between red vulva and the phallus is constructed as
the shaman, ‘the wounded healer’ who holds in his magical nature
both bleeding wound and phallus. It is at this point we enter the full
culture of shamanism, with its transformation of the Sense of Presence
of the chimps and bonobos to the personification of Presences in the
spiritual culture of Animism. This is the world’s first universal religion, the religion of the Great Mother, and its artifacts are wide-spread
from Iberia to Siberia."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.64.853&rep=rep1&type=pdf)


==The Shift from Matristic to Patriarchal Societies==

William Irwin Thompson:

The shift from matristic to patriarchal is
also expressed in the Rig Veda and the Ramayana (Thompson, 1996/
1998). By the time of the Axial Period of the Upanishads, we have
truly passed over into the culture of the sadhu and monk — which is
archetypally expressed in the life of the Buddha. On McLuhan’s
terms, we have also passed from the oral folklore of the O’Mas to the
power of the written text in the hands of monks, and the portability of
the new sutras helps to transform Buddhism into a new universal religion, spread along the silk road from northern India and Tibet to China,
and then on to Korea and Japan."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.64.853&rep=rep1&type=pdf)

[[Category:Gender]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]