
'''* Book: Timothy J. LeCain. The Matter of History. Cambridge University Press, 2017'''

URL =


=Contextual Quote=

“I’ve become increasingly convinced that it is the growing immaterialism of modern society that is generating many of our
most destructive political impulses and divisions. As we increasingly
move into a digital virtual world, we create an immaterial environment where the abstract starts to seem more real than reality. In
the past, our frequent engagement with the materiality of work and
play had served to bring us back ‘down to earth’ where our shared
human commonalities might bridge political divides. But now our
identities are increasingly whatever we wish to pretend they are, and
politics has become just another spectator sport that we play on the
Internet. This, I would suggest, is the logical outcome of the post-modern cultural turn: an environment where immaterial ideas are
everything and material reality is largely irrelevant. Any politics that
does not recognise and counter this growing immateriality is, I be-lieve, unlikely to succeed in changing much of anything in the real
World.”


- Timothy J. LeCain. [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344627074_Neomaterialism_Human_Evolution_and_the_Future_of_Environmental_History_an_Interview_with_Timothy_J_LeCain]


=Description=

Claudio de Majo:

“Timothy J. LeCain, professor of history at
Montana State University in Bozeman, seems to have a clear ideas in
this regard: perhaps a bit of both or, if you prefer, none of the above.

His latest book .. describes the interrelations between human culture and what
he defines as a vibrant natural material world as a coevolutionary
process in which the two poles mutually influence each other. Ac-
cording to the author, as ‘natural born humans’, our evolutionary
trajectory is embedded in a natural material world in which multiple actors have played an equally impacting role. LeCain adopts
several challenging historical examples in order to prove this point.

From the farming experiences of two extremely culturally different
areas of the world, American cowboys in Montana and silkworm
breeders in Japan have equally benefitted from the social intelligence
of other animal species, and their domestication can be considered
as multi-species alliance based on mutual interest. Remarkably, in
both instances this win-win game was only interrupted by the rise
of industrial societies, epitomised by the proliferation of electric net-
works, with wires stretching all over the world’s surface within a few
decades. However, even a ‘synthetic’ landscape like that created by
the industrial revolution presents its own challenging eco-material
aspects, thanks to the unique natural characteristics of copper, the
component that allowed human beings to extend these energy grids
on a global scale. Ultimately, our current high-tech anthropic ‘smart’
spaces are the result of human intelligence and skilfulness, but just
as much as the result copper’s resourceful qualities. In this light, it
might be more suitable to consider human history as a coevolution-
ary process: we are a telluric force that is creating a major ecological
impact on planet earth, just as countless environmental forces have
influenced our evolutionary trajectory in multiple ways.

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344627074_Neo-materialism_Human_Evolution_and_the_Future_of_Environmental_History_an_Interview_with_Timothy_J_LeCain)


=Interview=

Conducted by Claudio de Majo.

'''* Claudio de Majo: Let’s warm up with a broad question in order to introduce yourself and your research focus. What is neo-materialism and how is it relevant to environmental history?'''

''Timothy J. LeCain:''

I think neo-materialism can be understood
as a version of some earlier foundational materialist theories updated
to incorporate new humanistic and scientific breakthroughs. It owes
a lot, of course, to Bruno Latour’s Actor Network Theory and the so-called ‘flat ontologies’ of Deleuze and Guattari, among others. These
thinkers asked us to understand humans and their diverse cultures as
emerging from their interactions with an environment of other agents,
which could be everything from the copper wires in our walls to the
trees in a forest to the cows grazing in a distant pasture. In this emer-
gent sense, the cultural is always material, and the material is always
cultural. Such a view pushes back against the long-dominant historical
approach that framed culture – and the attendant society, politics, etc.
– as primarily an abstract, ideational or discursive phenomenon that
is clearly separated from the material environment.

This ‘culture mistake’, as I sometimes call it, was based on a mod-
ernist anthropocentric worldview that sees humans as exceptional
and distinct from the material world around them. Of course, almost everyone admits that humans are mammals who evolved from
earlier primates, and that all must depend on a ‘natural’ ecological
system just like any other creature. Yet most scholars to this day still
understand human culture as largely or entirely separate from that
material environment of ecology. Consider that we routinely speak
of ‘eco-system’ services for basic human physiological needs like food
and water, but we never consider that the emergence of art, music,
politics, community and other seemingly ‘human’ phenomena can
also be understood as depending on ecosystem services.

While Latour and others meant to escape the culture-matter
distinction, in practice even those who embraced his theories of-
ten ended up putting all of their emphasis on an abstract concept
of culture that seemed relatively unmoored from material things.
The emphasis of the past thirty-odd years of academic scholarship
was on how human culture or social groups
Constructed the material
environment, while relatively little weight was given to the ways in which that material environment shaped and sustained humans in
the first place.

Despite the field’s foundational basis in materialism, this empha-
sis on an immaterial concept of culture even gained some traction in
environmental history. Environmental historians had from the start
sought to recognise and study the agency of the non-human world.
But in the 1990s some scholars increasingly sought to ‘deconstruct’
the material world, seeing even ‘nature’ and ‘wilderness’ primarily
as human ideas or constructs rather than as material agents in their
own right. 

There was much of value in this, but it also tended to
pull the field away from what had made it unique in the first place:
a focus on the historical agency of the non-human environment.

Now the pendulum is beginning to swing back towards the material – but this time, the materialism in question is different. This is
where I think neo-materialist theory is so useful: it takes non-human
things seriously as creative agents from which the human animal
emerges in all its dimensions, biological and cultural. More specifi-
cally, it engages with many new scientific insights that have provided
a growing empirical basis for understanding human cultures and
societies as materially generated, sustained and embedded. Just to
give one quick example, the new science of epigenetics tells us that
the old nature-vs-nurture debates (which have an obvious parallel
with the humanistic matter-vs-culture debate) are wrong. We must
understand human physiological and cognitive processes as
developmental.

Our genotype does not alone determine our phenotype, but
rather environmental cues turn genes off and on during the course
of our lives in response to the environment around us. In this very
concrete biological sense, the material world enters into our bodies
and influences how we think and act. We don’t just
live in our environments – in some sense we
are our environments. For example,
there is now compelling evidence that epigenetic changes in Holo-
caust survivors explain the measurably higher rates of anxiety and
depression in their children and grandchildren. This phenomenon
has been recognised for decades, but prior to the emergence of epigenetic theory it was assumed that the cause was a learned culture of
poor parenting that was passed down through several generations.


'''* CdM: In this regard, which are the works of environmental history that in a way present a neo-materialist perspective, perhaps without explicitly defining it as such?'''

TL: Neo-materialism is my own neologism, and to date I can’t
say it’s widely caught on! I felt compelled to distinguish neo-materialism from the more commonly used ‘new materialism’ because I
was frustrated by the lack of materiality in much of the latter, which
was often more about human ideas about matter than matter itself.
But I also meant for the neo-materialist term to offer a more capa-
cious rubric that would include lots of other very materially oriented
works that didn’t necessarily self-identify as either neo- or new materialist. Many of these were in my home field of environmental
history, which, as I note above, has always had a strong materialist
strand, even during the peak of the cultural turn. Here I consider
Donald Worster as the godfather of environmental materialism. But
in a now legendary 1990 roundtable debate published in the
Journal of American History, William Cronon and other scholars challenged
Worster’s materialism and argued for greater attention to the then-
aborning cultural turn, as well as to the still dominant social history
analytical categories of race, class and gender.

By and large Cronon’s side won that debate and, as I said, the
field’s centre of gravity shifted from the material to the cultural for
a time. However, part of the reason Worster’s materialism couldn’t
stand up to the cultural challenge was, I think, because it focused
too narrowly on what he termed an ‘agro-ecological’ approach. In his
zeal for materialist causalities, Worster went straight to the heart of
what is one of the most powerful material realities in human history:
how we extract food from the land. I understand the logic of this, as
it was probably the best possible example for making the materialist
case at that time. Today the situation is very different. For all the rea-
sons, both scientific and humanistic, I’ve already noted, we can now
begin to explore the materialist basis for many other aspects of hu-
man history, including creativity, cognition and thus culture itself.
The old 1990 debate hasn’t shifted so much as it’s been transcended.

In part that’s because de facto
lots of environmental historians began
doing something like this along the way, whatever theory of method
that might have embraced. 

My own thinking was especially influenced by scholars like 

* Linda Nash (Inescapable Ecologies), 
* Edmund Russell (Evolutionary History), 
* John McNeill (Mosquito Empires) 

and even that early defender of the environmental cultural turn, 

* William Cronon (Nature’s Metropolis.) 

While they may not appreciate being
dragooned into service on this particular ship, I consider these and
other works as constituting a broader neo-materialism
avant la lettre.

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344627074_Neo-materialism_Human_Evolution_and_the_Future_of_Environmental_History_an_Interview_with_Timothy_J_LeCain}




=More information=


* '''Interview: Neo-materialism, Human Evolution and the Future of Environmental History: an Interview with Timothy J. LeCain. Claudio de Majo. Global Environment 13 (2020): 659–673'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344627074_Neomaterialism_Human_Evolution_and_the_Future_of_Environmental_History_an_Interview_with_Timothy_J_LeCain 




[[Category:Books]]


[[Category:Cosmobiological]]