
Video via http://vimeo.com/54434175


=Description=

"We live in the age of openness, of collaborative consumption: we are creating a new phase in human relations and development where the paradigm of sharing is brought to its fullest potential.

Yet we lack a language to speak about our souls, what’s inside us, what is intimate about us.

We have created a new social infrastructure (we called it social graph or social networks) yet we have re-created in digital form all the taboos and limits inherent to our physical, still closed society.

We need to explore a new paradigm. What happens to openness when it meets intimacy? How can we stop using our social graph as a stage for what we want the world to see and start using it to share what we truly are? How much value can we create in the world if we share not only our goods, but our souls?

This interactive and engaging talk explores the problem by contextualizing the exciting time we live in and introduces the topic of “Coming out in the digital age” through the meeting of the radical openness concept with the depths of our souls.

It’s the most current and most interesting development in human social interactions since social networking was born, a riveting new way of seeing the world and a call for a global coming out."

=More Information=

* This call for coming out has a name and a manifesto under OUT AS YOU: a non-profit, R&D based startup project with ambitious goals. Visit the link to know more: http://out.as/you/

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]