''' * Community currency engineer, a.k.a. matslats'''

[https://matslats.net Personal web site]

== Bio ==

Born 1972, Birmingham, UK. Teenage years in Cornwall. After my theology degree I allowed myself to be confused, depressed, married, experimenting with drugs; I failed teacher training, read lots of literature and travelled extensively. Towards the end of that decade I started computing, specifically Macromedia Director and made a meagre living from my bedroom making online arcade games. 

I turned 30 during a year in India and set out to use my computing skills to leave the world better than I found it. Taking career advice I consciously decided to become an expert in something, but what? Learning PHP I volunteered then worked for [https://sheltercentre.org Shelter Centre] for 3 years during which time it relocated from Cambridge to Geneva. Around the time of the Failure of Bear Stearns in 2008 I set out on my own as a community currency engineer providing 'lifeboat platforms', became nomadic and lived 'in the gift' to save money. Met everyone in that field, attended many conferences, tried many ecovillages.

In 2018 I accepted that the western civilisation (i.e. pretty much everybody) was vanishingly unlikely to evade a catastrophic collapse caused by climate change, energy depletion and mass extinction at the same time. Around that time I settled down with a partner, moving to South Italy where I now reside, combining my previous work talking about and implementing small scale monetary systems with new goals of living more resiliently and closer to nature.

== Work ==

In 2003 I developed a php application for my local LETS, but without sufficient engagement on their part and it was never deployed. I took it to LETS link UK where, despite much more work being done on it, it was never deployed. But in Shelter Centre I discovered Content Management Systems (specifically Drupal) and realised that this was a great approach for building highly configurable web sites which diverse community currency groups could manage themselves, while I provided a distribution which included an accounting module. So [https://communityforge.net Community Forge] was founded with the Chairman of the Geneva LETS, Tim Jenkin. That org continues to this day hosting my [https://drupal.org/project/cforge Hamlets] Drupal distribution for free for 2-300 mostly francophone groups.

In Geneva I also met and started collaborating with [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jem_Bendell Jem Bendell], creator of Deep Adapation.

[[Sybille Saint Girons]] and I developed the [https://matslats.net/trading-floor-game trading floor game], a fun 2 hour workshop session to help participants think about the nature of money as a medium of exchange and the effects of monetary policy on the marketplace and the soul.

Always looking for new possible use-cases, I spent time in the [https://ecovillage.org Global Ecovillage Network] helping with their website for a while and surveying [[Ecovillage Economics]]. I didn't find a context for a new accounting system either within or between the larger ecovillages.

In 2014 I modified Hamlets to build a [https://timebanking.com.au timebanking platform] for New South Wales. This was defunded after 5 years and redeployed for the government of Queensland.

In 2016 Bendell and I created the Money & Society MOOC, a Masters level course in 4 lessons running on a custom-built Drupal platform on which students marked each other's work. We ran it about 7 times and about 500 people completed the course. The narrated slideshows have been moved to [https://matslats.net/money-society-mooc my site]. I still send an [mailto://money-society-mooc-subscribe@lists.riseup.net occasional newsletter] to alumni.

Interoperability between local currencies had become my main focus. With Tim Jenkin, creator of [https://community-exchange.org Community Exchange Systems] I authored the [http://creditcommons.net/assets/credit-commons.pdf Credit Commons White Paper] and considered it might make a fundable blockchain application. But it didn't.

In 2018 Dave Darby founder of [https://lowimpact.org LowImpact] got in touch soon I introduced him to Dil Green and Oliver Sylvester Bradley who began a productive partnership which continues to evolve. Dave is now top advocate for Credit Commons. With Dil's encouragement, during COVID I defined the [[Credit Commons Protocol]], and built a [https://gitlab.com/credit-commons reference implementation]. Dil, under the guise of [https://mutualcredit.services Mutual Credit Services] has deployed it twice, while I am also now advocating for the other side of his work, Multilateral Offset Clearing.

Oli changed focus towards [https://murmurations.network/ Murmurations] meta-protocol, a way of indexing and finding structured content from many different sources. I designed the community currency profile and implemented it for all Community Forge sites, and the offers & wants profile which will be used more as Cforge sites upgrade from Drupal 7.

Around 2021 I started attending conferences organised by CryptoCommons Association, who found my monetary discourse deeper than the crypto discourse. In 2023 I was invited to organise my own conference. With sponsorship from blockchain outfit [https://informal.systems Informal Systems], the [https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVMRG45iA=/ #CoFi] (Collaborative Finance) conference was a [https://matslats.net/cofi-is-now-a-thing great success].

In 2023 I recorded my first professional audiobook, [https://jembendell.com/2023/04/08/breaking-together-a-freedom-loving-response-to-collapse Breaking Together] by Jem Bendell. [https://matslats.net/audiobooks Other audiobooks]

== Written word ==
* A snapshot and comparative survey of the field Hamlets was entering in 2010 [https://ijccr.net/2012/05/29/complementary-currency-open-source-software-in-2010 Complementary Currency Open Source Software]
* In Shareable magazine, [https://www.shareable.net/capitalism-cant-build-community-web-services Capitalism Can’t Build Community Web Services]
* Co-authored with Jem Bendell to make the case for open protocols to network communities together, not least, the Credit Commons Protocol [https://matslats.net/thwarting-uber-future-platform-cooperatives-credit-commons Thwarting an Uber Future for Complementary Currencies: Open Protocols for a Credit Commons], + video [https://matslats.net/speaker#barcelona2017 presentation] at RAMICS 2017 conference.
* Description of the architecture of the [https://matslats.net/mutual-credit-architecture-4 mutual_credit module] in Drupal (version 4).
* Thinking about the kind of software needed for integral grassroots social networking [https://matslats.net/missing-social-network-murmurations-payload-bonfire-holochain-activitypub The missing social network]
* With Extinction Rebellion co-founder Skeena Rathoor, a chapter in the Deep Adaptation book on [https://jembendell.com/2021/02/23/deep-adaptation-the-book relocalisation]
* [https://matslats.net/constructing-systems-of-exchange Constructing Systems of Exchange] explores how media of exchange work, especially when not backed nor guaranteed by a central authority.

== More Information ==
=== Pages on This Wiki===
* [[Matthew Slater on Complementary Currencies and Mutual Credit]]
* [[Matthew Slater and Dil Green on the Credit Commons Protocol]]
* [[Art Brock, Michael Linton, Michel Bauwens, and Matthew Slater on Currencies and the Credit Commons]]
* [[Money as a Commons]]
* [[Credit Commons Protocol]]
* [[Protocols as Organizational Forms]]
* [[Community Forge]]
* [[Money and Society MOOC]]
* [[Collaborative Credit Systems]]
* [[Integral Technology]]
* [[Solidarity Economy Networks]]
* [[Open Protocols]]
* [[Ecovillage Economics]]

=== Elsewhere ===
* [https://www.youtube.com/@matthewslater3301 his YouTube channel]
* [https://www.lowimpact.org/author/matthewslater on Lowimpact.org]
* [https://www.drupal.org/u/matslats at Drupal]
* [https://www.twitter.com/matslats Twitter/X]

[[Category:Collapse]]
[[Category:Demonetization]]
[[Category:Freeconomy]]
[[Category:P2P_Economic_Networks]]
[[Category:Post-Capitalism]]
[[Category:Bios]]