Video via https://youtu.be/9cRvfVBH128

== Description ==

In conversation with Tammy Lea Meyer:

"Join [[Matthew Slater]], Ross Gentleman and Tammy Lea Meyer as we explore the Credit Commons. Matthew Slater presents a proposed system of economic exchange for people in the solidarity economy. Based on the principles of reciprocal trade, it proposes a scalable, bottom up approach to money creation. The foundations are already laid for these commons based practices through business barter systems, LETS and Timebanks.

[[Matthew Slater]] has been building free open source software for Community Exchange and living as a digital nomad since 2008. In 2009 he co-founded a Swiss nonprofit, Community Forge, which hosts that software for 150 community exchange systems. In 2013 he co-created a trading floor game with Sybille Saint Girons and in 2014 he built the timebanking site for New South Wales government in Australia. Since 2015, he has been hosting the Money and Society MOOC, co-authored by professor Jem Bendell. A new course is Check out his blog.

Ross Gentleman is the GM and CEO of CCEC Credit Union, Canada’s activist Credit Union. Ross has been involved in CCEC since their first annual general meeting in 1977, where he was invited to join the Board. He has played many roles in the organization over the years, most recently as General Manager. Ross has also served in the regulatory environment, having worked for the Financial Institutions Commission, and has rich knowledge and experience in governance, regulation, operations and leadership."
(https://medium.com/@tammyleameyer/join-matthew-slater-ross-gentleman-and-tammy-lea-meyer-as-we-explore-the-ideas-behind-the-credit-85fed54e4090)

[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]