=Project Status=

Dormant

== Project Description ==

The purpose of this is to develop an actionable approach to offering a graduate (or other) program in Participatory Economics/ Social Entrepreneurship. Besides developing course content and pedagogy, the project would also identify sympathetic institutions in corporate, voluntary, government and other sectors for possible job openings for potential graduates. 

== Project Team ==

* [[User:SRose]]-expressing interest in meshing work I am doing with [http://go.webassistant.com/4u/upload/users/u1000468/pub/1000365/index.lhtml Collaborative Micro-enterprise] into this project. See also [http://www.cooperationcommons.com/cooperation-commons/entrepreneurs-of-cooperation-essay  Cooperation Commons blog post]
* [[User:Guaka|Guaka]], I never wanted to get an MBA, but if it's about parecon I even want to help setting it up

==Motivation==

==Objective==

==Course Outline==

==References: to similar materials related to curriculum==

==Resources: items that show what the contents of the course outline are==
[http://www.pbs.org/opb/thenewheroes/whatis/resources.html New Heroes]

Kailash Satyarthi: South Asian Coalition on Child Servitude (SACCS)
Works to end forced child labor in South Asia.

Moses Zulu
Development Aid from People to People in Zambia (Children's Town)
Educates and integrates AIDS orphans in Africa.

Mimi Silbert: Delancey Street Foundation
Criminal rehabilitation center in which residents run various business enterprises.

David Green and Dr. V: Aurolab
Hospital and manufacturer of medical devices serving poor people, mainly in India.

Nick Moon and Martin Fisher
Appropriate Technology for Enterprise Creation (ApproTEC)
Manufactures and markets simple agricultural tools that aid in business development in Africa.

Fabio Rosa
Agroelectric System of Appropriate Technology (STA) and The Institute for Development of Natural Energy and Sustainability (IDEAAS)
Distributes alternative energy sources in rural Brazil.

Muhammad Yunus: Grameen Bank
Grants small loans without requiring collateral.

Maria Teresa Leal: Coopa Roca
Brazilian sewing cooperative.

Albina Ruiz: Ciudad Saludable
Alternative waste management organization in Peru.

Dina Abdel Wahab: Baby Academy
Alternative preschool chain in Middle East.

Inderjit Khurana: Ruchika School Social Service Wing, Train Platform Schools
Educational opportunity for indigent children in India.

Sompop Jantraka
Development and Education Program for Daughters Community Center (DEPDC)
Education and socialization program for girls and women in Thailand who would otherwise be forced into prostitution.
----

[http://www.hbs.edu/socialenterprise/index.html Harvard Social Enterprise Program]

[http://www.skollfoundation.org/skollcentre/index.asp Skoll Center for Social Entrepreneurship at Oxford Business School]

[http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/default.aspx Social Enterprise Coalition]

[http://www.ssireview.com Stanford Business School - Social Innovation]

[http://www2.gsb.columbia.edu/socialenterprise Columbia Business School - Social Enterprise]