
'''= concept and particular platform'''

URL = http://www.mealsharing.org/

Meal Sharing is a platform that brings people together for home-cooked meals around the world.

=Discussion=

Cat Johnson:

" Right now, most meal sharing is found primarily in metropolitan areas and is harder to find as you move away from the cities. But, that may soon change.

With numerous platforms positioning themselves as key players, meal sharing might be the next big sharing thing. The platforms focus on different aspects of meal sharing and this benefits the movement as a whole. The more options people have to share in a way that works for them, the more likely they are to get involved.

In startup speak, the opportunity for growth in the meal sharing market is massive. Afterall, we all need to eat several times a day, many people eat out regularly and the community of foodies is expanding. If the potential can be harnessed and technology leveraged effectively, things in the food industry could be disrupted as people turn to shared meals rather than take-out and restaurants.

“Our goal in the next few years is to have more hosts around the world then the top three major fast food restaurants locations,” says Jason Savsani, founder of Meal Sharing, a platform that brings people together for home-cooked meals around the world. “That would really say something if we succeed. That the world stood up and said, ‘I would rather trust my neighbor for food, then a major food corporation.’”

The variety of approaches to connecting people over food creates a wide open environment with endless opportunities. For instance, if you want company for lunch at a local restaurant, check out COlunching; frequent travelers, and hosts that love to entertain travelers, can connect via Cookening; Mealku is a pay-it-forward, meal sharing barter system; Is take-out more your style? ShareYourMeal connects neighbors who have extra portions with those who need a portion; Meal Sharing takes a “make what you make” approach, encouraging people to prepare for travelers food they would eat on typical night; Eat With Me enables people to plan “cool food events” and invite others to join; Feastly facilitates everything from a gourmet Valentine’s Day meal to a 50-plus person ice cream event. EatWith out of Tel Aviv emphasizes fun and safety -- they background check hosts. And there are many more platforms, each with a unique angle."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/peer-to-peer-dining-builds-community-one-meal-at-a-time)



[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]