
'''* Article: The Meaning of Planetary Civilization: Integral Rational Spirituality and the Semiotic Universe. By Tim Winton.'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/5395136/The_Meaning_of_Planetary_Civilisation_Integral_Rational_Spirituality_and_the_Semiotic_Universe


=Abstract:=

"This paper composes a formal constellation of distinct, but overlapping, philosophical, methodological, and theoretical commitments enactive within the integrative world-space. This approach is proposed as a basis for exploring a pragmatic meta-worldview capable of carrying meaning making necessary for the formation of a healthy and enduring Planetary Civilization. The heart of this challenge lies in finding a coherent and culturally extensible contemporary integration of humanity’s most persistent and foundational dualism–that of materialist and spiritualist views (with their respective ontic/realist v epistemic/idealist orientations)and the over-arching meaning making cosmologies they respectively support. I contend that current integrative approaches are still early in the developmental process of forming such a view, and that while they move us ever closer to a viable nondual orientation, they are ultimately perceived  to fall on one side or the other of the divide and therefor fail, as yet, to locate a meaningfully comprehensivist stance capable of uniting all of humanity under one cosmological structure. In this paper I seek to develop an integral pragmatist  approach, which I refer to as integral Semiotic Realism, as a distinction supportive of resolving the cosmological divide. An integral cosmology is then proposed based on the post-metaphysical injunction prescribed by the semiotic enactment of Planetary Civilization through the signification of Integral Rational Spirituality." 


=Excerpt=

==[[Edgar Morin's Methodology for Complex Thought]]==

Tim Winton:

"Edgar Morin's ... approach is not  to work primarily from the establishment of a philosophical position or theoretical framework. He deliberately constructs a Method , a kind of ‘active inquiry’, which takes as its central and foundational rational the refusal to be pinned down in dualistic thought.

‘Morin’ s broader vision of complexity and of thought explicitly connects reason and emotion, wisdom and compassion, idealism and realism, and the other oppositions that have been created and are representatives of what he calls “ simple thought.”’ (Montuori, 2004)

Through the idea of complexity and the discipline of Complex Thought, Morin, then, is contributing an essential component to integrative work. His Method  points out the subtle
interpreted  duality created through the establishment of epistemological and ontological positions, no matter how ‘nondual’ they may intend to be in-and-of themselves. This approach gives us a means of resolution. 


As Alfonso Montouri points out, 

- “Morin’s method outlines a way of approaching inquiry that does not reduce or separate, and does justice to the complexity of life and experience.” (Morin,2008) 


For Morin understanding complexity becomes the means of integrating dualities. And as do both Wilber and Bhaskar, he understands the importance of the connection between nonduality, the deep meaning of a spirituality so situated, and the provision of an integrated world. Montuori states that The fact that the introductory chapter to the first volume of [Morin’s] Method is called The Spirit of the Valley, drawing explicitly on the Taoist tradition, is significant in many ways, pointing to what Morin calls the dialogical (not dialectical because there is no guaranteed resolution) relationship between traditional polarities, and to a deep, underlying spiritual thread running throughout Morin’s work. It reminds us that the spiritual is always present in his work, but in a far subtler way than has become the norm these days." (2004)

(https://www.academia.edu/5395136/The_Meaning_of_Planetary_Civilisation_Integral_Rational_Spirituality_and_the_Semiotic_Universe)

[[Category:Integral Theory]]