
'''Four meaures for Relocalization and four measures for reruralization.'''

From an essay by, "Two Baskets for Change", by Mariarosa Dalla Costa.

URL = http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta2.pdf

=Text=


==Introduction==

Mariarosa Dalla Costa:

"If I had two baskets, one with which to re-localize development and the
other with which to re-ruralize the world, in the first I would place four
things: 

1) the right of access to the land; 

2) short-cycle farming and one that is sustainable in every respect; 

3) the practice (one that is growing in numerous countries) of the recuperation of varieties that
have fallen into disuse as well as of their modalities of cultivation and consumption; and 

4) a focus on policies that contrast the extroversion of development. 

In the second basket I would put another four things:

1) the diffusion of an agriculture such as the one defined above; 

2) the adequate remuneration of farming, including that practiced in more
challenging areas; 

3) the reintroduction of diffuse free-range livestock rearing; 

4) the promotion of a culture, but above all of a politics, that
gives pride of place once more to an agriculture redefined in this
manner."


=Details=


==The Basket or Relocalization==

"Obviously these factors only provide a bottom layer for the
baskets. Let us take a closer look at each of them.

'''1. The right of access to the land in the areas in which one lives:'''

this is obviously a matter that needs to be articulated
according to the geographical context in question. For areas
in the global South it means above all the ability to have or
maintain access to the land (through common rights or
individual ones, for small and medium-sized farmers) against
the continual expropriation practiced by large investors or the
state. The availability of land where life is guaranteed by
subsistence agriculture or via small-scale sustainable
agriculture makes the difference between the possibility or
impossibility of survival. If in various regions of the world the
scope of this problem gestures to the necessity of agricultural
reforms that have always been promised but rarely enacted, it
is nonetheless important to recall the gains achieved on this
terrain by the large-scale movements for the appropriation of
land, above all the Sem Terra who in the last 20 years have
contributed to the settling of 250,000 rural families on 8
million hectares in almost all Brazilian states. For developed
areas, beginning with Italy, access to the land requires above
all that the land has maintained a price that is accessible to
the farmer. In our case this is no longer possible when land is
particularly close to important tracts of highway or when there
are tourist-industry interests or other profitable investments
nearby, thanks to which the price rises so much that it is no
longer accessible or amortizable within an agricultural
process. This has been a typically Italian phenomenon, one
that, due to the greater availability of land, is not as much the
case in Spain, France or Germany. Yet in our case this is an
added obstacle for the possibility of a diffuse presence of
agriculture. And, obviously, a problem that aggravates the
matter and is substantial in our area with respect to the issue
of access to the land is that of a justly remunerative
agricultural income, especially when managing a type of
farming that is other than the productivist and industrial kind.
Another important aspect of being able to access the land is
that relative to the lands upon which there persist practices of
common usage (often this dates back to medieval times), a
necessary corollary of the breeding of livestock and farming.
These lands are diminishing in Italy as well, where they are
sold or hoarded by private companies or individuals also
thanks to negligence in their cataloguing or in the
conservation of land records.


'''2. Short-cycle farming''', one that is sustainable across its various
dimensions, is the only kind capable of guaranteeing
freshness, authenticity, and the traceability of the food.
Freshness and authenticity have increasingly become a part
of the demands made by movements of farmers and citizens
in the most developed regions, beginning with the United
States where from the Atlantic coast to the Pacific “fresh and
genuine food for the community’s nutritional security”8 has
been the banner of networks like the Community Food
Security Coalition. Another emerging demand has been that
the food be produced and distributed with methods and
organizational networks that can guarantee moderation in its
pricing and therefore its accessibility for customers with less
income at their disposal. To this end agreements are
stipulated between the producer and the consumer, according
to which an amount of agricultural product is purchased in
advance with cash or through offering other forms of labour in
exchange. Another important phenomenon that, significantly,
is growing in the United States (but not only) in past years, is
the possibility for producers to directly sell their products in
farmers’ markets in cities without resorting to costly
intermediaries. 

In Italy fair trade buying associations have
been growing. GAS (Gruppi di Acquisto Solidale), which has
roughly 2 million members, has adopted 5 basic principles: 

1) respect for human beings, so the purchased products cannot
be the result of social injustice but rather must actively
contribute to a sustainable social development; 

2) respect for the environment, or the choice of products obtained in a
manner that is respectful of nature while trying ensure the
least possible transportation; 

3) respect for health, which
comes in the form of choosing organic products; 

4) solidarity, or choosing to purchase from small producers who otherwise
would be crushed by larger ones; 

5) respect for flavour, as a
part of returning to natural rhythms by eating seasonal foods
such as organic products, which beyond having greater
nutritional capacity are notoriously better tasting. It is
significant that the new ethic that is appearing involves the
economic, social, and environmental aspects of the question.
Here too there is the desire to declare “ya basta” in the face
of the modalities of this kind of development and their
consequences, the desire to affirm other relations. In this way
initiatives such as that of the [prezzo sorgente], or ensuring a
registered designation of origin, including the new forms of
local designation, (De. Co., or “Denominazione comunale”, is
a simple and inexpensive method created by the
municipalities) guarantee transparency and traceability,
valourize the location of production against the invisible or
uncertain place of origin, and valourize the locality of
production and the difference of relations that flow from it,
not only between producers and consumers, but between
citizens. These practices obviously re-familiarize humanity
with the local, which is valourized as the fragment of a
common good and therefore as something accessible to
everyone.


'''3.''' The series of projects in many countries that for some time
have been organizing in order '''to recuperate varieties of
foodstuffs''', and their relative methods of cultivation and
preparation, that are at risk of being forgotten or becoming
extinct. This is a reclaiming of cultivation, of cultures and of
knowledges against the disappearance of varieties and the
9 “Prezzo sorgente” is an expression that emerges from social movements, and
refers to the original price or source price, that which is paid to the farmer.
The proposal is that this be noted on the product’s label in order to discourage
unjustified price hikes during the phases in which the product is transformed
and commercialized. In this way the consumer can be aware of such price
increases if they have occurred. The problem is that the farmer is paid very
little and yet the end consumer pays a great deal due to the unjustified profits
that are eked out during intermediate phases. Such distortions and price
increases are caused by “long cycle” agricultural production.
standardization and the obliteration of flavour imposed by the
nutritional dictatorship of the multinationals. This is
connected to the right to variety (beginning with the variety
offered by the land upon which one lives), which in turn is tied
not only to the right to a variety of taste but also to the
greater nutritional potential of a varied diet and the greater
nutritional security that this provides considering the risk of
species becoming subject to disease. In Italy in the most
recent years, together with an emerging interest in the
revalorization of some partially forgotten species, within the
context of Civiltà Contadina, the activity of the Seed Savers is
also growing.10 Yet without defining themselves as such,
elderly people and farmers also act as seed savers, seized as
they are with the preoccupation of “prolonging” the life of
varieties of fruit and vegetables that have been absent for
years from the catalogues of seed companies. Young women,
with the ancient love for the reproduction of life, are seed
savers as well. If some varieties lend themselves to being
commodified in different regions others do not, as they might
not be able to survive the trip, and therefore in such cases
only the locality and the regionality of production and
distribution could offer the pleasure of seeing and enjoying
these species. Associations such as Pomona that are
dedicated to the recuperation of ancient fruit also
demonstrate another process these practices address: that of
the survival of animal species that do so through the
consumption of endangered fruit. The re-localization of
development, therefore, geared towards the recuperation of
some of the immense richness not only of vegetable, but also
of animal biodiversity.


'''4. The necessity of revealing the falseness and to contrast the
abuses of a neoliberalism''' that wishes to simply impose on all
countries the erasure of borders for the benefit of a
dictatorship of the strongest, the extroversion of development
(that is, a strong orientation towards exports), and above all
agricultural development (with the pretext of reducing
international debt). In reality this model of development
cannot but increase foreign debt and with it the difficulties for
nourishment and for life. Next to the construction from below
of a new agriculture there should also be the reclamation of a
political regulation that promotes, protects and valourizes a
local, regional and national agriculture (the qualification of
such terms must be contextualized however) that is
sustainable in every aspect, aimed at the maximum
promotion of self-sufficiency as well as the conservation of
biodiversity and the diversification of cultivation, all aspects
that are subtended to the perspective of food sovereignty
which alone can offer a guarantee against the growth of
foreign debt. Food, as a fondamental rule for and right of of
citizens in the North as well as in the South, must not only be
available, but above all it must not be alien to the history and
the geographical context of those consuming it. Therefore,
imports or exports, instead of constituting the driving axis of a
nutritional system, ought to be a subsidiary measure with
respect to that which cannot be produced locally or that which
constitutes an excess.


==The Basket or Rerulization==

"As for the items placed in my basket with which one could figuratively
re-ruralize the world, let us take a closer look at these.


'''1. The spread of an agriculture that is sustainable and diversified
in every respect.''' In order to be able to spread, this farming
must be oriented towards the creation of the maximum
possible number of jobs and therefore to the refusal of the
industrial model and the logic of the concentration of industry
which is its bearer. Therefore an agriculture that is not only
organically, but also socially oriented.


'''2. A type of agriculture with these characteristics ought to be
maintained even in areas where the land presents particular
difficulties''', along with economic incentives that could assist in
the remuneration of greater work. A landscape without
agriculture is, in fact, a landscape with less life. Yet the
landscape is a common good, and it makes sense therefore
that everyone make it their responsibility.


'''3. The resumption of a widespread free range raising of livestock
as a crucial element of agriculture''', allowing the animals to
graze, allowing herbivores to remain such, and maintaining in
this manner the fertility of the land through organic
fertilization. The reflections, honed and practiced by François
Dufour, beginning with not keeping more animals than that
which the land which one has access to can sustain, seem
quite illuminated to me.


'''4. The promotion of a culture, a diffusion of experiences of self-organization,'''
the appeal for politics that concretely sustain
the possibility of a broad agricultural re-conversion. In
developed regions in particular, after the phase of Fordism
and then post-Fordism in which agriculture was first
considered the poor sister and then a degenerate daughter of
large-scale industry, it is necessary to ensure a primary role
for agriculture, one which it has had and which it must
continue to have in human history. This must occur by
allowing agricultural practices access to the means that can
allow it to re-convert itself in its entirety to an agriculture that
is healthy and sustainable in all of its aspects, the social one
above all. In different situations one might discover that, as
my students tell me, many people, instead of considering
spending their lives amidst paper and plastic and in front of a
computer, want to be farmers. Thus from the earth there has
also begun to germinate a new imaginary."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta2.pdf)


[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Villages]]