
'''= Unvirtual Us: research project by Daniel Verhoeven: "Is interplay between virtual and real world communities creating inequality or not?".'''

URL = https://unvirtual.us/about/

=Description=

Daniel Verhoeven:

"The degree of social inequality is seen by me as a function of the social structure. Periods that will be discussed: the hunter-gatherers, possibly the late Middle Ages, and the period after the invention of printing, but the main part will be the period 1960-1990 and the period after 2000 when the social media emerged and became influential.

A brief analysis of the hunter-gatherer society serves as a baseline measurement and reference. Reference because various scientists such as Richard Wilkinson, Kate Picket, Robin Dunbar and Frans De Waal point out that our brain has mainly developed during the period when we, as groups of hunter-gatherers, roamed the globe. This period spans 90% of our presence on this planet.

The intention is always to show the basic social structure of a certain society. Although, for example, I mainly rely on anthropological research among hunter-gatherers, I am in fact only interested in the sociology of hunter-gatherers. This is the level at which I view and compare the processes.

Knowing that ecology played an enormous role in their lives, but that I cannot dwell on that is a generalization, which is regrettable, but which would also distort the sociological picture. This also eliminates the differences between the groups on the different continents. This limitation to one level is necessary because (1) multiple levels can only be managed by extensive teams and (2) if one starts measuring with elements of different levels, one naturally cheats. This also has to do with the complexity of people and their social structures1.

My working method is inspired on the one hand by C. Wright Mills’ critique of “abstract empiricism” and on the other hand it is an interpretation of the dynamic structuralism of Jean Piaget and the second generation of dynamic structuralists around Heinz Von Foerster, also called second-order cybernetics.

I will describe each structure in some 20-30 pages. This natural language text serves then as a source for a formal coding of the key processes and states and their links with one another, that define the actual social structure."
(https://unvirtual.us/about/)


[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Research]]