
=More Information=

==Bibliography==

Biblio on measures of value, compiled by P2PValue [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g32DWkpVj-k7Dc1N3ByAm]:

Arthur, B. W. (1994). Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy. U. Michigan Press.

Arvidsson, A. and Peitersen, N. (2013). The ethical economy. Columbia University Press.

Barbrook, R. (1998). The Hi-Tech Gift Economy. FirstMonday, Volume 3, Number 12 - 7 December 1998     

Bauwens, M. (2005). The political economy of peer production. CTheory, 1.

Bruns, A. (2008) Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life, and beyond: from production to produsage. New York, Peter Lang.

Ghosh, R.A. (1998). Cooking Pot Markets: an economic model for the trade in free goods and services on the net, First Monday (3)3, March 1998.

Katz, M. L., & Shapiro, C. (1985). Network externalities, competition, and compatibility. The American economic review, 424-440.

Kelty, C. M. (2008). Two bits: The cultural significance of free software. Duke University Press.


Lerner, J, and J. Tirole. (2002). Some simple economics of open source. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 50(2): pp. 197-234.


Muegge, S. (2013). Platforms, Communities, and Business Ecosystems: Lessons Learned about Technology Entrepreneurship in an Interconnected World. TIM Review, February 2013.

OECD (2013), "Measuring the Internet Economy: A Contribution to the Research Agenda", OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 226, OECD Publishing.
doi: 10.1787/5k43gjg6r8jf-en

Ostrom E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge Univ Pr.


Raymond, E. S. (2001). The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on linux and open source by an accidental revolutionary. O'Reilly Media.

Rullani, E. (2011). L’economia della conoscenza nel capitalismo delle reti. Sinergie rivista di studi e ricerche, (76).

Stalder, F. (2011). Digital Commons. In: Keith Hart, Jean-Louis Laville, Antonio David Cattani (eds). The Human Economy: A World Citizen’s Guide. Cambridge, UK, Polity Press.


Weber,  S. (2004). The success of open source. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Wenger, E., Trayner, B., and de Laat, M. (2011) Promoting and assessing value creation in communities and networks: a conceptual framework. Rapport 18, Ruud de Moor Centrum, Open University of the Netherlands.


Von Hippel, E. & von Krogh, G., 2003. Open source software and the “private-collective” innovation model: Issues for organization science. Organization science, 14(2), pp.209–223.

Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & Laat, M. de. (2011). Promoting and assessing value creation in communities and networks: A conceptual framework. Available at URL: http://www.knowledge-architecture.com/downloads/Wenger_Trayner_DeLaat_Value_creation.pdf


==Bauwens==

Arvidsson, A., Bauwens, M., & Peitersen, N. (2008). The crisis of value and the ethical economy. Journal of Futures Studies, 12(4), 9–20.

Bauwens, M. (n.d.). P2P and Human Happiness.

Bauwens, M. (1996). Spiruality and technology: exploring the relationship. First Monday, 1(5).

Bauwens, M. (2005). P2P and Human Evolution: Peer to peer as the premise of a new mode of civilization. Ensaio, Rascunho, 1–73.

Bauwens, M. (2006). Le Peer to Peer : Vers un Nouveau Modèle de Civilisation.

Bauwens, M. (2006). The political economy of peer production. Post-Autistic Economics Review, (37), 33–44.

Bauwens, M., Sussan, R., Evolution, H., Summary, E., Sociology, T., Framework, T., & Capitalism, C. (n.d.). Peer to Peer and Human Evolution, 1–190.

Laffan, L. (2012). A New Way of Measuring Openness: The Open Governance Index. Technology Innovation Management Review, (January), 18–24.

P2P Foundation. (2012). Synthetic Overview of the Collaborative Economy. ( ?? Journal of chromatographic science (Vol. 51, p. 346). doi:10.1093/chromsci/bms216 ?? )

==Benkler==

===On commons===

Benkler, Y. (1997). Overcoming agoraphobia: building the commons of the digitally networked environment. Harv. JL & Tech., 287, 1–113.

Benkler, Y. (1998). The commons as a neglected factor of information policy. 26th Annual Telecommunications Research …, 1–28.
Benkler, Y. (1999a). Free as the air to common use: First Amendment constraints on enclosure of the public domain. NyuL Rev., 250(1918), 354–446.

Benkler, Y. (1999b). From consumers to users: Shifting the deeper structures of regulation toward sustainable commons and user access. Fed. Comm. LJ, 52(3).

Benkler, Y. (2000). Property Commons and the First Amendment: Toward a Core Common Infrastructure. Brennan Center for Justice, New York University …, 1–84.

Benkler, Y. (2001). The battle over the institutional ecosystem in the digital environment. Communications of the ACM, 44(2), 84–90.
Benkler, Y. (2003). The political economy of commons. Upgrade: The European Journal for the …, 6(3).

Benkler, Y. (2004). Commons-Based Strategies and the Problems of Patents. Science, 305, 15–16.

Benkler, Y. (2011). Between Spanish Huertas and the Open Road: A Tale of Two Commons?, 1–24.

Benkler, Y. (2013). Commons and Growth : The Essential Role of Open Commons in Market Economies, (Cambridge 1990), 1499–1555.

===On peer-production===

Algan, Y., Benkler, Y., Morell, M. F., & Hergueux, J. (2014). Cooperation in a Peer Production Economy Experimental Evidence from Wikipedia. … and Economics, Milan, ….

Benkler, Y. (2002). Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm. The Yale Law Journal.

Benkler, Y. (2004). Peer Production and Cooperation. In M. Latzer & J. M. Bauer (Eds.), Handbook on the Economics of the Internet (pp. 1–35). Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Benkler, Y. (2005). Essay Sharing Nicely : On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production, 273–358.

Benkler, Y. (2006). The Wealth of Networks. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

Benkler, Y. (2010). Law, policy, and cooperation. Government and Markets: Toward a New Theory of ….

Benkler, Y. (2013). Practical Anarchism: Peer Mutualism, Market Power, and the Fallible State. Politics & Society, 41(2), 213–251. doi:10.1177/0032329213483108

Benkler, Y., & Nissenbaum, H. (2006). Commons-based Peer Production and Virtue*. Journal of Political Philosophy, 14(4), 394–419.

Benkler, Y., Shaw, A., & Hill, B. M. (2013). Peer Production: A Modality of Collective Intelligence. Mako.cc, 1–31.

Rand, D. G., Pfeiffer, T., Dreber, A., Sheketoff, R. W., Wernerfelt, N. C., & Benkler, Y. (2009). Dynamic remodeling of in-group bias during the 2008 presidential election. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(15), 6187–91. doi:10.1073/pnas.0811552106


===Other issues===

Benkler, Y. (1997). Overcoming agoraphobia: building the commons of the digitally networked environment. Harv. JL & Tech., 287, 1–113.

Benkler, Y. (1998). Communications infrastructure regulation and the distribution of control over content. Telecommunications Policy, 22(3), 183–196.

Benkler, Y. (1999). Free as the air to common use: First Amendment constraints on enclosure of the public domain. NyuL Rev., 250(1918), 354–446.

Benkler, Y. (2000a). Constitutional Bounds of Database Protection: The Role of Judicial Review in the Creation and Definition of Private Rights in Information. SSRN Electronic Journal, (1). doi:10.2139/ssrn.214973

Benkler, Y. (2000b). Unhurried View of Private Ordering in Information Transactions, An. Vand. L. Rev., 2063–2080.

Benkler, Y. (2001). Siren Songs and Amish Children: Autonomy, Information, and Law. NYUL Rev., 23–113.

Benkler, Y. (2002a). Intellectual property and the organization of information production. International Review of Law and Economics.

Benkler, Y. (2002b). Some economics of wireless communications. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 16(1).

Benkler, Y. (2003). Through the looking glass: Alice and the constitutional foundations of the public domain. Law and Contemporary Problems, 1257.

Benkler, Y. (2009). Sharing, Trading, Creating Culture. Science, 324(April).

Benkler, Y. (2011a). Free Irresponsible Press: Wikileaks and the Battle over the Soul of the Networked Fourth Estate, A. Harv. CR-CLL Rev., 1–69.

Benkler, Y. (2011b). Networks of power, degrees of freedom. International Journal of Communication, 5(May 2010), 721–755.

Benkler, Y. (2011c). WikiLeaks and the PROTECT-IP Act: a new public-private threat to the Internet commons. Daedalus, 154–164.

Benkler, Y. (2012). OPEN WIRELESS VS. LICENSED SPECTRUM: EVIDENCE FROM MARKET ADOPTION. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 26(1).

Benkler, Y., & Lessig, L. (1943). Will technology make CBS unconstitutional? Net Gains, 1–3.

Benkler, Y., & Roberts, H. (2013). Social Mobilization and the Networked Public Sphere: Mapping the SOPA-PIPA Debate. Berkman Center …, 7641.

Kapczynski, A., Chaifetz, S., Katz, Z., & Benkler, Y. (2005). Addressing Global Health Inequalities: An Open Licensing Approach for University Innovations. Berkeley Tech. LJ.

==Surveys on FLOSS==

Bonaccorsi, A., Giannangeli, S., & Rossi, C. (2006). Entry Strategies Under Competing Standards: Hybrid Business Models in the Open Source Software Industry. Management Science, 52(7), 1085–1098. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1060.0547

Bonaccorsi, A., & Rossi, C. (2004). Altruistic individuals, selfish firms? The structure of motivation in Open Source software. First Monday, 9(1).

Bonaccorsi, A., & Rossi, C. (2006). Intrinsic motivations and profit-oriented firms in open source software: Do firms practise what they preach. The Economics Of Open Source Software Development, 18(4), 84–109. doi:10.1007/s12130-006-1003-9

David, P. a., & Shapiro, J. S. (2008). Community-based production of open-source software: What do we know about the developers who participate? Information Economics and Policy, 20(4), 364–398. doi:10.1016/j.infoecopol.2008.10.001

David, P., Waterman, A., & Arora, S. (2003). FLOSS-US the free/libre/open source software survey for 2003. … . edu/group/floss-us/report/FLOSS-US ….

Ghosh, R. (2003). Understanding free software developers: Findings from the FLOSS study. In J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, K. Lakhani, & S. Hissam (Eds.), Perspectives on free and open source software (pp. 1–23). O’Reilly.

Ghosh, R. A., Krieger, B., Glott, R., & Robles, G. (2002). Free / Libre and Open Source Software : Survey and Study Deliverable D18 : FINAL REPORT Part 2B : Open Source Software in the Public Sector : Policy within the European Union (p. 29).

Gonzalez-Barahona, J. M., Robles, G., Andradas-Izquierdo, R., & Ghosh, R. A. (2008). Geographic origin of libre software developers. Information Economics and Policy, 20(4), 356–363. doi:10.1016/j.infoecopol.2008.07.001

Hars, A., & Ou, S. (2001). Working for free? Motivations of participating in open source projects. System Sciences, 2001. Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2001, 00(c), 1–9.

Haruvy, E., Wu, F., & Chakravarty, S. (2005). Incentives for developer’s contributions and product performance metrics in open source development: an empirical exploration.

Krishnamurthy, S. (2006). On the intrinsic and extrinsic motivation of free/libre/open source (FLOSS) developers. Knowledge, Technology & Policy, 18(4), 17–39. doi:10.1007/s12130-006-1002-x

Lakhani, K., & Hippel, E. Von. (2003). How open source software works:“free” user-to-user assistance. Research Policy, 32(July 2002), 923–943.

Lakhani, K., Wolf, B., Bates, J., & DiBona, C. (2002). The Boston Consulting Group hacker survey. Boston Consulting Group.

Lakhani, K., & Wolf, R. (2005). Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source software projects. In J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. Hissam, & K. R. 

Lakhani (Eds.), Perspectives on free and open source software (pp. 1–27). MIT Press.

Robles, G., Scheider, H., Tretkowski, I., & Weber, N. (2001). Who is doing it? A research on libre software developers. Research Paper, TU Berlin, August, (August).

Shah, S. K. (2006). Motivation, Governance, and the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development. Management Science, 52(7), 1000–1014. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1060.0553

Shimizu, H., Iio, J., & Hiyane, K. (2004). The realities of Free/Libre/Open Source Software developers in Japan and Asia. First Monday, 9(11).

Von Hippel, E. (2007). Horizontal innovation networks--by and for users. Industrial and Corporate Change, 16(2), 293–315. doi:10.1093/icc/dtm005

Von Krogh, G. (2003). Open-Source Software Development. MIT Sloan Management Review, 44(3), 14–18.

Von Krogh, G., Spaeth, S., Haefliger, S., & Wallin, M. (2008). Open Source software: what we know (and do not know) about motives to contribute. DIME-DRUID Fundamental on Open …, 38(38).

Ye, Y., & Kishida, K. (2003). Toward an understanding of the motivation of open source software developers. In Software Engineering, 2003. Proceedings. 25th International Conference on. IEEE, 2003. (pp. 419–429).

==Value in management==

Adler, P., & Kwon, S. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of Management Review, 27(1), 17–40.

Bowman, C., & Ambrosini, V. (2000). Value Creation Versus Value Capture: Towards a Coherent Definition of Value in Strategy. British Journal of Management, 11(1), 1–15. doi:10.1111/1467-8551.00147

Crowston, K., Howison, J., & Annabi, H. (2006). Information systems success in free and open source software development: theory and measures. Software Process: Improvement and Practice, 11(2), 123–148. doi:10.1002/spip.259

Felin, T., & Hesterly, W. S. (2007). the Knowledge-Based View, Nested Heterogeneity, and New Value Creation: Philosophical Considerations on the Locus of Knowledge. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 195–218. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.23464020

Holste, J. S., & Fields, D. (2010). Trust and tacit knowledge sharing and use. Journal of Knowledge Management, 14(1), 128–140. doi:10.1108/13673271011015615

Kang, S., Morris, S., & Snell, S. (2007). Relational archetypes, organizational learning, and value creation: Extending the human resource architecture. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 236–256.

Lakhani, K., & Wolf, R. (2005). Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source software projects. In J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. Hissam, & K. R. 

Lakhani (Eds.), Perspectives on free and open source software (pp. 1–27). MIT Press.
Lee, S., Peng, M., & Barney, J. (2007). Bankruptcy law and entrepreneurship development: A real options perspective. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 257–272.

Lepak, D. P., Smith, K. G., & Taylor, M. S. (2007). Value Creation and Value Capture: a Multilevel Perspective. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 180–194. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.23464011

Lerner, J., & Tirole, J. (2002). Some simple economics of open source. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(2), 197–234.

Madison, M., Frischmann, B., & Strandburg, K. (2010). Constructing commons in the cultural environment. Cornell Law Review, 95, 657–710.

Nahapiet, J., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social Capital, Intellectual Capital, and the Organizational Advantage. The Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 242. doi:10.2307/259373

Normann, R., & Ramírez, R. (1993). From Value Chain to Value Constellation: Designing Interactive Strategy. Harvard Business Review, (July-August), 65–77.

Porter, M., & Kramer, M. (2011). The big idea: creating shared value. Harvard Business Review.

Preece, J., Abras, C., & Maloney-Krichmar, D. (2004). Designing and evaluating online communities: research speaks to emerging practice. Int. J. Web Based Communities, 1(1), 2–18.

Priem, R. L. (2007). a Consumer Perspective on Value Creation. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 219–235. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.23464055

Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. a., & Ireland, R. D. (2007). Managing Firm Resources in Dynamic Environments To Create Value: Looking Inside the Black Box. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 273–292. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.23466005

Stabell, C., & Fjeldstad, Ø. (1998). Configuring value for competitive advantage: on chains, shops, and networks. Strategic Management Journal, 19(November 1996), 413–437.

Tsai, W., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital and value creation: The role of intrafirm networks. Academy of Management Journal, 41(4), 464–476.

Vargo, S. L., Maglio, P. P., & Akaka, M. A. (2008). On value and value co-creation: A service systems and service logic perspective. European Management Journal, 26(3), 145–152. doi:10.1016/j.emj.2008.04.003

Wenger, E., Trayner, B., & Laat, M. de. (2011). Promoting and assessing value creation in communities and networks: A conceptual framework. URL: Http://www. Knowledge- ….



[[Category:P2P Accounting]]