'''* Book: Media Archaeology. Approaches, Applications, and Implications. Ed. by Erkki Huhtamo, Jussi Parikka. University of California Press, 2011'''

URL = http://www.ucpress.edu/book.php?isbn=9780520262744


=Description=

"This book introduces an archaeological approach to the study of media - one that sifts through the evidence to learn how media were written about, used, designed, preserved, and sometimes discarded. Edited by Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka, with contributions from internationally prominent scholars from Europe, North America, and Japan, the essays help us understand how the media that predate today’s interactive, digital forms were in their time contested, adopted and embedded in the everyday. Providing a broad overview of the many historical and theoretical facets of Media Archaeology as an emerging field, the book encourages discussion by presenting a full range of different voices. By revisiting ‘old’ or even ‘dead’ media, it provides a richer horizon for understanding ‘new’ media in their complex and often contradictory roles in contemporary society and culture."
(http://www.ucpress.edu/book.php?isbn=9780520262744)



=Contents=

1. Introduction: An Archaeology of Media Archaeology.
Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka


'''Part I: Engines of/in the Imaginary'''

2. Dismantling the Fairy Engine: Media Archaeology as Topos Study.
Erkki Huhtamo

3. On the Archaeology of Imaginary Media.
Eric Kluitenberg

4. On the Origins of the Origins of the Influencing Machine.
Jeffrey Sconce

5. Freud and the Technical Media: The Enduring Magic of the Wunderblock.
Thomas Elsaesser


'''Part II: (Inter)facing Media'''

6. The “Baby Talkie,” Domestic Media, and the Japanese Modern.
Machiko Kusahara

7. The Observer’s Dilemma: To Touch or Not to Touch.
Wanda Strauven

8. The Game Player’s Duty: The User as the Gestalt of the Ports.
Claus Pias

9. The Enduring Ephemeral, or The Future Is a Memory.
Wendy Hui Kyong Chun


'''Part III: Between Analogue and Digital'''

10. Erased Dots and Rotten Dashes, or How to Wire Your Head for a Preservation.
Paul DeMarinis

11. Media Archaeography: Method and Machine versus History and Narrative of Media.
Wolfgang Ernst

12. Mapping Noise: Techniques and Tactics of Irregularities, Interception, and Disturbance.
Jussi Parikka

13. Objects of Our Affection: How Object Orientation Made Computers a Medium.
Casey Alt

14. Digital Media Archaeology: Interpreting Computational Processes.
Noah Wardrip-Fruin

15. Afterword: Media Archaeology and Re-presencing the Past.
Vivian Sobchack


=Introduction=

Jussi Parikka:

"Media Archaeology is a book that focuses on the transdisciplinary theories and practices of understanding new and emerging media cultures through old media. Even that characterisation is a bit of a simplification, as media archaeology does not just aim to show that “there is nothing new under the sun”. Indeed, it is as interested in finding the “new in the old” as Siegfried Zielinski, German based media theorist, puts it. This gives a good indication of some of the ways in which media archaeology attempts to approach contemporary network culture. It offers critiques of the imaginaries surrounding our understanding of the “New Economy” of contemporary bit-based capitalism, as well as alternative genealogies to “how we got here” – in the midst of high-tech based social situation, where still some of our mediatic practices seem oddly archaic.

It is emblematic that a lot of the early media archaeology emerged in the 1990s, in the midst of the emerging hype concerning the Internet and digital culture. Instead of playing along to such enthusiastic voices claiming that it is “all changing” from atoms to bits, media archaeological art and theory turned the other way round – perhaps a bit like Marshal McLuhan had suggested in his idea of us always approaching the future through the rear view mirror. The reference to McLuhan is far from accidental – even to an extent that one can approach McLuhan as an early media archaeologist of sorts. In this vein, Arthur Kroker characterizes this book with his reference to McLuhan: “Where McLuhan’s Understanding Media ends, Media Archaeology actually begins. Refusing the often futile search for the eternal laws of media, Media Archaeology does something more difficult and rare. It literally brings the history of media alive by drawing into presence the enigmatic, heterogeneous, unruly past of the media—its artifacts, machines, imaginaries, tactics, and games. What results is a fabulous cabinet of (media) memories: the imaginary moving with kinetic frenzy, histories of what happens when media collide in the electronic space of the virtual, and stories about those strange interstitial spaces between analogue and digital.”

Geert Lovink has in another context said that media archaeology is a methodology of reading “against the grain” – both new media cultures, and traditional ways of seeing old media. In his characterization of this book and media archaeology, Richard Grusin says how these methodologies and theories “not only excavates the ways in which newer media work to remediate earlier forms and practices but also sketches out how older media help to premediate new ones."

This book attempts to give a good glimpse of what different traditions of media archaeology can contribute to our analyses of contemporary culture. It is far from a unified discipline, more like a cluster of different “schools” – and a thorough debate between these has not yet taken place. Part of media archaeology stems from new film history, part from German media theory with a strong emphasis on Friedrich Kittler’s way of understanding media materially; as important is the “variantology” project by Zielinski, and various ways of understanding cyclically media cultural changes (Huhtamo). Even the thesis concerning “remediation” by Bolter and Grusin can be seen related to this project. Media archaeology reaches towards many directions from film theory to software studies, from creative practice to ontologies of memory/storage in the digital age.

The book offers a rich view to a variety of topics from screen media to imaginary media and to software studies. For instance Casey Alt has a very insightful chapter on how computation became understood as a media machine through the emergence of object-oriented-programming. In addition, some of the implications for network culture analysis are approached in Jussi Parikka’s chapter on noise and non-communication – a certain kind of a media archaeology of tactiques and techniques of how communication has hindered, as part of military contexts or some other forms of interests of power. Hence, the more recent focus on viruses, worms and cyberwarfare can actually be seen through the earlier phases of for instance 19th century telegraphic communication, and how “safe communication” was already a big topic then. Tom Standage even labeled the 19th century era of networks as the “Victorian Internet” era.

Media archaeology bends itself to thinking about the past but also about how to understand contemporary massive distributed, dynamic and processual cultures – both as dynamic forces of creation as well as archival objects. Archival objects and processes of technical media culture from gramophones to cinema, and to software, is already problematic but when it comes down to attempts to register, record and pass-on the cultural heritage of network culture of distributed, P2P, we are yet in another dilemma. In this book, Wolfgang Ernst, Wendy Hui-Kyong Chun and for instance Noah Wardrip-Fruin address the various aspects of dynamic digital media as archival problems – challenges for memory. Now we have to face the task of future media archaeologists, scanning through the remains of networks that are not identifiable as specific objects but as distributed processes, as cultural practices of open peer-to-peer sharing."

=Excerpt=

From the introduction. by Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka:


"The advent of "new media" (in common parlance, a loose conglomeration of phenomena such as the Internet, digital television, interactive multimedia, virtual reality, mobile communication, and video games), has challenged many scholars to investigate the media culture of late modernity. Research agendas vary from network analysis to software studies; from mappings of the new empire of network economies to analyses of new media as "ways of seeing" (or hearing, reading, and touching). Efforts have been made to pinpoint where the "newness" of social networking, interactive gaming, or data mining lies and to lay the foundations for "philosophies" and "languages" of new media. For some researchers, the main concerns are social or psychological, while for others they are economical and ideological, or motivated by search for technological determinants behind the myriad manifestations of media.


As different as these approaches may be, studies of new media often share a disregard for the past. The challenges posed by contemporary media culture are complex, but the past has been considered to have little to contribute toward their untangling. The new media have been treated as an all-encompassing and "timeless" realm that can be explained from within. However, signs of change have begun to appear with increasing frequency. Numerous studies and collections addressing the media's past(s) in relation to their present have appeared in recent years. This influx of historically oriented media studies must be greeted with a cheer. Still, one cannot avoid noticing how little attention has often been devoted to defining and discussing methods and approaches. The past has been visited for facts that can be exciting in themselves, or revealing for media culture at large, but the nature of these "facts" has often been taken as a given, and their relationship to the observer and the temporal and ideological platform he or she occupies left unproblematized.


This book aims at amending the situation by introducing an approach-or a bundle of closely related approaches-that has come to be known as "media archaeology." Although this term does not designate an academic discipline (there are no public institutions, journals, or conferences dedicated to it), it has appeared in an increasing number of studies, and university courses and lectures have also been given under this heading. As their highly divergent syllabi and reading lists testify, there is no general agreement about either the principles or the terminology of media archaeology. Yet the term has inspired historically tuned research and is beginning to encourage scholars to define their principles and to reflect on their theoretical and philosophical implications. The purpose of this volume-the first collection of writings on media archaeology published in the United States-is to facilitate this process of self-identification and -definition.


No effort will be made to nail down "correct" principles or methodological guidelines or to mark fixed boundaries for a new discipline. Rather than positing an "orthodoxy," the book presents itself as an open forum for very different voices, hoping to trigger "polylogues" about the problems and prospects of this emerging field. It could be claimed that a compilation of texts that have already been published would have served this purpose. The editors have chosen a different path by soliciting new contributions from both seasoned and emerging scholars, asking them to look forward rather than backward and to reflect on their particular take on media archaeology. To set the stage, work that has already been done will be reviewed in this introduction, a tentative mapping of an "archaeology of media archaeology." Concentrating solely on cases where the words media archaeology have been explicitly enounced would have been too limiting. It is also important to acknowledge work that has not defined itself as "media archaeology" but nevertheless has shared similar interests and goals.


Michel Foucault's writings have been an important formative experience for many media archaeologists. However, there are other theoretical and critical contributions that have contained seeds of media archaeology. Theorists and historians such asWalter Benjamin, Siegfried Giedion, Ernst Robert Curtius, Dolf Sternberger, Aby Warburg, and Marshall McLuhan were all in some ways "media archaeologists" avant la lettre. More recently, the debate on new historicism has brought up themes and motifs that occupy media archaeologists as well. It could be claimed that media archaeology is new historicist in its essence, but this would be too gross a generalization. A wide array of ideas have provided inspiration for media archaeology. Theories of cultural materialism, discourse analysis, notions of nonlinear temporalities, theories of gender, postcolonial studies, visual and media anthropology, and philosophies of neo-nomadism all belong to the mix.


What is it that holds the approaches and interests of the media archaeologists together, justifying the term? Discontent with "canonized" narratives of media culture and history may be the clearest common driving force. Media archaeologists have concluded that widely endorsed accounts of contemporary media culture and media histories alike often tell only selected parts of the story, and not necessarily correct and relevant parts. Much has been left by the roadside out of negligence or ideological bias. For the media critic Geert Lovink, media archaeology is by nature a "discipline" of reading against the grain, "a hermeneutic reading of the 'new' against the grain of the past, rather than telling of the histories of technologies from past to present." Media archaeologists have challenged the rejection of history by modern media culture and theory alike by pointing out hitherto unnoticed continuities and ruptures. As a consequence, the area for media studies has been pushed back by centuries and extended beyond the Western world. On the basis of their discoveries, media archaeologists have begun to construct alternate histories of suppressed, neglected, and forgotten media that do not point teleologically to the present media-cultural condition as their "perfection." Dead ends, losers, and inventions that never made it into a material product have important stories to tell.


Media archaeology should not be confused with archaeology as a discipline. When media archaeologists claim that they are "excavating" media-cultural phenomena, the word should be understood in a specific way. Industrial archaeology, for example, digs through the foundations of demolished factories, boardinghouses, and dumps, revealing clues about habits, lifestyles, economic and social stratifications, and possibly deadly diseases. Media archaeology rummages textual, visual, and auditory archives as well as collections of artifacts, emphasizing both the discursive and the material manifestations of culture. Its explorations move fluidly between disciplines, although it does not have a permanent home within any of them. Such "nomadicism," rather than being a hindrance, may in fact match its goals and working methods, allowing it to roam across the landscape of the humanities and social sciences and occasionally to leap into the arts. Media archaeology may-and perhaps it should-develop into a "traveling discipline," to refer to an idea proposed by Mieke Bal."
(http://www.ucpress.edu/excerpt.php?isbn=9780520262744#readchapter1)






[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Books]]