
=Description=

A proposal by Sam Rose at
http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588

"For background, see this article on the "Faith Based Health Insurance" phenomenon
at http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/32630.php

The way this works is that "members send a monthly check, or "share," that
ranges from $200 to $400 to the plan or to members the plan designates with
"needs," or medical bills. The plans subtract overhead and administrative
expenses from the total collected and use the remainder to pay claims"

Members are "vetted" or qualified to join the "plan" based on a letter from
their clergy person verifying they are an active church member, and
trustworthy person."
(http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588)


=Commentary=

==Why such peer-based reform is needed for health care==

Sam Rose [http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588]:

"The Greeks and Romans had an early donation-based funding system for
health care , and funeral costs, that was tied to their guild system.

Modern "insurance", as a service in general was originally designed to
be a hedge fund, which means that it is an market enterprise. Our
modern insurance system was originally designed and formulated by
Lloyd's of London to hedge financial losses in shipping disasters.
Entrepreneurs would make a contract with the insurer to spread risk
out among everyone in the fund, no different fundamentally, than any
other hedge, or mutual fund.  This is a equitable solution for people
who launch into business ventures that contain a certain amount of
risk. They are launching into these ventures for profit first and
foremost, and they can employ the insurance hedge fund as an agent to
collectively spread risk across all of the people in their market
segment. They are at the whim of the greater market place, but both
sides are making decent bets, usually, and the insurer is guaranteeing
against to disaster up to a certain point, at a certain market rate.

To me, this does not sound like a good way to fund my health care
costs. I don't want to buy a share in a hedge fund that it pitted
directly against the market place, because what happens is that, as
the cost of health care increases, it costs more money to hedge our
bets against the health care markets. One problem is that health care
providers, and drug providers inflate costs, of course. But the bigger
problem is that volatile markets are no place for a vital need like
heatlh care funding. When health care funding is market driven, then
the fund managers are forced to start cutting out more and more
coverage to balance their hedge fund against the health care market
place. This is why they cover less and less, while you pay more and
more. The same dynamics apply as someone calculating the current costs
of replacing a ship and all of it's cargo, should it capsize and sink
in the ocean. Under US and State Laws, this type of hedge fund
commerce is understandably regulated like any other market.  It is a
market!

So, in my mind, the solution is simple, roll back to the ancient greek
and roman system of group/trade/community-based donation. Take the
money we putting towards health care costs off of the market, and give
it directly to people who need it. The same could be said for certain
types of disaster insurance. Look at how many people got screwed by
the insurance companies down in the Gulf after Hurricane Katrina. The
insurance companies scrambled to readjust to the markets, because they
are pitted against the markets, and the contracts people made with
them let the insurance companies loosely interpret what types of
"damage" happened, and whether they should pay claims or not. Frankly,
this is insane. What is the use of a group of people pooling money, if
some of them will be discluded from the the help they need, when it is
needed? This is the wrong way to leverage the power of groups for
solving vital human needs.  It's time to take our health and personal
welfare off of the market place, and into our own hands."
(http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588)
==Peer Plans and [[Co-Working]]==

Sam Rose [http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588]:

"So, what does this have to do with Coworking?

Well, this "church plan" shows a plausible legal international route to
sharing health care costs among a network of people, religious or otherwise.
These "church plan" participants are really just donating money to one
another, facilitated by their churches, and by "plan" coordinators. Might a
non-religious network of people also think about a way to pool money, and
route it to people who need it in this way? I think so.

The system that I envision here is:

   
1. Participation is based upon the trust metrics of others who are
already in the network (others "vouch" for you).
   
2. Money is pooled on the scale of coworking spaces. Pariticpants pay
a trusted volunteer in their local homebase coworking space
   
3. Verification of medical need happens on the scale of coworking
spaces, with the ability to appeal to the greater network shuld the local
coworking network fail to assist or address for some reason. Participants
may opt to bypass the network and send donations directly to people who are
appealing this way
   
4. Coordination of local spaces is done through a group of elected,
term-serving network orchestrators, who are dispersed around the network,
and who split up the labor in a diverse way, so that one local person does
not become the "lord and master" of their own local region. Other people are
elected to act as voluntary impartial mediators and conflict resolvers
   
5. P2P open identity based trust metrics help keep trust issues
transparent
   
6. All donated monies are totally transparent and accounted for, 100%

The idea here is that it is legal for us to give money to each other for
pretty much anything we want to, so it becomes a matter of figuring out how
we can give each other money in an equitable, not-for-profit way, that can
systematize some aspects, and can buil on inherent trust."
(http://groups.google.com/group/coworking/browse_thread/thread/668715b7b3114588)


[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]