* '''Book: The Media Ecosystem. What Ecology Can Teach Us about Responsible Media Practice. By Antonio López. Evolver, 2012.'''

=Description=

"In The Media Ecosystem, Antonio López draws together the seemingly
disparate realms of ecology and media studies to present a fresh and
provocative interpretation of the current state of the mass media—and its
potential future. López explores the connections between media and the
environment, arguing that just as the world's powers have seized and
exploited the physical territories and natural resources of the earth, so, too,
have they colonized the "cultural commons"—the space of ideas that everyone shares. He
identifies the root of the problem in the privileging of "mechanistic" thinking over ecological
intelligence, which recognizes that people live in a relationship with every other living thing on
the planet.

In order to create a more sustainable media ecosystem—just like the preservation of organic
ecosystems—we must reconnect our daily media activities to their impact on others and the
environment. To become "organic media practitioners," we must become aware of the impact of
media use on the environment; recognize media's influence on our perception of time, space, and
place; understand media's interdependence with the global economy; be conscious of media's
interaction with cultural beliefs; and develop an ethical framework in order to act upon these
understandings. Above all, López calls for media producers and consumers alike to bring a sense
of ritual and collaboration back to the process of communication, utilizing collective intelligence
and supporting a new culture of participation. Containing both wide-reaching analysis and
practical tips for more conscious media use, The Media Ecosystem is designed for all those who seek
a more sustainable future."


=Excerpt=


==Reoccupying the Collective Imagination==

Earth embodies a great spirit, of which we are all a part.

But alienated humans have colonized this planetary life
force. Working in service of corporate abstractions, they
have forsaken membership in the Earth community for
the power and privilege to exploit all its resources and
living subjects. Despite being children of Earth, they no
longer know from where they come. Instead they enclose
commonly shared resources, altering the chemistry of the
atmosphere and oceans in order to transform our biosphere
into a buyosphere. These ecological imperialists
cannibalize the living systems they depend on. Not only do
they subsist by eating the world, they colonize the media
in order to harvest the system’s most valuable resource:
human consciousness.

The corporate project of savage capitalism is a colonial
war on the spirit of Earth, anima mundi, the all-encompassing
life force of minerals, water, air, plants, animals,
and humans. Through creativity and the capacity to learn,
anima mundi represents the self-regulating power of the
world that guides evolution and life. It is both our ancient
past . . . and our ancient future.

Rather than acting as a parasite on its life force, human
culture should act as part of Earth’s immune system. Such an
immune system is encompassed by the cultural commons,
the uncommodified activities and mutual support that
are key to evolving our species. The cultural commons
includes food recipes, agricultural knowledge, spiritual
traditions, rituals, healing practices, language, everyday
skills, crafts, songs, games, political conventions, and philosophical
knowledge. In traditional land-based cultures,
the vast array of practices that enables them to survive
from year to year are passed between generations, sometimes
refined and built upon, but always based on the condition
that culture remain “all that we share.”

Characteristics of the cultural commons include reciprocity,
mutual support, participation, intergenerational
dialogue, self-sufficiency, and receptiveness. Ultimately
these practices and behaviors derive from knowledge
gleaned from inhabiting the biggest commons of all:
Earth. Therefore, the cultural commons is integral to sustainability
and is the last line of defense against the fencing
off and privatization of life on Earth. For a sustainable
cultural commons to thrive, we need organic media that
promotes green cultural citizenship and an Earth Democracy.

Coined by Vandana Shiva, Earth Democracy represents
the Indian concept of vasudhaiva kutumbakam, Earth family,
which encompasses the planetary community of beings
that comprise our living systems. Because corporate media
and gadget companies promote technological “progress”
while excluding living systems from our awareness, organic
media practitioners are charged with the responsibility of
incorporating an Earth perspective into their engagement
of media ecosystems.


The French theologian Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
argued that if the biosphere is all that contains life on
Earth, then a noosphere contains our collective consciousness.
The semiotic version of a noosphere is the semiosphere,
which is the totality of human signs and symbols. Anthropologist
Wade Davis envisions an ethnosphere, which contains
the totality of human cultural and linguistic diversity.
The space of mediated civic engagement refers to the public
sphere. The mediasphere is an all-encompassing media ecosystem
that mixes these various concepts: a mediated cultural
commons that facilitates planetary communications.

As a space of appearance that shapes our interconnected
reality, the mediasphere can make visible the spirit
of Earth. Imagine the healing and bridging potential of a
healthy, conscientious, democratic media space. Unfortunately,
the mediasphere is largely colonized by corporate
forces that propagate an unsustainable model of unlimited
growth and technological progress. This domination is represented
by the increased monopolization of traditional
mass media (TV, film, popular culture, news, etc.), the
commercialization of the internet, and an unsustainable
system of media gadget consumption. If unchecked, corporate
media’s power to shape our collective imagination
inhibits our ability to envision alternatives beyond a colonial
model of the world, in which a handful of megacorporations
privatizes the planetary commons at the expense of
the public good and living systems.

Resistance to corporate domination of the planet is
reflected in the struggle for control of the mediasphere
between the concentrated wealth holders of the planet
and the global majority. Colonized media coordinates
the interests of the corporate kleptocracy; decolonized
media emerges from daily practice and the communication
habits of people. The former is vertically structured
and controlled by a handful of multinational megacorporations;
the latter constitutes the horizontally networked
communications environment that makes up the rest of
the global mediasphere.

As such, we see hope in people’s movements around
the world: across the planet citizens take root, occupying
the last remnants of the commons. Through selfmediation
and network savvy, occupations glocalize their
struggles by linking local conditions with a larger globalized
network. In the process they engage in a kind of cultural
citizenship that is shifting planetary culture toward
an Earth Democracy. It’s represented by systems theorist
Ervin Laszlo’s call to consciously evolve civilization from
conquest, colonization, and consumerism to connection,
communication, and consciousness. In short, through
active engagement we can transition the cultural commons
from “my space” to “our space.”

Media’s collective “myth space” is shifting from the topdown,
transmission-based media of the Industrial Age to
ritual communication. Ritual draws on the ancient traditions
at the root of communication: commune, commonness,
community, and communion. Through the
occupation and reclamation of public spaces and the
cultural commons—done in the spirit of conviviality,
democracy, and connectivity—we can chart a new course
of planetary evolution. When these physical spaces hybridize
with global networks, they create an interconnected
swarm of raised consciousness.

To this end, we can instigate a kind of media occupation
that accelerates the emergent democratization of
our collective imagination. Occupy, a transient verb, represents
movement and transition in a number of ways:
(1) seizing possession or control, (2) dwelling or residing
in time or space, (3) residing as owner or tenant, (4)
engaging attention, and (5) filling or performing a function.
It should not be thought of as a noun or an end, but
rather an action. Occupation doesn’t mean taking over
the TV studios or editorial offices of corporate media.

It means staking a position as a node within a network
that transcends the top-down propaganda machines of
the past. Like the fluid media spaces we engage on a daily
basis, sites of occupation are provisional, liminal zones.
They politicize and socialize according to the form they
take. 


These five dimensions are expressed by the following
characteristics:

* Seizing control. The past five hundred years of colonization
have resulted in the corporate occupation and
theft of the global commons from Earth’s human and
nonhuman inhabitants. The consolidation of corporate
control is leveraged by the monopolization of the
symbolic order. Because media represent the planetary
communications commons, such a space must remain
open, transparent, diverse, and democratic. Occupying
the media means reclaiming the cultural commons and
envisioning alternate realities beyond the corporatocracy’s
vision of world enclosure.


* Dwelling in time or space. Colonization resulted in a disruption
of our ancient sense of time and space, breaking
our perceptual bonds with living systems. The antidote
requires that we engage a participatory cosmology that
reintegrates time and space into a shared reality that
extends to global ecology. Our minds and bodies are
designed to interact and engage with living systems. The
rupture with and virtualization of living systems necessitates
that we integrate our perception to acknowledge,
respect, and engage the nonhuman world. Media should
serve the purpose of making these connections more real
and significant.


* Residing. We reside within embedded landscapes, from
how we connect our senses with the environment to
the bioregions that feed and nurture us. Occupying the
media means the reinhabiting of not just public spaces
but living systems. By hybridizing local issues with global
movements, these actions glocalize the reclamation of the
commons. Media occupation extends beyond the internet,
cell phones, plazas, parks, and streets to how we inhabit
the landscape of our lifeworld and within our own sense
perception.


* Engaging attention. The colonizers’ most precious commodity
is our attention. Daily complacency and inattention enable the commodities system’s ecocidal assault on
the planet. Additionally, colonized media repackages and
sells the time we spend doing things with media. Through
media mindfulness we can allocate our energy through
the careful application of our attention so that we no
longer manufacture consciousness for the benefit of the
corporatocracy.


* Performing a function. When one occupies a specific
position within an organization (whether formal or informal),
it entails a set of practices, skills, relationships, and
expectations. It also means belonging to communities of
practice with unspoken guidelines and norms. Whether
working in traditional media companies and marketing
firms, producing activist media, participating in education,
or engaging in daily media practice, our global emergency
calls for explicit ethics. Green cultural citizenship means
articulating and thinking about the ethical orientation of
our work, and engaging in mindful practice founded on a
moral framework that puts the commons and the sacredness
of life at the center of our attention.

Media occupation means applying green cultural citizenship
to media ecosystems. Every media portal offers the
chance for individuals to make the choice of whether to
perpetuate the system of conquest and destruction or to
become part of a greater evolution in which consciousness
and connection build an Earth Democracy. Integral to this
evolution is the reintegration of ecological intelligence
into our daily practice, in particular how we use and make
media. Media occupation and green cultural citizenship
cannot be prescribed. There is no singular handbook
or manual to direct its activities; the form of its practice
comes through its doing and not through description or
ideology. These particular practices emerge in the same
way that dreaming merges creativity and learning to create
new pathways of understanding.

The one thing we can be sure of is that the planet calls
upon us to take action. Either we continue to reproduce
the colonizers’ planet-destroying delusions, or we restore
the mediasphere’s power balance by embracing the one
advantage we have: our collective imagination. As such,
we are too big to fail.

You are the ultimate mediator. As a medium of the
planet’s spirit, channel wisely."


=About the Author=

[[Antonio López]] is a media educator and journalist who has written for Tricycle, Punk Planet, In These
Times, High Times, The Brooklyn Rail, Reality Sandwich, and scores of other magazines, newspapers,
websites, and academic journals. His essays have been featured in several anthologies, including
Toward 2012: Perspectives on the Next Age and the MacArthur Foundation’s book series, Digital
Learning in the 21st Century. His first book on media and education, Mediacology, was published in
2008. López received professional training at the Center for Investigative Reporting in San
Francisco and studied peace and conflict studies at University of California, Berkeley. He received
an MA in media studies from the New School for Social Research and holds a PhD from the
School of Punk Rock. He currently resides in Rome, Italy, where he teaches media studies at an
American university and is completing his PhD in education for sustainability." 


=More Information=

* blog at http://mediacology.com .


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Media]]