

=Description=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: 

"At present, a common
practice at media companies is to involve so called reader reporters or even global
crowdsourcing platforms as for example the platform ‘Have your Say’ of BBC and
the similar platform of Al Jazeera (see for more details Newman 2009). These
crowdsourcing practices show similar advantages and disadvantages as already
described crowdsourcing platforms of companies in other industries: Media
companies can chose from a growing supply of user generated content and
contributions. However, they also have to cope with similar problems as other
industries, such as critical mass of contributors, qualified contributors, quality
control of contributions as well as selection, classification and evaluation of an
increasing quantity of content provided. Another approach for aggregation of
various user contributions is automatic aggregation as it is provided by Google
news. However, automatically aggregated user generated content does not meet
the requirements of high quality.

At present, the new challenge for media companies is how to include
valuable contributions of users from social media. Social media have become
important agenda setters and sources of alternative information and news (see
Ebermann et. al. 2009, Jarvis 2008, Newman 2009). During certain events, as for
example the Iran election in 2009, social media might even be the only source of
information (Ebermann et. al. 2009). As the recent Arabic revolution showed,
social media have become the arena for citizen activism of any kind and by that
also a prime source of information. In particular, eyewitness information is spread
mainly over Social Media. Jeff Jarvis used the term eyewitness journalism to
denote this phenomenon and noted in the Guardian (Jarvis 2008): “The witnesses
are taking over the news.”

Being the main channel for eyewitness news, Social Media are
fundamentally changing the way how news are broken (Newman 2009). They are
"… contributing to the compression of the ‘news cycle’" (Newman 2009) and are
putting more pressure on editors and journalists over what to report and when.
The need for selecting of relevant information and publishing in almost real time
has increased tremendously. Because of their growing importance in the news and
information creating cycle, many commercial and public media outlets have
started to use Social Media as complementary sources of information and
distribution channels (see the examples in (Ebermann et. al. 2009); (Newman
2009)). Furthermore, new approaches are being tested on how to include Social
Media into routine workflow of journalists (see case study in Ebermann et. al.
2009).

In context of these developments, a new crowdsourcing or rather crowd
harnessing approach that can be observed in the media practice and also by
independent users is the [[Social Media Content Curation]] approach. With the term
social media content curation the authors denote the new approach for creation of
content based on social media that goes beyond simple and automatic
aggregation. According to (Rosenbaum 2011), “… curation is about adding value
from humans who add their qualitative judgment to whatever is being gathered and
organized.” Rosenbaum (2011) furthermore adds: “Curation is about selection,
organization, presentation and evolution. While computers can aggregate content,
information or any shape or size of data, aggregation without curation is just a big pile of
stuff that seems related but lacks qualitative organization.” According to (Rotman et. al.
2011) curation deals with large corpora of content from diverse sources and
connotes the activities of identifying, selecting, verifying, organizing, describing,
maintaining, and preserving existing artifacts as well as integrating them into a
holistic resource. Curation thus, is a symbiosis of human and machine efforts. The
experts performing curation tasks are called curators, and in context of media
content curators. Rosenbaum (2011) cites in his book Rohit Bhargava's curation
manifesto, to describe a content curator as “… someone whose job it is not to create
more content, but to make sense of all the content that others are creating”.
Social-media content curation means creating of new media genres and
content based on input from social media. Curated social media content is an
innovative content genre that consists of original contributions from both online
sites of media outlets and social media such as tweets from microblogs, posts
from social networks and videos from video sharing platforms. The selected
original contributions are glued together to a story with background and context
information provided by the curator (author). Social-media curated content is
emerging in different formats such as books (for example the Quakebook was
created based on contributions from social-media related to the earthquake in
Japan), print articles, video and audio formats. Compared to the crowdsourcing
platforms that require input from human contributors, curated content is
assembled half-automatically from existing contributions of users in social media.
Another characteristic of social media content curation is the real-time collection,
selection and classification of contributions made by users."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 


=Examples=

"First examples illustrate that the concept of curation or crowd harnessing is
applicable also to other application areas. (Rotman et. al 2011) describe the
phenomena of content curration communities based on the case of the
Encyclopedia of Life. The Encyclopedia of Life (eol.org) is a cooperation project
among scientists and citizen scientists and has the ambitious goal to create an
encyclopedia of every known species on earth. Involved users curate existing
material about species available from other sources, classify it, embed it into
background and context information. The curation is performed either manually
or through extracting content automatically through APIs. One of the sources of
information for the encyclopedia is also Wikipedia.

Compared to existing crowdsourcing processes, content curation
introduces a new crowdsourcing or rather crowd harnessing approach. Instead of
acquiring a crowd and posting a problem, already existing contributions of users
in social media related to e certain topic, as for example a product, are curated.
This means they are collected, evaluated, classified and aggregated. Thereby, the
potential outcome is open and depends on the bottom-up contributions of user,
communities or other content providers.

The question is if semi-automatic collection of content, knowledge, ideas
and concepts that users worldwide publish in social media such as YouTube,
Facebook, Twitter and others might be the next development step in
crowdsourcing practices. Instead of pre-defining the topic for crowdsourcing,
potential topics in a certain field or industry might be observed and curated by
collecting and clustering the discussion taking place in social media communities.
In this way the limitation, that only ideas and problems based by the internal
company cognition might be overcome. Bottom up collection, classification,
integration and rating of independent contributions by users might result in ideas
nobody has thought of before."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]