'''In The Presence of Networks: A Meditation on the Architectures of Participation'''

-- John Hopkins (for the Pixelache 2007 festival publication),
Helsinki, 17 March 2007

=Summary=

<i>Architectures of Participation</i> is a compelling phrase that
attempts literally to frame a deeper fundamental of human existence.
This text is a preliminary meditation on that existence and its
profound presence.

On the immediate surface, the phrase suggests the grandiose, the
monumental, and the static and rigid hegemony of brick-and-mortar --
a suggestion that appears to contravene the deeply dynamic nature of
the broader continuum of human relation.  This continuum, generated
in part through participatory actions, is a far more fundamental
space that circumscribes much of our passing presence in this world.
We will have to dig deep to find the foundations.

Participation is one reductive descriptor that applies to the
infinite range of personal energies expressed and shared during our
lived be-ing.  Participation is a condition that does not leave our
lives until we leave our lives.  Participation starts when life
starts with the participatory synergy of reproduction.  This
prototypical participatory act is phenomenal in that the energies of
two human beings combine to create the presence of a third human
being.  Participation is the root of life.  Participation follows
life in the synergies of parent with child, friend with friend,
partner with partner, colleague with colleague, stranger with
stranger.  We participate in life, in living, every moment.

In the search for another way to understand participation, and to
understand the dynamic of social collaboration, it is critical to
leave materialism behind.  Or at least leave the limited
understanding of material expression as a defining Cartesian and
mechanistic concept and move instead into a universe defined by and
indeed comprising a dynamic configuration of energized flows.  This
is the basic assumption underlying the following thoughts.

Without this shared human presence, life would be a desert of
phenomenal natural events each more alienating in its
unpredictability than the previous.  It is through the challenging
dialectic of human relation that we find understanding, and,
ultimately, some meaning in our brief presence in this world.

Social systems frame or perhaps even comprise this fundamental
participatory nature of life.  These systems are characterized by
dynamic constellations of Selves desiring relevant interaction with
Others -- most apparently to enhance physical survival.  When the
system functions properly, the body wins the battle for a time; but
what happens to the spirit?

Individual isolation within or as an affect of social systems applies
at least a patina of madness to one's presence in the world.  It is
primarily the a-social or the mad who retreat voluntarily from all
human contact -- along with  those who are in pursuit of the
greater-than-social spirit.  The yogi, the hermit, the vision-quester
all retreat to isolation in the desert or on the mountain -- to those
special places where the brute energy flows of physical nature
actively drain the ordering life energy from the body system.  This
at the same time the chaotic natural flux allows the human spirit to
expand almost without limit, but at the definite expense of bodily
degeneration.  The spirit wins the battle for a time; the body loses.

So, while some humans withdraw to the empty places to watch stars and
clouds, let the spirit expand, and listen to the creaking groans of
the earth, the rest of us are left elbowing each Other in order to
get to the head of the queues for mating, food, and shelter.  We fall
back to the body fighting for dominance over the inevitable change of
dissolution and final death.

Along with the jostling and elbowing for position, small groups
gather to share their energy-draining experience and calculate the
relative benefits of coordinated survival.  Safety seems to inhabit
numbers, and numbers add up to enhanced reproductive odds.  Numbers
also frame the abstracted domain of technology and machines.
Machinic devices seem to help guarantee the dominance of one small
group over another by supplying some slight edge on reproductive
viability.  These social constellations create or mandate structures
of human relation which pool labor -- the cumulative expended energy
of individual lives -- while endeavoring to create
survival-technologies that will prolong the life of the collective.

A life-time is a limited period of organized organismic existence
that each of us is endowed with by means of some indeterminate
process.  A primary characteristic of life-time is its absolute and
unconditional limit: it runs out.  We apparently do have some degrees
of freedom to choose how we spend that life-time, so it becomes a
question of which pursuits, interests, necessities, and diversions
should populate our days.  We often forget the absolute limit to it
all, and proceed as though there is an unlimited amount of time.
There is not.  Each moment is a unique passing-through of experience,
expenditure of time, and, more importantly, expenditure of energy.
Each moment represents a small incremental dissolution in the
organized structure of our embodied presence, entropy gnawing at our
bones, energy flowing outwards.  Each moment's survival is an
expression of energy flowing from our bodies.  Yes, we spend more or
less time ensuring that we take energy into our systems to help
maintain the necessary order, but it is never enough: the battery
slowly runs down.  With this in mind, how then do we choose how to
expend our life-times, our dwindling energy stores?  Do we value
every moment as we should?

<i>Time moving (there is no Other time!) is energy (which is motion)
is change (all is) creativity (the foundational expression of energy)
is life (the Self is limited but desires immortality and, indeed, is
immortally transcendent).</i>

One major choice we face is how much energy to expend in the course
of interacting with the Others who populate our lives.  How much
face-time/energy do we spend on each human we come across.  How much
time do we spend on those remote Others we cannot see, or cannot
hear, or cannot touch?  How much time on those many Others who
populate the social system we live in.  The ones we cross paths with
in random and determinate movement?  The ones who forcefully find our
paths and deflect them from their natural trajectory?  The ones who,
by their gravity or Light, attract or repel us?

It is this process of giving and receiving energy that is the very
fabric of life-time, it accumulates to be the essence of our presence
and our life.

Starting from the unitary encounter of the Self with the Other, there
is, in the dynamic of the encounter, a sensation of flow (and of a
lack of flow). Many terms and instances in language and social
structure frame this sensation.  It is clear that when there is an
open and bi-directional flow between any two individuals that out of
the encounter comes an excess of energy -- a condition of
in-spiration following the encounter.  In the opposite case, in a
situation of blockages between the Self and the Other, the encounter
is often a loss of creative inertia -- where there is a direct
relationship between the sustained intensity of the engaged flow and
the creative possibilities coming from it.

If one looks at an accumulation of these binary human systems, each
with a potential energy surplus, there begins to appear two
structures.  The first is a simple network, where individuals in a
limited system are connecting, engaging, and being energized by those
encounters -- each encounter generating a surplus of energy.  The
network becomes the source of a powerful collective energy.

The second structure is an evolving social structure, which, by
nature, seeks to harness those energies, the energies generated from
these individual encounters, for the collective 'good.'  The
imposition of defined social pathways controls and harnesses the
movement of energy between individuals.  The fabric of a social
system is the accumulation of these proscribed pathways or
mediations.  Some of the energy invested in the process is tapped off
into the social system when the Self and the Other engage with each
other through these mediated pathways.  Each encounter mediated by
the imposed pathways is drained to a greater or lesser degree of its
vitality, at the same time that the social system is strengthened by
the accumulated energies.

What is this web of interacting flows that together are the
accumulated and energized field of a social system?  What is the
relationship between the individual, the engaged pair of humans, and
the collective in this space of flows?  Moreover, again, why do we as
individuals participate in this system, giving up major fragments of
our life-times to it?

By spending one's life-time in the labor of common good, the duration
of life time is apparently increased, statistically.  By giving
life-time to the social system, the social system reciprocates by
making available collective, though temporary, solutions to the
problem of death.  The process of many individuals surrendering their
own life-times to the collective creates a pool of energy that can
then be expended based on the desires of those who control the social
collective.  This energy bank, as it were, allows the collective to
engage in energy-intensive activities to secure its common survival
(though clearly the survival of any particular individual with in the
system is secondary!).  The larger and more complex that the social
system is, the greater the demands on the life-times of those who
chose to participate in it.  The pathways through which the social
system draws these energies from the individual become ever more
pervasive, and, at the same time, they recede into near-invisibility
compared to the over-riding issue of the survival of the social
system.

Does this process actually increase the quantity of life overall?  If
energy can be neither created nor destroyed, then the energy bank
represents a concentration of energy while a relative scarcity of
energy remains the condition of the individual.  Concentration and
rarefaction.

There are more things to meditate upon regarding the relationship
between the Self, the Other, and the social, but to close this short
text, and to return to the original phrase <i>Architectures of
Participation</i>, a few more questions should be posed among the
many possible.

What does it mean to participate?  Does it mean agreement in action?
Does it assume surficial homogeneity of intent?  Is there a
reciprocal exchange implicit in a participatory system?  What
characteristics do the prototypical participatory events in life
exhibit?  What mechanisms exist to guarantee the auspiciousness of
participation?  Is intuition a key filter in the process of energized
participation.  Can the individual life-energy contributed to the
social system by recalled?  Is there a collective means whereby the
social energy can be tapped to insure the good of each individual
(versus the corporate collective)?

Participation is a set of actions, tasks that might occur
back-to-back, face-to-face, or side-by-side.  The physical placement
of the bodies in relation to each Other gives fundamental
characteristics to the participation.  Whatever material form it
takes, participation precipitates a deeply seated change in
point-of-view, in internal energy states -- shifted by the energy of
the Other.  Participation affects an internal transformation that in
turn changes the world.


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Participation]]