'''= "The ethical code of conduct for investment professionals".''' [https://govclab.com/the-mensarius-oath/]

URL = https://govclab.com/the-mensarius-oath/ [https://govclab.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Mensarius-Oath-v2.0.pdf pdf]


=Description=

"The Mensarius Oath of ethical investing is an code of conduct for venture capitalists and other finance professionals designed to foster positive outcomes for humanity.

‘Mensarius’ is a Latin noun that refers to a banker or financier, and the tenets of the Mensarius Oath were based on the Hippocratic Oath used in the medical profession."


=The Text=

"The Mensarius Oath v2

As a financial professional investing with personal or investor capital, I pledge to uphold these values. If determined by myself or a panel of my peers that I have violated these values without reconciliation agreed between all involved parties, then I will voluntarily leave the industry.

Integrity: I vow to invest with integrity, ensuring my actions benefit humanity and consciously avoid harm to any parties.

Excellence: I commit to maintaining the highest professional standards, setting an exemplary ethical benchmark in finance.

Fairness: I endeavor to be fair in my dealings, standing against abuse of power, unfair advantage, seduction, corruption, or mistreatment.

Equality: I pledge to promote inclusivity and equitable treatment in all financial endeavors, consciously working to reduce inequality.

Respect: I promise to treat individuals and opportunities with the respect and the attention deserved in business interactions.

Transparency: I affirm to be transparent and honest in dealings with investors, founders, and colleagues.

Confidentiality: I swear to safeguard private, confidential, or personal information, keeping it safe from public or other unwanted disclosure.


(https://govclab.com/the-mensarius-oath/)
Growth: I am resolved to embrace feedback from clients and peers, committing to ongoing personal and professional growth."

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Social_Charters]]