'''= "Economic grwoth ... led to overuse of the global commons and insufficient provision of social commons".''' (MCC Berlin)

URL = https://www.mcc-berlin.net/
=Description=

"Our starting point is the "Climate & The Economy" perspective. We simultaneously explore two inherently different, and to some extent contradictory, aspects. Economic growth has brought prosperity and lifted many people out of poverty, but it has also led to overuse of the global commons and insufficient provision of social commons. To address this conflict, it is crucial to understand the economic drivers, the mechanisms of income and wealth distribution, and the political economy of countries and companies. We need policy options that can both stop global heating and enhance prosperity and human well-being."
(https://www.mcc-berlin.net/en/about.html)

=Status=

"MCC was founded in 2012 by Stiftung Mercator and the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) as a non-profit company (gGmbH). It is currently funded through core funding by Stiftung Mercator of 2.2 million euros per year on average, and project-related third-party funding, which totalled 1.4 million euros in 2020. Staffing reached about 65 employees in 2018, representing a total of 35 full-time equivalents, and numbers have stabilised at that level since then. Our economic and social science research is organised around seven working groups plus the cross-sectional Policy Evaluation Lab. The interface with politics (policy dialogue) is shaped by a Policy Unit. Important prerequisites for the successful interaction of research and policy dialogue are MCC's distinctive competencies in the areas of evidence synthesis and ethics."
(https://www.mcc-berlin.net/en/about.html)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Germany]]