
'''= caused by misalignment with planetary process'''

=Discussion=

Chor Pharn:

"Bypass becomes the new form of violence.
Not destruction—displacement.
Not invasion—irrelevance.
Not triumph—exclusion from timing.

China feels this pressure not because it is weak, but because it is the last remaining full body. Holding coherence inside a system that punishes wholeness is exhausting. Every conflict, every rerouting, every asymmetry lands inside its internal machinery and must be absorbed or redirected. It does not break, but each shock makes the body harder, more brittle, more determined to delay its decomposition for as long as possible. Coherence becomes a burden even as it remains a strength.

The Gulf experiences mesh-violence differently: through volatility in energy corridors, capital flows, climate belts, and geopolitical winds. Its synthetic organs adapt quickly, but speed has its own fragility. It must constantly remake itself to stay in rhythm, and each disruption tests how far synthetic capacity can stretch before it tears.

For America, the violence of the mesh comes through acceleration. Machine tempo moves faster than political memory; improvisation outruns institution; volatility outruns coherence. Its whalefall is not a collapse but a series of metabolic spasms—creative, destabilising, generative, erosive—all at once. It shakes the mesh even as it releases nutrients into it.

For the rest of the world, the violence is simpler: misalignment. They move on tempos they did not choose, in architectures they did not design, toward futures they cannot stabilise. They absorb shocks not because they are targeted, but because the system cannot slow down enough to protect them.

No single war will define this century. Instead, the century is already being shaped by the steady accumulation of small conflicts—none decisive, all consequential. They do not topple civilisations; they soften them. They do not redraw borders; they erode bodies. They do not end orders; they prepare them for whalefall.

This is what violent interference looks like in a world where civilisations have become organs inside a planetary shoggoth:
not a clash of empires, but the grinding of mismatched tempos inside a body that has grown larger than any of its parts."

(https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/dtos-iii-the-planetary-operating)


[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Geopolitics]]