
* METAMODERN SPIRITUALITY SERIES. 6 Volume Series.

==VOLUME I==

'''* Book: [[Metamodernism and the Return of Transcendence]]. By A. Severan. Ed. by Graham Brendan Dempsey.'''

"The period known as postmodernism is over. With it goes the pervasive cynicism, apathy, and nihilism that defined so much of American culture during the latter 20th century. Now, a new sensibility — called “metamodernism” by an emerging consensus — has occasioned the return of various ideas long denigrated under postmodernism, but also transformed by it. This metamodern sensibility is characterized by a thorough reimagination of transcendence, and the exploration of new modes of depth and dimensionality for meeting the challenge of the contemporary meaning crisis.
 
Such is the argument presented in this short but incisive text, as it tracks the development of this new period from the decline of postmodernism to today. In addition, this analysis is supplemented by an accompanying essay that explores the metamodern reconstruction of meaning through artistic mythmaking, with examples from post-postmodern art. "

==VOLUME II==

'''* Book: The GOD Emerging. By Julian, A. Severan (Introduction)'''

"What does the future of spirituality look like? The 'Religion of Tomorrow'? 'Meaning 3.0'? The 'Religion That's Not A Religion'? How did we get here, and where are we going?

The GOD Emerging offers some answers that speak urgently to our crisis-ridden moment. From the ashes of traditional religion, the desolation of modernity, and the chaos of postmodernity, a new God rises. This is its story, told as a myth for our time.

An abridged version of Julian's epic GOD, this book is addressed specifically to a metamodern generation of thinkers, activists, metatheorists, systems poets, and sensemakers."


==VOLUME III==

'''* Book: The Oil and the Lamp. Anti-Kierkegaard, Anti-Nietzsche.'''

"A triptych of essays. "The Midwife" aims to provide lessons in a novel field called “sacred obstetrics,” or the midwifery of God. Its main postulate is that God must be reborn into the world as an antidote to a pervasive cultural nihilism. The "Postscript" takes up a number of issues explored by Anti-Kierkegaard in “The Midwife,” such as irony, indirect communication, reflection, and the pia fraus. How does one go about reconstructing religion for radically different audiences, some naive and some aware? Finally, in "The Euthanist," anti-Nietzsche explores the landscape of a fully immanent spirituality after the murder of transcendence." 


==VOLUME IV==

'''* Book: Building the Cathedral: Answering the Meaning Crisis through Personal Myth. By Sadie Alwyn Moon.'''

The modern world is in turmoil. The decline of the old religious myths has generated profound psychological instability for many people, with nothing yet to take their place. The resulting “meaning crisis” lies at the heart of so much of our cultural tumult, and will continue to unravel society until we find a way to effectively reintegrate a sense of meaning and common purpose back into our lives. 

​Personal myth offers us a constructive way forward. Since Carl Jung first explored the idea in the mid-20th century, numerous psychologists and comparative mythologists have advanced the concept in fruitful ways. This book attempts to develop it even further—to show how the process of personal mythmaking can not only return a sense of meaning to our individual lives but also form the basis of genuinely edifying spiritual community. The task of reimagining the sacred calls each of us to do our part—a project every bit as bold as the building of the great cathedrals. What will you build with your life?"


==VOLUME V==

'''* Book: GOSPEL. Azul Bernstein, Max Pomarańczowy, a. verte, Søren St. Gul (contributors)'''

"What does "gospel" mean to you? Liberation—or oppression? Forgiveness—or judgment? Saving truth—or harmful illusion?

​What if a gospel text were discovered that radically revolutionized our understanding of Jesus and his message, providing a scripture of warmth, welcome, and wonder that uncannily speaks to the spiritual needs of our post-postmodern age? Could we trust it? Could we "believe" in Gospel again?

This publication from Palimpsest Press presents us with such a text. Ostensibly discovered deep in the Israeli desert in 1954, could this be the "first ever" account of Christ's teaching? Decide for yourself. The gospel is here reproduced in its entirely, alongside the facing-page original Greek, and features multiple perspectives and interpretations from a number of scholarly voices for your consideration. Could it change what you believe? Or, could it change your engagement with belief itself? This is your invitation to find out...


==VOLUME VI==

'''* Book: Emergentism: A Religion of Complexity for the Metamodern World. By Adyahanzi, Brendan Graham Dempsey. Metamodern Spirituality Series, Vol. VI.'''. See: [[Emergentism as a Religion of Complexity]].

URL = https://www.brendangrahamdempsey.com/metamodern-spirituality-series

"The new sciences of complexity have completely revolutionized our understanding of the universe as well as our place in it. At a time when nihilism and meaninglessness are affecting more people than ever, the new cosmic story of complexification comes as a genuine revelation. Evolution, we now know, is not some senseless meandering, but part of an ever-deepening learning process by which the universe is waking up to itself. And, as highly complex, conscious beings, we have a unique role to play in this cosmic drama.

Addressing the meaning crisis head-on, this book synthesizes such insights and explains their profound implications for spirituality and human purpose. Applying a ‘civilizational design’ lens to this endeavor, it boldly presents these ideas in terms of a new religion for our time. Emergentism is the complexity-informed, sincerely ironic, co-created religion for a metamodern moment poised between breakdown and breakthrough. In a time between worlds, at the edge of chaos, the conditions are ripe for a new God to emerge."

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]