=Description=

Zak Stein:

"The phrase I have used in my book to describe our current historical epoch—“a time between worlds”—is not a metaphor. It is not “as if” we are in a time between worlds; we are quite literally in such a time. It is possible to see within history periods of time that mark transitions between world-systems; times when the deep structures and codes of civilization itself are in flux. Comenius lived in such a time, and so do we. Understanding this requires looking into the work of diverse and relatively new fields such as world systems analysis, cultural evolution, and cliodynamics, which can all be classed under the heading of “metahistory.” Metahistory is about the search for overarching patterns that characterize large swaths of time. This can only be undertaken through an integration of multiple academic disciplines.

Notably, this search for large patterns in the unfolding of human societies used just to be called “history.” But the grand narratives of modernity fell hard as their ideological underpinnings began to fade. Postmodern social sciences dissected and fragmented “his-story” into various camps. Then postmodern approaches encountered their own limits. Arguing for the absence of a metanarrative is still a kind of metanarrative, and a particularly incoherent and confusing one. Social systems and cultures do not long survive when there is no “shared story” about the big picture of history.

So, today, a new generation of scholars are using unprecedented analytical tools to tell a different kind of “metahistory.” These approaches engage with the complexity sciences, epistemology, and syntheses of quantitative and qualitative data across various time scales and geographical scopes. The result are compelling metahistorical insights into trends, dynamics, and patterns unfolding over centuries involving billions of people."

(https://systems-souls-society.com/education-must-make-history-again/)


=Discussion=

Christopher Dawson:

"Metahistory is a new word and one which is as yet unfamiliar to the ordinary reader, so that it is perhaps necessary to define what we mean by it before any discussion of its function and value. I take it that the term was coined on the analogy of Metaphysics which is itself by no means an easy word to define. When Aristotle had written his books on Physics, he proceeded to discuss the ultimate concepts that underlie his physical theories: the nature of matter, the nature of being and the cause of motion and change. In the same way Metahistory is concerned with the nature of history, the meaning of history and the cause and significance of historical change. The historian himself is primarily engaged in the study of the past. He does not ask himself why the past is different from the present or what is the meaning of history as a whole. What he wants to know is what actually happened at a particular time and place and what effect it had on the immediate future. The facts may be of little importance, but if they are true facts, they are important to him if he is a true historian."

(https://www.historytoday.com/archive/problem-metahistory)


=More information=

==Book==

Zak Stein recommends:

"The '''Santa Fe Institute has recently published a book on just this field, simply entitled History, Big History, and Metahistory, edited by Krakauer, David C., Gaddis, John Lewis & Pomeranz, Kenneth (2017)'''. The book collects papers from an interdisciplinary conference dedicated to considering the “return” to metahistorical theory and research. Importantly, Big History pushes time sequences back beyond the human to include biological, geological, and cosmic time scale. Big History puts human history within a universal cosmic frame and begins to place the patterns of history alongside the patterns of biological and cosmic evolution."

(https://systems-souls-society.com/education-must-make-history-again/)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]