
=The Metamodern View of Reality=

By Zachary Stein:

" To see the fractal nature of reality and of the development and applicability of ideas,
that all understanding consists of reused elements taken from other forms of
understanding.

 To be anti-essentialist, not believing in “ultimate essences” such as matter,
consciousness, goodness, evil, masculinity, femininity or the like – but rather that all
these things are contextual and interpretations made from relations and comparisons.
Even the today so praised “relationality” is not an essence of the universe.

 To no longer believe in an atomistic, mechanical universe where the ultimate stuff is
matter, but rather to view the ultimate nature of reality as a great unknown that we must
metaphorically capture in our symbols, words and stories. To accept the view of a world
being newly born again and again.

 To see that the world is radically, unyieldingly and completely socially constructed,
always relative and context bound.

 To see that the world emerges through complex interactions of its parts and that our
intuitive understandings tend to be much too static and mono-causal. This is called
complexity. It is the fundamental principle of not only meteorology but also of social
psychology, where patterns (such as the “self”) emerge through the interactions of
interrelated, interdependent dividuals.

 To accept the necessity of developmental hierarchies – but to be very critical and
careful with how they are described and used. Hierarchies are studied empirically, not
arbitrarily assumed.

 To see that language and thereby our whole worldviews travel through a much greater
space of possible, never-conceptualized worlds; that language is evolving.

 To look at the world holistically, where things such as scientific facts, perspectives,
culture and emotions interact (this form of interactivity is called hypercomplexity,
because it involves not only many interacting units, but interacting perspectives and
qualitatively different dimensions of reality, such as subjective vs. objective reality).

 To see that information and management of information is fundamental to all aspects
of reality and society: from genes to memes to money and science and political
revolutions.

 To accept an informational-Darwinian view of both genes (organisms) and memes
(cultural patterns) competing to survive through a process of developmental evolution
that involves negative selection (that disfavored genes and memes go extinct, but
continue to exist as potentials).

 To see that Darwinian evolution depends equally on mutual cooperation and
competition; that competition and cooperation are always intertwined.

 To see the dynamic interplay of the universal and the particular, where for instance
humans in more complex societies become more individualized, which in turn drives
the development of more complex societies where people are more interdependent and
more universal values are needed to avoid collapse.

 To see that the world runs on dialectic logic, where things are always broken, always
“stumbling backwards” as it were; that things are always striving for an impossible
balance and in that accidental movement create the whole dance that we experience as
reality. So the development of reality does have directionality, it’s just that we are
always blind to this direction; hence the metaphor of “stumbling backwards”.

 To see that reality is fundamentally open-ended, broken, as it were, even in its
mathematical and physical structure, as shown in Gödel’s incompleteness theorem and
in some of the core findings of modern physics.

 To recognize that potentials and potentiality, rather than facts and actualities, constitute
the most fundamental or “more real” reality. What we usually call reality is only
“actuality”, one slice of an infinitely larger, hypercomplex pie. Actuality is only a “case
of” a deeper reality, called “absolute totality”.

 To explore visions of panpsychism, i.e. that consciousness is everywhere in the
universe and “as real” as matter and space. But panpsychism should not be confused
with animistic visions of all things having “spirits”."

(https://integral-review.org/issues/vol_14_no_1_stein_love_in_a_time_between_worlds.pdf)


=More information=

See also: The [[Metamodern View of Science]]


[[Category:Integral Theory]]