
* Article: Metapolitics of the Noosphere. William Irwin Thompson.

URL = 


=Contextual Quote=

William Irwin Thompson:

The term “metapolitics” was coined by the poet and cultural historian Peter Viereck in his 1941 book, Metapolitics: the Roots of the Nazi Mind. Politics is expressed in ideologies that are territorially based, but when an ideology is lifted from one location to become a universal ideology, it becomes more messianic and its leaders become avatars of a new world view. Think of Che Guevara. For me, the cultural shift from an identity that is based upon a nation or a territory to one based upon a state of consciousness—indeed even a seizure of consciousness — expresses the transition from politics to metapolitcs."

(https://www.academia.edu/26045242/Metapolitics_of_the_Noosphere)




=Description=

"Our task in the twenty-ﬁrst century is for humanity to workout the political form of the State of Consciousness, the noetic polity. A noetic polity is not an ideology, but more of an ecology of consciousness that works through diversiﬁcation. ... An ideology works through suppression; an ecology of consciousness works through expression. What we see in the daily news is that we are living through the diﬃcult transition from violent religions and an authoritarian form of capitalism in which money has replaced democracy to a Dark Age and an emergent spiritual and cultural transformation."

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Noosphere]]