'''* Article: The [[Meta-industrial Class]] and Why We Need It. ARIEL SALLEH'''

URL = http://arielsalleh.info/theory/eco-socialism/d-and-n/d-and-n-article.pdf

=ABSTRACT= 

"The paper suggests that the appropriate ‘agents of history’ in an era of globalisation
and ecological crisis are ‘meta-industrial’ workers. This hitherto nameless class carries out
hands-on reproductive labours at the interface of ‘humanity’ and ‘nature’ using ‘holding skills’, a
grounded epistemology and ethic consonant with genuine democracy and local sustainability.
Pointing to the unexamined neo-liberal assumptions of many environmental philosophers, the
author suggests that only an ‘embodied materialist’ epistemology and ethic can do justice to class,
race, gender, and species diversity."


=Discussion=

Ariel Salleh:


'''1.'''

"In Ecofeminism as Politics (1997) I introduce the term ‘meta-industrial’ to designate a hitherto
unrecognised class whose labours and value orientation in relation to ‘nature’ leave them at the
margins the tele–pharmo–nuclear complex. Strictly speaking, meta-industrial groupings such as
women domestic workers, subsistence farmers, and indigenous peoples, are both inside and
outside of the dominant hegemony. They are inside in as much as they are essential ‘resources’
but as political ‘subjects’ they are largely outside. At an existential level, this structural
contradiction is a source of insight and political motivation (viz. my chapter 11—‘agents of
complexity’). The term ‘meta-industrial’ thus has both positive (immanent) and normative
(transcendent) senses."
(http://arielsalleh.info/theory/eco-socialism/d-and-n/d-and-n-article.pdf)


=Excerpts=

Ariel Salleh:

"A materialist approach to ecofeminism is guided by Marx’s profound understanding
of the dialectic between our practical actions in the world—labour—
and the form that our thought processes take. However, Marx’s model was
biased toward industrial labour and the production of things, ‘men’s work’ as
distinct from women’s socially given reproductive activities. So, an ecofeminist
approach must fill out the gaps in the master’s historical materialism: his
philosophic silence on ‘women’ and on ‘nature’, marginalised subjects in an
otherwise radical analysis. Ecofeminist politics can re-embody materialism and
in doing this, the notion of reproductive labour becomes central. Reproduction
means to be engaged in nurturing living processes by enhancing our human
interchange with nature. Such labours give rise to kinds of knowing that defy the
Eurocentric definition of humanity as distinct from nature. Socially reproductive
domestic work for example, is a process by which women have traditionally
mediated nature for men as they cook and clean, tend young, old, and sexual
bodies. But sustaining reproductive labour is not necessarily gendered.

Subsistence farming and hunter gathering by men also mediates humanity and
nature without turning it into dead matter as industrial workers have been forced
to do. Obviously, women and men caught up in urban consumer societies have
less direct give and take with so called external nature than cottage dwelling folk
once did. But in the international division of labour, indigenous peoples and
Third World farmers are still bound up in care for earthly cycles, albeit
increasingly compromised by technology transfer. In environmental terms,
subsistence agriculture is low in energy input and pollution output, and it
preserves biodiversity as it goes. Moreover, since four-fifths of the world’s food
is provided by this meta-industrial class in the South, its labour should be of
great significance in the global economy. Why is this not the case?"


'''2.'''

"Under capitalist patriarchal industrial production, abstract dis/located knowledge called expertise,
generates merely an illusion of human choice and control, but the North’s myth
of management is protected by the professional elite’s labelling of unanticipated
consequences as accidents.

Conceptualising the ecosystem as a web of internal relations calls for a radical
non-’identitarian ’ logic where process replaces fixed categories. Everything is
both this/and that. How do we talk about this dialectic in every day life?

Typically, in caring for sick infants and aging parents, women workers become
highly skilled in coping with non-identity, permeability and contamination of
boundaries. Bodies as nature, wither and ooze, but sustaining labours are about
holding these moments of transformation—in the bedroom or in the field. But
most metropolitan men are taught to be contemptuous of bodily flows, waste and
soil. Eurocentric languages and institution s offer an armoury of externalising,
idealising gestures to bolster masculine separateness from matter. But what our
brothers can end up with is desensitisation , a false sense of individualism,
crippling loneliness and destructive compensatory drives.

Different ways of living and working yield different psychologies . Thus
holding labours open people to an embodied self-consciousness quite at odds
with the cogito of the masculine unitary subject. Women, says ecofeminist
methodologist Maria Mies, are inclined to work out their ethical responsibilities
integrating thought and feeling in relational context.16 Such an approach calls us
away from strategic calculation of optimisations and abstract formulae like
rights, into an extrapolation of caring experience. Holding as both epistemology
and ethic is based neither on instrumental control of others, nor suddenly
‘waking up’ deep ecological style to some ephemeral cosmic fusion. An
embodied materialism rests on practical deferral to the matter at hand and as
such it is intrinsically precautionary. Such labour practices exemplify a strong
and flexible de-centred subjectivity , implicated in many layers of time at once;
a relation self grounded, in place.

As suggested above, an embodied materialism implies an ontology of internal
relations, a dialectical epistemology, a precautionary ethic and a bioregional
politics. It celebrates the qualities of engagement that an unnamed class—
housewives, subsistence farmers and forest dwellers, bring to their provisioning
in partnership with nature. In contrast to the profoundly alienated labour of
conventional political economy, these workers carry an alternative way of
knowing and doing. In fact, it is this experience outside of the dominant
productivist time frame, that provides the possibility of a grounded political
vision and solidarity between meta-industrial labour North and South. Their
insights and skills are sorely needed for building an Earth democracy beyond the
divisive plurality of neo-liberal, socialist, post-colonial , feminist and ecological
politics."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]