
'''a free and open source platform that supports real-time sense-making, distributed collaboration, and the creative intelligence of individuals, organizations and communities'''

URL = http://metamaps.cc/ and http://blog.metamaps.cc

==Project==
Metamaps.cc project was initiated by Connor Turland and Ishan Shapiro in fall 2012, building on prior designs and concept development going back to 2010. Metamaps allows users to build free-form knowledge graphs of ideas and information (called "topics") connected by semantic links ("synapses"). 

Each graph (or "map") is part of a larger database which stores all topics and synapses, allowing for their reuse in other maps as selected by users. With increasing usage, topics become part of a growing web of contextually linked semantic data, providing a powerful environment for various [[Collective Intelligence]] applications and insights.

==Technology==
Metamaps is a collaborative concept mapping platform built primarily in Rails and Javascript using several existing libraries. An open source repository exists on [[GitHub]] at https://github.com/metamaps

The platform is under active development by a network of peer collaborators working with various project partners to design and implement new feature sets for specific use cases.

==Metacodes==
A distinctive feature of the metamaps.cc platform is its use of "metacode" icons to visually designate high level categorization of map content (topics). Metacodes are selected by the user when creating a new topic, and help to specify the manner of usage of the topic's label (i.e. is it an ''action'', an ''idea'', an ''intention'', etc.).

==Network==
The metamaps.cc project is part of an [[Open Value Network]] which supports the development of this technology as a [[commons]] around which many peers and projects may create and derive value.

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Maps]]