
=Description=

"William Irwin Thompson envisioned post-capitalist village economies—“metaindustrial
villages”—as recapitulating the four stages of human economic history (paleolithic hunter-gatherer,
horticultural, industrial and cybernetic) in a higher synthesis based on post-scarcity technology.
DECENTRALIZATION of cities and the miniaturization of technology will alter the centerperiphery
dialectic of traditional civilization and make a whole new cultural level possible. What
will take place in the metaindustrial village will be that the four classical economies of human
history, hunting and gathering, agriculture, industry, and cybernetics, will all be recapitulated within
a single deme. We will look back to where we have been in history, gather up all the old economies,
and then turn on the spiral in a new direction.

The hunting and gathering economy could focus on the gathering of wood, wind, and sun. In a
way, the work of the New Alchemy Institute is to create a food and energy base for a small tribal
band of people living in isolated circumstances.... New Alchemy is not a civilized strategy; it is not
going to feed the huddled masses of New York and Calcutta; it either will be co-opted and absorbed
by conglomerate NASA as the ecology of a space colony or will enable small groups to live in
dispersed settlements—or both.

The agricultural economy of the metaindustrial village would focus on organic gardening and
the replacing of fossil-fuel agribusiness with natural cycles in the food chain. Since the shift from
gardening to field tillage with the plow originally displaced women from food production, the return 
to ecologically sophisticated gardening enables women to return to take up significant roles in the
economy of the village, and thus to overcome the sexual alienation characteristic of industrial
society.
The third economy of the community would be industrial, and this is where I part company with
many critics of contemporary culture. The metaindustrial village is not anti-industrial and Luddite;
there will be industry and technology, but they will be brought down to scale as workshops in
converted barns. A village could produce artistically beautiful glass bottles which could be kept as
art objects or reused as containers in place of plastics. Or the village could produce bicycles,
clothing, rotary tillers, or other well-crafted and durable instruments. In a return to the mystery of
the craft guild, particular communities could focus on the revival of particular crafts and industries.
Whatever the industry chosen, the scale of the operation would be small, in harmony with the
ecosystem of the region, and devoted more to a local market than an international one.

The fourth economy of the community would be postindustrial, or cybernetic. The characteristic
feature of a postindustrial economy is the emphasis on research and development and education.

Since the entire village would be a contemplative educational community, after the manner of
Lindisfarne and Findhorn, the adventure of consciousness would be more basic to the way of life
than patterns of consumption. Everyone living in the community would be involved in an
experiential approach to education, from contemplative birth, after the thought of Dr. Frederick
LeBoyer, to contemplative death, after the thought of Dr. Elizabeth Kübler-Ross. And at the various
stages of life in between, the entire community would function as a college, in which children and
adults would work together in gardening, construction, ecological research, crafts, and classes in all
fields of knowledge."
(https://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/community-platforms.pdf)

Source: William Irwin Thompson, Darkness and Scattered Light, quoted in “Meta-Industrial Villages: what happens afternthe miniaturisation of technology?” P2P Foundation Blog, April 18, 2015 [https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/meta-industrialvillages-what-happens-after-the-miniaturisation-of-technology/2015/04/18]


[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]