
=Description=

== Towards a [[Metasystem Transition Theory]]==

Principia Cybernetica:

"Metasystem Transition Theory (MSTT) is the name we have given our particular cybernetic philosophy. Its most salient concept is, of course, the Metasystem Transition (MST), the evolutionary process by which higher levels of complexity and control are generated. But it also includes our views on philosophical problems, and makes predictions about the possible future of mankind and life. Our goal is to create, on the basis of cybernetic concepts, an integrated philosophical system, or "world view", proposing answers to the most fundamental questions about the world, ourselves, and our ultimate values.

Our philosophy too is based on cybernetic principles. 

* Our epistemology understands knowledge as a model, which is constructed by the subject or group, but undergoes selection by the environment. 
* Our metaphysics asserts actions as ontological primitives. 
* On the basis of this ontology, we define the most important concepts and organize them in a semantic network. 
* At a higher level, we also lay out the fundamental principles of cybernetics in terms of these underlying concepts.

One of the central concepts is that of evolution in the most general sense, which is produced by the mechanism of variation and selection. Another is control, which we define in a special cybernetic sense, and assert as the basic mode of organization in complex systems. This brings us to '''the central concept for MSTT, that of the [[Metasystem Transition]], or the process by which control emerges in evolutionary systems'''.

'''On this basis we then reconstruct the complete history of evolution, from the Big Bang to the present, as a sequence of MST's.''' An extrapolation of this sequence provides us with a first glimpse of what the future might bring. Finally, the possible dangers and opportunities of our evolutionary future direct our attention to the need for formulating an ethics, based on evolutionary and systemic principles, that could guide our actions.

(http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/MSTT.html)


=Characteristics=

Andrea Farias [https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/Metasystem+Transition+Theory]:


==Integration== 

 Initially, disparate subsystems start to interact and integrate, forming a more cohesive whole.

'''Human Body''': In biological evolution, simple cells integrated to form more complex multicellular organisms.

'''Civilization''': In the early stages of civilization, human societies consisted of small, nomadic bands that survived by hunting and gathering. These societies increasingly integrated into larger networks, often driven by conquest, where dominant groups subdued others and imposed tribute systems.


==Coordination==

 As integration progresses, the emerging system develops mechanisms to coordinate the interactions and functions of its subsystems.

'''Human Body''': As multicellular organisms evolved, different types of cells began to specialize and perform specific functions (e.g., muscle cells, nerve cells). The nervous system started to coordinate these specialized cells, ensuring they worked together efficiently to maintain the organism’s overall health and functionality.

'''Civilization''': As these networks grew, the need for coordination increased. The agricultural surplus and the ability to accumulate resources enabled by grain production facilitated higher levels of specialization. This, in turn, led to the emergence of a ruling class that coordinated economic and social activities.


==Control==

 The system evolves control mechanisms to regulate the behavior of its subsystems. These mechanisms include feedback loops, decision-making processes, and adaptive strategies that ensure the system can respond effectively to internal and external changes.

'''Human Body:''' The nervous systems provides control mechanisms for the body by processing sensory information, making decisions, and regulating bodily functions through feedback loops involving hormones and neural signals.

'''Civilization:''' With larger and more complex societies, formal systems of control became essential. The ruling elites established laws and policies to regulate land use, manage agricultural production, and collect taxes or tributes. The invention of writing was pivotal in this phase, facilitating administrative control, enhancing communication, and ensuring that governance structures could cope with large populations and complex economic activities.


==Emergence of Higher-Level Functions==

 With effective control and coordination, the system can develop higher-level functions that are not possible in isolated subsystems. 

These emergent properties enable the system to tackle more complex tasks and adapt to more diverse environments.

'''Human Body''': Through the human nervous system, higher-level functions such as conscious thought, language, and sophisticated motor skills emerged.

'''Civilization''': The new governance and economic structures, along with the development of writing, enabled advancements in crafts, arts, sciences, and religions. For example, writing supported new forms of distributed cognition, contributing to the Axial Age, when ideological systems such as Christianity, Buddhism, and Greek philosophy were established.


==Stabilization and Adaptation==

 The new metasystem stabilizes and fine-tunes its control mechanisms, ensuring efficient functioning and continued adaptation to changing conditions.

'''Human Body''': The body continuously stabilizes and adapts through processes like homeostasis, where it maintains internal balance despite external changes.

'''Civilization''': Through these new governance and economic systems, civilizations responded with varying levels of success to environmental changes and social challenges."

(https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/Metasystem+Transition+Theory)

=More information=

* The basic tenets of MSTT were formulated by Turchin and Joslyn in "The [http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/MANIFESTO.html Cybernetic Manifesto]".

*  [[Human Metasystem Transition Theory]] (HMST). By  Cadell Last. Journal of Evolution and Technology - Vol. 25 Issue 1 – January 2015 - pgs 1-16 [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284157238_Human_metasystem_transition_HMST_theory]

* [[Information-Energy Metasystems Model]]

[[Category:Network_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Transition]]
[[Category:Patterns]]
[[Category:Transitions]]