For a list of pages see [[:Category:Mexico]].

=Intro=

Interesting remark by Jeffrey Juris:

", I have recently become fascinated with the burgeoning free media scene in Mexico, which includes not only online news sites, but also a rapidly expanding network of Internet/FM radio stations, web-based forums and zines, digital video collectives, free software initiatives, etc. (my current research focuses on the relationship between alternative media, autonomy, and repression in Mexico). Some of the most exciting developments are happening within the free radios, many of which combine FM and Internet broadcasts to reach out to activists on a global scale, while at the same time more deeply engaging local populations outside typical activist circles. Many of these projects combine an open publishing component on the web with live streaming as well as more focused and directed reporting about local issues and wider national and international campaigns."
(http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/inside-networked-movements-interview-with-jeffrey-juris/)


=Directory=

List provided by Jeffrey Juris:

1) LaNeta

http://www.laneta.apc.org/laneta/

LaNeta provides electronic tools and resources to NGOs and other civil society organizations, and is a member of the Association for Progress in Communications (APC). 

2) Ubuntu Mexico

http://www.ubuntumexico.org/ 

3) Par-a-Par 

http://libreyabierto.cc/lawiki/index.php/Par-a-par

Par-a-Par is a festival of Critical Action, Art, and Technology scheduled to take place from October 20 to 22, 2008 in Mexico City at the Multimedia Center of the National Center for the Arts

4) Centro Multimedia

http://cmm.cenart.gob.mx/

The Centro Multimedia (Mulimedia Center) of the National Center for the Arts in Mexico City provides resources and programming surrounding multimedia production, digital technologies, free software, etc. 

5) Espora.org

http://base.espora.org/tiki-index.php

Espora.org is an autonomous web server in Mexico City that hosts numerous alternative media and free software projects. 

6) Ke Huelga Radio

http://www.kehuelga.org/

Ke Huelga is a “free radio” station (FM and Internet) and webpage based out of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) in the South of Mexico City. 

7) Regeneracion Radio

http://www.regeneracionradio.org/

Regeneracion Radio is a “free radio” station (FM and Internet) and webpage in the North of Mexico City. 

8) Radio Zapote

http://radiozapote.flujos.org/

Radio Zapote is a “free radio” station (Internet and limited FM) and webpage based out of the National School of Anthropology and History (ENAH) in the South of Mexico City. 

9) Radio Sabotaje

http://sabotaje.blogsome.com/

Radio Sabotaje is an Internet-based “free radio” in Mexico City. 

10) Indymedia Mexico

http://mexico.indymedia.org/

Indymedia Mexico is an online activist news forum associated with the global Indymedia network

11) Centro de Medios Libres

http://www.cml.lunasexta.org/

Centro de Medios Libres is an online activist news forum based in Mexico City. 


=[[Basic Income]] Status Report 2007=

MEXICO: BASIC INCOME ON THE AGENDA?

From Bien.org:

Political prospects of Basic Income in Mexico are advancing by leaps and bounds. On June 6 and 7, Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México (UACM) and the Department for Social Development of the Government of Mexico City organised the First International Conference on Basic Income ever held in Mexico. A great number of academics, politicians and practitioners both from Mexico and other countries like Argentina, Brazil, Spain and United Kingdom attended the Conference and engaged into very vivid discussions with its more than 100 delegates.

Speakers included Martí Batres (Social Development Secretary of the Government of Ciudad de México), María Julia Bertomeu (Universidad de la Plata, Argentina & Argentine Section of BIEN), Julio Boltvinik (El Colegio de México), David Casassas (University of Oxford & Secretary of BIEN), Oscar Conde (Seminario Universitario de la Cuestión Social), Pedro Moreno (Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana), Manuel Pérez Rocha (Rector of Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México), Daniel Raventós (Universitat de Barcelona & Red Renta Básica), Eduardo Suplicy (Senator of the Republic of Brazil & Co-chair of BIEN), Enrique del Val Blanco (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), and Pablo Yanes Rizo (Social Development Secretariat of the Government of Ciudad de México). The organisers also arranged a great number of meetings with local politicians and practitioners as well as seminar sessions at both the Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México (UACM) and the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM).

The Conference was the result of the effort to foster the study of Basic Income made by an active and plural local group of people who will now constitute a network called “Red Mexicana del Ingreso Ciudadano Universal” (Mexican Network for the Universal Basic Income). This new network will submit an application to BIEN’s Dublin General Assembly asking for official recognition.

The participants in the Conference underlined the importance of the Universal Citizen Pension (for those above 70) that has already been implemented in Mexico City as an opportunity to open the debate on Basic Income and make crucial moves towards its introduction on a national level.

On this matter, the most important news is that on July 4, PRD (Partido de la Revolución Democrática), which is exploring the possibility of including Basic Income into its programme, put a bill for a Basic Income in Mexico before the Permanent Commission of the Mexican Congress (the text of that bill can be found at http://www.nodo50.org/redrentabasica/index.php). 

It is a bill that suggests the introduction of a fully universal and unconditional Basic Income aiming to fight urban and rural poverty, large inequalities and social exclusion, and to grant everybody the necessary socioeconomic security that is needed to access the sphere of work without having to accept degrading labour conditions. The text of the bill establishes that full universality must be reached within a three-year period. It also points out that existing conditional cash transfer schemes have proved to be inefficient, costly, and a source of corruption. The proponents of the bill assert that in a political context in which the possibility of a reform of the taxation system is being discussed, the introduction of a Basic Income pretending to build social policies from a rights-based perspective and to enhance the freedom of the vast majority of the population makes the best of the senses.

Another left-wing party, Alternativa Socialdemócrata, which organised a public lecture with Daniel Raventós, has also endorsed Basic Income by including it into its programme.

As a result of all these events, a great number of articles on Basic Income were published in important newspapers like La Jornada, El Universal, La Crónica, and El Financiero. Some of these articles can be found at:

http://www.nodo50.org/redrentabasica/textos/index.php?x=628
http://www.nodo50.org/redrentabasica/textos/index.php?x=627
http://www.nodo50.org/redrentabasica/textos/index.php?x=625
http://www.nodo50.org/redrentabasica/textos/index.php?x=624

For more information on the state of the Basic Income debate in Mexico, contact Pablo Yanes(pyanes2007@gmail.com) or send an email to Ingreso Ciudadano Universal – México (ingresociudadano@gmail.com).

[[Category:Country]]
[[Category:North America]]
[[Category:Mexico]]