
=Books=

*  Bauwens, M., Kostakis, V., & Pazaitis, A. (2019). [[Peer to Peer: The Commons Manifesto (Book)]]. London, UK: University of Westminster Press. [https://www.uwestminsterpress.co.uk/site/books/10.16997/book33 download]
* Kostakis, Vasilis, and Michel Bauwens. 2014. ''[[Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy]]''. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Bauwens, Michel, and Jean Lievens. De Wereld Redden. Brussells: Houtekiet, 2013
* Sauver le monde. Vers une société post-capitaliste avec le peer-to-peer. Par Michel Bauwens et Jean Lievens, 2015 [http://www.editionslesliensquiliberent.fr/livre-Sauver_le_monde-9791020901835-1-1-0-1.html]
* Manifeste pour une véritable économie collaborative. Vers une société des communs. Par Michel Bauwens, Vasilis Kostakis. ECLM, 2016


----

=Reports=
* The Commons Transition Plan for the Government of Ecuador. The FLOK Society Project, 2014. [http://commonstransition.org/?page_id=14576]
* The Commons Transition Plan for the City of Ghent, Belgium, 2017. [http://commonstransition.org/commons-transition-plan-city-ghent/]
* Value in the Commons Economy: Developments in Open and Contributory Value Accounting. By Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Niaros. Heinrich Boll Foundation, 2016 [https://www.boell.de/en/2017/02/01/value-commons-economy-developments-open-and-contributory-value-accounting]
* Changing Societies through Urban Commons Transitions. By Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Niaros. Heinrich Boll Foundation, 2017 [https://commonstransition.org/changing-societies-through-urban-commons-transitions/]


----

=Essays=

* Grace, M. and Bauwens M. (2020) [[Reimagining New Socio-Technical Economics Through the Application of Distributed Ledger Technologies]]. Front. Blockchain, 23 January 2020 [https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2019.00029/full?]
* Bauwens, Michel, & Pantazis, Alekos. (2018). The ecosystem of commons-based peer production and its transformative dynamics. The Sociological Review, 66(2), 302–319. London, England: SAGE Publications
* Michel Bauwens & Jose Ramos (2018): Re-imagining the left through an ecology of the commons: towards a post-capitalist commons transition, Global Discourse, DOI: 10.1080/23269995.2018.1461442; see: [[Re-Imagining the Left Through the Lens of Post-Capitalist Commons‎‎]]
* Arvidsson, Adam, Bauwens, Michel and Peitersen, Nicolai. The [[Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy]]. Journal of Futures Studies, May 2008, 12(4): 9 - 20''' http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/12-4/A02.pdf
*Kostakis, Vasilis, Niaros, Vasilis, Dafermos, George, and Michel Bauwens. 2015. “Design Global, Manufacture Local: Exploring the Contours of an Emerging Productive Model”. Futures, 73, 126-135. http://www.p2plab.gr/el/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Futures.pdf 
*Kostakis, Vasilis, Roos, Andreas and Michel Bauwens. 2015. “Towards a Political Ecology of the Digital Economy: Socio-environmental Implications of Two Value Models”. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Env-Innov-and-Soc-Trans.pdf
*Bauwens, Michel and Vasilis Kostakis. 2015. “Towards a New Reconfiguration Among the State, Civil Society and the Market”. Journal of Peer Production, 7, 1-6. http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-7-policies-for-the-commons/peer-reviewed-papers/towards-a-new-reconfiguration-among-the-state-civil-society-and-the-market/ 
* [[Par Cum Pari]]. Notes on the Horizontality of Peer to Peer Relationships in the Context of the Verticality of a Hierarchy of Values. Michel Bauwens. In: Pursuing the Common Good: How Solidarity and Subsidiarity Can Work Together. Fourteenth Plenary Session, 1-6 May 2008. Acta 14, eds Margaret S. Archer and Pierpaolo Donati. Vatican City, 2008, pp. 708. Retrieved at http://www.pass.va/content/dam/scienzesociali/pdf/acta14/acta14-bauwens.pdf
*Bauwens, Michel and Vasilis Kostakis. 2014. “From the Communism of Capital to Capital for the Commons: Towards an Open Co-operativism”. Triple-C: Communication, Capitalism & Critique, 12(1): URL= 356-361.http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/561
*The Political Economy of Peer Production. CTheory, October 2, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499 ; Re-published Post-Autistic Economics Review, issue 37. Retrieved from http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue37/Bauwens37.htm 
*Passionate Production and the Happiness Surplus. International Conference. On “Happiness and Public Policy”. United Nations Conference Center (UNCC) Bangkok, Thailand. 18-19 July 2007. Retrieved from http://ppdoconference.org/session_papers/session14/session14_michel.pdf ; (draft version at http://gnh-movement.org/papers/bauwens.pdf )
*P2P and Human Evolution. Institute for Network Cultures. March 2005. Retrieved from http://www.networkcultures.org/weblog/archives/2005/03/ ; alternative version at Integral Vision. Retrieved from http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2ptheory1 
*The Peer to Peer Manifesto: The Emergence of P2P Civilization and Political Economy. Reality Sandwich, 2008. Retrieved from http://www.realitysandwich.com/the_peer_peer_manifesto_the_emergence_p2p_civilization_and_political_economy ; Original at Master New Media. Retrieved from http://www.masternewmedia.org/news/2007/11/03/the_peer_to_peer_manifesto.htm 
*Peer-to-Peer Governance, Production And Property: P2P As A Way Of Living. Master New Media, October 20, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.masternewmedia.org/information_access/p2p-peer-to-peer-economy/peer--to-peer-governance-production-property-part-1-Michel-Bauwens-20071020.htm & http://www.masternewmedia.org/information_access/p2p-peer-to-peer-economy/peer--to-peer-governance-production-property-part-2-Michel-Bauwens-20071020.htm 
*Peer to Peer | The New Relational Dynamic. Kosmos Journal. Spring | Summer 2008. ToC retrieved from http://www.kosmosjournal.org/kjo/backissue/s2008/index.shtml 
*P2P Politics, the State, and the Renewal of the Emancipatory Traditions. Re-public, Wiki Politics issue, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=133. Reprint at Democracy by the People blog, http://democracybythepeople.blogspot.com/2008/04/peer-to-peer-politics.html 
*The Political Implications of the Peer to Peer Revolution. Knowledge Politics, Volume 1 Issue 2 (April 2008), pp. 1-24 . Retrieved from http://www.knowledgepolitics.org.uk/kpq-1-2-Bauwens.pdf 
*The social web and its social contracts. Re-public, . Retrieved from http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=261 
*The Political Demographics of Cyberspace. Cy-Rev, Issue 3, 1997. Retrieved from http://www.net4dem.org/cyrev/archive/issue3/articles/Cyberspace/Cyberspace.pdf 
*Peer production in an integral and intersubjective framework. Integral World, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.integralworld.net/bauwens3.html 
*Peer production, integral theory, and intersubjectivity. Conference of the Association for Critical Realism. Tromse, 2006. Retrieved from http://uit.no/getfile.php?PageId=8315&FileId=32 (modified version at http://www.integralworld.net/bauwens3.html )
* The Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy. Adam Arvidsson, Michel Bauwens, & Nicolai Peitersen. Journal of Futures Studies, May 2008, 12(4): 9 – 20. Retrieved from http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/12-4/A02.pdf
* Bauwens, M., & Kostakis, V. (2014). From the Communism of Capital to Capital for the Commons : Towards an Open Co-operativism. Triple C Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society 12(1), 356–361. 

===Collaborations:===

* Kostakis, V., & Bauwens, M. (2014). Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy. Houndmills, Basingtoke, Hampshire, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Kostakis, V., Niaros, V., Dafermos, G., & Bauwens, M. (2015). Design global, manufacture local : Exploring the contours of an emerging productive model. Futures, 73, 126–135.
* Kostakis, V., Roos, A., & Bauwens, M. (2015). Towards a political ecology of the digital economy : Socio-environmental implications of two competing value models. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 18, 82–100. doi: 10.1016/j.eist.2015.08.002
* Manski, S., Bauwens M. (2020). Reimagining New Socio-Technical Economics Through the Application of Distributed Ledger Technologies.Front. Blockchain, 23 January 2020 [https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2019.00029/full?]

==2016-2017==

* Bauwens, M., & Niaros, V. (2016). Value in the Commons Economy: Developments in Open zand Contributory Value Accounting. Retrieved from https://www.boell.de/sites/default/files/value_in_the_commons_economy.pdf
* Bauwens, M. (2016). Towards a Commons Transition Policy: Re-Aligning Economics and Politics for a Commons-Centric Society. P2P Foundation. Retrieved from http://revista.ibict.br/p2p/article/download/1784/1986
* Bauwens, M., Kostakis, V., Troncoso, S. & Utratel, A. M. (2017). Commons Transition and P2P: a primer. Transnational Insitute & P2P Foundation. Retrieved from https://www.tni.org/files/publicationdownloads/commons_transition_and_p2p_primer_v9.pdf

'''Collaborations:'''

* Kostakis, V., Latou, K., Liarokapis, M., & Bauwens, M. (2016). The convergence of digital commons with local manufacturing from a degrowth perspective: Two illustrative cases. Journal of Cleaner Production. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.077
* Ramos, J., Bauwens, M., & Kostakis, V. (2016). P2P and Planetary Futures. In Critical Posthumanism and Planetary Futures, 193–214. doi: 10.1007/978-81-322-3637-5


----

=Chapters=

*Kostakis, Vasilis, Bauwens, Michel, and Vasilis Niaros. 2015. “Urban Reconfiguration After the Emergence of Peer-to-peer Infrastructures: Four Future Scenarios with an Impact on Smart Cities” in Araya, D. (Ed.). Smart Cities as Democratic Ecologies (pp. 116-124). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
*Ramos, Jose, Bauwens, Michel and Vasilis Kostakis. 2016, forthcoming. “[[P2P and Planetary Futures]]” in Carslon, R. (Ed.). Critical Posthumanism and Planetary Futures. Berlin: Springer.
*Bauwens, Michel, Kostakis, Vasilis and Alex Pazaitis. 2016, forthcoming. “Towards a Society of the Commons” in Baier, W., Canepa, E. and E. Himmelstoss (Eds.). Transformative Strategies: European Network for Alternative Thinking and Political Dialogue. London: The Merlin Press.
*Bauwens, Michel and Vasilis Kostakis. 2016, forthcoming. “Peer-to-Peer” in Ritzer, G. (Ed.). The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology (2nd ed). Malden, MA: Wiley.
*Some notes on the social antagonism in netarchical capitalism. Chapter 14 of: Cyber-conflict and Global Politics. by Athina Karatzogianni (Editor). Routledge, 2008.
*The Next Buddha Will Be a Collective: Spiritual Expression in the Peer-to-Peer Era. ReVision: A Journal of Consciousness and Transformation   Issue:  Volume 29, Number 4 / Spring 2007   Pages:  34 – 45. Draft version retrievable via http://p2pfoundation.net/Next_Buddha_Will_Be_A_Collective 
*Peer-to-peer: From technology to politics. Chapter 7 in: Towards a Sustainable Information Society: Deconstructing WSIS. Ed. Jan Servaes, Nico Carpentier. Portland, OR: Intellect Books, 2006


----
=Short Articles=
*Social Innovation and the Partner State as Emerging Models for the Developing World. Information Technology in Developing Countries Volume 17, No. 3. International Federation for Information Processing, November 2007. Retrieved from http://www.iimahd.ernet.in/egov/ifip/nov2007/michel-bauwens.htm  
*P2P Foundation, Thailand . Developing a global Online presence through Wiki and blog. I4D Magazine, August 2008. Retrieved from http://i4donline.net/August08/998929018.pdf
*(with Father Vincent Rossi). Dialogue on the Cyber-Sacred and the Relationship Between Technological and Spiritual Development. In Cybersociology. Issue Seven: Religion Online & Techno-Spiritualism.  September 1999. Retrieved from http://www.cybersociology.com/files/7_bauwensrossi.html 
*Beyond Perspectives, Reductionisms and Layers.  Integral Review, I ssue 1, 2005 (June), pp. 14-15. Retrieved from http://integral-review.org/documents/Integral%20Review%20and%20Its%20Editors%201,%202005.pdf 
*Peer to Peer and the Feudal Transition. European Tribune, March1, 2008. Retrieved from http://www.eurotrib.com/story/2008/2/24/83914/3356 
*The peer-to-peer revolution. Malaysiakini, February 3, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.malaysiakini.com/opinions/46452 (article behind paywall)
*Business Models for Peer Production. Open Source Business Resource, January 2008. Retrieved from http://www.osbr.ca/ojs/index.php/osbr/article/view/494/458 
*Social Innovation, Peer Production, Open Design: Implications for Policy. Center for the Experience Economy, November 11, 2007. Retrieved from  http://www.experience-economy.com/2007/11/21/social-innovation-peer-production-open-design-implications-for-policy-by-michel-bauwens/ 
*From Social Innovation to Peer Production and Open Design. European Multimedia Forum, 2008. Retrieved from http://www.e-multimedia.org/articles/Michel%20Bauwens.html?eid=24355365 
*Enterprise 2.0: Will Corporations Embrace the Social Media Revolution? Cutter IT Journal. Special Issue on Enterprise 2.0. 2008
*(with Adam Arvidsson) The Experience Economy will not be capitalist. Kommunikationsforum, December 2007. Retrieved from http://www.kommunikationsforum.dk/default.asp?articleid=12938 
*Business Models for Peer Production. Center for the Experience Economy, October 15, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.experience-economy.com/2007/10/15/business-models-for-peer-production-by-michel-bauwens/ 
*WATCHDOG: Peer-to-peer revolutionising global society. The Nation, Published on January 22, 2006 . Retrieved from http://www.nationmultimedia.com/2006/01/22/opinion/index.php?news=opinion_19718609.html 
*Peer production, peer governance, peer property. Re-public, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=87 
*P2P Economics: A Design Vision For A Commons-Based Distributed Marketplace. Master New Media, March 6, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.masternewmedia.org/news/2006/03/06/p2p_economics_a_design_vision.htm 
*Deus ex Machina vs. Electric Gaia. CMC Magazine, April 1997. Retrieved from http://www.december.com/cmc/mag/1997/apr/last.html


----
=Reviews=

*Review of: My First Recession: Critical Internet Culture in Transition. By Geert Lovink. Rotterdam: V2/NAi Publishers, 2003. Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies, December 2006, http://rccs.usfca.edu/bookinfo.asp?ReviewID=430&BookID=346 
*Review of Code: Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Economy. Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies, September 2008. Retrieved from http://rccs.usfca.edu/bookinfo.asp?ReviewID=562&BookID=405
*Review of Political Economy from Below. Economic Thought in Communitarian Anarchism, 1840-1914. Review of Political Economy, Volume 21, Issue 2 April 2009 , pages 336 - 337 [http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/content~content=a910947765~db=all?alerttype=author,email&amp;jumptype=alert]


----
=Interviews=
*Entretien de Michel Bauwens : les accès publics Internet et politiques publiques TI en Thaïlande. By Valerie Daigrain for @Brest. Juin 2008. Retrieved from http://www.a-brest.net/article4077.html 
*Interview on Peer to Peer Politics with Cosma Orsi. Planned for publication in Italian translation for Il Manifesto. Retrieved from http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/interview-on-peer-to-peer-politics-with-cosma-orsi/2008/04/10 
*Interview by Mikkel Holm Sørensen. Kommunikationsforum, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.kommunikationsforum.dk/default.asp?articleid=12866 
*Interview by Michael Holloway. Open Business, January 15, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.openbusiness.cc/2007/01/15/interview-with-michael-bauwens/ 
*Interview by Richard Poynder. Open & Shut, .  Part one retrieved from http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/09/p2p-very-core-of-world-to-come.html ; Part two retrieved from  http://poynder.blogspot.com/2006/09/p2p-blueprint-for-future.html
* [[Michel Bauwens in Dialogue with David Bollier on P2P and the Commons]], 2006


----
=As Editor=
* Guest editor of: Cybersociology. Issue Seven: Religion Online & Techno-Spiritualism.  September 1999. Retrieved from http://www.cybersociology.com/issue_7_religion_online_technospiritualism/index.html 
* Editor of P2P News, 2005-2007. Archive at http://integralvisioning.org/index.php?topic=p2p 


----
=In Other Languages=

* "Le Peer to Peer: Vers un Nouveau Modèle de Civilization"Integral Review, Issue 2, 2006, pp. 126-138; Retrieved from http://integral-review.org/documents/Bauwens,%20Peer%20to%20Peer%202,%202006.pdf . [http://integral-review.org/documents/Bauwens,%20Peer%20to%20Peer%20English%20Summary%202,%202006.pdf summary in English]. 
* [[La crise de l’immatériel, la production entre pairs (P2P) et l’économie éthique à venir]]. Michel Bauwens, Ecorev 33, 2009 [http://ecorev.org/IMG/pdf/EcoRev_33-PenserL_apresCapitalismeAvecAndreGorz.pdf]


----
=Citation Indexes=

* [https://scholar.google.co.th/citations?hl=en&user=DcNo35QAAAAJ&view_op=list_works Google Scholar public profile]
* [https://scholar.google.co.th/scholar?hl=en&q=Michel+Bauwens&btnG=&as_sdt=1%2C5&as_sdtp= Google Scholar citations by search]



[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Bibliographie]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]