


=With Chris Pinchen of Podcamp Barcelona=

The best questions so far, and the most recent one from December 2008.

URL = http://cataspanglish.wordpress.com/2009/01/15/michel-bauwens-of-the-p2p-foundation/

Note - mp3 file is missing.

Chris Pinchen:

"I met Michel Bauwens, the founder of the P2P Foundation, at UrbanLabs which took place at Citilab in Cornellà, Barcelona. He kindly agreed to record an interview for the PodCamp Barcelona Podcast, but due to his hectic schedule it was impossible to do until recently. I finally caught up with Michel when he was in Amsterdam and we recorded this conversation over Skype from his hotel room. I think the recording provides a very good introduction to the work of the P2P Foundation and Michel’s vision."

=With David Levine of Hearsay Culture=

August 2008 Podcast via http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/podcasts/20080827_Levine_72_Bauwens.mp3

"Show #72 is my interview with Michel Bauwens of the Foundation for P2P [Peer-to-Peer] Alternatives. Michel is an Internet and technology philosopher, and we discussed P2P theory and Michel’s conception of P2P as a mode of organization that transcends technology. P2P as a unifying theory of a new focus in communal creation is the primary focus of the discussion."
(http://www.hearsayculture.com/?p=134)


=With Joannes Vandermeulen of Namahn=

URL = http://www.namahn.com/resources/talks/NamahnTalk04.mp3

Interview with Michel Bauwens of the Foundation for Peer To Peer Alternatives on Peer to Peer: a New Economy and Civilisation.
June 2007.

Available from the [http://phobos.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewPodcast?id=206876043 iTunes store]


=With Sundar Raman for Open Views=

Interviewed by Sundar Raman for the Open Views series.


URL = http://kruufm.com/node/420


"Peer-to-Peer (or P2P) is most often thought of in terms of the file-sharing computer networks that have been vilified by the recording and movie industry associations, for allegedly permitting (if not encouraging) rampant digital content "piracy". But Michel takes the concept of peer networks, to the realm of society. We're creating a new world, where peer production is taking on traditional societal models. The most obvious example is Wikipedia - an encyclopedia designed to be created by collaborators, and gaining sufficient momentum (and arguable credibility) to take on the likes of
Brittanica. The success of the Wikipedia project could be attributed to peer production - basically global collaboration amongst a like-minded group.

Peer production leads to a peer-based society, creating collaborative networks that can take on projects that formerly required huge capital investment. The cost has always come in due to the
perception of a certain kind of scarcity - whether it be with human resources or knowledge. But what happens when this "artificial scarcity" is taken out of the picture? You end up with nothing less than way to transform society and human civilization."


=Presentation at Cambrdige University=

This is a recording of a lecture given at Cambridge University in April 2006, for the Immaterial Labour conference.

Main points are peer to peer and its relation to the Commons.


URL = http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/?p=316 


=First Bangkok BarCamp 2006=

On March 19, 2006, in Bangkok's Thammasat University Faculty of Journalism, the first conference of Thai and 'farang' bloggers was held, and for those who attented, such as myself (Michel Bauwens) it was a very exciting and enthusing event, showing the richness of web-based and blog-based initiatives.

The quality of the recordings is not optimal, but if you're interested in the local scene, worth exploring.

It also contains a presentation on P2P explaining the basic concepts. Click on "BlogConThai Michel" to launch the MP3 session.

URL = http://www.content-wire.com/Multimedia/Index.cfm?cls=3

Picture of the event at http://www.flickr.com/photos/chinarut/124495032 


=More Information=

See also: [[Michel_Bauwens_on_the_Political_and_Policy_Aspects_of_P2P]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Politics]]