
==Discussion==

Kevin Carson summarizes our ideas in his report on [[Real and Counterfeit Techno-Utopianism]]

"We need a new model for struggle and for the postcapitalist transition. [...]

===Michel Bauwens===

Left-wing theories of systemic transition to a high-tech post-capitalist
economy are hardly limited to Marxism. One of the most useful non-Marxist
schools is the post-capitalist model of commons-based peer production,
which includes that of Michel Bauwens of the Foundation for Peer-to-Peer
Alternatives.

Late capitalism, Bauwens writes (with Franco Iacomella), is beset by two
main structural irrationalities: artificial abundance and artificial scarcity.
# The current political economy is based on a false idea of material abundance. We call it pseudo-abundance. It is based on a commitment to permanent growth, the infinite accumulation of capital and debt-driven dynamics through compound interest. This is unsustainable, of course, because infinite growth is logically and physically impossible in any physically constrained, finite system.
# The current political economy is based on a false idea of “immaterial scarcity.” It believes that an exaggerated set of intellectual property monopolies -- for copyrights, trademarks and patents -- should restrain the sharing of scientific, social and economic innovations. Hence the system discourages human cooperation, excludes many people from benefiting from innovation and slows the collective learning of humanity. In an age of grave global challenges, the political economy keeps many practical alternatives sequestered behind private firewalls or unfunded if they cannot generate adequate profits.

These structural contradictions have always made for reduced efficiency
and irrationality. But in recent decades they have resulted in increasingly
chronic crisis tendencies, which amount to a terminal crisis of capitalism as
a system. Both artificial abundance and artificial scarcity have been integral
to capitalism since its beginnings five centuries or so ago, and absolutely
essential for the extraction of profit. But capitalism is becoming increasingly
dependent on both artificial abundance and artificial scarcity for its survival
at the very same time that the state's ability to provide them is reaching its
limits and going into decline. Hence a crisis of sustainability.

Capitalism has pursued a model of growth based on the extensive addition
of artificially cheap inputs. This has been possible either because the
colonial conquest of the world outside Europe has given the extractive
industries privileged access to mineral deposits, fossil fuels and other
natural resources, or because capitalist states have subsidized important
material inputs to the corporate economy like transportation infrastructure
and the reproduction of trained labor-power, at the expense of the general
population.

Western states have engaged in constant wars, not only directly intervening
with military force and maintaining military and naval forces all over the
world, but backing death squads and terrorist dictators like Suharto, Mobutu
and Pinochet, to guarantee continued global corporate control of local land
and natural resources. The main role of the US Navy is to keep the major
sea lanes open at general taxpayer expense to subsidize the transportation
of oil and other looted natural resources from the Global South, and to
provide secure shipping lanes for container ships hauling offshored
production back to the shelves of Walmart.

The problem is that when a particular factor input is subsidized and
artificially cheap, a business will consume increasing amounts of it as it
substitutes it for other factors. And at the same time, capitalism has been
beset by a long-term tendency, since the depressions of the late 19th
century, towards crises of over-investment and excess capacity, demand
shortfalls and declining organic rates of profit.

This means that an ever growing amount of state subsidies, and ever larger
inputs of subsidized material inputs, are necessary just to keep the
corporate economy running artificially in the black. In the words of James
O'Connor, in Fiscal Crisis of the State, the state must subsidize a
perpetually increasing share of the operating costs of capital to keep the
economy out of depression.

The result is two forms of input crisis. First (in the words of O'Connor's title)
the "fiscal crisis of the state," as the state must run increasingly large
deficits, and incur increasingly large debt, in order to meet the constantly
increasing demands for subsidized education, transportation infrastructure,
and foreign imperial wars. Of course the growing deficits are necessary in
their own right, in order to stimulate aggregate demand and counter the
chronic crisis of excess capacity. And the growing debt, which is sold to the
rentier classes, soaks up trillions in surplus investment capital that would
otherwise lack a profitable outlet.

Capitalism -- like every other class society in history -- has likewise
depended since the beginning on artificial scarcities. Such scarcities include
all forms of artificial property rights that erect barriers between labor and
natural productive opportunities, so that producers can be forced to work
harder than necessary in order support privileged classes in addition to
themselves. Capitalism inherited the artificial property rights in land of
earlier systems of exploitation, by which vacant and unimproved land is
engrossed and held out of use on a continuing basis, such engrossed land is
made available to cultivators only on condition of paying tribute to the
engrosser, or a landed oligarchy is superimposed on existing cultivators.

Other forms of artificial scarcity are regulatory entry barriers that impose
unnecessary capital outlays for undertaking production or limit the number
of producers, regulations that impose artificial floors under the cost of
subsistence, restraints on competition between producers that facilitate
administered pricing, and restraints on competition in the issuance of credit
and currency that enable those engaged in that function to charge usurious
prices for it. Perhaps the most important form of artificial scarcity today is
so-called "intellectual property," which is a legal monopoly on the right to
perform certain tasks or use certain knowledge, rather than engrossment of
the means of production themselves.

Artificial scarcity, like artificial abundance, is becoming increasingly
unsustainable. Copyright is rapidly becoming unenforceable, as the
proprietary content industries are learning to their dismay. And the
implosion of necessary capital outlays for manufacturing and of the feasible
scale for micro-manufacturing, coupled with the ease of sharing digital
CAD/CAM files, is raising the transaction costs of enforcing industrial
patents to unsustainable levels. Intensive growing techniques like
Permaculture are far more efficient in terms of output per acre than factory
farming, thus reducing the necessity and value of engrossed land for people
to feed themselves. And the explosion vernacular building technologies,
coupled with the fiscal exhaustion of states that enforce zoning regulations
and building codes and the like, means that the imposition of artificial costs
of comfortable subsistence is likewise becoming unsustainable.

Meanwhile, as capitalism reaches these terminal crises, it is generating its
successor -- its gravedigger classes -- from within its own interstices. Like
the classical slave economy and feudalism, capitalist political economy is
reaching crises of extensive inputs and will be supplanted by a successor
system that is able to pursue intensive use of inputs in ways its predecessor
couldn't. And the phase transition includes an "Exodus" very much like that
envisioned by Negri and Hardt.

====The first transition: Rome to feudalism====

At some point in its evolution (3rd century onwards?), the Roman
empire ceases to expand (the cost of of maintaining empire and
expansion exceeds its benefits). No conquests means a drying up of
the most important raw material of a slave economy, i.e. the slaves,
which therefore become more ‘expensive’. At the same time, the tax
base dries up, making it more and more difficult to maintain both
internal coercion and external defenses. It is in this context that Perry
Anderson mentions for example that when Germanic tribes were
about to lay siege to a Roman city, they would offer to free the slaves,
leading to an exodus of the city population. This exodus and the set of
difficulties just described, set of a reorientation of some slave owners,
who shift to the system of coloni, i.e. serfs. I.e. slaves are partially
freed, can have families, can produce from themselves and have
villages, giving the surplus to the new domain holders.

Hence, the phase transition goes something like this: 1) systemic
crisis ; 2) exodus 3) mutual reconfiguration of the classes.

This whole process would of course take five centuries. In the First
European Revolution, ... the feudal system would only consolidate
around 975, the date of the political revolution confirming the
previous phase transition, and setting up a consolidated growth phase
for the new system (doubling of the population between 10 and 13th
century).

...[T]he failure of extensive development is what brought down earlier
civilizations and modes of production. For example, slavery was not
only marked by low productivity, but could not extend this productivity
as that would require making the slaves more autonomous, so slave-based 
empires had to grow in space, but at a certain point in that
growth, the cost of expansion exceeded the benefits. This is why
feudalism finally emerged, a system which refocused on the local, and
allowed productivity growth as serfs had a self-interest in growing and
ameliorating the tools of production.

The alternative to extensive development is intensive development,
as happened in the transition from slavery to feudalism. But notice
that to do this, the system had to change, the core logic was no longer
the same.

====The second transition: feudalism to capitalism====

Something very similar starts occurring as of the 16th century. The
feudal system enters in crisis, and serfs start fleeing the countryside,
installing themselves in the cities, where they are rejected by the
feudal guild system, but embraced by a new type of proto-capitalist
entrepreneurs. In other words, a section of the feudal class (as well as
some upstarts from the lower classes) re-orient themselves by
investing in the new mode of production (and those that don’t
gradually impoverish themselves), while serfs become workers.

In short, we have the same scheme:
# Systemic crisis
# Exodus
# Mutual reconfiguration of classes
# After a long period of re-orientation and phase transitions: the political revolutions that configure the new capitalist system as dominant

Again, the process of reconfiguration takes several centuries, and the
political revolutions come at the end of it.

Hypothesis of a third transition: capitalism to peer to peer
Again, we have a system faced with a crisis of extensive globalization,
where nature itself has become the ultimate limit. It’s way out,
cognitive capitalism, shows itself to be a mirage.

What we have then is an exodus, which takes multiple forms: precarity
and flight from the salaried conditions; disenchantement with the
salaried condition and turn towards passionate production. The
formation of communities and commons are shared knowledge, code
and design which show themselves to be a superior mode of social
and economic organization.

The exodus into peer production creates a mutual reconfiguration of
the classes. A section of capital becomes netarchical and ‘empowers
and enables peer production’, while attempting to extract value from
it, but thereby also building the new infrastructures of cooperation.
This process will take time but there is one crucial difference: the
biosphere will not allow centuries of transition. So the maturation of
the new configuration will have to consolidate faster and the political
revolutions come earlier.

"Cognitive capitalism" is increasingly dependent on p2p productive
relations and communications infrastructures, and is attempting to
incorporate them into its old corporate framework as a way of injecting life
into the dying system. But it is a force that cannot be contained within the
institutional framework of the old society, and can only come into its full
development as the basis for a successor society.

Companies have used these technologies to integrate their processes
with those of partners, suppliers, consumers, and each other, using a
combination of intranets, extranets, and the public internet, and it has
become the absolutely essential tool for international communication
and business, and to enable the cooperative, internationally
coordinated projects carried out by teams. As we will see in our full
review on the emergence of P2P practices across the social field, an
emphasis on business and economic processes would be very onesided. 
Politics, culture, and science are equally changed by distributed
practices enabled by the new technological infrastructure. Examples
are the grown of massive multi-authorship in different scientific fields,
with hundreds of people involved in research projects, and the
distributed use of scientific instruments, such as arrays of small radio
telescopes.

So the general conclusion of all the above has to be the essentially
cooperative nature of production, the fact that companies are drawing
on this vast reservoir of a 'commons of general intellectuality', without
which they could not function. That innovation is diffused throughout
the social body.

...''Just as post- or late feudal society and its absolutist kings needed
the bourgeoisie, late capitalist society cannot survive without
knowledge workers and their P2P practices. It can be argued that the
adoption of P2P processes is in fact essential for competitiveness: a
strong foundation of P2P technologies, the use of free or open source
software, processes for collective intelligence building, free and fluid
cooperation, are now all necessary facets of the contemporary
corporation''.

On the other hand, P2P systems are not just the outcome of plans of
the establishment, but are the result of the active intervention of
consumers avid for free access to culture, of knowledge workers
actively working to find technical solutions for their needed
cooperative work, and of activists consciously working for the creation
of tools for an emerging participative culture. P2P is both 'within' and
'beyond' the current system.

Some of the more "progressive" elites see "cognitive capitalism" as a way
out of the crisis, but it simply isn't a viable alternative. Although cognitive
capitalism needs P2P, "it cannot cope with it very well, and often P2P is
seen as a threat.... [W]hile being part and parcel of the capitalist and
postmodern logics, it also already points beyond it...."75
And in addition, as we saw above, the artificial scarcities on which rent extraction
depends are becoming largely unenforceable in the information realm.
The dream of our current economy is therefore one of intensive
development, to grow in the immaterial field, and this is basically
what the experience economy means. The hope that it expresses is
that business can simply continue to grow in the immaterial field of
experience.

But is that really so? I have a set of arguments and observations that
argue against that hope. First of all, in the field of the immaterial, we
are no longer dealing with scarce goods, but with marginal
reproduction costs and non-rival goods. With such goods, sharing does
not diminish the enjoyment of the good, since all parties retain their
ability to use them. The emergence of peer production shows a new
form of creating value, that is in fundamental aspects "outside the
market". Typically, in commons-based production we have a
common pool, accessible to everyone (Linux, Wikipedia), around
which an ecology of business can form to create and sell scarcities
(usually services and experiences). In sharing-oriented production
(YouTube, Google documents), we have proprietary platforms that
enable and empower the sharing, but at the same time, sell the
aggregated attention (a scarcity), to the advertising market. Finally, in
the third crowdsourcing mode, companies try to integrate
participation in their own value chain and framework.

So the good news is that indeed business is possible. But I would like
the readers to entertain the following proposition, nl. 

That:
# The creation of non-monetary value is exponential
# The monetization of such value is linear

In other words, we have a growing discrepancy between the direct
creation of use value through social relationships and collective
intelligence (open platforms create near infinite value through the
operations of the laws of Metcalfe and Reed), but only a fraction of
that value can actually be captured by business and money.

Innovation is becoming social and diffuse, an emergent property of
the networks rather than an internal R & D affair within corporations;
capital is becoming an a posteriori intervention in the realization of
innovation, rather than a condition for its occurrence; more and more
positive externalizations are created from the social field.

What this announces is a crisis of value, most such value is beyond
measure, but also essentially a crisis of accumulation of capital.
Furthermore, we lack a mechanism for the existing institutional world
to re-fund what it receives from the social world. So on top of all of
that, we have a crisis of social reproduction: peer production is
collective sustainable, but not individually. For all of this, we will need
new policies, major reforms and restructurations in our economy and
society.

But one thing is sure: we will have markets, but the core logic of the
emerging experience economy, operating as it does in the world of
non-rival exchange, is unlikely to have capitalism as its core logic.
It can no longer grow extensively, but it cannot replace it by intensive
growth. The history of slave empires and their transition to feudal
structures is about to repeat itself, but in a different form.

The successor society centered on peer production will not have
capitalism's core logic (material abundance, immaterial scarcity) at all. It
will be steady-state and sustainable, with true cost pricing, in its use of
physical resources, and it will permit the free replication, sharing and use of
information without limit.

Much as when "Marx identified the manufacturing plants of Manchester as
the blueprint for the new capitalist society," Bauwens sees commons-based
peer production as the core logic of the post-capitalist successor society.

A new class of knowledge workers, in its broad sense already the
majority of the working population in the West, and poised to be in the
same situation elsewhere in a few decades, are creating new practices
and tools that enable them to do what they need to do, i.e. knowledge
exchange. As they create these new tools, bringing into being a new
format of social exchange, they enable new types of subjectivation,
which in turn not only changes themselves, but the world around
them. When Marx wrote his Manifesto, there were only 100,000
industrial workers, yet he saw that this new social model was the
essence of the new society being born. Similarly, even if today only a
few million knowledge workers consciously practice P2P, one can see
the birth of a new model of a much larger social consequence. This
new model is inherently more productive in creating the new
immaterial use value, just as the merchants and capitalists were more
effective in the material economy.

As the hegemonic organizational form of the new society, peer-to-peer is
characterized by processes that
* produce use-value through the free cooperation of producers who have access to distributed capital: this is the P2P production mode, a 'third mode of production' different from for-profit or public production by state-owned enterprises. Its product is not exchange value for a market, but use-value for a community of users.
* are governed by the community of producers themselves, and not by market allocation or corporate hierarchy: this is the P2P governance mode, or 'third mode of governance.'
* make use-value freely accessible on a universal basis, through new common property regimes. This is its distribution or 'peer property mode': a 'third mode of ownership,' different from private property or public (state) property.

With P2P, people voluntarily and cooperatively construct a commons
according to the communist principle: "from each according to his
abilities, to each according to his needs." The use-value created by
P2P projects is generated through free cooperation, without coercion
toward the producers, and users have free access to the resulting use
value. The legal infrastructure [of open licenses] creates an
'Information Commons.' The new Commons is related to the older
form of the commons (most notably the communal lands of the
peasantry in the Middle Ages and of the original mutualities of the
workers in the industrial age), but it also differs mostly through its
largely immaterial characteristics. The older Commons were localized,
used, and sometimes regulated by specific communities; the new
Commons are universally available and regulated by global cyber
collectives, usually affinity groups. While the new Commons is
centered around non-rival goods (that is, in a context of abundance)
the older forms of physical Commons (air, water, etc.) increasingly
function in the context of scarcity, thus becoming more regulated.

* peer production effectively enables the free cooperation of producers, who have access to their own means of production, and the resulting use-value of the projects supercedes for-profit alternatives...
* peer governance transcends both the authority of the market and the state
* the new forms of universal common property, transcend the limitations of both private and public property models and are reconstituting a dynamic field of the Commons.

Although commons-based peer production first appeared in the immaterial
sphere, new technological possibilities for the widespread ownership of
cheap, small-scale material production tools and distributed aggregation of
capital have laid the groundwork for the same mode of production to spread
rapidly into the physical realm as well.

* P2P can arise not only in the immaterial sphere of intellectual and software production, but wherever there is access to distributed technology: spare computing cycles, distributed telecommunications and any kind of viral communicator meshwork.
* P2P can arise wherever other forms of distributed fixed capital are available: such is the case for carpooling, which is the second most used mode of transportation in the U.S.
* P2P can arise wherever the process of design may be separated from the process of physical production. Huge capital outlines for production can co-exist with a reliance on P2P processes for design and conception.
* P2P can arise wherever financial capital can be distributed....
* P2P could be expanded and sustained through the introduction of universal basic income.

(As an anarchist who sees universal basic income as a positive step
compared to the capitalist welfare state but also sees it as at least
potentially problematic as an end-state institution, I would note that the
same function is likely to be served by other, more decentralized voluntary
institutions for pooling costs, risks and income through micro-villages,
multi-family cohousing units and the like.)

The state and market will continue to exist, but will take on a fundamentally
different character, defined by its relation to the larger society -- with the
commons as its hegemonic institution -- into which it is embedded.


The peer-to-peer vision relies upon the three major sectors of society –
the state, market and civil society – but with different roles and in a
revitalized equilibrium. At the core of the new society is civil society,
with the commons as its main institution, which uses peer production
to generate common value outside of the market logic. These
commons consist of both the natural heritage of mankind (oceans, the
atmosphere, land, etc.), and commons that are created through
collective societal innovation, many of which can be freely shared
because of their immaterial nature (shared knowledge, software and
design, culture and science). Civil society hosts a wide variety of
activities that are naturally and structurally beneficial to the commons
– not in an indirect and hypothetical way, as claimed by the “Invisible
Hand” metaphor, but in a direct way, by entities that are structurally
and constitutionally designed to work for the common good. This
sphere includes entities such as trusts, which act as stewards of
physical resources of common use (land trusts, natural parks), and for
benefit foundations, which help maintain the infrastructure of
cooperation for cultural and digital commons....

Around this new core is a private sphere, where market entities with
private agendas and private governance can still create added-value
around the commons by producing relatively scarce goods and
services. However, because of the pathological and destructive nature
of profit-maximizing corporations, in the P2P economy this private
sphere is reformed to serve more ethical ends by using proper
taxation, revenue and benefit-sharing modalities to help generate
positive externalities, e.g., infrastructure, shareable knowledge, and
by using taxation, competition, and rent-for-use to minimize negative
externalities, e.g., pollution, overuse of collective resources.
Cooperative enterprises are the more prominent and developed form
of private organization in this new economy.

The markets will be non-capitalist -- without the artificially cheap material
inputs and the artificial scarcity of naturally free information -- and the state
will increasingly take on the character of a networked support platform in
its relationship to self-managed, horizontal civil society organizations.
* A powerful and re-invigorated sphere of reciprocity (gift economy) centered around the introduction of time-based complementary currencies.
* A reformed sphere for market exchange, the kind of 'natural capitalism' described by Paul Hawken, David Korten and Hazel Henderson, where the costs for natural and social reproduction are no longer externalized, and which abandons the growth imperative for a throughput economy as described by Herman Daly.
* A reformed state that operates within a context of multistakeholdership and which is no longer subsumed to corporate interests, but act as a fair arbiter between the Commons, the market and the gift economy.85

The public sector of the P2P economy is neither a corporate welfare
state at the service of a financial elite, nor a welfare state that has a
paternalistic relation to civil society, but a Partner State, which serves
civil society and takes responsibility for the metagovernance of the
three spheres. The Partner State is dedicated to supporting “the
common value creation of the civic sphere”; the “market” and the
“mission-oriented” activities of the new private sphere; and all the
public services that are necessary for the common good of all citizens.

It is very important here to distinguish the market from capitalism.

Markets predate capitalism, and are a simple technique to allocate
resources through the meeting of supply and demand using some
medium of exchange. The allocation mechanism is compatible with a
wide variety of other, eventually dominant systems. It is compatible
with methods of “just pricing,” full or “true cost accounting”
(internalization of all costs), fair trade, etc. It does not require that
labor and money be considered as commodities nor that workers be
separated from the means of production. Markets can be subsumed to
other logics and modalities such as the state or the commons.

Capitalism, on the other hand, considered by some as an “antimarket”..., requires amongst other features: 
# the separation ofproducers and the means of production; and 
# infinite growth (either through competition and capital accumulation, as described by Karl Marx, or through compound interest dynamics, as described by Silvio Gesell).

In the vision of a commons-oriented society, the market is subsumed
under the dominant logic of the commons and regulated by the
Partner State....

The essential characteristic of the new system is that the commons is
the new core, and a variety of hybrid mechanisms can productively
coexist around it, including reformed market and state forms.

The basic principles of the emerging post-capitalist economy, with the peerto-peer movement as its core, are:

"Firstly, there is the mutualisation of knowledge, the idea that it is
unethical to withhold basic keys of knowledge that could solve the
problems of the world.

"The second key point of open-source is called the `sharing economy'.
It involves mutualising idle resources.

"The third point is relocalising production. New types of technology --
such as 3-D printing -- mean we can apply a typical rule: what is
physically heavy is produced locally; what is light is globally
distributed."

It's a twist on the traditional economic paradigm of supply and
demand.

"At present we have a supply-driven economy in which companies
either respond to real needs or try to create a perception of need;
they centralise production, have massive over-production then require
marketing and advertising to get rid of products.
"Studies have shown that two-thirds of matter and energy go into the
transportation of goods, not their actual production. If we can diminish
that transportation, we can have a much lighter impact on the
planet.''

Bauwens suggests an economic model involving micro-factories that
produce designs created via open-source networks.

Bauwens sees commons-based peer production as a post-capitalist mode of
production that will succeed capitalism, growing out of it in a matter
analogous to how the manorial economy emerged from the collapse of the
slave economy of classical antiquity and capitalism emerged from late
feudalism. And like the previous transitions, peer-production will evolve as a
solution to the crisis tendencies of late capitalism when the latter reaches
its limits.

Although his approach is closer to the Exodus and horizontalism of Negri
and Hardt, it is not purely one of quietism towards the state. Bauwens sees
a need for active engagement with the state to manage the transition and
to run interference on behalf of emergent P2P institutions, even if the
primary path is evolutionary rather than by seizure of the state and
implementation of a post-capitalist successor society through it.


A first step is to become aware of the isomorphism, the commonality,
of peer to peer processes in the various fields. That people devising
and using P2P sharing programs, start realizing that they are
somehow doing the same thing than the alterglobalisation movement,
and that both are related to the production of Linux, and to
participative epistemologies. Thus what we must do first is building
bridges of cooperation and understanding across the social fields....

...

[T]he second step is to "furiously" build the commons. When we
develop Linux, it is there, cannot be destroyed, and by its very
existence and use, builds another reality, based on another social
logic, the P2P logic. Adopting a network sociality and building dense
interconnections as we participate in knowledge creation and
exchange is enormously politically significant. By feeding our
immaterial and spiritual needs outside of the consumption system, we
can stop the logic which is destroying our ecosphere. The present
system may not like opposition, but even more does it fear
indifference, because it can feed on the energy of strife, but starts
dying when it is shunted. This is what is being expressed by Toni
Negri's concept of Exodus, and what other call 'Desertion' . These
commentators note that it was 'the refusal of work' in the seventies,
with blue-collar workers showing increasing dissatisfaction with the
Taylorist/Fordist system of work, that lead to the fundamental 
re-arrangement of work in the first place. In the past, the labor
movement and other social movements mostly shared the same
values, and it was mostly about a fairer share of the pie. But the new
struggles are mostly about producing a new kind of pie, and producing
it in a different way. Or perhaps an even more correct metaphor: it is
about the right to produce altogether different kinds of pie.

Today, the new ethic says that 'to resist is in the first place to create'.
The world we want is the world we are creating through our
cooperative P2P ethos, it is visible in what we do today, not an utopian
creation for the future. Building the commons has a crucial ingredient:
the building of a dense alternative media network, for permanent and
collective self-education in human culture, away from the mass
consumption model promoted by the corporate media.

Thus, if there is an 'offensive' strategy it would look like this: to build
the commons, day after day, the process of creating of a society
within society. 

In this context, the emergence of the internet and the
web, is a tremendous step forward....
Regarding the commons such an approach would entail:
# a defense of the physical commons and the development of new institutions such as trusts to manage the environment;
# an end to exaggerated private appropriation of the knowledge commons;
# a universal basic income to create the conditions for the expansion of peer production;
# any measure that speeds up the distribution of capital.

In the field of the gift economy: the promotion of reciprocity-based
schemes, using alternative currency schemes based on equal time
(Time Dollars and the like)

Finally, peer to peer also demands self-transformation. As we said, P2P is
predicated on abundance, on transcending the animal impulse based on
win-lose games. But abundance is not just objective, i.e. also, and
perhaps most importantly, subjective. This is why tribal economies
considered themselves to live in abundance, and were egalitarian in
nature. This is why happiness researchers show that it is not poverty that
makes us unhappy, but inequality. Thus, the P2P ethos demands a
conversion, to a point of view, to a set of skills, which allow us to focus
ourselves to fulfilling our immaterial and spiritual needs directly, and not
through a perverted mechanism of consumption. As we focus on
friendships, connections, love, knowledge exchange, the cooperative
search for wisdom, the construction of common resources and use value,
we direct our attention away from the artificial needs that are currently
promoted, and this time we personally and collectively stop feeding the
Beast that we have ourselves created."

==More Information==

Excerpted from [[Real and Counterfeit Techno-Utopianism]]

* Report: Techno-Utopianism, Counterfeit and Real (With Special Regard to Paul Mason's Post-Capitalism). By Kevin A. Carson. Center for a Stateless Society Paper No. 20 (Spring 2016)

URL = https://c4ss.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/TechnoUtopiaPDF1.pdf

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]

[[Category:P2P Transition]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]