
=Bio=

Michael Madison is a professor of law at the School of Law at the University of Pittsburgh, located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.  He has been a member of the law faculty since 1998.  Before that time, he was a practicing lawyer in San Francisco and in the Silicon Valley, California.  His research and scholarship concentrates on the law and public policy of intellectual property and the internet, with special attention to copyright law and to institutions.  He has published numerous articles in scholarly law journals, the most recent of which develop a new research framework for exploring commons in the cultural context.  He received a bachelor's degree (BA) from Yale University and a law degree (JD) from Stanford University, both with honors.
 

=Publications=

Published research related to the [[Commons]] includes:

* Constructing Commons in the Cultural Environment (with Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)95 Cornell L. Rev. 657 (2010) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1265793 and a collection of papers discussing that work at http://www.lawschool.cornell.edu/research/cornell-law-review/Volume-95-Number-4.cfm

* The Complexity of Commons (with Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)95 Cornell L. Rev. 839 (2010) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1607701

* The University as Constructed Cultural Commons (with Brett M. Frischmann & Katherine J. Strandburg)30 Wash. U. J. Law & Pol’y 365 (2009) http://ssrn.com/abstract=1256090



=More Information=

CV at http://madisonian.net/home/downloads/cv.pdf
 
website at http://madisonian.net/home


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons]]