
=Description=

"Michael Opielka is professor of Social Policy at the University of Applied Sciences, Jena, managing director of the Institute for Social Ecology in Siegburg and a lecturer at the Universities of Bonn and Hamburg. He received his doctorate in sociology at the Humboldt University Berlin in 1996 and his habilitation in sociology at the University of Hamburg in 2008. In 2004–5 he was visiting scholar at the University of California at Berkeley, School of Social Welfare. Formerly a parliamentary advisor of the German Green Party in the federal parliament for social policy, today he is a member of the commission for a ‘Solidarisches Buergergeld’ (Basic Income) of the Christian Democratic Party and consultant to the Friedrich-Ebert-Foundation of the Social Democratic Party as well as to the Heinrich-Boell-Stiftung of the Green Party. He was founder of the Basic Income Earth Network (BIEN) and the German Basic Income Network. He is the author of numerous articles and books on social policy, sociology, religion, and culture."



=Publication=

* The [[Case of Basic Income for Third Way Politics after the Global Crisis]] Paper presented at the Colloquium of the Center for Social Science together with the Institute of Social Welfare of Seoul National University, May 27, 2010


=More Information=

Address: Prof. Dr. habil. Michael Opielka, University of Applied Sciences Jena, Faculty of Social Welfare – Carl-Zeiss-Promenade 2, D-07745 Jena, Germany, e-mail: michael.opielka@fh-jena.de 


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]