
=Contextual Citation=

"Criticism of political correctness was supposed to be the exclusive province of the rightwing. For most observers, it was almost inconceivable that an anti-P.C. critic could come from another political quarter. Unsurprisingly, then, the majority of people who discovered my case, including some reporters, simply assumed that I was a conservative. As one Twitter troll put it: “You’re anti-P.C.? You must be a rightwing nut-job.” But as I explained in numerous interviews and essays, I was not a Trump supporter; I was never a right-winger, or an alt-right-winger; I was never a conservative of any variety. Hell, I wasn’t even a classical John Stuart Mill liberal. 

In fact, for several years, I had identified as a left communist. My politics were to the left (and considerably critical of the authoritarianism) of Bolshevism!"
(https://www.michaelrectenwald.com/essays/chapter-2-becoming-deplorable)


=Bio=

"Michael Rectenwald—the notorious @antipcnyuprof—is the author of nine books: Springtime for Snowflakes, Google Archipelago (Aug. 2019), Nineteenth-Century British Secularism, and others. He was a Professor at NYU from 2008 to 2019. He is a pundit and champion of free speech against all forms of authoritarianism and totalitarianism, including socialism-communism, “social justice,” fascism, and PC. 

He has appeared on numerous major network political and other talk shows (Tucker Carlson Tonight, Fox & Friends, The O’Reilly Factor, Varney & Company, The Glenn Beck Show), on syndicated radio shows (Glenn Beck and many others), and YouTube shows and podcasts (see Media).

His academic essays have appeared in the British Journal for the History of Science, Endeavour, and the Cambridge University Press anthology George Eliot In Context, among others. He holds a Ph.D. in Literary and Cultural Studies from Carnegie Mellon University, a Master's in English Literature from Case Western Reserve University, and a B.A. in English Literature from the University of Pittsburgh."

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]