
Video via https://vimeo.com/191648888

Kaaiteater, 14/11/2016 in Brussels, Belgium.


=Description=

"Which new social structure are we evolving towards? Michel Bauwens tries to work this out by looking at contemporary practices that address the challenges of the future in the most direct way. He identifies an exponential growth of civil initiatives that experiment both locally and globally with new models and solutions. Behind the scenes, an entirely new set of values is being built up, with discoveries such as new types of contributory accounting to manage common property, open logistics systems for the circular economy, and so on. Michel Bauwens and the network of researchers into the emerging commons-based economy present a summary of 10 years of research."

=Contents=

Timeline by William Charlton:

10:24 Kojin Karatani - The Structure of World History - https://www.amazon.co.uk/Structure-World-History-Production-Exchange/dp/0822356767 

Karl Polanyi - The Great Transformation - https://www.amazon.co.uk/Great-Transformation-Political-Economic-Origins/dp/080705643X 

17:42 Giorgio Agamben - The Highest Poverty - http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=22397 

Contributory Accounting

P2P Value - https://p2pvalue.eu/ 

23:50 Guerrilla Translation - http://www.guerrillatranslation.org/ 

24:08 David Bollier - Think like a Commoner - http://www.thinklikeacommoner.com/ 

26 Netarchical capital - http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057%2F9781137406897_4 and http://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Netarchical_Capitalism 

26:28 Hyper-Neo-Liberalism

Generative Value Regime

27:30 Enspiral - http://enspiral.com/ 

29: 06 4 Forms - (Karatani) Pooling, Reciprocity, Markets and State Redistribution

29: 49 Why Capitalism?

30:40 Transvestment - https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Transvestment 

31:00 Cooptates

31:10 Terre de Liens - https://www.terredeliens.org/ 

32:43 Driftless Area Wisconsin - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Driftless_Area 

33:50 Reintegrate Externalities - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Externality 

35:30 Wikispeed - http://wikispeed.org/ 

36:50 Capped Investments - https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Joshua_Vial_on_the... 

38:00 Douglas Rushkoff - Life Inc - http://www.rushkoff.com/books/life-inc/ 

40:00 Ethical markets in Middle Ages

40:28 Execution of speculators! (in Middle Ages)

40:56 100 industrial sectors. All unviable if externalities are included Ditto CAC 40 (French Stock market)

41:30 Corporations v Cooperation

42:20 Lamps that burn forever

43:00 Mutualisation

43:30 Jevons' paradox - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jevons%27s_paradox - see also the Coal Question http://oilcrash.net/media/pdf/The_Coal_Question.pdf

44:00 Uber - the reality

46:09 Cosmo-localization - http://actionforesight.net/cosmo-localization/ and https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Cosmo-Localization 

48:10 Mark Whitaker- Ecological Revolution: The Political Origins of Environmental Degradation and the Environmental Origins of Axial Religions; China, Japan, Europe - https://www.amazon.com/Ecological.../dp/383830022X 

50:30 Mutualisation of knowledge, Mutualising infrastructure and relocalising production.

52:17 A political voice for Commoners

58:00 Trans-National Localisation

1:00:00 Q and A

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]