The following is a record of some of the reactions we received from people attending our [[P2P Seminars]].  (See also our [[Bio]])


'''Michel is one of the most powerful global thinkers about the social, political, economic and psychological consequences of Web 2.0 and the peer-to-peer revolution, and is vigorously developing his P2P Foundation in service of this'''.

- Pat Kane [http://www.theplayethic.com/]


"Michel Bauwens is the global authority on Peer-to-peer, social production and the new economic and social forms that are emerging around information and communication technologies. His research is meticolous and his theoretical work pathbreaking: He has made a crucial contribution to building an intellectual consciousness about these matters. We all depend on his work."

- Adam Arvidsson, Associate Professor, University of Milan



Paul Hartzog, University of Michigan: "'''You ARE the foremost scholar in this space'''"

Dr Athina Karatzogianni, University of Hull: "'''I have benefitted immensely from the foundation'''."


=Documentation=

#Record of P2P lectures since 2007: http://delicious.com/mbauwens/Bauwens-Lectures
#Video recordings of presentations, interviews: http://delicious.com/mbauwens/Bauwens-Videos


=Testimonials in English=

==Seminar Reactions==

===Australia===

- Brad Hinton, Ark Group's Knowledge Management Australia, Sydney 7/07

'''The highlight of the day, however, was the presentation by Michel Bauwens.'''
[http://bradhinton.wordpress.com/2007/07/23/on-km-australia-2007-part-1/]

- Pat Byrne, Holistech Australia:

"I was most impressed with your knowledge and approach - you do not "preach" as others sometimes do but more "engage and
explain" and that is important to us and others."


- Mark Elliot, Stygmergic Collaboration [http://mark-elliott.net/view/Blog/BlogEntry55]:

"'''a clear, focused and compelling proposal''' for the emergence of a new organisational paradigm ... I thoroughly enjoyed the talk and was very happy to have had the opportunity to further discuss all things p2p"


 
===Austria===


- Franz Nahrada - Global Villages

Michel Bauwens is a thorough researcher who makes it easy for his public to comprehend the deep changes in todays economy. '''With a passion and diligence comparable to Adam Smith''', he looks at the traits of the upcoming most powerful mode of production that humankind has ever invented, the one that is truly setting free the full potential of individuals and collectives through self-detemination, autonomy and infinite networking.

His speeches and even more his in-depth seminars are mind - openers and
lead to activate the sense for a whole range of opportunities in todays
seemingly saturated world of business.

Mr. Nahrada is even more enthusiastic in his Native German:

"''Wie soll ich ihn beschreiben? Er ist ein brillianter Kopf, guter Redner,
unglaublich fleissiger Cybrarian, Chronist und zugleich wichtigster
Organisator der Bewegung. Ein Universaltalent wie es die Geschichte in
wichtigen Momenten braucht. Er ist sozusagen das Gegenstück zu Bill Gates
oder Steve Jobs auf unserer Seite. Nur ein bischen weniger bekannt, aber
das wird sich noch ändern und ist im Moment vielleicht auch noch ganz gut
so''."

===Belgium===


- by a creative professional from the These Days advertising company:

URL = http://blog.thesedays.com/blog/2006/09/28/these-days-peer-to-peer-seminar-a-recap/


===Canada===

By [[Tiberius Brastaviceanu]], co-founder of [[Sensorica]]

I want to thank Michel Bauwens for the positive effect he left on Montreal. On September 2th 2012 he was invited to "A l'ecole des communs" organized by [http://www.communautique.qc.ca/ Communautique] to give a series of talks. Michel came and went like a good rainy day in a dry season, living behind him an explosion of life!

Different groups working in isolation merged into a reinforced network focused around the p2p economy and the economy of the commons. We are now having serious discussions around concrete projects, putting together our different resources, addressing challenges from different perspectives. One initiative is to create a local and diverse fablab network. Fablabs are now popping up everywhere. What's different in our approach, is that this network will be complemented with an underlying [http://valuenetwork.referata.com/wiki/Main_Page "value network"] infrastructure to allow the flow of resources between individuals participating in these diverse open collaborative spaces. These individuals will be able to take their ideas to the market without compromising the ethical values behind the open culture.

Thank you Michel for catalyzing this convergence!

===Denmark===

- Thomas Ermacora, webentrepreneur & futurist:


"Michael Bauwens belongs to this new generation of progressive, involved and hyperconnected intellectuals who develops a deep and continuous analysis of the social web phenomena, particularly how P2P impacts people and society at large, and what potential for positive change this sharing sphere comprises. Not only that, his foundation is a gem - a platform for interactive reformation. "


- Damien Mulley, on the Reboot 9 intervention:

"'''Michel Bauwens’ talk was great. He’s a good speaker and his topic was very engaging.''' I hope the presentation is available somewhere. It’s one of those kind of talks where you get excited that maybe we can change the world and make it better."
(http://www.mulley.net/2007/06/03/a-reboot-review-reboot-90-in-denmark/)



===Ethiopia===

- Dorothy K. Gordon, director-general aiti-kace:

Your intervention at the last WITFOR was much appreciated and '''many people found it to be a highlight of the meeting'''.


===France===

- Francois Rey - Open Xchange

For long I had this feeling that behind P2P there was a lot more to discover, that it wasn’t just about file sharing. Michel was the first person to give me a better understanding of what it is that makes P2P such an important aspect in our evolution. His work has given me a greater context in which to insert my own research.


===Italy===


- Professor Ezio Manzini, Milan Politechnico

"thank you again for your brilliant conference"


===Netherlands===

- Prof. Rik Maes, from the University of Amsterdam

Read the more extensive evaluation here: [[Some remarks regarding the contributions of Michel Bauwens to the activities of the University of Amsterdam]]


- Thomas Thijssen, Via Nova Academy

Michel Bauwens fully understands the signs of our time and the emergence of a society where peer production and peer governance present new opportunities for individuals and groups to create value together. He is able to place these new developments in both a historical context and a future oriented context. For international leaders it is a must to understand the consequences of the P2P-movement.


- Albert Boswijk, Center for the Experience Economy

Mr. Bauwens has presented for our institute several times in an international context. '''He is a very good speaker and has deep knowledge of the subject he is covering. He inspired our public several times and we higly recommend him.'''

- Kim Veltman - Virtual Maastricht McLuhan Institute

There are too many prophets of glory and prophets of doom. Michel Bauwens is different. In a world of technophiles and techo-evangelists, of computer salesmen and technology buffs, Michel Bauwens introduces new ways of thinking about the extraordinary developments that are occurring. In a world where there are 1000 mobile phones being sold every minute, where there are 1.13 billion Internet users, Michel Bauwens looks at facts and also provokes us to think afresh. He is a good speaker. He is very much worth listening to, not because he has all the answers but because he offers new questions.


- George Dafermos - Researcher TU Delft

'''Michel Bauwens's analysis of the emerging peer-to-peer landscape is by
far the most inspiring and acute I have ever come into contact with.''' His
prescient - yet firmly based on empirical facts - observations elucidate
the dynamics underlying the peer-to-peer paradigm and explicate its
significance for both economic and social actors. In explaining the new
forms of collaboration, production, and distribution made possible by
and atop the technical infrastructure of peer-to-peer, Bauwens
skillfully and convincingly demonstrates how peer-to-peer translates
into a new form of human association which will catalyse new structures
in our economies and societies.


- Tatian Glad, The Hub Amsterdam

"It was amazing to have Michel in our Hub Amsterdam - though a lot of what he talked about was so new to the general community, it sparked an ongoing tickle to explore more among some key members..."

===Thailand===


- From Thailand, Hans van Willenswaard - Editor 'Business & Society', Bangkok. 

'''Michel Bauwens is able to describe in a concise way what others can hardly grasp because it is so groundbreaking but subtle''': fundamental changes in the business sector are emerging and will replace the present system as it becomes redundant. Michel presents his case not as an academic but from the point of view of a business leader with alerting experiences he took to his heart. It made him search for the principles of conventional thinking and the new paradigms we need to become sustainable.


- Jan Orsini, Rural Employment Promotion Expert


"'''I was profoundly moved when Michel made his presentation on P2P systems'''"


===United States===

Jorge N. Ferrer, Ph.D., Chair, Department of East-West Psychology, CIIS:

"It was a rare pleasure to have Michel Bauwens delivering a special lecture at the California Institute of Integral Studies (CIIS), San Francisco. Michel is an incredibly learned and humble visionary who skillfully combines a refined sense of the pulse of our technological times with a rich background in the business world and personal spiritual depth. I especially appreciated the way he used his P2P framework to connect cutting edge cultural phenomena such as the Wikipedia or YouTube with a range of pivotal socio-political and psycho-spiritual issues. A truly integral thinker with a grounded vision of the times to come."

==Reactions on the Writings==


-	George Dafermos, at  http://radio.weblogs.com// 

"Michel Bauwens is the author of '''the most visionary piece on peer-to-peer I've ever read''', published his much-awaited new essay on P2P, entitled P2P and Human Evolution: p2p as the premise of a new mode of civilization. As expected, his excellent and path-breaking treatise is all-encompassing, critically exploring P2P in all its possible manifestations and linkages, that is, with respect to its political, social, economic, spiritual, cultural, and technological implications. It is at the intersections of all these spheres and their interactions that P2P holds the potential to emerge as the basis of the new civilisation premised on self-realisation, autonomy, creation, eros, and sharing. It's either that or a return to barbarism, writes Bauwens. '''Read on and marvel at the mental syntheses that this essay invokes'''."

-	Peer to Peer weblog / Unmediated at http://p2p.weblogsinc.com/entry// 

"Michel Bauwens has written '''a phenomenal essay''' entitled P2P and Human Evolution: Placing Peer to Peer Theory in an Integral Framework. It's long and much of it goes far over my head, but reads like a P2P manifesto" Bauwens even concludes by calling it a guide to an active participation in the transformation of our world, into something better, more participative, more free, more creative. Really quite fascinating."


-	Integral Foresight Institute, Chris Stewart

"'''What Michael Bauwens has achieved in a very short space fullfills the same function as the Communist Manifesto once did: a call for a worldwide movement for social and political change, firmly rooted in the objective and subjective changes of contempary society, and articulated as a practical and insightful model of human value and power relations that is ahead of its time.  If we listen more carefully to Bauwens than we ever did Marx, however, it just might lead to a smooth evolution for humanity rather than revolution, or at worst, destruction.  Bauwens has traced out real contours of hope for Western civilization.'''  His presentation of a P2P perspective includes a clear theory of human power and value relations, a practical appreciation of its relationship to the current orthodoxy, and an inspiring vision for viable, sustainable, and desirable futures.  Just as Bauwens notes the limited social acceptance of Marx at the time of his writing, it may well be that in years to come Bauwens’s articulate and deeply considered insights will not only be as profoundly influential and valuable but, crucially, a lot more workable." 


-	P2P and Integral Theory – Generation Sit weblog

"I rarely encounter essays addressing Integral Theory in the context of emerging technology. But '''if there's one thing out there worth reading, this essay is one of them''' -- P2P and Human Evolution: Placing Peer to Peer Theory in an Integral Framework (via IntegralWorld). This very long essay describes P2P in detail, covering the interior and exterior aspects, and its incompatibilities with Spiral Dynamics and Integral Theory. There are a lot of heady stuff for me to digest in this essay. And I'm still not done reading it."


-	John Heron, Participatory Spirituality pioneer, author of Sacred Science

"What I appreciate is your clarity with regard to the following: your basic definition of p2p; the way you trace this definition, and any compromises and departures from it, within its many manifestations; and toward the end of your account, forms co-existence and of possible political strategies. All of this is very valuable food for thought and action. You make a most effective and persuasive case for the widespread significance of the p2p phenomenon, in diverse fields, and with due regard for the underlying epistemological shifts involved. '''This work is indeed a major achievement of scholarship, insight, moral vision and political imagination'''."


-	Larry Penslinger, author of The Moon at Hoa Binh

“I have been reading your essay.  The information in book form is far easier to approach than the online newsletter, of course.  This is '''truly a great introduction to this field of thought.  A major accomplishment''', even in its present "a work in progress" stage. Thank you very much for making this available. One of the very useful aspects of P2P&HE, I find, is contextualization of the notes with their many website referrals.  This allows me to follow out the ideas in a coherent fashion.  A significant body of this material has been available only in French, which I do not read, and much of it remains untranslated.  However, much information is now available in English on the net concerning what remains untranslated, and P2P&HE is an excellent guide."


- Kevin Carson, Mutualist.org

"- Kevin Carson

"The quality of writing on the P2P Foundation blog is incomparable, and I have relied heavily on material in the P2P Wiki on peer production, open source manufacturing, and desktop manufacturing, in writing Chapters Fourteen and Fifteen of my org theory manuscript.

I highly recommend Bauwens' extended essay "[[P2P and Human Evolution]]," and his shorter introductory essay "The [[Political Economy of Peer Production]]."


-	Brian Martin, University of Wollongong, Australia

“It's excellent! You've presented P2P in a logical way that clarifies how it relates to other modes of production, both meshing with and transforming them. I really appreciate your careful thinking."


-	Victor Lewis-Hansom, by email:

"At first skim reading, I think that '''the spark you have created in our historical times, will be historically significant and remembered'''.  Thank you for putting so much of yourself into your essay."


-	Darren Sharp, by email

"Just read your outstanding 'P2P and Human Evolution: Peer to Peer as the premise of a new mode of civilization.' I've got to say, '''I was blown away by your bold synthesis of such complex material'''."


-	Tony Mobily, editor in chief of Free Software Magazine

“I think your paper is fantastic." (email, 3/2006)

==Reactions to our Videos==

- Tim Gartside, from [[Open Sphere]], Australia

"I found myself watching it last evening with great interest. '''The material is certainly full of life''' the second time around (or I found it so). Indeed, I may well line up for a third pass! There is so much content floating around nowadays, though '''I give this material a fulsome recommendation in terms of its relevance to the evolution of organisations'''. Michel has made a keen synthesis of a wide range of social trends (including technology). Much of his practical commentary is highly pertinent to the development of Open Sphere which is concerned with the development of ‘peer to peer’ zones within existing organisations; and organisations learning to alternate between the formal/vertical structure and the open sphere/horizontal structure. The video is just under one hour."


==Reactions to the site==

Thank you for the great info - it reads like an outline for a fantastic course I should start offering and then push into the engineering curriculum at every university of the world. This is the perfect way to learn - while actually doing some good.

''Joshua M. Pearce, Ph.D. Coordinator of Nanotechnology and Sustainability: Science and Policy Programs [http://jupiter.clarion.edu/~jpearce/]''


==Reactions to the work at the P2P Foundation==

'''Sundar Raman''':

"I wanted to tell you that your name comes up almost every day with projects that I'm working on. I've put Open Views on a hiatus for a year, and will be resuming it in May (in about a month). I'm working with a group of students and other visionaries on building sustainable businesses, rethinking how we interact in the business world, and how we can do collaborative projects. And pretty much every conversation brings your name up since your videos and writings have influenced a large number of the participants in our group. Strangely this all happened entirely without my prompting - we happened to all come together for our projects and all believe in collaborative approaches and your P2P visions have contributed greatly to understanding what collaboration can really mean." (April 2009)


'''Jose Ramos''', Action Foresight, Australia:

"I was fortunate to catch up with friend and colleague Michel Bauwens in Chiang Mai in Nov. of 2011. It was truly inspiring to be with Michel, who I consider one of the most brilliant minds I have come across in my lifetime. For him, Peer-to-Peer is not just a few examples of web2+, but a macro-historical analysis combined with an integrative philosophy. I have met few people who can straddle diverse discourses while maintaining the raw energy of the creative global change agent, and an amazing vision for our common futures."

=Testimonials in French=



==Seminar Reactions==


From Denmark, by Thomas Ermacora, webentrepreneur & futurist:


"Michael Bauwens fait partie de cette nouvelle caste d'intellectuels du web social qui comprennent à la fois comment vulgariser la connaissance complexe des differents types d'interactions qu'il engendre et catégoriser leurs effets pour une lecture plus lucide des tendances lourdes de la transformation de la société à travers la toile. " (Thomas Ermacora, webentrepreneur & futuriste)


==Reactions on the Writings==

- Yves Simon at http://www.social-computing.com/showitem.php?ID=137 

"Michel Bauwens est un personnage connu du monde de la nouvelle économie. Il a rendu public une dernière mouture de son essai courant mars 2005 : P2P and Human Evolution : Peer to peer as the premise of a new mode of civilization
Un article dans la revue belge Imagine Magazine présente les conclusions de cette étude. Michel Bauwens estime que les technologies peer to peer ne sont que les prémisses de la constitution d'une nouvelle civilisation de pairs qui doit bouleverser les modèles établis. Je cite ci-après qq passages remarquables de l'interview conduit par David Leloup :

"Il s’agit donc d’une grande transformation culturelle qui conduit à un paradigme participatif.

Le P2P est d’abord un concept descriptif. Il permet d’analyser des nouvelles formes d’organisation. Là où le concept de peer-to-peer devient encore plus puissant, c’est quand il passe du statut d’outil descriptif à une utilisation normative. Comment le monde changerait-il, comment ma vie et mon éthique changent-elles, quand je commence à exiger des relations de pairs dans la totalité de mes actes ? Le peer-to-peer acquiert alors une véritable puissance révolutionnaire. C’est par exemple ce que le mouvement féministe a voulu et en partie réalisé : un refus d’accepter encore plus longtemps l’inégalité avec les hommes. Il y a aujourd’hui un véritable exode vers les interstices du système : non seulement il y a les «downshifters» comme moi-même, mais également des pans entiers de la jeunesse qui refusent la féodalité intrinsèque de la structure des entreprises.

Le peer-to-peer est en effet la structure même du troisième capitalisme : le capitalisme cognitif, qui remplace le capitalisme industriel lui-même ayant remplacé le capitalisme marchand.

...liée à la notion de «noosphère» de Teilhard de Chardin, c’est-à-dire la sphère spécifiquement culturelle, humaine. Le peer-to-peer permet une interconnexion de tous les cerveaux au niveau planétaire, et permet donc une action globale afin de répondre aux énormes défis écologiques et autres. Avant l’avènement d’Internet, ce genre de coordination globale était exclusivement réservée aux grandes multinationales.

le P2P permet de créer un contre-pouvoir qui combine l’échange égalitaire et la création d’une nouvelle sphère cognitive commune – ce que Lawrence Lessig appelle les «Creative Commons».


- Marc Dangeard in http://casailor.blogspot.com/2005/04/p2p-et-societe.html

"Je viens de lire l'essai de Michel Bauwens sur le Peer-to-Peer, et '''c’est extremement interessant. Ca se lit vite, et ca en vaut l'effort''': [http://noosphere.cc/P2P2bi.htm]

La conclusion est qu’il y a dans l’avenement du peer to peer une vraie opportunite de changer le systeme dans lequel nous vivons.

En relation avec cette analyse sur l’evolution des modes de communication vers un modele peer to peer, et sur les modeles de societe qui peuvent en decouler, je suis convaincu que la facon dont on peut ameliorer les choses en matiere de business, d’enrichissement spirituel de l’individu au sein d’une entreprise, et de repartission des richesses en general est de passer par la creation d'entreprises qui seront construites sur des modeles nouveaux, ou les employes pourront participer activement et volontairement aux process et ou la distribution du revenu se fera de facon plus large, un peu sur le modele des stocks options qui sont distribuees aujourd'hui dans les start-ups de la Silicon Valley (mais avec un twist). Rien de radical, pas de revolution, plutot une evolution des modes de fonctionnement existants mais pour des resultats qui seront eux radicalement differents; l'entreprise de demain dont je parle dans un post precedent."


=Biographical Material=

==Some Academic Qualifications==

#Research Fellow, University of Amsterdam, Primavera program (Prof. Rik Maes)
#Outside expert for the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences, Rome 2008
#Maintainer of the [[Association for Peer to Peer Researchers]]
#Co-editor of the Anthropology of Digital Society (Ichec St. Louis, Belgium)
#Past teaching positions at Ichec St. Louis, Payap University, Chiang Mai University


==Education and Training== 

Master Degree (Licentiate) in Political Relations/International Relations, Free University of Brussels, Belgium, 1981
Associate, Thai Cultural Studies, Payap University, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 2003


==Research and Professional Experience==

#[1983-1990] Research Assistant and Information Analyst, United States Information Agency
#[1990-1993] Business Information Manager, BP Nutrition- agribusiness division of British Petroleum
#[1994] Editor-in-chief of Wave, the first European commercial newsstand magazine about digital convergence. 
#[1995 – 1996] Founder and Managing Partner, Ecom, now under the name of the eCorporation, bought by Alcatel, a leading company in the production of intranets and extranets
#[1997-1998] Founder and Managing Partner, Kyber Co, one of the leading Internet marketing and website promotion companies in Belgium, now part of Virtuology
#[1997-1998]: TV documentary producer, the impact of ‘TransHuman Technologies’: TechnoCalyps, the metaphysics of technology and the end of man. The documentary was shown on Dutch (IKON) and Belgian-Flemish television. An updated version is currently doing the festival circuit.
#[1999-2000] Marketing Manager, USWeb/CKS Belgium, part of the largest Internet professional services company in the world. Practice Leader Branding and Advertising for client projects for leading industrial and consumer companies such as AltaVista, Shell Geostar, and Eurostar Diamond Trade (2nd largest diamond company after DeBeers), Bacob, and many others.
#[1998-2000] Postgraduate Teaching,  European Master in Multimedia Program at ICHEC/Fac. St. Louis, a course created through the Leonardo program of the EU; ‘The Anthropology of Digital Society’
#[1998-2000] Professor, Multimedia Program at ICHEC/Fac. St. Louis, ‘Social and political economic implications of Information and Communication Technologies’ for 3rd year Communication students
#[2000-2002] eBusiness Strategy Manger, Digital Futures Initiative 
#[2004-2005] Payap University and Chiang Mai University, Thailand, Globalization and Introduction to the Vocabulary of the Social Sciences
#[2002-present] Founder, Peer to Peer Alternatives Foundation

==Awards and Honors:==

•	USIA Meritorious Honor Award, July 1990
•	BP Information Star Prize for Innovative Applications of Information Technology: "For the concept and creation of a total electronic information environment for the provision of business intelligence to senior management", January 1993
•	European Special Librarian of the Year award, "For outstanding role in redefining the profession in harmony with the advances in technology", December 1993


==Collaborations and Affiliations==

•	Research Fellow for Primavera, (University of Amsterdam, with Prof. Rik Maes, 2007+)
•	Invited expert at the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences, 2008 -
•	Board Member of the Union of International Associations, 2007 –


==Publications==

#Bauwens, M. The Political Economy of Peer Production. CTheory, October 2, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499 ; Re-published Post-Autistic Economics Review, issue 37. Retrieved from http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue37/Bauwens37.htm 
#Bauwens, M. Passionate Production and the Happiness Surplus. International Conference On “Happiness and Public Policy”. United Nations Conference Center (UNCC) Bangkok, Thailand. 18-19 July 2007. Retrieved from http://ppdoconference.org/session_papers/session14/session14_michel.pdf ; (draft version at http://gnh-movement.org/papers/bauwens.pdf )
#Bauwens, M. P2P and Human Evolution. Institute for Network Cultures. March 2005. Retrieved from http://www.networkcultures.org/weblog/archives/2005/03/ ; alternative version at Integral Vision. Retrieved from http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2ptheory1 

Also: 

#Bauwens, M. Social Innovation and the Partner State as Emerging Models for the Developing World. Information Technology in Developing Countries Volume 17, No. 3. International Federation for Information Processing, November 2007. Retrieved from http://www.iimahd.ernet.in/egov/ifip/nov2007/michel-bauwens.htm  
#Bauwens, M. P2P Foundation, Thailand . Developing a global Online presence through Wiki and blog. I4D Magazine, August 2008. Retrieved from http://i4donline.net/August08/998929018.pdf
#Bauwens, M. Social Innovation, Peer Production, Open Design: Implications for Policy.  Center for the Experience Economy, November 11, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.experience-economy.com/2007/11/21/social-innovation-peer-production-open-design-implications-for-policy-by-michel-bauwens/  
#Bauwens, M. From Social Innovation to Peer Production and Open Design. European Multimedia Forum, 2008. Retrieved from http://www.e-multimedia.org/articles/Michel%20Bauwens.html?eid=24355365
#Bauwens, M. The Peer to Peer Manifesto: The Emergence of P2P Civilization and Political Economy. Master New Media. Retrieved from http://www.masternewmedia.org/news/2007/11/03/the_peer_to_peer_manifesto.htm 
#Bauwens, M. Peer to Peer | The New Relational Dynamic. Kosmos Journal. Spring | Summer 2008. ToC retrieved from http://www.kosmosjournal.org/kjo/backissue/s2008/index.shtml 
#Bauwens, M. The social web and its social contracts. Re-public, . Retrieved from http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=261 
#Bauwens, M. Business Models for Peer Production. Open Source Business Resource, January 2008Retrieved from http://www.osbr.ca/ojs/index.php/osbr/article/view/494/458 
#Bauwens, M. Enterprise 2.0: Will Corporations Embrace the Social Media Revolution? Cutter IT Journal. Special Issue on Enterprise 2.0. 2008
#Bauwens, M. Peer production, peer governance, peer property. Re-public, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.re-public.gr/en/?p=87 
#Bauwens, M. P2P Economics: A Design Vision For A Commons-Based Distributed Marketplace. Master New Media, March 6, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.masternewmedia.org/news/2006/03/06/p2p_economics_a_design_vision.htm