Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UCkLHj6r7y8

In conversation with Matthew Monahan of Ma Earth.


=Contents=

00:00 Introduction

04:37 The Future of Coordination

22:08 Shortcomings of Web3

32:58 Historical Patterns and Cultural Agency

38:19 The Role of Web3 and Future Alliances

45:20 Navigating the Transitions


=Summaries=


==ChatGPT 1==

Based on the transcript, by Chat GPT:

"If we want to avoid a regression into a dark age where society collapses and many lives are lost, we need to embrace mutualization—smart mutualization and smart localization. This is where Web3 technology comes in. These technologies have the potential to address real-world challenges like renewable energy and organic farming by grounding themselves in physical reality.

Welcome to The Regeneration Will Be Funded, a show exploring regenerative finance and pathways toward a life-affirming economy. I’m your host, Matthew Monahan, and today, I’m joined by Michel Bauwens, founder of the P2P Foundation. Michel, welcome.

Michel shares his journey, mentioning his roots in Belgium and his move to Chiang Mai two decades ago. As the founder of the P2P Foundation, he has been observing peer-to-peer and commons-based innovations. Michel explains that peer-to-peer systems enable trans-local self-organization on a scale never before possible. Historically, human conviviality was limited by the need to create hierarchies and bureaucracies to manage large-scale projects. Now, with digital networks, we have the tools to recreate cooperative systems on a broader level.

Michel draws on the work of Kojin Karatani, who describes historical modes of social organization. Mode A represents kinship-based systems like those of hunter-gatherers, rooted in commoning and gift economies. Mode B introduced state structures to manage resources, while Mode C ushered in market-based systems. Karatani argues that humanity always seeks to return to Mode A but at higher levels of complexity, which he calls Mode D. This innate drive for a more humane and harmonious lifestyle resurfaces whenever civilizations face existential crises.

Michel reflects on the historical cycles of economic and social organization. The Christian monastic movements, for instance, combined farming, craftsmanship, and intellectual pursuits in an integrated way that valued labor and nature. However, with the commodification of labor in the modern era, work has often lost its deeper significance. Michel believes that Web3 offers an opportunity to reclaim this meaning, creating open ecosystems where people can contribute their skills to shared goals with passion and purpose.

The advent of crypto and Web3 has also addressed the challenge of funding commons-based projects. Early free software initiatives like Linux and Wikipedia faced difficulties financing core operations, leaving the door open for large corporations to dominate. With innovations like crowdfunding and quadratic voting, Web3 allows for more equitable distribution of resources, empowering contributors rather than centralizing control.

Michel highlights the need to connect Web3 technologies with local projects like renewable energy initiatives and organic farming. Multinationals already dominate global supply chains, but Web3 could empower localized networks to thrive. He envisions a coalition of community land trusts operating within a global commons, where shared protocols and knowledge attract capital to support regeneration at the local level.

On regulation, Michel traces the historical shifts from commons-based systems to state-dominated markets. He observes that as capitalism globalized, it became harder to regulate markets, leading to frustration with political systems. Instead of pursuing a world government—which risks alienating local cultures—Michel advocates for trans-local commons as a new regulatory mechanism. This approach combines localized production with global knowledge sharing, a model he calls cosmolocalism.

Michel provides examples of distributed manufacturing, such as Arrival’s platform for producing buses locally based on shared designs. This approach reduces humanity’s environmental impact by minimizing transportation needs while fostering innovation through global collaboration.

He also critiques Web3’s current trajectory as an “exit strategy” for privileged groups rather than a tool for systemic change. To realize its full potential, Web3 must root itself in local communities and support regenerative projects. Michel emphasizes the importance of creating alliances between urban and rural commons, bridging the gap between digital and physical realities.

As we face an uncertain future with challenges like climate change, geopolitical tensions, and demographic shifts, Michel sees hope in the emergence of seed forms—innovative, prefigurative models of a new civilization. He references historical patterns where crises led to fragmentation, followed by the rise of new systems created by pioneers who left the old order to experiment.

Michel concludes with optimism, believing that humanity has the capacity to adapt and innovate. He stresses the importance of embracing deep thinking and long-term strategies, urging listeners to engage with macrohistory and prefigurative innovations that could guide us toward a more resilient, equitable, and regenerative future."


==ChatGPT 2==

Provided by Kim Chapple:

"The video interview features Michel Bauwens, founder of the P2P Foundation, in 
conversation with Matthew Monahan. The discussion revolves around the intersection 
of Web3 technologies, commons-based peer production, and the potential for a 
regenerative economy. Below is an inventory of the key ideas, concepts, and references 
explored in the interview, along with summaries of each. 


===1. [[Cosmo-Localism]]===

● Concept: Cosmo-localism refers to the idea of combining local production with 
global knowledge sharing. Heavy, physical production (e.g., manufacturing, 
agriculture) is localized, while light, digital knowledge (e.g., designs, protocols) is 
shared globally. 

● Summary: Bauwens argues that this approach can reduce the ecological 
footprint of global supply chains by localizing production and mutualizing 
resources. He gives the example of Arrival, a company that produces vans and 
buses locally using global designs, allowing for customization and adaptation to 
local needs. 

===2. Web3 and [[Global Mutual Coordination]]===

● Concept: Web3 is seen as a global infrastructure for mutual coordination, 
enabling decentralized, peer-to-peer collaboration and resource sharing. 

● Summary: Bauwens describes Web3 as a continuation of the open-source 
movement (e.g., Linux, Wikipedia), but with added financial mechanisms (e.g., 
cryptocurrencies, quadratic voting) that allow for the funding of collective work. 
He emphasizes the potential for Web3 to create anti-oligarchic systems where 
contributors, rather than capital, have more control. 


===3. [[Commons-Based Peer Production]]===

● Concept: Commons-based peer production refers to collaborative production 
models where resources are shared and managed collectively, often outside 
traditional market or state structures. 

● Summary: Bauwens highlights the importance of the commons as a way to align 
people around shared goals, transcending political and ideological divides. He 
mentions the P2P Foundation as an observatory for such practices, which 
include open-source software, shared knowledge, and community land trusts. 


===4. Historical Context: [[Modes of Exchange]]===

● Concept: Bauwens references [[Kojin Karatani]], a Japanese philosopher, who 
categorizes human history into four modes of exchange: 

1. Mode A: Hunter-gatherer societies based on kinship and gifting. 

2. Mode B: State-based systems (e.g., ancient empires).
 
3. Mode C: Market-based systems. 

4. Mode D: Attempts to recreate Mode A at a higher level of complexity (e.g., 
world religions, secular mass movements). 


● Summary: Bauwens argues that humanity is wired for Mode A (commoning and 
gifting) and that current movements (e.g., Web3, urban commons) are attempts 
to return to a more harmonious way of life. 


===5. [[Regenerative Finance]] and [[Localism]]===

● Concept: Regenerative finance focuses on funding local, sustainable projects 
that contribute to ecological and social regeneration. 

● Summary: Bauwens discusses the underfunding of local regenerative projects 
and suggests that Web3 could be a vehicle for attracting global capital to local 
initiatives. He envisions a coalition of community land trusts that share global 
protocols while operating locally. 


===6. [[Quadratic Voting]] and [[Anti-Oligarchic Systems]]===

● Concept: Quadratic voting is a governance mechanism that reduces the influence 
of wealth by giving more weight to the number of contributors rather than the 
amount of capital they contribute. 

● Summary: Bauwens sees quadratic voting as a way to democratize 
decision-making in Web3 projects, ensuring that contributors have a say 
proportional to their involvement rather than their financial stake. 


===7. [[Global Commons]] and Resource Management===

● Concept: The idea of global commons involves managing shared resources (e.g., 
water, air, biodiversity) at a planetary level, beyond the control of individual states 
or corporations. 

● Summary: Bauwens suggests that Web3 and blockchain technology could 
enable the creation of global commons organizations that regulate and protect 
resources. He mentions Fishcoin and SolarCoin as examples of cryptocurrencies 
tied to ecological metrics. 


===8. [[Historical Cycles]] and [[Civilizational Collapse]]===

● Concept: Bauwens draws on macrohistorians like Oswald Spengler, Jean Gebser, 
and Pitirim Sorokin to discuss the cyclical nature of civilizations, which go 
through periods of growth, peak, decline, and collapse. 

● Summary: He argues that we are in a period of civilizational decline, but that new 
"seed forms" (e.g., Web3, bioregionalism) are emerging that could lead to a new 
paradigm. He emphasizes the importance of resilience and local innovation 
during this transition. 


===9. [[Bioregionalism]] and [[Thermodynamic Equilibrium]] ===

● Concept: Bioregionalism is an approach to organizing society based on 
ecological and geographical regions rather than political boundaries. 

● Summary: Bauwens argues that bioregionalism can help create 
thermodynamically informed supply chains, reducing the ecological impact of 
production and transportation. He sees this as a way to align human activity with 
natural systems. 


===10. Web3 Critiques and Shadow Side===

● Concept: Bauwens critiques Web3 as an "exit strategy" for privileged groups, 
particularly the global coding class and digital nomads, who are not rooted in 
local communities. 

● Summary: He warns that Web3 could become a tool for escapism rather than 
regeneration if it doesn't connect with local, physical communities. He suggests 
that digital nomads should work more closely with local permaculture and land 
trust activists to create meaningful change. 


===11. [[Bitcoin]] and [[Cryptocurrencies]]===
 
● Concept: Bauwens discusses the role of Bitcoin as a global reserve currency and 
its potential for activism. 

● Summary: He sees Bitcoin as useful for activists (e.g., Julian Assange, Nigel 
Farage) who are excluded from traditional banking systems. However, he also 
critiques Bitcoin for being disconnected from physical reality and suggests that 
programmable cryptocurrencies (e.g., Holochain) could be more aligned with 
ecological and social goals. 


===12. [[Artificial Intelligence]] (AI) ===

● Concept: Bauwens sees AI as a tool for managing global complexity, particularly 
in tracking and regulating resources. 

● Summary: He is cautious about AI's potential to dominate human life but believes 
it can be a functional addition to human society if used responsibly. He 
references Nikolai Berdyaev, who predicted that technology would eventually 
lead to a spiritual revolt against transhumanism. 


===13. [[Resilience]] and [[Transition]]===

● Concept: Bauwens emphasizes the need for resilience in the face of civilizational 
collapse, particularly through local innovation and knowledge sharing. 

● Summary: He suggests that the internet accelerates social learning, allowing 
innovations to spread quickly. He also discusses the potential for demographic 
collapse and the need for a "mature technosphere" that is in balance with the 
biosphere. 


===14. [[Jurisdictional Alliances]]===

● Concept: Bauwens discusses the idea of forming alliances between different 
social classes (e.g., commoners, the middle class, and elites) to drive systemic 
change. 

● Summary: He draws on historical examples (e.g., the fall of the Roman Empire) 
to argue that change often happens through alliances between different groups. 
He sees Web3 as a potential platform for such alliances but warns that it must 
include local, physical communities to be effective. 


===15. [[Seed Forms]] and [[Prefigurative Politics]]===

● Concept: Seed forms are early experiments or models that prefigure a new 
societal paradigm. 

● Summary: Bauwens identifies Web3, urban commons, and bioregional finance as 
seed forms that could lead to a new civilization. He emphasizes the importance 
of experimenting with new models and learning from failures. 


===16. Global Magisteria of the Commons===

● Concept: The global magisteria of the commons refers to a coalition of global 
commons organizations that regulate and protect shared resources. 

● Summary: Bauwens envisions a system where local commons are connected 
globally, sharing protocols and knowledge while attracting capital for local 
regeneration. 


===17. Reinflation of the Commons===

● Concept: Reinflating the commons means expanding the role of shared 
resources and collective management in society, as opposed to relying on state 
or market mechanisms. 

● Summary: Bauwens argues that the commons should be used as a new 
regulatory mechanism, particularly in a world where states and markets have 
failed to address global challenges like climate change and inequality. 


===18. Historical Examples and Analogies===

● Concept: Bauwens frequently draws on historical examples to illustrate his 
points, including the fall of the Roman Empire, the rise of feudalism, and the 
Christian monastic movement. 

● Summary: He uses these examples to show how societal transitions often 
involve alliances between different groups and the emergence of new cultural 
and economic models. 


===19. Projects and Organizations Mentioned===

● P2P Foundation: An observatory for peer-to-peer and commons-based practices. 

● Arrival: A company that produces vehicles locally using global designs. 

● Fishcoin and SolarCoin: Cryptocurrencies tied to ecological metrics. 

● Holochain: A blockchain alternative focused on peer-to-peer applications. 

● Regen Network: A project that tracks ecological impact using blockchain. 

● Sarafu Network: A mutual credit system in Kenya that uses blockchain to track 
transactions. 


===20. Key Thinkers and Authors Referenced===

● [[Kojin Karatani]]: Japanese philosopher who categorized human history into modes 
of exchange. 

● [[Oswald Spengler]]: Author of The Decline of the West, which discusses 
civilizational cycles. 

● [[Jean Gebser]]: A cultural philosopher who wrote about the evolution of human 
consciousness. 

● [[Pitirim Sorokin]]: A sociologist who studied societal evolution from sensate to 
ideate civilizations. 

● [[Nikolai Berdyaev]]: An Orthodox Christian thinker who wrote about the stages of 
technological development. 


===21. Final Thoughts on Reading and Depth===

● Concept: Bauwens warns against the superficiality of internet culture and 
emphasizes the importance of deep reading and historical understanding.
 
● Summary: He argues that in a time of crisis, we need to go deeper into 
understanding the past and future, rather than reacting to the present. He 
encourages people to read more and engage with complex ideas. 

This inventory provides a comprehensive overview of the key ideas, concepts, and 
references discussed in the interview. Each concept is summarized to give a deeper 
understanding of the topics explored by Michel Bauwens and Matthew Monahan."

=More information=

# Zuzalu: https://www.zuzalu.city/
# Holochain: https://www.holochain.org/
# Regen Network: https://www.regen.network
# Commons Sense by Austin Wade Smith: https://mirror.xyz/austinwadesmith.et...
# Grassroots Economics: https://grassecon.org/
# Ma Earth Grants: https://maearth.com/grants


* THE REGENERATION WILL BE FUNDED

# Ma Earth Website: https://maearth.com 
# YouTube:    / @maearthmedia  


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local_Production]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]