“'''micro-volunteering, refers to the ability to collaborate on a occasional basis''', for example in the Wikipedia, i.e. you can put a touch on something and never spend time on it again" ([http://www.principledinnovation.com/blog/2006/07/11/would-you-work-for-your-association-for-free/])

It is related to the concept of [[Micro-Innovation]]


=Characteristics=

The extraordinaries:

"Micro-volunteering has four defining characteristics:

1. Convenient. It's volunteerism that fits into your schedule when you have time - typically (but not necessarily) via an internet connected device such as a mobile phone or personal computer. In practice, to achieve this level of convenience, there is often no training or vetting necessary.

2. Bite-sized. Volunteer tasks are broken into small(-ish) pieces, so that you can complete a task in the time that you have available (whatever that time may be).

3. Crowdsourced. The nonprofit that needs help asks a large(-ish) group for assistance.  Micro-volunteers who have the time, interest, and skills (ideally), and who may be previously unknown to the nonprofit, do the work. 

4. Network-managed. The time demands of the manager (e.g. a nonprofit staffer) are reduced by distributing as much of the project management and quality review as possible to the network of micro-volunteers. This work management method differs from a top-down model of project management."
(http://blog.beextra.org/2010/12/a-definition-of-micro-volunteering.html)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]