

=Source=

* Article: Increasing the Productivity of the World’s Micro-farmers. By Paul Polak

URL = http://www.siminet.org/images/pdfs/increasing-productivity-pp.pdf

=Discussion=

Paul Polak:

"The cheapest diesel pumpset on a tubewell costs $500 (US) and does not pay for itself on less than
five acres. For the majority of the world's farmers who cultivate less than five
acres and earn $300 or so a year, a purchase price of $500 is not affordable.
Without affordable irrigation, the benefits from small farmer access to divisible
high yielding seeds and fertilizer are minimal.


'''* Affordability- The Sina Qua Non for Small Farmer Irrigation Devices'''

It makes as much sense to apply drip irrigation equipment that costs a thousand
dollars an acre to a tenth of an acre of vegetables as it does to use a $100,000
combine to harvest a quarter acre plot of wheat. Affordability is the sina qua non
of small farm irrigation devices. But the whole direction of the design process
optimizes efficiency instead of affordability. To fit the needs of small farmers, this
western design paradigm needs to be reversed. Design for small farmers must
go through a process that puts first priority on affordability. Defining the key
contributors to cost of existing useful but expensive technologies is the first step
in identifying tradeoffs acceptable to small farmers as consumers.


'''* Breaking Irrigation Technology into Microplot Sized Pieces'''

Seeds can be divided into tiny packets that both fit the needs of tiny plots, are
affordable to poor farmers. The same is true for the most part, for fertilizer. But it
is decidedly not true for existing irrigation equipment. No existing drip irrigation
system is available in India for plots under one acre. Yet inexpensive backyard
drip kits are available in every hardware store in North America that can provide
drip irrigation for a small kitchen garden. The smallest diesel pumpset in Nepal
starts with a five acre command area.

Conventional irrigation devices need to be miniaturized to conform to the size
and agricultural requirements of micro-plots. But because of the extreme
limitations small farmers have in access to cash, ideal micro-irrigation
technologies are designed so they can be added to incrementally, like a lego set.
In this way, a small farmer can make a tiny initial investment, and use the income
the investment generates to expand the technology for the next harvest.


'''* A Farmer Based Technology Adaptation Process'''

Early prototypes in the design of affordable micro-irrigation technology are put in
the hands of small farmers, and redesigned using their critical feedback. The
same adaptation process is followed when micro-irrigation devices that work in
one country are transferred to a new country, or into different agro-climactic
conditions. Detailed small farmer feedback is also used as a basis for the design
of a rural mass marketing strategy.


'''* A Generation of New Affordable Micro-irrigation Devices'''

Three high impact affordable Micro-irrigation devices have been designed and
mass marketed to small farmers in several countries by IDE, a Denver based
non-profit development organization. Their experience shows that completing the4
design process addresses no more than 10% of the problem. The other 90 % of
the time and energy is required is for implement the mass dissemination strategy
to put the technology in the hands of micro-farmers. This requires a long range
effort focussed on rural mass marketing, and the establishment of a sustainable
private sector supply chain network of profitable small private sector enterprises
that manufacture, distribute, and install the technology.


'''* The Treadle Pump Story'''

Millions of farmers in Bangladesh grow only two crops a year, in spite of the fact
that a copious supply of regularly replenished groundwater is available 15 feet
below the surface. To get at this water, Gunnar Barnes, a Norwegian
development worker, designed a pump that a micro- farmer could buy by selling
a sack of rice. A simple looking device, it is powered by walking on two bamboo
treadles. This activates two steel cylinders that are made in a village workshop.
The Treadle Pump costs eight dollars, and a total of $35 installed on a tubewell,
less than one tenth of the cost of a diesel pump. By irrigating half an acre of dry
season vegetables, a small farmer increases net income by a hundred dollars a
year, diversifies crops, gains access to clean drinking water, and shortens the
three month period of hunger.

Working at first in Bangladesh, IDE implemented a national rural mass marketing
program for Treadle Pumps. Billboards, callenders, and demonstrations at village
and regional markets made the technology known. A 90 minute entertainment
movie featuring top Bangladeshi movie stars embeds the treadle pump story in a
popular plot, and the movie is shown in open air settings to an audience of a
million people a year.

To meet the demand generated by grass roots marketing strategies like the
movie, IDE has facilitated the establishment of a local supply chain of 70
manufacturers and several thousand village dealers and technicians trained by
IDE. Each of these micro-enterprises operates for a profit, and Treadle pumps
are installed without subsidy. This rural mass marketing strategy then was
applied, after adaptation, to initiate similar programs in India, Nepal, Cambodia,
and Zambia. At present, approximately 150,000 Treadle Pumps are being
installed each year in these countries.

One of the common objections raised by development policymakers to micrirrigation
technologies is that even if they improve the lives of poor farmers, their
national impact is only a drop in the bucket because they are likely to be adopted
by only a few people, and each pump only irrigates a small plot. The ten year
experience of the Treadle Pump in Bangladesh sheds interesting light on this
issue. By implementing a national rural mass marketing program, 1.3 million
Treadle Pumps have been installed through the local private sector.

Each of these pumps provides an average increase in net cash income of $100 a
year for small farmers, at an investment cost of $35. This amounts to an increase5
in net cash annual income of $135 million dollars a year for small farmers, and an
increase in gross income of approximately $270 million a year. Using a 2.5
multiplier, the effect on the local and national economy can be estimated at $675
million a year. This does not include the economic impact of thousands of self
supporting enterprises that manufacture and distribute Treadle Pumps.Total
costs for IDE’s services over ten years was $8 million (US), and total investment
by small farmers themselves over ten years was just under $46 million.


'''* Cutting the Cost of Drip Irrigation by Two Thirds'''

Five years ago, IDE set out to apply what it had learned from the Treadle Pump
experience to other irrigation problems critical to the increased productivity of the
world’s micro-farmers. In semi-arid areas where water is precious, large farmers
use drip irrigation to minimize evaporation losses by delivering water directly to
the roots of plants. At a cost of a $1,000 an acre for crops like vegetables,
conventional drip systems are not affordable for small farmers. A standard drip
system uses a tank, a filter, and plastic drip lines to deliver water to each drip
point in the field. Hundreds of emitters at each drip point control drip rate and
prevent clogging. Plastic drip lines and emitters are key contributors to cost.
To make drip irrigation affordable for small farmers, my colleagues and I
designed a variety of low cost drip systems that cut the cost of conventional drip
systems by two thirds8

 
The investment in plastic pipes was reduced by making it
possible for each plastic pipe (lateral) to serve 4-10 rows of plants instead of one.
The cost was further reduced by replacing emitters with microtubes or baffled
holes, which also are easier to unplug. This in turn made it possible to use
simpler lower cost filters, and to lower system pressure. 


'''Four low cost drip systems are now available.'''

1. Bucket Kits

This consists of a simple household bucket attached to a pole at shoulder
height, which supplies a drip line with 26 microtubes, each of which waters
four plants. A starter bucket kit costs $5 in India, including the bucket, and
irrigates a 25 sq. meter kitchen garden to feed a family of 6, using 2-4 buckets
of water a day. If the family sells some of the crop, they can use the profit to
expand their system


2. The Drum Kit uses a 200 liter drum instead of a bucket, and uses five lateral
lines to irrigate a 125 sq meter plot for a cost of $26. It can be expanded to
irrigate 250 sq meters for an additional $16.


3. Shiftable Drip Systems. The shiftable drip system substitutes low cost labor
for capital by making lateral lines shiftable, so that each line is capable of
irrigating ten rows of plants instead of one. Water drips out of baffled holes or
curled microtubes instead of more expensive emitters.


4. Larger Low Cost Drip Systems Larger systems from ¼ hectare to 4
hectares cost of $625 a hectare for crops like cotton, using microtubes to
reduce the requirement for plastic delivery lines from one for every row to one
for every four rows. This does not include the cost of a pressure pump.10
Side by side comparisons of low cost drip and furrow irrigation with cotton,
sugarcane, and mulberry in India found that low cost drip irrigation cut water use
in half and increased crop yield, paralleling numerous earlier studies comparing
conventional drip and flood irrigation in India. Several thousand low cost drip
systems have now been purchased by micro-farmers in Nepal and India, and
their introduction has been initiated in Sri Lanka and Vietnam.


5. Low Cost Sprinkler Systems for Microfarmers

The primary constraint to productivity for many microfarmers in semi-arid and hill
area is a severe shortage of irrigation water. For row crops, low cost drip
irrigation provides an effective solution. But many non-row crops, like wheat and
oilseeds, are not amenable to drip. Sprinkler irrigation, though not as efficient in
water use as drip, is significantly more efficient than conventional flood irrigation.
But conventional sprinkler systems are too expensive for microfarmers, and do
not fit small plots. My colleagues and I at IDE have now made Low cost sprinkler
systems for microfarmers in India and Nepal. This process has been much
simpler than the process for designing low cost drip systems, because all the key
components for low cost sprinkler systems are already available in the Indian
marketplace.

The first type of low cost sprinkler system consists of microsprinklers being
produced by the manufacturers of conventional drip irrigation equipment. These
systems are particularly useful for small plots of vegetables or other horticultural
plots. The second system consists of a low cost overhead sprinkler attached to a
flexible pipe and placed on a low cost tripod. By shifting this sprinkler six times, a
small farmer can irrigate a half an acre of wheat at a total equipment cost of $26
(US), exclusive of the pressure source. This low pressure system runs on 10
meters of head, which can be produced by gravity or a ½ hp electric pump."
(http://www.siminet.org/images/pdfs/increasing-productivity-pp.pdf)




[[Category:Agrifood]]