

=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"A microfactory refers to a small dimension factory able to produce small dimension products. The term was proposed by the Mechanical Engineer Laboratory (MEL) of Japan in 1990. The microfactory main advantages are to save great amount of resources like space, energy, materials and time.

Due to its reduced dimensions, microfactories should be highly automated. It might contain automatic machine tools, assembly systems, quality inspection system, material feed system, waste elimination system, a system to evaluate tool deterioration and a system to replace tools.

At least one proposed microfactory is being designed to make many of its own parts, i.e., is a partially self-replicating machine."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microfactory)


=More Information=

* see the video of the Tampere University of Technology Microfactory Concept, Microfactory Concept


==Bibliography==

* Makoto Tanaka, Development of desktop machining microfactory. Riken Review N. 34 Focused on Advances on Micro-mechanical Fabrication Techniques, April, 2001. Available in the WEB at http://www.riken.go.jp/lab-www/library/publication/review/pdf/No_34/34_046.pdf

* Yuichi Okazaki, Nozomu Mishima, and Kiwamu Ashida. Microfactory - concept, history, and developments. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, pages 837–844, 2004. Available in the WEB at http://scitation.aip.org/getabs/servlet/GetabsServlet?prog=normal&id=JMSEFK000126000004000837000001&idtype=cvips&gifs=yes

* Ernst Kussul et al. Development of micromachine tool prototypes for microfactories, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, V. 12. N. 6. November 2002. pp.795-812. Available in the WEB at http://www.iop.org/EJ/abstract/0960-1317/12/6/311

See also:

* [[Factory-in-a-Box]], http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-1-84800-267-8_70#page-1

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]