
=Discussion=

Sohail Inayatullah:

"in the very long run vaccines would be energized with microvita. While the science is not yet formulated, we can imagine a future where medicine is vibrated with sacred sound, with subtle emotions working at the viral level, that is instead of mind-in-technology as with artificial intelligence, consciousness-in-technology as with the microvita hypothesis. Writes Shrii Sarkar (1987:51), “There will be revolutionary changes in the fields of pharmo-chemistry and biotechnology. A particular object has its particular medicinal value… Intensive pharmaco-chemistry research will reveal the amount of microvita required to produce particular kinds of medical effects, and accordingly a scientist will be able to evolve accurate and effective formulae for various medicines.”

What Shrii Sarkar is hinting at – in the longer-term future – is personalized and precision medicine designed for the individual. Thus, vaccines and other medicine will be targeted, thereby reducing the side effects suffered by many.

Certainly, microvita medicine is outside of today’s dominant scientific paradigm. One way to make it intelligible, how I understand it, is to see it as activating the placebo response. This entails seeing placebo not as false but as an active ingredient in health (and nocebo in illness). With placebo, the receiver activates his/her brain/mind to help create the best possible reactions from the intervention. The person expects healing. This can occur through a contact with a medical professional where they feel listened to, heard, connected with and as well when the belief emotional system is active. Ted Kaptchuk, head of Harvard’s Medical School Program in Placebo Studies and the Therapeutic Encounter, argues that the “placebo effect is a result of the complex conscious and nonconscious processes embedded in the practitioner-patient relationship. (Greenberg, 2018).

Microvita, however, can be positive and negative. In the medical world, the approximation of this is nocebo. “Essentially, the nocebo effect means if a patient is worried about a treatment regime, poor results are likely. If you emphasise negative side-effects, you’re more likely to get them.” (The University of Sydney News, 2019). This works because of the power of the brain/mind to imagine reality. The goal is to use placebo to enhance wellbeing and ensure anxiety and fear are not enhanced through the nocebo effect.

In Shrii Sarkar’s language, one goes deeper into the layers of the mind – the kosas (Sarkar, 1959). Vaccines work at the body level of the mind – the first layer. Placebo and other modalities work at deeper levels to produce results. Each level is important, as we as humans exist at all levels. At deeper levels, imagination can be used to heal – to connect with nature, selves, and spirit – instead of being isolated or controlled for at the more superficial level of the body, as in traditional science."

(https://gurukul.edu/newsletter/issue-53/53-power-and-medicine-during-transitional-eras/)

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]