'''= "research program on the reciprocal impact of social inequality and microbiomes, both human and environmental".''' [https://sueishaqlab.org/microbes-and-social-equity-working-group/]

URL =

=Contextual Quote=

"What do ‘microbes’ have to do with social equity? On the surface, very little. But these little organisms are integral to our health, the health of our natural environment, and even impact the ‘health’ of the environments we have built. Early life and the maturation of the immune system, our diet and lifestyle, and the quality of our surrounding environment can all impact our health. Similarly, the loss, gain, and retention of microorganisms ⁠— namely their flow from humans to the environment and back⁠ — can greatly impact our health and well-being. It is well-known that inequalities in access to perinatal care, healthy foods and fiber, a safe and clean home, and to the natural environment can create and arise from social inequality. Here, we focus on the argument that access to microorganisms as a facet of public health, and argue that health inequality may be compounded by inequitable microbial exposure.

- Ishaq et al. 2019 PLoS Biology [https://sueishaqlab.org/microbes-and-social-equity-working-group/]

=Description=

"The Microbes and Social Equity working group was formed in 2019 to examine, publicize and promote a ''research program on the reciprocal impact of social inequality and microbiomes, both human and environmental''. Suzanne Ishaq, Assistant Professor of Animal and Veterinary Sciences at the University of Maine, is the founder and lead organizer for the 120-person (and growing) group, comprised of researchers around the globe at all stages of career and with various specialties. In 2021, 35 members wrote our inaugural publication (Ishaq et al. 2021) introducing the group, establishing our mission statement, and outlining our goals."

(https://sueishaqlab.org/microbes-and-social-equity-working-group/)


=More information=

* Video dialogue between John Thackara and "Dr. Suzanne Ishaq – a microbiome researcher and founder of the Microbes and Social Equity working group". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdFaJLt89ck


'''* Article: Ishaq SL, Rapp M, Byerly R, McClellan LS, O’Boyle MR, Nykanen A, et al. (2019) Framing the discussion of microorganisms as a facet of social equity in human health. PLoS Biol 17(11): e3000536.''' [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000536 doi]

"What do “microbes” have to do with social equity? These microorganisms are integral to our health, that of our natural environment, and even the “health” of the environments we build. The loss, gain, and retention of microorganisms—their flow between humans and the environment—can greatly impact our health. It is well-known that inequalities in access to perinatal care, healthy foods, quality housing, and the natural environment can create and arise from social inequality. Here, we focus on the argument that access to beneficial microorganisms is a facet of public health, and health inequality may be compounded by inequitable microbial exposure."

* [[Microbiome Inspired Green Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Design]]