

=Description=

Tomas Byrne:

"Fascism is an overused, emotionally-charged and elusive term, in some cases nothing more than a pejorative. Attempts have been made at a comprehensive definition, but none widely accepted. Suffice it to say, the term fascism is used in an historical or ideological context, but can also refer more generally to a mode of social interaction.

Fascism in the macro sense, as used in political theory, typically refers to a form of ultra-right authoritarian nationalism that rejects liberalism and democracy. And this political model is based on the primary historical examples, incorporating the attributes, mode and ethos of the regimes in place under Mussolini and Hitler.

Fascism in the micro sense relates to informal sentiments and interactions in society. The use of the term in this context implies a number of qualities most of us would intuitively recognize as reflections of the historical and ideological model above: authoritarian behavior, domination of others, xenophobia, violence, fear mongering, prejudice, racial supremacist views, ultra-conservative sentiments, and the denial of freedom of others or groups of others.

Micro-fascism is a term coined by Gilles Deleuze, the French post-structuralist philosopher. Deleuze framed micro-fascism in the context of what he understood to be the most fundamental question of political theory:

- ''Why do people fight for their servitude as stubbornly as though it were their salvation?''

What causes us to desire that which dominates and exploits us and others? In other words, Deleuze approaches fascism from the point of view of the person who would dominate and asks what in him or her attaches desire to a belief and behavior resulting not only in outward domination of the oppressed, but slavery of the oppressor to a transcendent ideal or belief.

The answer that Deleuze provides harks back to his interpretation of Nietzsche, in particular the latter’s discussion of active and reactive forces. Under a Nietzschean ethic, active forces are those that enable a mode of existence to be all it can be. Reactive forces are those that separate a mode of existence from its active forces; culminating in guilt, bad conscience, resentment and judgement of others.

In the context of micro-fascism, those who would dominate others have become separated from their own active life forces of creativity and evolution via an attachment to, or desire to identify with, a transcendent belief or disposition. They have become dominated by rules of belief that inform all behavior, eg., non-white people are inferior.

Separated as such from their own humanity, they re-enact this separation in all of their social interactions, and at the extreme, participate in behavior that disregards the humanity or active forces of other human beings, or groups of human beings."

(https://tomasbyrne.com/the-dawn-of-everything-and-fascism-in-society/)

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]