
'''= better low-level or “drive-by” participation opportunities whereby citizens can make (many) small yet valuable contributions without having to be involved over the full length of a participation project.''' [http://intellitics.com/]

=Description=

Chris Haller:

“Micro-participation is a term that’s been discussed within open government circles as a way to make citizen engagement more convenient, effective, and scalable. The idea is to fit civic activity and involvement into the everyday lives of the public, resulting in more small ways to collaborate and communicate. 

'''How to apply micro-participation'''

This concept can be applied on a broad scale (like involving the public in discussions about their general needs and opinions) or on a more targeted scale (like getting place-based feedback on particular locales or collaborating with certain citizens on issues that directly affect them). In any case, the attraction of micro-participation methods lies in the avoidance of:

* long-term involvement 
* interacting with strangers 
* wading through lots of materials 
* attending meetings 


Instead, people can let their voices be heard through dozens of small interactions, perfect for:

* asking questions 
* prioritizing or ranking ideas and items 
* brainstorming (crowd-sourcing innovation) 
* raising concerns “
(http://shareable.net/blog/micro-participation-connects-citizens-to-their-governments)

=Discussion=

Chris Haller:

==Why is traditional participation so difficult==

Why do planners and policy makers find themselves fielding the vociferous complaints and demands of a few die-hards instead of enjoying more positive interaction with the general public? Why is it so hard to get people involved? Not because people are lazy or indifferent, but because traditional participation methods are simply not convenient for the modern citizen. The way organizations (particularly governments) usually function does not fit into most citizens’ busy daily schedules.

Online innovation evangelist Dave Briggs summed up the need for micro-participation in a witty post that emphasized: Participation needs to be made easier. Fit civic activity into people’s lives as they are lived right now. For instance, folks may not have time to attend a planning meeting or mail back a questionnaire about their neighborhood, but they are plugged into their computers and mobile phones all day. Give them a chance to interact through technology, and be amazed at how many people take a few minutes to comment in a forum or answer a three-question survey. They can do this while waiting for the bus or during lunch break. Even better, use interactive maps or QR codes to enable location-specific feedback. The game-changer is this: micro-participation fits into their schedule, and that’s why it works.
In a way, it’s a shame that community participation should fall so low on our society’s priority list. Planners should not have to cater to a culture that defines people as workers and consumers more than as citizens. But the micro-participation approach can be a starting point — meeting people where they are today, and hopefully leading them into a greater interest in their communities.”

(http://shareable.net/blog/micro-participation-connects-citizens-to-their-governments)



=More Information=

micro-participation for urban planning, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1760522

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Politics]]