
=Discussion=

==The [[Mid-Tech Approach]] for Scalable Production==

Vasilis Kostakis, Lucas Lemo, and Asimina Kouvara:

"Cosmolocal production thus emerges as a vibrant thread, weaving together the seemingly disparate strands of global connectivity and local autonomy. This novel approach to manufacturing and design presents a compelling alternative to the monolithic structures of conventional industrial production. At its core, cosmolocal production is defined by at least four key features that set it apart from its industrial counterparts (Kostakis et al. 2018).

First, it embraces design-embedded sustainability, where products are often conceived not just for immediate use, but for longevity and adaptability. This attribute echoes the timeless wisdom of craftsmanship, where objects are created to last and evolve with their users. Second, it promotes on-demand local manufacturing, bringing production closer to the point of use and significantly reducing the ecological footprint associated with long-distance transportation. Third, it employs shared productive infrastructure, where digital and physical tools are communally managed resources, so productive infrastructure is optimised. This sharing extends beyond mere tools to encompass designs and technical information, fostering a culture of grassroots innovation (Troullaki and Rozakis 2024). Fourth, cosmolocal production allows for participant-defined value systems. For example, the members of L’Atelier Paysan decided that the cooperative model better reflects and encapsulates their values. Instead, the members of Farm Hack feel that a more autonomous model of organisation better fits them, which is why they have established a network organised around their web platforms and physical events that take place from time to time (Giotitsas 2019).

Cosmolocalism combines digital tools with local knowledge and traditional crafts in a “mid-tech” approach (Kostakis, Pazaitis and Liarokapis 2023). It leverages advanced digital design and knowledge sharing tools, while incorporating local expertise and simple techniques. The goal is to create accessible, adaptable, and repairable technologies, reducing reliance on global supply chains and prioritising longevity and ease of maintenance. Examples like a specific version of OpenBionics’ prosthetic limbs, which minimise the use of electronics and utilise the Internet and high-tech software for global design and distribution, as well as open-design agricultural tools from initiatives like L’Atelier Paysan, show how this approach can result in new, affordable solutions that integrate technological progress with ecological sustainability and social inclusion.

The mid-tech approach also challenges the idea that newer, more complex technologies are always superior. Instead, it encourages a critical examination of technological choices, considering factors such as energy efficiency, resource use, and social impact. This approach recognises that sometimes, simpler technologies or hybrid solutions that combine traditional methods with modern innovations can be more effective and sustainable.

This unique configuration allows for a balance that does not reject all technological progress, but rather seeks to harmonise it with local needs and knowledge. Cosmolocal projects thus help us reimagine scalability, moving away from the traditional capitalist model of ”scaling up” to embrace a concept of “scaling wide” or “scaling out”. This alternative trajectory of scalability embraces diversity and local adaptation while still facilitating replication and expansion. In cosmolocalism, ideas, practices, and innovations can spread widely without imposing a homogeneous template, offering a vision of post-capitalist scalability that respects and celebrates the rich tapestry of local contexts and cultures."

(https://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/download/1535/1612?inline=1)

[[Category:Cosmo-Local_Production]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]