


=Bio=

"Researcher and activist in the field of free knowledge and culture, currently preparing a PhD thesis on ‘Intellectual commons and commodification’ at the Education faculty of the University of São Paulo - a critical reading of the Ostrom school and the possibilities of commodification linked to new business models. Member of Scientiae Studia, a philosophical association focusing on societal impacts of technoscience. His publications can be found at <http://impropriedades.wordpress.com/artigos>."


'''Long:'''

I'm a Brazilian researcher and activist in the field of free
knowledge and culture.

Since 2008 I'm preparing a thesis on the subject of
‘Intellectual commons and commodification’, at the University of
São Paulo (Education Faculty, department of Philosophy of
Education). I have graduated in Communications (minor:
Publishing) and Philosophy, both also at the University of São
Paulo, and have a specialization degree on intellectual property
management (from a course promoted by UBV, SAPI and OCPI —
respectively: Bolivarian University of Venezuela, and the
Venezuelan and Cuban intellectual property offices). I have
published some texts on the subjects of intellectual property
and, more recently, collaborative production, commodification
and the commons (all of them available at
<http://impropriedades.wordpress.com/artigos>); through them I
have helped to introduce the concept of intellectual commons in
Brazilian academia (along with prof. Imre Simon, with whom I
wrote two book chapters). I have also been invited to take part
in two international debates on commons: the Crottorf retreat
(Germany, 2008) and a workshop at the Summer University of
International Solidarity (France, 2010).

I'm member of Epidemia, a Brazilian collective which advocates
for free knowledge and culture and keeps an eye on the
intellectual property-related agenda. I'm also member of
Scientiae Studia, a philosophic association focusing on science
and technology. I represent Epidemia at the Science & Democracy
World Forum's international secretariat, and have participated
in its planning. I have also had an active role in mobilizations
for the reform of Brazilian copyright law and against Projeto
Azeredo, a cybercrime bill that jeopardized internet privacy."


=More Information=

* An "official" academic CV in Portuguese can be found here:
http://lattes.cnpq.br/1506673424818764



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Brazil]]