
'''= " software for peer-to-peer networks that are creating something and experimenting with different economic relationships".'''

URL = http://mikorizal.org/


=Description=

Three interlocked projects as described by Bob Haugen and Lynn Foster:

==Network operational software==

"This software is currently known as NRP/VAS for Network Resource Planning / Value Accounting System. It is operational software for peer-to-peer networks that are creating something and experimenting with different economic relationships. So this could be open value networks, food networks, worker cooperatives, and others. Could even be small business ecosystems.

It involves defining the network, planning the requirements, coordinating the work, and democratically sharing the benefits.


==Regional economic ecosystem analysis==

This software works on the same resource flow model as the operational software, except at the next level up. It can be used for local and regional economic planning, identification of problems in the resource flows, and gaps that are opportunities to be filled. Communities can define different clusters of resource flows within and in and out of the community, and analyze these.

This is the one that connects to the whole ecosystem if you want it to.



==Network inter-operability==

This is a project involving a number of people and software organizations who want to create open vocabulary and protocols so that next economy networks can inter-operate with each other. We want to create a way for networks on different servers, and/or different software packages, to talk the same language.

With some other people, we've created a repository for working on this. We think this ongoing work has a lot of promise for creating ever-increasing networks of networks."


=Discussion=

Bob Haugen and Lynn Foster:

"By internetworking, we can pool ideas and resources, create things together, and create regional economic ecosystems that can behave differently from capitalism.

The details of internetworking are simple but evolve into complex systems.

They are input-process-output networks, where the output resource of one process becomes the input for another. Sometimes the resources are tangible, sometimes intangible.

The input-process-output networks can grow into economic ecosystems. That’s what we are trying to make happen: connect all the similar but disconnected experiments toward a better economic system into an actual real-life better economic system.

Back in the 1990’s, when supply chain systems were rising, their motto was “the best supply chain wins, not the best company”. Then the thinking broadened to the best value system, then the best value network. Now it’s the best economic ecosystem.

But all of these formations under capitalism have a fatal flaw: all of the participants in the ecosystem are trying to grab more of the value for themselves, which degrades the whole system.

And by ecosystem, we really mean ecosystem. The economic ecosystem is part of the whole ecosystem. When any part of the ecosystem tries to grab more for itself at the expense of some other part, it may weaken the whole system. The rule should be mutual benefit as much as possible. If you degrade the soil, you will degrade the crops. If you degrade the crops, you will degrade those who eat the crops. If you as a capitalist impoverish your workers, they will no longer be able to buy your products. And so on."
(http://mikorizal.org/)



[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Technology]]