

=Bio=

"Dr. Mina M. Ramirez is President of the Asian Social Institute, Vice-President of the Francis Senden Memorial Foundation (FSMF), Inc.; Consultant of the Social Research Center of the University of Sto. Tomas; Board Member of Miriam College; and a member of the Pontifical Academy of the Social Sciences established by His Holiness Pope John Paul II in January 1994 in Rome, Italy.

She holds the following degrees: AB in 1955; BS in Education from St. Theresa’s College, Manila (summa cum laude); MS in Sociology from the Asian Social Institute; and Ph. D. in Organizational Development and Planning from the Southeast Asian Interdisciplinary Development Institute.

In the past, she has served as National Organizer and National President of the Young Christian Workers. In the Asian Social Institute, she has served in various capacities as Professor, Dean of the Sociology Department and Acting Director. Outside of the ASI, she also served as President of the Ecumenical Development Cooperative Society (EDCS - now known as Oikocredit), Board Member of the De La Salle University System, East Asian Pastoral Institute and Ramon Magsaysay Awards Foundation.

Dr. Ramirez is also a recipient of various awards like the Ozanam Award (given by the Jesuits), St. Benedict Award (given by the Benedictines, Most Outstanding Women of the Philippines given during the centennial year of the Philippines, etc."
(http://www.asinet-online.org/asi_president/drmina.htm)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Philippines]]