'''= " an unprecedented developmental tracking tool that charts the hierarchical complexification of skills using high-precision Lectical scoring".''' [https://brendangrahamdempsey.substack.com/p/mindlog]

URL = https://lectica.org/

''The Lectical Scale "examines how meaning and the complexity of thought have evolved over time (historically)."'' [https://lectica.org/about/skill-levels]


=Description=

Lectica:

'''1.'''

"A Lectical Score is a score on the Lectical Scale, which is a refinement of Dr. Kurt Fischer's Skill Scale, a developmental scale that goes from birth to the highest levels of development we know how to measure. It is a scale of increasing complexity, so a score on the scale represents the complexity level of a particular performance.

It's possible for people to keep developing on the Lectical Scale for as long as they're learning new things and connecting what they learn to their existing knowledge."

(https://lectica.org/about/skill-levels)


'''2.'''

"MindLog is a sophisticated learning tool that supports mental development while creating a visual record of an individual's progress in the form of a growth chart calibrated to the Lectical Scale. MindLog is the first tool of its kind, and it's backed by more than 100 years of research.

...

MindLog is designed exclusively to measure the mental development of individual humans. This means that it only works when you do your own work and generally make a reasonable effort to share what is on your mind. Doing your own work means no AI, no grammar checkers, and no open-book entries. If you use outside sources, your growth curve will be meaningless."

(https://lectica.org/about/mindlog)

=Typology=

''(Skill levels were first described by Dr. Kurt Fischer in 1980.)''

==Level 6 Single representations==

26-40 mos	Concepts are 1st order representational sets

"These coordinate symbolic systems. In responses to the Joe dilemma, for example, the concept of camping coordinates activities like swimming, sleeping in a tent, and painting, and the concept of a paper route coordinates activities like riding a bike, delivering papers, and receiving money.	


==Level 7: Representational mappings==

4-5 years	Concepts are 2nd order representational sets

These coordinate or modify representational sets (the concepts constructed at the single representations level). The very popular representational mappings Lectical™ level concept of having favorites, for example, can be employed to rank camping and fishing. "Camping is my favorite, and fishing is my next favorite." Concepts like being mean, keeping a promise, changing one’s mind, and sharing also become common at this Lectical™ level. "[Joe’s father] is just being mean; he is taking the money away from his kids."	


==Level 8: Representational systems==

6-7 years	Concepts are 3rd order representational sets

These coordinate elements of representational systems. For example, the concept of trust, articulated for the first time at this Lectical™ level, can be used to describe the system of interactions between Joe and his father. "Joe trusted [his Dad] that he could go to the camp if he saved enough money, and then his father just breaks it, and the promise is very important." Concepts like to turn against, to blame, to believe, and being fair are also infrequently observed before this level. "[If you break a promise] they will not like you anymore, and your friends will turn against you."	


==Level 9: Single abstractions==

8-11 years	Concepts are 1st order abstractions

These coordinate representational systems. For example, the concept of trustworthiness, articulated for the first time at this Lectical™ level, defines those qualities that make a person trustworthy rather than describing a particular situation in which trust is felt or not felt. It is composed of qualities that produce trust, such as telling the truth, keeping secrets, and keeping promises. "It's always nice…to be trustworthy. Because, then, if [someone has] a secret, they can come and talk to you." Concepts like kindness, keeping your word, respect, and guilt are also rare before this level. "If you don't do something you promise, you'll feel really guilty."	


==Level 10: Abstract mappings==	

Concepts are 2nd order abstractions

These coordinate or modify abstractions. For example, the abstract mappings level concept basis can be employed to coordinate the elements essential to a good relationship. "To me, [trust and respect are] the basis of a relationship, and without them, you really don't have one." Concepts like coming to an agreement, making a commitment, building trust, and compromise are also rare before this Lectical™ level. "I think [Joe and his father] could come to an agreement or compromise that they are both comfortable with."	


==Level 11: Abstract systems==

Concepts are 3rd order abstractions

These coordinate elements of abstract systems. For example, the concept of personal integrity—which is rare before the abstract systems level—refers to the coordination of and adherence to notions of fairness, trustworthiness, honesty, preservation of the golden rule, etc., in one’s actions. "[You should keep your word] for your own integrity. For your own self-worth, really. Just to always be the kind of person that you would want to be dealing with." Concepts like verbal contract, moral commitment, functional, development, social structure, and foundation are also uncommon before the abstract systems level. "A promise is the verbal contract, the moral commitment that the father made to his son. It is the only way for the child to…develop his moral thinking—from watching his parent's moral attitude."	


==Level 12: Single axioms/ principles==

Concepts are 1st order axioms/ principles

These coordinate abstract systems. A single principles notion of the social contract, for example, would result from the coordination of human interests (where individual human beings are treated as systems in interaction with other individual and collective systems)."

(https://lectica.org/about/skill-levels)

[[Category:Integral_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Education]]