'''Mobile 2.0.''', usually refers to the convergence of the [[Web 2.0]] principles to mobile devices.


=Web 2.0 related Definition=

Mobile 2.0 = the application of Web 2.0 collective intelligence features to [[Restricted Devices]] such as the mobile phone.


From http://web2.sys-con.com/read/251673.htm

"Web 2.0 is about 'harnessing collective intelligence via the web'. When we extend this definition to 'mobile Web 2.0' – there are two implications:

a) The web does not necessarily extend to mobile devices

b) Even though the web does not extend to mobile devices, intelligence can still be captured from mobile devices."
(http://web2.sys-con.com/read/251673.htm)

"Thus, the characteristics(distinguishing principles) of mobile Web 2.0 are:

a) Harnessing collective intelligence through restricted devices i.e. a two way flow where people carrying devices become reporters rather than mere consumers

b) Driven by the web backbone – but not necessarily based on the web protocols end to end

c) Use of the PC as a local cache/configuration mechanism where the service will be selected and configured."
(http://web2.sys-con.com/read/251673.htm)


==Characteristics==

According to Rudy de Waele at

"Here are some essential components of what mobile 2.0 is about:

1) Openness: open standards, open-source development and open access - creating more options for the user, not enclosing them in the walled gardens currently (still) used by operators.

2) The context of accessing the network and associated web services needs to be a positive user experience. For example for mobile search, the context includes: browser type, different device functionalities, security issues, display on a small screen, how to insert ads, etc. Associated with this is the usability experience of the devices, applications and services - and other components. For a more detailed analysis of context and the mobile web, see this article I wrote for gotomobile.

3) Affordable pricing to use the network to access content and services.

4) More user choice in the ways to communicate and share experiences with others (social interaction)

5) Intelligent 'aware' applications and devices that know where you are; location 'aware' applications seamlessly integrated.

6) New business opportunities coming to market, which may or may not connect to operators networks; think RSS feeds, alerts to SMS, Bluetooth and Wi-Fi Entertainment download zones and access spots, Podcasting to your mobile, Streaming Videocall to TV, Moblogging, Video blogging and media sharing applications, Click to Call (a phone number tagged into a mobile web or WAP page), Mobile Search, and last but not least VoIP tools & services."
(http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/understanding_mobile_2.php)

=Non Web 2.0 related Definition=

Concept developed by Oliver Starr of Mobhappy at http://mobhappy.com/blog1/2006/02/06/mobile-20-is-not-web-20/ 

"The poorer a region is - both technologically and economically, the greater the impact mobile phones have on society, and in a few scattered places around the world where mobile phones have been adopted enterprising individuals have quite literally capitalized on their acquisition of a phone to vault themselves upwards economically by creating businesses out of letting their less fortunate contemporaries rent the phones - in essence becoming a one man, one phone telco. . . .

Mobile 2.0 is not device dependent. There is no measuring stick of functionality that is a determinant as to whether or not a mobile phone is or is not a Mobile 2.0 device. All functioning phones today are Mobile 2.0. It isn’t what the phone does, so much as what is being done with the phone that has lead us to Mobile 2.0. This definition has the advantage of extensibility - a developing country experiences Mobile 2.0 by virtue of the changing socio economic status of those that own phones. In Japan or Korea Mobile 2.0 can be seen in the development of entirely new forms of entertainment oriented content for display on mobile devices and in the US we can see the birth of Mobile 2.0 in the roll-out of presence enabled services and phone-based navigational services.

Unlike Web 2.0 or its extension to the mobile web, perhaps properly called WAP 2.0 or 2.0 Micro, Mobile 2.0 is almost as much about the end user as it is about the device or the service whereas Web 2.0 doesn’t exist with out the combination of the two. In a similar vein, Mobile 2.0 is morphologically amorphous - the form of the device is constantly changing and shifting. As Walter Mossberg said at a keynote last year, Mobile is the most important new technology but we have no idea what it is going to become."


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]