
'''= template available on gitbooks'''

URL = https://swarm.gitbooks.io/dco-book/content/dco-model-template.html

"A distributed organization can more rapidly engage stakeholders who are interested in the projects success. If the stakeholders can also experience some financial returns associated with their participation, this opens up a larger possibility of liquidity around associated offerings. Consequently, this can open up the larger possibility of funding and can be seen as a logical conclusion and extension of the crowdfunding model."


=Description=

"The function and goal of this paper is to explore the DCO model in greater length to establish the benefits and limits of a DCO, and to begin to examine how the concept of a DCO can be brought into existence. Most notably it wishes to establish both best practice for setting up a DCO, both with respect to the foundation of the DCO and its on-going governance. In addition, it wishes to establish the bottom limit. What qualifies as “sufficient control” that will qualify something as a DCO instead of an “investment contract” under U.S. Law.

Unlike the last Harvard working paper, this Stanford extension is conducted on the basis of multiple real world organizations which are attempting to structure themselves as DCOs. These span multiple different jurisdictions and types of organizations. Consequently, on the basis of this information, we attempt to provide a generalized example."
(https://swarm.gitbooks.io/dco-book/content/dco-model-template.html)

=Context=

"Produced by the Stanford working group on Distributed Collaborative Organizations, which was itself the extension of the Harvard working group on the same, the results of which are available here: https://www.scribd.com/doc/255347578/SWARM-Working-Paper-Distributed-Networks-and-the-Law

Participants:

#[[Joel Dietz]], [[Swarm]]
#Greg Xethalis, Katten
#Primavera de Filippi, Harvard / LOVE
#Jim Hazard, [[Common Accord]]]]



=More Information=

* The Digital Collaborative Organization Contract (Model DCO Contract) is here at https://swarm.gitbooks.io/dco-book/content/dco-model-template.html

* [[Distributed Collaborative Organization]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]