
=Source=

The below is a translated excerpt from:

'''* Agentique. Julien Cantoni.'''

URL = https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/agentiques-julien-cantoni-4a79f/?


=Typology=

Julien Cantoni:

"In my intellectual journey, I have come across an original proposal that challenges the idea of a purely financial Universal Basic Income (UBI). Instead of distributing purchasing power so that individuals can buy their share of resources, why not restructure production to directly guarantee access to essential goods for all? This idea is embodied in the Triple Economy model, outlined by some contemporary thinkers. I envision myself following a guiding thread that connects existing ideas (UBI, social experiments) toward a more systemic approach.

The Triple Economy model proposes dividing economic activity into three distinct spheres, each with its own logic:


==An Automated and Self-Consumed “Base Economy”== 

This is the foundation. It includes the production of essential goods and services (basic food, housing, energy, fundamental healthcare, etc.), but these would be produced primarily by machines and automated processes. Crucially, this base production would be directly accessible to the population, outside the traditional market. One can think of it as a high-tech extension of social security, where not just income, but the goods themselves (or a set quantity of them), are guaranteed. For example, automated cooperatives could ensure a “free” or self-sustaining supply of basic food for everyone. This base economy would function without a profit motive, somewhat like a productive public service. Some describe it as “automated, self-consumed productive social protection”, meaning that instead of providing financial benefits, tangible resources produced by machines are made available. The goal is that everyone, employed or not, has a guaranteed minimum basket of goods to live decently, sustained by the productivity gains of automation.


==A “Regulatory Economy” with a Time-Decay Currency==

Surrounding the base economy, there would be a second sphere dedicated to complementary exchanges and production, governed by a unique monetary system. This regulatory economy would use a "chronodegradable" currency, meaning that its value diminishes over time if not spent. This concept, inspired by the early 20th-century theories of Silvio Gesell, aims to discourage hoarding and ensure the continuous circulation of wealth.

This model suggests a radical shift in economic organization—one where essential needs are guaranteed through automation, and market dynamics operate under new monetary principles to maintain fluidity in economic exchanges.

Historically, the Wörgl experiment in Austria (1932) demonstrated that a "melting currency" (losing 1% of its value per month) encouraged citizens to spend or invest quickly, stimulating the economy during the Great Depression.

Transposed to the modern era, the chronodegradable currency in the regulatory economy would serve to compensate essential work that cannot be automated (e.g., robot maintenance, education, certain public services). However, it would prevent unlimited wealth accumulation. This currency expires or depreciates over time, preventing large dormant fortunes and ensuring that resources are continuously reinvested into the economy. It could also be used to allocate regulated consumption quotas (e.g., access to scarce natural resources or essential services), helping prevent shortages and inflation. In short, the regulatory economy balances the automated base economy and the traditional market, using a currency designed to discourage speculation.


==A “Free Economy” for Market-Based Activities==

The third sphere is the free economy, which corresponds roughly to the classical free market. Here, actors exchange non-essential goods and services, such as luxury items, entertainment, and innovations, using a traditional currency (not subject to depreciation).

This free economy ensures a space for entrepreneurship, creativity, and personal profit. It coexists with the other two spheres without threatening the satisfaction of primary needs, since these are already covered by the base economy. However, it would likely be taxed to help finance the base economy and regulated by the second sphere to avoid excessive wealth concentration. This zone allows supply and demand to interact freely for anything beyond basic needs, fostering technological and cultural innovation."

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/agentiques-julien-cantoni-4a79f/?t)

=Discussion=

Commentary by Julien Cantoni:

==A Modern Synthesis of Economic Ideas==

Looking at these three layers, it is hard not to see parallels with historical models—as if the Triple Economy is a modern synthesis of both old utopias and recent experiments.

The base economy echoes Universal Basic Income (UBI), but instead of providing money to buy essential goods, it directly socializes the production of those goods (through cooperatives, states, or automated commons). This shifts from a “right to income” to a “right to food, housing, and energy”, made possible by automation. This could be seen as a form of “technological dividend in kind”—where the benefits of robotics are distributed directly in goods rather than cash.

The chronodegradable currency offers a solution to some of UBI’s monetary challenges. Instead of fearing that people will hoard money or that demand for essentials will surge uncontrollably, this currency has a built-in expiration. This prevents speculative inflation, ensuring spending remains focused on real needs.

By preventing idle wealth accumulation, this currency also encourages investment in the real economy or in productive projects rather than hoarding money for power. This acts as a continuous redistribution mechanism—similar to 100% taxation beyond a certain wealth threshold but implemented automatically through currency design.

The free economy ensures that market freedom and competition remain. A frequent criticism of highly planned or guaranteed systems is that they stifle innovation and personal risk-taking. By maintaining a space where everything else can be traded freely, the Triple Economy attempts to reconcile universal security with economic freedom.


==A Structural Alternative to Universal Basic Income==

I find myself mentally comparing this model to the Universal Basic Income (UBI) model studied earlier.

Traditional UBI injects money into the existing economy, relying on the market to provide goods. It leaves the means of production in private hands, assuming that monetary redistribution will be enough for everyone to afford their share.


The Triple Economy, by contrast, proposes a structural transformation:

* Socializing the production of essential goods (automated commons, cooperatives, or state-managed systems)

* Redefining monetary rules to prevent speculative accumulation

* Maintaining a free market space for non-essential goods

This makes the Triple Economy a more systemic and structural approach — one that rethinks production, distribution, and economic rules rather than just injecting money into an existing system."

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/agentiques-julien-cantoni-4a79f/?)

[[Category:Commons_Economics]]