=Typology=

==[[Models of Societal Response To Societal Collapse and Civilizational Decline]]==

From the Wikipedia:

According to Joseph Tainter (1990), too many scholars offer facile explanations of societal collapse by assuming one or more of the following three models in the face of collapse:

* '''The Dinosaur, a large-scale society in which resources are being depleted at an exponential rate, but nothing is done to rectify the problem''' because the ruling elite are unwilling or unable to adapt to those resources' reduced availability. In this type of society, rulers tend to oppose any solutions that diverge from their present course of action but favor intensification and commit an increasing number of resources to their present plans, projects, and social institutions.

* '''The Runaway Train, a society whose continuing function depends on constant growth''' (cf. Frederick Jackson Turner's Frontier Thesis). This type of society, based almost exclusively on acquisition (such as pillaging or exploitation), cannot be sustained indefinitely. The Assyrian, Roman and Mongol Empires, for example, all fractured and collapsed when no new conquests could be achieved.

* '''The House of Cards, a society that has grown to be so large and include so many complex social institutions that it is inherently unstable and prone to collapse'''. This type of society has been seen with particular frequency among Eastern Bloc and other communist nations, in which all social organizations are arms of the government or ruling party, such that the government must either stifle association wholesale (encouraging dissent and subversion) or exercise less authority than it asserts (undermining its legitimacy in the public eye).

By contrast, as Alexis de Tocqueville observed, when voluntary and private associations are allowed to flourish and gain legitimacy at an institutional level, they complement and often even supplant governmental functions. They provide a "safety valve" for dissent, assist with resource allocation, provide for social experimentation without the need for governmental coercion, and enable the public to maintain confidence in society as a whole, even during periods of governmental weakness.

'''Tainter's critique''': Tainter argues that those models, though superficially useful, cannot severally or jointly account for all instances of societal collapse. Often, they are seen as interconnected occurrences that reinforce one another.


Tainter considers that social complexity is a recent and comparatively-anomalous occurrence, requiring constant support. He asserts that collapse is best understood by grasping four axioms. In his own words (p. 194):

* human societies are problem-solving organizations;
* sociopolitical systems require energy for their maintenance;
* increased complexity carries with it increased costs per capita; and
* investment in sociopolitical complexity as a problem-solving response reaches a point of declining marginal returns.


With those facts in mind, collapse can simply be understood as a loss of the energy needed to maintain social complexity. Collapse is thus the sudden loss of social complexity, stratification, internal and external communication and exchange, and productivity."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Societal_collapse)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Collapse]]