
'''= mobile journalist.'''

Explanatory article at 
http://www.editorandpublisher.com/eandp/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003805733: 

=Citation=

"Such an assignment is typical for Blackwell and other "backpack" or "mobile" journalists, who spend most if not all of their time outside the newsroom recording, shooting, and writing stories without ever sitting at a desk. "It is probably 60% of my time that is spent out; there are days I don't come into the office at all — at least once or twice a week," says Blackwell, 44. He had worked at the D&C for more than a decade when editors approached him two years ago with the idea of outfitting his 2002 dark blue Audi with a laptop, video camera, audio recorder, still camera, and plenty of lenses.

Blackwell's beat is becoming more and more common as a growing number of newspapers employ these mobile journalists, known as "mojos" in many places. As technology offers easier ways to collect sound and images, editors are finding that equipping reporters with the necessary gadgets to work remotely — and kicking them out the door to do it — is an attractive option. One daily even plans to make all of its reporters and photographers "mobile" this year.

"We are trying to equip more folks with media kits so that everything we could conceivably want, journalistically, can be gathered in the same setting," says Peter Bhatia, executive editor of The Oregonian in Portland — which currently has six mojo kits. "There will be more of that. Some people really take to it." 

It simply means that "people are out and about looking for news and covering news, and in a position to file to the Web," says Pam Fine, managing editor of The Indianapolis Star, which has about a dozen mobile reporters. "Most newspapers have the equipment for journalists to report from the scene, but it is a matter of degree."
([http://www.editorandpublisher.com/eandp/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003805733])


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]