
"Music, cinema, literature, society, travel, events, reports, artists…Mondomix.com is the essential online resource for worldwide music and culture. With editions in English, French and Italian which are updated daily, Mondomix presents unique and original content on over 60,000 pages, including videos, interviews, photo galleries and audio clips.

Offering a vast, specialist catalogue of over 200,000 tracks and information in French and English, the download platform mp3.mondomix.com is an integral part of Mondomix.com. This unparalleled selection of DRM-free downloads features favourite classics as well as sourcing rare gems for worldwide music lovers. With the Radiomix player and a navigation system that allows users to search by country, by genre, and soon, by instrument, mp3.mondomix.com is uniquely equipped to guide huge numbers of users through unexplored musical territories.

Mondomix is also :

* MyMondoMix.com – where ideas connect. The dynamic social network created in 2008.
* Mondomix Magazine - the free print magazine in French. 100,000 copies distributed at 550 cultural locations in France. Created in 2003 it was the first free music magazine in France. Published bi-monhtly, 76 pages of reviews, articles, interviews and reports.
* Mondomix Productions & Publications – worldwide music and culture productions: TV documentaries, music DVDs, books, multimedia exhibitions, online programmes and music events.
* Mondomix Régie – the multi-media advertising agency in Paris represents:
** Mondomix.com, MP3.mondomix.com, MyMondoMix.com, Africultures.com and other music and travel websites
** The free print magazines Mondomix et Afriscope
** Music events and festivals
* Mondomix Digital Music Distribution - professional digital distribution service via IODA – the largest independent digital distribution network.

In association with Atelier 144, Mondomix also produces websites for cultural businesses and institutions, videos (videoclips, EPKs, corporate), soundbeds, webcasts, events and special cultural projects."

(information from 2010)

[[Category:Music]]