By Geoff Chesshire at 
http://groups.google.com/group/barcampbank/browse_thread/thread/a9b05d9a32cff8e4/# :

=Text=

"What I   
have learned is that we are missing a huge opportunity by conflating   
credit (reputation) with money (exchange medium/measure).  The missed   
opportunity is the ability to recognize the value of all that we receive   
without payment, without which we would have nothing to exchange, no   
economy and no life.  A more general notion of "currency" is any   
medium/measure for recognizing flow of value.  Money is not the only kind   
of currency, as exchange is not the only kind of flow.  Likewise, a more   
general notion of "credit" is reputation for actually doing good, for   
contributing to the vitality of the systems in which we participate.   
Credit is not merely capacity for debt-service.  For example, the sun does   
not receive payment in exchange for the energy it provides to the earth.   
However, it has such a solid reputation for reliably providing this energy   
that we take it completely for granted.  Plants do not receive payment for   
photosynthesis, which provides us with food, clothing, shelter, fuel and   
much more.  However, they have a reputation for providing incredible   
abundance and diversity of valuable products.  Likewise the animals, and   
even people working under miserable conditions.  Community organizations   
and volunteers typically do not receive payment for their many essential   
services, certainly not commensurate with the value of these services.   
Family members do not receive payment for household work; neither is the   
value of this work recognized as contributing to the economy.  The   
solution to the problem of how to recognize these flows of value is not   
more creative use of exchange accounting, because this would entail   
further enclosure of the commons and strengthening of disastrous   
hierarchical systems of domination.  The solution is to give recognition,   
reputation and credit for all of this unrecognized flow of value.  Credit   
establishes the capacity of people and businesses to participate in the   
economy.  However, more fundamentally and additionally, this recognition   
establishes the reputation of all of the participants (not just people and   
businesses) for their contributions to the economy, not only to the   
production/consumption economy of market exchange, but additionally to the   
natural economies of family, community, bioregion and planet.  This is how   
we can begin to recognize these living systems as valuable both in their   
own right and for their service to us.  This is how we can learn to   
contribute to the health of these systems, instead of merely exploiting   
them as externalities.  To account for these contributions, the key is to   
develop quantitative measures of system health, and to recognize the   
extent to which various kinds participation in the system contribute to   
these measures.  We need to think about what makes life worth living, and   
start using measures that correlate with vitality, diversity, resilience,   
abundance, joy, etc.  We need to stop using economic measures that promote   
scarcity, exploitation and fear.  Ecology is real economy, minus the   
hubris of our species."

=More Information=

See our entries on

#[[Wealth Typology]]
#[[Levels of Wealth]] 
#[[Wealth Acknowledgment Systems]]


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]