
'''* Article: Money and the Feminine Archetype. By Carol Schwyzer. MoneyMuseum ,'''

URL = https://www.moneymuseum.com/pdf/today/01_Philosophical/Geld%20und%20der%20weibliche%20Archetyp%20en.pdf


=Excerpt=

By Carol Schwyzer:

"Since Bernard Lietaer, however, cannot get to the root of the way people are seen to handle money
using Jung's four archetypes he follows up clues like a detective that might help him to solve the
mystery. He asks, for example, which archetype has the shadow sides of greed and fear of a
shortage of money. His answer: the obvious shadows of our currencies suggest that here the
archetype of the Great Mother – largely forgotten in our society – is repressed, since greed and
scarcity belong as shadows to the feminine archetype, which symbolises fertility and abundance.
Today the shadows of the Great Mother are an unconscious, but quite natural, part of the monetary
system. Not without good reason did Adam Smith, whose economic theory from the 18th century
dominates economics to this day, say that money was scarce, as if this were the most normal thing
in the world.


==The presence of the Great Mother in early currencies==

Not always has the feminine principle been situated so much in the shadow as it is in the case of
our money. Since earliest times the archetype of the Great Mother, of the fertile feminine principle,
has been documented in portraits. She was often depicted as a pregnant woman with firm breasts
like the famous Venus of Willendorf (early Palaeolithic age, about 30,000 BC). The unrestricted
worship of the Great Goddess lasted until around 3000 BC. It is logical that in a society that
collectively regarded as holy and worshipped the feminine the feminine archetype also became
visible in the currency – which, of course, represents a mirror of the collective attitude to life.
Cattle were one of the first means of payment. In the 8th century BC Homer always expressed
wealth in head of cattle. Our word "pecuniary" comes from pecus (Latin for cattle) and the term
"capital" is derived from capus (Latin for head). Even today the wealth of a cattle breeder is
measured by the number of cows he owns. But in the old myths the symbol of the cow is closely
tied up with the Great Creator and Mother. In ancient Egypt, for example, she was called "Hathor,"
the goddess of beauty and abundance, whose full udders were believed to be responsible for the
creation of the Milky Way. She is depicted with cow's ears and each day gives birth to the sun, her
"golden calf."

The cowry shell, too, one of the oldest and longest used currencies, bears feminine attributes. Its
shape is like that of a vulva. It comes from the water, a feminine element, and serves as a vessel for
a living creature. Traditionally it was associated with wealth and happiness, sexual fulfilment and
fertility.



In China the first metal coins from the Bronze Age also integrated the feminine element. These
coins are round with a square hole in the middle, so that they could be tied together for trade and
transport. In the 11th century BC the description "huan fa" for the coins as "square in the centre
and round on the outside" was very widespread. The reason for the rectangular hole – it would
have been easier to make a round one – is to be found in its symbolism: in the Taoistic tradition the
circle stands for the sky, a yang symbol, and the square for the yin element, the earth. Here Mother
Earth still lay at the centre of money.


==The repression of the feminine element as the price for western civilisation==

If we now examine the symbolism of the first large trading currency and principal silver coin of the
Greek world, the drachma, we see that here a masculine element is already dominant. For the name
of the coin is derived from " what you can grasp with your hand" and goes back to the iron
spearheads which circulated before coins, when tools were used as money.

Indeed, the gradual repression of the feminine element can be traced through the whole history of
the western world: the Indo-European invasions beginning in the 3rd millennium BC resulted in
the settled, peaceful, earthbound matriarchal civilisations being conquered by male-orientated,
mobile and belligerent societies. The defeated men were killed off and the women raped and
enslaved.

In Mesopotamia, too, a patriarchal society prevailed from the 3rd millennium BC in a process
lasting over 2500 years. It went hand in hand with the private subjugation of women. The
dependence of the men on the king and the state administration was compensated by the dominant
position of men as heads of families.

Like all Indo-Europeans, the Greeks, too, were familiar with patriarchal myths, for they developed,
among other things, the rational way of thinking, which repressed the senses in favour of reason
and intellect – but denied that women possessed intellectual abilities.

The Jews were now the first nation to be guided by a book, the Holy Scripture. It presented the
idea of a single male God, who created the world solely through the power of the word, without the
help of the feminine principle. The feminine is totally demonised in the story of Adam and Eve,
which makes the serpent – an ancient symbol of the Great Goddess – the cause of the Fall.
With the New Testament God's position as the absolute male monarch was firmly established –
since then only male priests have been able to serve him. The archetypal driad, for example, of Isis
– Osiris – Horus in Egypt, adopted a purely male form in the Holy Trinity of God the Father – the
Son – the Holy Ghost. The only woman remaining is the Virgin Mary. Her Immaculate Conception,
however, makes her unattainable for real women.

After the Reformation the last vestiges of the feminine disappeared from part of Christianity
together with the adoration of Mary and pictures of saints. The emotional linkage to the picture of
feminine holiness was severed. Parallel to this, the witch hunts dealt the death blow to the old
values of the Goddess – respect for nature and the body. From now on the male hero was the ideal:
he dominates our thinking to this day as crusader, samurai or superman, as king, magician, priest,
scientist or missionary.

Five thousand years of patriarchal rule have, therefore, shaped a way of thinking which separates
the spirit from the body and reason from nature, and that down to the last detail. For the Hero had


to learn to bear pain in silence. Thus with the passage of time he lost the feeling for his body and
his feelings generally – and thus for the feminine in himself and in nature.


==Yang currencies==

The systematic repression of the feminine archetype has a great impact on the monetary system of
a society. For if the feminine archetype is ousted currencies arise with the yang features of
hierarchy, concentration, control and competition. They bear interest and all of them have in
common that they favour the accumulation of money by a small elite.

The gold and silver coins that developed in western civilisation and our conventional, centrally
controlled national currencies are typical yang currencies. A hierarchically structured authority
(state, central bank) created them from nothing. Because they bear interest, they encourage
hoarding and drive the competitive economy. Moreover, handling them also produces feelings of
greed and fear of scarcity on the financial markets. And these collective perceptions are –
according to Lietaer – nothing but the shadows of the Great Mother, of the repressed feminine
archetype.

But as so often, one person's sorrow is another's joy: the currencies of the highly developed
patriarchal civilisations are – much to the pleasure of the numismatists – made of lasting materials
and decorated with beautiful symbols which glorify a ruler, a town or an empire.


==Yin currencies==

In the few societies which, unlike ours, honour the feminine, two complementary currency systems
can and could frequently be observed coming into existence, namely a yang currency for longdistance trade and a yin currency for local use. The yin currency here operates purely as a means of
exchange and payment. It circulates on all levels of society without restriction, is available to all
and results in long-term investments.

Let us take an example from history: the bracteates of the high gothic (11th-13th centuries) were
recalled every year and replaced by new ones with a tax collected in the process. So it was not
worth hoarding this money. At the same time the people revered the Virgin Mary, especially as the
Black Madonna, and built hundreds of cathedrals in her honour. Cathedrals are, in turn, the
prototypes of a long-term investment, as they are built over several generations.

A similar means of payment, the ostracon, or potsherd – actually a receipt for the goods to be
stored – are also found in Egypt of the 13th century BC. The value of these receipts decreased in
the course of the years, because the costs of storing the food were deducted. So here, too, there was
no incentive to hoard. Parallel to this women enjoyed a high status and there were female deities.


'''Yin currencies have essentially four effects:'''

1. They bring about economic prosperity for broad sections of society.
2. They encourage cooperation and investments with long-term prospects.
3. They emerge in societies in which the feminine is honoured.
4. They are a forerunner of the present-day movement for local currencies, like, for example,
Time Dollars.


==The money of the future==

Bernard Lietaer observes that civilisations disappear or change when they come up against the
archetype they repress. The peace-loving archaic civilisations, for example, fell victim to the IndoEuropean warriors because they had not developed their aggressive nature. 

Our civilisation also
finds itself in a state of upheaval, because the repressed feminine archetype has awoken. The
present crisis of the West is characterised by the return of the feminine. The purely masculine and
reason-orientated way of thinking, although admittedly our technical and many cultural
developments would have been impossible without it, is losing its absolute claim. A fundamental
change in consciousness has set in. It can be seen in the feminist movement, in a heightened
environmental awareness, in the interest in holistic medicine or in the chaos theory in physics.
Hierarchical structures are being replaced by networks (internet). In addition to intellectual
intelligence emotional intelligence is now being discovered and called for.

In brief, we are resorting to the yin energies, which up to now our civilisation has rejected. This
also manifests itself in the currency system: the complementary local currencies have exploded, so
that today there are over 2500 yin currencies.

Lietaer stresses, however, that a balance between the yin and yang economy is indispensable if the
economy is to function sustainably. His model for the integrated economy of the future therefore
comprises two complementary cycles: a national currency for business transactions and alongside
it complementary currencies for transactions inside the community to promote it.

With his books Lietaer essentially wants to show that we can change our currency systems
positively if we become aware of the way money works. How he proposes achieving his aim –
creating sustainable prosperity for us and future generations – is certainly worth reading."
(https://www.moneymuseum.com/pdf/today/01_Philosophical/Geld%20und%20der%20weibliche%20Archetyp%20en.pdf)