'''= documentary on approaches to monetary transformation by Portland-based filmmaker, Alan Rosenblith'''= 

URL = http://www.themoneyfix.org/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"Just where does that dollar in your pocket originate? The answer is that all money enters the economy as bank debt. So what? You may ask. This seemingly innocuous detail is actually at the core of many of the social and environmental problems of today.

Join us on a voyage that will utterly transform the way you perceive money. Many leading thinkers expose the truth about money, and what we can do about it in this feature length documentary. For more info email: info@themoneyfix.org"
(http://www.themoneyfix.org/index.php)


'''2.'''

“”Money is just information, a way we measure what we trade, nothing of value in itself. And we can make it ourselves, to work as a complement to conventional money. It’s just a matter of design.”

Money is at the intersection of nearly every aspect of modern life. Most of us take the monetary system for granted, but it has a profound and largely misunderstood influence on our lives. ‘THE MONEY FIX’ is a feature-length documentary exploring our society’s relationship with the almighty dollar.
The film documents three types of alternative money systems, all of which help solve economic problems for the communities in which they operate.

‘THE MONEY FIX’ examines economic patterning in both the human and the natural worlds, and through this lens we learn how we can empower ourselves by redesigning the lifeblood of the economy at the community level."


=More Information=

#Documentary: The [[Wealth of Neighbors]]: the power of local currency. By Alan Rosenblith.
#Please visit themoneyfix.org for more information.

=Full Documentary on Youtube=

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwmM5Nb6hiE

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]