''If the American people ever allow private banks to control the issue of currency, first by inflation, then by deflation, the banks and corporations that will grow up around them will deprive the people of all property until their children wake up homeless on the continent their fathers conquered.'' -- '''Thomas Jefferson'''

''Give me control of a nation's money, and I care not who writes it's laws...'' -- '''Meyer Armschel Rothschild 1790'''

''If you want to be the slaves of banks and pay the cost of your own slavery, then let the banks create money...'' -- '''Josiah Stamp, Governor of the Bank of England 1920'''

''Whoever controls the volume of money in any country is absolute master of all industry and commerce.'' -- '''President James A. Garfield'''

''If our Nation can issue a dollar bond, it can issue a dollar bill.  The element that makes the bond good also makes the bill good.  The difference between the bond and the bill lets money brokers [bankers] collect twice the amount of the bond plus interest.  Whereas the bill [currency] pays nobody but those who contribute directly in some useful way.  The People are the basis for government credit.  Why then cannot the People have the benefit of their own credit by receiving non-interest bearing currency, instead of bankers receiving the People's credit in interest bearing bonds?  It is absurd to say that our country can issue 30 million dollars in bonds and not 30 million dollars in currency!  Both are promises to pay; but one promise fattens the usurers and the other helps the People!'' -- '''Thomas Edison'''



==Discussion==
Anyone know any of the privileged few humans with authority to Issue Money out of thin air?

This has got to be the best job on earth!


Those issuers often buy bonds backed by "Federal Land" within each nation - so whenever a nation defaults on it's "National Debt", those issuers become the new property owners of that country!

This is a much easier way to conquer than going to war.  Just trick the island next to you into NOT issuing their own money, then get them into debt by issuing money backed by nothing which you then borrow to them!  Genius!


Note, this 'money' is not the physical coins or paper notes, but simply declarations of value = 'fiat' made by ... WHO?  *Who* is declaring this value, and *why*  do national governments borrow it from these people instead of issuing it for the people that comprise that nation?

There is never any reason for any government or group (at the State, County, City, even Community level) to be in debt, because they could always just issue Money for themselves, but the won't.  Weird.

----

I understand the rules of partial-reserve banking cause even more
money to be created when I enter into a debt.

But that transaction cannot occur unless there was some 'base'
money to begin with - the 'reserve'.

I think it is called M0.  Who creates the M0 supply?


I'm trying to find out where our money comes from *originally*.

You may answer "a bank".  But then where did *they* get it from?

Someone or some institution is declaring (by fiat) that money
into existence, so *who* or *what* has that authority?

It is like a variation the game of Monopoly(R) where the person
"playing the banker" has an infinite supply of money that he can
create for himself whenever he likes without ever going into debt
and yet all the other players must borrow from him.

I'm not trying to question the morality of any banker as a person,
I'm trying to understand the strategy that has nations enter into
massive debt when it seems it could easily be avoided if those
nations would simply choose to issue M0 for themselves.

But since the question "Why do our nations borrow" is probably too
vast, I simplified to "What is the Origin of our Money Supply"?

[[Category:Money]]