
= [[MONNETA]], the '''Money Network Alliance'''

URL = http://www.monneta.org/

A project to sustain monetary reform and transformation, in continuation of the work of [[Margrit Kennedy]].

=Description=

'''I.'''

"MonNetA is a non-profit organisation of Lebensgarten Steyerberg e.V.

1. 	to widely disseminate to growing circles of interested people - the possibilities and contribution of complementary currencies to achieve regional development, particularly in overcoming economic problems, social polarities, unemployment and environmental degradation

2. 	to publish, connect together and support the experiences of projects and new initiatives at home and abroad

3. 	to introduce and test new monetary tools towards pro-active management in the context of the restructuring of the regional economy"
(http://www.monneta.org/about.html)


=Status 2018=

'''Antja and Declan Kennedy:'''

"A quick update about how we continued Margrit's work on complementary currency solutions. 

Because today as then, the kind of money we use is a central issue on the way to a more just and equitable economy. If we succeed in creating more awareness about and alternatives to our current financial system, a lot can be improved.

The charitable association MONNETA, which Margrit founded before her death together with Kathrin Latsch, has developed over the years. To reflect that also in its name, we added the line "Network for Monetary Diversity" to it in recent month.

In 2015, the MONNETA Website had been relaunched and now provides an excellent overview of all monetary reform proposals and explains particularly complementary currencies in an accessible way. MONNETA collaborates with other organisations like Finance Watch, or the citizens' movement Bürgerbewegung Finanzwende and the German network for Pluralistic Economics. We organise public lectures, panel discussions and workshops, regularly in cooperation with universities. MONNETA also produced several new films and video interviews, which can be found in our media library. The latest one, released this summer, provides a short and concise introduction to why we and our experts are so concerned about money - not the lack of it, but as a topic of education and innovation (German only, English translation coming soon).

The continuation of MONNETA is financially secured - but to do more towards Margrit's hopes and ambitions MONNETA would like to develop additional activities, like a major documentary on the subject of "alternatives to the perpetual financial crises and the money of the future". For those we rely on your support! Antja, Margrit's daughter, has followed her wish and joined the MONNETA board and provides an "out-side eye" on our topics and activities. Declan supports her and Kathrin with his experience and advise - as much in regards to the long history of Margrit's work as to the future."


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Germany]]