
= there is only consciousness ?


=Discussion=

Daniel Pinchbeck:

"Scientific materialism derived from the Newtonian-Cartesian paradigm that postulated an independent physical world, where consciousness, through the random evolution of species, developed as an accidental byproduct of increasing biological complexity. However, through experiment, quantum physics discovered that consciousness, not matter, is the basis of reality. A definable world only comes into being when an observer makes an observation. What we experience as physical reality emerges from the infinite source field or plenum of consciousness. The new paradigm — explored by diverse thinkers including Amit Goswami, Robert Lanza, Rudolf Steiner, Edgar Mitchell, and more — can be called “monistic idealism.” 

For physicist Amit Goswami: “The consciousness of the subject in a subject-object experience is the same consciousness that is the ground of all being. Therefore, consciousness is unitive. There is only one subject-consciousness, and we are that consciousness.” According to Robert Lanza: “Some may imagine that there are two worlds, one “out there” and a separate one being cognized inside the skull. But the “two worlds” model is a myth. Nothing is perceived except the perceptions themselves, and nothing exists outside of consciousness.” James Matlock notes: “There is only one substance and that is consciousness.” This is the same viewpoint as Eastern mysticism. 

Monistic idealism — the new world revealed by quantum physics — allows us to make scientific hypotheses about the workings of reincarnation, the subtle bodies and energy systems, and, potentially, the existence of an afterlife. Once this is generally understood and accepted, it will be possible to supersede scientific materialism and establish a new coherent worldview which allows for psychic phenomena, reincarnation, and the afterlife. As we integrate such subjects into an expanded scientific worldview, they will be made a focus for further investigation. As we supersede scientific materialism and embrace monistic idealism, our priorities as a species will also change radically."

(https://danielpinchbeck.substack.com/p/crossing-the-threshold)

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]