'''* Book: The Moral Molecule: Vampire Economics and the New Science of Good and Evil. Paul J. Zak. 2011'''

URL = http://www.moralmolecule.com/


=Description=

Author's introduction, by Paul Zak:

"This book tells the story of oxytocin—not to be confused with the often abused pain killer OxyContin—in its capacity as "the moral molecule." It's a story that takes us into the heart of the longest running debate since debates began—the one about the essence of human nature and whether human beings are fundamentally good or evil. In ancient times the Psalmist placed human beings "a little lower than the angels." Arguing for the other side, the Roman playwright Plautus declared that "Man is wolf to man." Philosophers, preachers, and politicians have been going at it ever since, offering theories to pin down our moral core that range from original sin, to the pursuit of what economists call "rational self-interest," to the belief that we are born a blank slate upon which all manner of goodness might be written if only everyone had the right environment in early childhood. And this is not merely some academic dispute. This is a debate with consequences, because each contending theory competes to be inculcated in our laws, cultural expectations, and social policies.

Over the past few years, new insights as to why people behave as they do have flooded in from fields like experimental economics, behavioral economics, social neuroscience, neurotheology, evolutionary studies of altruism and cooperation, even "happiness research." All these data suggest that, as a species, we are far less rational—and, on balance, generally kinder and more cooperative—than the prevailing wisdom has ever assumed.oxytocin_molecule

But up until now, this scientifically enhanced insight into human nature—the good as well as the bad—still begged the question: Given that humans can be at the same time rational and irrational, ruthlessly depraved and immensely kind, shamefully self-interested and completely selfless, what specifically determines which aspects of our nature will be expressed when? When do we trust and when do we remain wary? When do we give of ourselves and when do we hold back? The answer is oxytocin.

Oxytocin affects every aspect of our moral behavior, and this book will show that effect across the full spectrum of life, scaling up from the individual and her close personal relationships to society as a whole. Toward the end, I'll give special focus to the morality of the marketplace, where issues of trust, trustworthiness, prosperity, and human happiness intersect.smith

With a PhD in economics, I may appear to have a fairly odd background for this study of morals and molecules. But that may be because economics has become so associated with mathematical models and financial statistics that we forget that it came into existence as an offshoot of moral studies. Adam Smith, the founder of the field of economics, lived and died before the term "economist" ever came into use; he considered himself a moral philosopher.

About thirty years ago, some economists began to turn away from theoretical modeling to pay more attention to what actual people did in actual situations in which they had to make choices. Experimental economics and behavioral economics emerged, but some of us wanted to dig even deeper than behavior. I, for one, wanted to try to explore the underlying physiology and brain mechanisms that actually drove the behavior. This led me to found a subdiscipline of my own, which a dean of mine once referred to as "vampire economics." Under the more formal rubric of "neuroeconomics," we combine experimental methods from economics with biomedical techniques such as blood analysis and brain scans.

This career progression, however, met with somepic1 resistance. Many of my more traditional colleagues did not see the point of mixing economics with neuroscience. In fact, I was roundly discouraged by almost everyone, including my wife, who happens to be a neurologist. Fortunately, there were a few, very supportive exceptions that made it possible for me to move ahead outside the traditional boundaries. But working outside the boundaries meant that, even though I was a tenured professor, I carried out much of my early oxytocin research the way indie filmmakers make movies—borrowing space, begging for funding, and hauling equipment around Los Angeles in my car. But as I discovered, a side benefit of doing science this way is that it gets me out of the usual rut and into some highly atypical situations: taking blood from tribal dancers, working with inmates in the San Diego jail to explore why they often make such terrible moral decisions, and attending celebratory events such marriage ceremonies."
(http://www.moralmolecule.com/about.html)


=Discussion=

Adam L. Penenberg:

"Trust goes to the heart of our economic and social systems. Neuroeconomist Paul J. Zak, a professor at Claremont College and author of the forthcoming book, The Moral Molecule: Vampire Economics and the New Science of Good and Evil, says that trust is the lubricant that makes economic transactions possible. It wasn't until European nations could agree on standard weights and measures, which facilitated trust, that trade and commerce flourished. While it may say "In God We Trust" on every dollar bill, what we are really trusting is that this piece of paper or coin--nowadays often a digital representation on a screen--is worth what we all believe it's worth.

In his own research, Zak and a co-researcher found that nations with higher levels of trust (Sweden, Germany, the U.S.) have stronger economies than those on the other end of the spectrum (the Congo, Sudan, Colombia). "Where there is more trustworthiness, there is more prosperity," Zak says. This trust also influences what we buy. A 2009 Nielsen Global Online Consumer Survey study found that shoppers value the opinions of people they know the most, followed by online reviews written by strangers or in online communities.

There's a good reason for this. We humans are hard-wired to commingle with one another offline and on-, and the web and its platforms like Facebook and Twitter make it more efficient than ever. That's because virtual relationships can be as real as actual relationships. The truth is we're all one step removed from reality, living life through the prism of our own minds. Researchers at Washington University in St. Louis found when they scanned the brains of fiction readers that they reacted as if they were actually living the events in the story.

Zak has traced much of our behavior to oxytocin, a single neuropeptide he's dubbed "the moral molecule" because it appears to shape much of our better nature. Also referred to as the "cuddle hormone," oxytocin is the same chemical that forges that unshakeable bond between nursing mothers and their babies. Women have 30% more of it than men, but men have plenty, too, and in a spate of experiments spanning a decade Zak has linked oxytocin to all manner of human behavior--from empathy to generosity to trust. And when we believe that someone trusts us, we trust them back, and this alters our behavior: It makes us more generous, for one. Ultimately, oxytocin is, Zak says, the "social glue" that adheres families, communities, and societies while simultaneously acting as an "economic lubricant" that enables us to engage in all sorts of transactions."
(http://www.fastcompany.com/1767125/digital-oxytocin)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Economics]]