'''* Book. The River and the Star. Book One of the Moral Transformation Cycle series. By David Loye.'''

URL = http://benjaminfranklinpress.com/papers/moral.pdf

"is it possible to radically accelerate moral evolution, if not indeed launch moral revolution?" [http://benjaminfranklinpress.com/papers/moral.pdf]


=Content=

==The River and the Star==

"The River and the Star: The Lost Story of the  Great Explorers of the Better World

In this first book for the Cycle, Loye provides a startling new
look at the lives, times, and work of a comparative handful of
men—and later, women—who, although from diverse, indeed
radically different backgrounds, shared a single passion.

Generation after generation, against opposition from
authoritarian religions, governments, and social systems—and
despite the massive indifference of much of the social science
they helped create—over 200 years they fought to expand the
ability of our species to build better lives and the better world for ourselves.
Immanuel Kant, Marx and Engels, Sigmund Freud, Jean Piaget, Erich Fromm, Lawrence
Kohlberg and Carol Gilligan—we follow these and other famous social scientific explorers
as bit by bit they uncover the “two worlds” of morality and a firm first foundation for moral
evolution.

On the surface we know the deeper reality of the “river” and the “star” as the drive for
freedom and equality. But now for the first time we can see the deep primacy of this
evolutionary partnership for moral evolution—and revolution; not only in politics, but in
gender relations, child-raising, economics, religion, science, education, and all other regards."

(http://benjaminfranklinpress.com/papers/moral.pdf)


==The Glacier and the Flame I: Rediscovering Goodness==
 

Are we by nature good? Or bad? Or are we only some kind of
organic putty for shaping in whatever way over-riding control or
blind chance drives us?

In this first of the core triad of books for his Moral
Transformation Cycle Loye applies the neglected power of
progressive science to the question of what makes us good with
these stunning results:

A basic finding that by evolution we’re pre-programmed good. The uncovering of six
foundations for moral evolution. Translation of the six into a new six point Global Ethic.

And in a pioneering tour de force: Corroboration of this compelling statement for progressive
science by thousands of years of the codes and beliefs of a similarly neglected and embattled
progressive religion.


==The Glacier and the Flame II: Redefining Evil==

Are we bad as a matter of “innate evil”? Is ours the root
problem of a basically bestial human nature we can only hope to
improve by relentless control?

Or is ours the astonishing case of the massive rise and global
proliferation of much of what we know as evil imposed upon us
by a specific time of bloody conquest in the supposedly
unknowable distant past of our species?

The pioneering work of archeologist Marija Gimbutas and
evolution theorist Riane Eisler—along with by now scores of
other social scientists revealing both an earlier era and later pockets of comparative global
peace and plenty—has in many places been written off as “just a feminist fantasy.”
For the first time this book provides the powerful corroboration of generation after
generation of male thinkers considered among the leading scholars and scientists of their time.
What emerges is an extraordinary uncovering of the shaping impact on our history and
human evolution of the “two worlds” of dominator morality and partnership morality.

The wasteful, dysfunctional and heart-rending barriers erected against human evolution
by the dominator morality are revealed with haunting precision. Likewise, the dynamics of
how—in radically different ways—we construct the conscience, sexual morality, and
economic, political, and environmental morality.


==The Glacier and the Flame III: A Fragment of the Vision==

The first two books of the triad for The Glacier and the Flame
explore the supporting science and religion for only the first
two of the six foundations that Loye identifies in GF I.

Forced by advancing age and the lack of a market for his
original purpose of a book for each of them, into this final book
for the triad Loye collapsed fragments earlier written to flesh
out the scientific support for the following six foundations:

Foundation I: The Expectation of Goodness. 

Foundation II: Perception of the Two Worlds
of Partnership and Dominator Morality. 

Foundation III: The Cosmic and Political Drive of
Freedom and Equality. 

Foundation IV: The Immanent and Transcendent Power of Love.

Foundation V: The Guidance System of Higher Mind. 

Foundation VI: Earth and the Action
Imperative


==The Science of Evil: What Makes Us Good or Bad?==
 
“This book is about the immensely engaging, periodically
rewarding, and often delightful adventure of battling evil
through changes in our understanding of what evil is, and
what we can do about it,” David Loye tells us in his Prologue.

“Over many millennia we humans have grappled with evil
with the tools of mind perfected through the cumulating
experience of billions of us and the insight of great thinkers
gathered into three great bodies of organized knowledge.”

First, over many thousands of years, came the rich, ritualistic
attempt by religion. Next, over only three to four thousand years, came the lofty bookish
probe by philosophy. Last, over barely more than 300 years, has come the attempt to
ground our search for understanding in genetics, behavior, environment, and other
multifaceted explorations of science."


==Moral Sensitizing: A Guide to a New Method of Learning and Therapy for Teachers,  Counselors, and Self-Healers==
 
How are we to find for ourselves and teach and counsel
others in the arts and sciences of goodness?

Though to ourselves we may seem alone in wondering
this, actually worldwide millions of us are beginning to ask
this question because of our perception of how environmental
devastation and a new escalation in violence, wars and
nuclear proliferation is increasingly linked to the question
of species if not indeed even planetary survival.

Drawing on the accumulated wisdom of the five earlier books for his Moral Transformation
Cycle, as well as his revolutionary six book Darwin Anniversary Cycle, in this final book
Dr.Loye provides everything one needs to get underway with the approach of Moral
Sensitivity Learning (MSL) or Moral Sensitivity Healing (MSH).

“These approaches are designed to work for groups with an organizer (or organizers, for
having co-facilitators is the ideal), or for the person who for reasons of convenience or privacy
wants to experience this process by themselves. Because of the greater complexities involved,
the emphasis here will be mainly on group process. But throughout these pages I also will be
speaking to the self-healer.”

=Discussion=

David Loye (interviewed by David Loye):

"I’ve written about this in a
book of mine called the River and the Star, which is actually the first book for my seven book “Moral Transformation Cycle.” The first book is River and the Star: The Lost Story
of the Great Explorers of the Better World. It’s possibly the best thing I’ve ever written.
It’s out there with all the online booksellers worldwide. I write about Piaget, for example.
Today, we’ve focused on the cognitive development he wrote about and forgotten about
the moral development work that came earlier, but it was the most brilliant of all.


Russ: Interesting. So Piaget is another example of someone who has written about moral
development—not just Darwin—and that portion of their work is being ignored.


David: Yes, and that’s what I’m addressing in the River and the Star. I start with Immanuel
Kant. Who really pays any attention to him except for dull philosophers these days? But
he was a fireball! I move on to Herbert Spencer. Everyone writes him off as this rightwing ideologue. Well, he had some very important things to say about moral
development. Marx and Engels—they’re the demons, you know—but they significantly
advanced our understanding of moral development. I go into Freud and Emile Durkheim,
who is one of the towering figures in the study of moral development, then on to Piaget
and into the work of many people who I’ve worked with or knew, like Ashley Montague
and Milton Rokeach. I used to work with Milton and it’s a magnificent story. And I
include all of that work, except for the most recent, Carol Gilligan’s, because she’s still
living and tied to the Women’s Movement. Hardly anybody pays any attention to it
anymore so I’m determined to shove it at them.

In the seven books of my “Moral Transformation Cycle,”
most particularly in the “Glacier and the Flame” trilogy. There I differentiate dominator
moral insensitivity and dominator morality from partnership moral sensitivity and
partnership morality in relation to Riane Eisler's fundamental work on domination and
partnership systems. That is what we have to get across. Today, we live in this hybrid
world where we’re hit with both versions; we’re muddled and mixed up. You go to
church on Sunday, you tithe and go there on the holidays. But in the meantime, the other
six days of the week, the orientation is screw your neighbor. Instead of “Do unto others
as you would have them do unto you,” it has become, “Do unto others before they can do
it unto you.” That’s the regressive dominator morality."

(http://integral-review.org/issues/vol_4_no_2_volckmann_interview_with_loye.pdf)


=More information=

'''* Action research and human evolution: David Loye's lifelong exploration of moral sensitivity. By Riane Eisler. World Futures. The Journal of New Paradigm Research, Volume 49, 1997 - Issue 1-2Pages 89-101, 1996 [https://doi.org/10.1080/02604027.1997.9972624 doi]; Special Issue: The Dialatic of Evolution: Essays in Honor of David Loye'''

URL = https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02604027.1997.9972624

This article summarizes the scientific contribution of David Loye in terms of early writings and research; prediction, brain, gender, political, and chaos theoretical studies; and studies of moral sensitivity and development of moral transformation theory.

[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]