
=Typology 1: M. Borba=

Summarized by Joseph Dillard [http://www.integralworld.net/dillard40.html?]:


Source Borba, M. The Step-By-Step Guide to Building Moral Intelligence. Jossey-Bass Publishers, 2001.

"There are various versions of such virtues. For example, here is Borba's construction, developed as a guide for the moral education of children:

==EMPATHY:==

Identifying with and feeling other people's concerns.

* Step 1. Foster awareness and an emotional vocabulary.
* Step 2. Enhance sensitivity to the feelings of others.
* Step 3. Develop empathy for another person's point of view.


==CONSCIENCE:==

Knowing the right and decent way to act and acting in that way.

* Step 1. Create the context for moral growth.
* Step 2. Teach virtues to strengthen conscience and guide behavior.
* Step 3. Foster moral discipline to help kids learn right from wrong.


==SELF-CONTROL:== 

Regulating your thoughts and actions so that you stop any pressures from within or without and act the way you know and feel is right.

* Step 1. Model and prioritize self-control to your child.
* Step 2. Encourage your child to become his own self motivator.
* Step 3. Teach your child ways to deal with temptations and think before acting.


==RESPECT:==

Showing you value others by treating them in a courteous and considerate way.

* Step 1. Convey the meaning of respect by modeling and teaching it.
* Step 2. Enhance respect for authority and squelch rudeness.
* Step 3. Emphasize good manners and courtesy--they do count!


==KINDNESS:==

Demonstrating concern about the welfare and feelings of others.

* Step 1. Teach the meaning and value of kindness.
* Step 2. Establish a zero tolerance for meanness and nastiness.
* Step 3. Encourage kindness and point out its positive effect.


==TOLERANCE:== 

Respecting the dignity and rights of all persons, even those beliefs and behaviors we may disagree with.

* Step 1. Model and nurture tolerance from an early age.
* Step 2. Instill an appreciation for diversity.
* Step 3. Counter stereotypes and do not tolerate prejudice.


==FAIRNESS:== 

Choosing to be open-minded and to act in a just and fair way.

* Step 1. Treat your kids fairly.
* Step 2. Help your child learn to behave fairly.
* Step 3. Teach your child ways to stand up against unfairness and injustice.



==Typology 2: Doug Lennick and Fred Kiel==

Summarized by Joseph Dillard:


"Doug Lennick and Fred Kiel, Ph.D., authors of Moral Intelligence and the originators of the term, provide their own version of judgment-based virtues:


==Integrit==y: 

Creating harmony between what we believe and how we act, doing what we know is right, always telling the truth


==Responsibility:== 

Taking personal responsibility, admitting mistakes and failures, embracing responsibility for serving others


==Forgiveness:== 

Letting go of one's own mistakes, letting go of others' mistakes


==Compassion:== 

Actively caring about others."

(http://www.integralworld.net/dillard40.html?)


=More information=

Beheshtifar, M., Esmaeli, Z., & Moghadam, M. N. (2011). Effect of moral intelligence on leadership. European Journal of Economics, Finance and Administrative Sciences, 43, 6-11