
===On the Need for Treating Natural and Knowledge Commons Differently===

"By commonwealth, I mean the wealth that no one has made, or the wealth that practically everyone has made. So it’s either nature – nobody made it, we all inherited it – or knowledge – everybody contributed to making it, but everyone’s contribution is small in relation to the total and depends on the contributions of others. In managing the commonwealth of nature, our big problem is that we tend to treat the truly scarce as if it were non-scarce. The opposite problem arises with the commonwealth of knowledge, in which we tend to treat what is truly not scarce as if it were."

- Herman Daly [http://steadystate.org/sustaining-our-commonwealth-of-nature-and-knowledge/]


===Obtaining Economic Advantage through Serving and Sharing===

"The future of advantage is radically different from the past for a simple reason: because it's economically better. 20th century advantage focuses firms on simply extracting resources from people, communities and society — and then protecting what they extract. 21st century advantage focuses firms on creating new resources, and allocating them better. The former is useful only to shareholders and managers — but the latter is useful to people, communities, and society. The old Microsoft was useful to shareholders, but a lot less useful to society — and that's exactly how Google and Apple attacked it, and won."

Umair Haque [http://blogs.hbr.org/haque/2010/03/the_new_paradigm_of_advantage.html]



===Social Commerce and the Intention Economy===

"only 13% of consumers say they buy products because of their ads. Contrast that to 60% of small business owners in North America that say they use peer recommendations to make their buying decisions and over 70% of 18-35 year olds who report the same for their media purchases."

- Tara Hunt [http://www.horsepigcow.com/2007/09/13/how-to-make-a-gabillion-dollars-with-community-marketingor-something-to-that-effect/]


===Replacing Modes of Production===

"The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in general. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness. ... At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or – this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms – with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure."

-Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy [http://www.libertyandsolidarity.org/node/104]


===More Citations===

Here at [[Introduction to the P2P Foundation Wiki Material about Economics#Long Quotes]]

# Clay Shirky on abundant immaterial resources and scarce profits
# David Graeber on The disappearing legitimacy of capitalism
# John Earls on The new logic of post-growth economies
# Bill McKibben on the Carbon Bubble
# Competing 'on top' of the Commons
# The Sharing Economy should be distinguished from the Monetary Economy
# Market Logic vs. Network Logic
# From Profit-Maximization and Market-Orientation to Mission-Focused
# Markets without Money
# Monetization vs. Community value creation
# The New Social Capitalism
# Why Localization is Inevitable in a Resource-scarce World
# Scaling Up From One Through Personal Fabrication Ecosystems

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Quotes]]