

=Discussion=

From the Wikipedia:

"Walking Marriage vs. Traditional Marriage:

Anthropologists believe the premodern Mosuo family system has withstood modern Chinese marriage practices (identical to America's monogamous marriages) for many reasons. The practice of walking marriage allows two people to pursue intimacy as equals purely for the sake of satisfaction.

Mosuo family principles challenge some of the world's deepest, most popular beliefs about marriage, parenting, and family life. 

The following are convictions about marriage scholars, politicians, and citizens from the East and West (including traditional Chinese patriarchy) believe are true of family and kinship: Marriage is a universal institution. ; The quality and stability of a couple’s marriage profoundly affects their children’s welfare and security. ; Parents who engage in multiple, short-term, extra-marital sexual liaisons irresponsibly threaten their children’s emotional development (Wait, L.) 
The Mosuo family life offers an exception that questions these convictions. Traditional Mosuo families value sexuality and romance separate from domesticity, parenting, caretaking, and economic situation. A Mosuo woman's sex life is strictly voluntary and nocturnal while her family life is a daily obligation (Stacey, J.).

Mosuo Culture and Female Sexual Freedom
The practice of tisese allows Mosuo women to avoid the double standard that regulates women's sexuality in other cultures. Women's sexual behaviors are judged equally. Girls and boys alike are raised learning to express sexuality to the same degree (Fox, R).

The traditional Mosuo family and kinship affords women an equality and agency over their sexual and procreative lives that is rare in most cultures. Romantic and sexual unions are governed solely by the woman and man involved. Other family members are unconcerned with the romantic lives of their offspring.

Mosuo women enjoy a freedom from reproductive demands that is foreign to most Chinese cultures."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosuo_women#Walking_Marriage_vs._Traditional_Marriage)


=More Information=

* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosuo_women#Walking_Marriage_vs._Traditional_Marriage

* http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bbzG0n3shTM


[[Category:Relational]]