'''Article: Motivation, Governance, and the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development.''' Sonali K. Shah, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. MANAGEMENT SCIENCE, Vol. 52, No. 7, July 2006, pp. 1000–1014


URL = http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Motivation,%20Governance,%20Hybrid%20Forms.pdf


=Abstract=

"Open source software projects rely on the voluntary efforts of thousands of software developers, yet we
know little about why developers choose to participate in this collective development process. This paper
inductively derives a framework for understanding participation from the perspective of the individual software
developer based on data from two software communities with different governance structures.
In both communities, a need for software-related improvements drives initial participation. The majority of
participants leave the community once their needs are met, however, a small subset remains involved. For this
set of developers, motives evolve over time and participation becomes a hobby. These hobbyists are critical to
the long-term viability of the software code: They take on tasks that might otherwise go undone and work
to maintain the simplicity and modularity of the code. Governance structures affect this evolution of motives.
Implications for firms interested in implementing hybrid strategies designed to combine the advantages of open
source software development with proprietary ownership and control are discussed.


From the introduction:


"This paper investigates two specific research questions
from an empirical perspective. First, why do
individuals participate in innovation communities?
And, second, how do differences in governance affect
individuals’ reasons for participation, as well as the
type and quality of their contributions? To address
these questions, this paper examines the motives of
participants in two large and well-known communitybased
software development projects. One community
is open source and the other is gated source, meaning
that the communities rely on different governance
structures, although both seek to attract the efforts of
volunteer software developers. The study of two communities
with different governance structures allows
me to investigate how such differences affect individual
participation."


=Findings=

"Three key findings were uncovered. First, reasons
for participation vary, but a critical subset of open
source developers—hobbyists—participate because
they derive enjoyment from the act of creating code.
Second, reciprocity is a crucial factor in motivating
contributions to the community. Third, governance
structure has a first-order effect on patterns of participation.
Two additional distinctions not present in
the existing literature also emerged. First, the creation
and contribution of code and knowledge to the community
are two different activities and are motivated
by different sets of factors.1 Second, the outcomes that
motivate behavior are not always the same as the outcomes
generated by the behavior. For example, some
developers do attain status within communities and
a select few have leveraged their open source efforts
into high-paying jobs. Yet, it does not appear that
these developers originally participated in the hopes
of obtaining these rewards."


==Issues with Gated Communities==

* "Although the open source community greatly benefited
from the presence of hobbyist developers, virtually
all long-term gated source participants continued
to focus on need as their primary reason for project
involvement 


In describing their activities within the gated source
community, participants voiced blatant disapproval of
two elements of the governance structure: The level
of code control held by the sponsor (the sponsor is the
only actor able to make changes to the source code)
and ownership by the corporate sponsor.

Day-to-day control over the code made participants
question whether their efforts would go to waste, as
their needs and activities might not be reflective of
the sponsor’s financial interests:

I answer questions and stuff, but I don’t feel the need
to contribute my changes to the community. It’s time
consuming and I don’t know if [the corporate sponsor]
will do anything with it 

At the end of the day, they
make the decisions with their commercial licensees in
mind. (Long-term participant, gated source community,
United States)

'''Ownership by the corporate sponsor raised four issues.''' 

The '''first issue''' involves '''unrestricted use of the
code by the participant''':

Why should I contribute to something that is not mine?

It’s okay if it’s mine and someone else’s and someone
else’s, but I have to be able to use it the way I
want, whenever I want. (Short-term participant, gated
source community, United States)


The '''second issue involves the fairness of restrictions
on wider code use and distribution''', as illustrated
below.

I make the changes that I really need and so does
everyone else and we benefit from one another.

There are a lot of things the project still needs that I
keep asking [the corporate sponsor] to develop -- they
are not absolutely critical, but they’d take the software
to the next level and expand its capabilities : if I
develop it and then [the corporate sponsor] says I can’t
let others see it or work on it or use it in whatever
way that makes sense—now come on! That’s not how
it works! (Long-term participant, gated source community,
United States)

'''The third issue involves various scenarios under which the sponsor might inadvertently or deliberately, in the words of a participant, “appropriate code away” from the community'''. 

For example, conflicts
over ownership and use might arise if the
sponsor goes out of business, chooses to discontinue
the project, or wants to sell the code. 

'''The fourth issue involves problems created by the commercialuse clause of the license.''' Although the code may be
used freely for developmental work by other firms,
commercial use requires the negotiation and payment
of a royalty fee to the sponsor. Many participants were
wary that the sponsor might stipulate outrageous
license terms for commercial use after the participant
(on behalf of an employer or himself) invested in the
creation of a product based on the code.

Due to these issues, those who participated tended
to be developers with no other option but to use
the gated source software, those who believed that
they could trust the sponsor (e.g., the sponsor’s existing
customers), and those willing to work under
the licensing constraints (e.g., start-ups and consultants
who believed they would gain financially from
the technology). Many of these participants chose
not to contribute the code that they created, leaving
other developers with less to work with and build
on. In the long run, this limits cumulative development
activity and overall value creation. When these
participants did contribute, their contributions often
stemmed from strategic concerns."


==Property Rights, Fairness, and Reciprocity==

"This study highlights the importance of fairness in
supporting exchange relationships. In this setting,
property and decision-making rights affected individuals’
perceptions of fairness, which in turn affected
their behaviors. Participants in each community were
aware of who controlled property and decisionmaking
rights and appear to view that actor as their
primary exchange partner. That is to say, when assessing
reciprocity within the community and choosing
the extent to which they wish to create and contribute
code, open source participants focus on the
actions of volunteer community members, whereas
gated source participants focus on the actions of the
corporate sponsor.

The possibility of opportunistic ("unfair") actions by
those holding control rights can both decrease and
alter the character of volunteer participation. Gated
source developers feared that the corporate sponsor
might exercise control rights in a strategic manner
benefiting the corporation over the community. As a
result, gated source participants invested effort only
if they very much needed the software and were less
likely to contribute their findings to the community.
Moreover, they were unwilling to engage in fun and
challenging development activities, depriving themselves
of an enjoyable activity and depriving the community
of their efforts and talents. From the perspective
of behavioral game theory and evolutionary psychology,
it is not surprising that perceptions of fairness
weigh heavily into an individual’s decision to
work with others and even leads individuals to punish
others at a cost to themselves (Barkow et al. 1992;
Kahneman et al. 1986a, b). From this perspective, the
creation of a neutral and accessible commons is crucial
for fostering community-based innovation. Keeping
a resource in the commons both allows others to
draw on the resource and mitigates the number of
strategic games played by others (Lessig 2001, p. 72)"


=Governance Issues=

"Here I discuss the impact of two broad sets of
governance mechanisms—decision rights and property
rights—on participation.


===Decision-Making Rights===


* Code Control. 

In the gated source community, only
the corporate sponsor is allowed to alter the source
code. This strict control over the code affects both
need-driven and hobbyist participants. Need-driven
participants worry that their voices will be drowned
out by the needs of the firm and its customers when
software-related decisions are made. Such control limits
the ability of hobbyists to work and contribute in
self-defined ways. In addition, the volume of feedback
and overall activity is likely to decline due to
both decreased participation and tighter control over
what is committed to the source code and, therefore,
used by others.


* Domination of Mailing List Interaction. 

Firms may inadvertently dominate mailing lists through a desire
to influence the direction of the project or because
firm employees represent a substantial portion of the
participant pool, as might be the case when a firmsponsored
community is newly created. This may
act to inhibit developers from voicing heterogeneous
views, resulting in decreased volunteer participation.
This relationship was not directly observed in this
study, however developers’ distaste of tightly controlled
open source projects was observed.


==Property Rights==


'''Private Ownership of Source Code.''' 

Private ownership
of the code acts to dismantle the collective development
process in a variety of ways. Most noticeably,
ownership by the firm creates the possibility that the
developer will not have access to the code at a later
date. Participants value the results of their efforts and
expect to continue using the software well into the
future. The open source project gave them this right,
but the gated source project did not make this guarantee.
Private ownership also appears to inhibit reciprocity:
if the firm is not donating the code to the
community, why should the developer take additional
time and effort to donate code to the firm?


'''Restrictions on Use, Modification, and Distribution.'''

... act to reduce the degrees of freedom that an individual
can exercise when using and creating the code,
particularly when compared to open source licensing
arrangements. These restrictions can be thought of as
limiting the value available to the individual developer,
i.e., the developer can only use the code for
certain purposes, modifications made and deployed
must meet community standards (rather than his own
preferences), and the code may only be shared with
others willing to abide by the community’s governance
arrangements, thereby decreasing the volume
of subsequent improvements and feedback that many
developers relish. On the other hand, these restrictions
might create value for the company.

Restrictions on commercial use in the gated source
community created additional problems because
licensing terms were negotiated with the firm on an
individual basis. This decreased trust dramatically
by creating the possibility of ex post hold-up problems.
Restrictions on commercial use with terms set
in advance and applicable to everyone may be less
problematic.


'''Proprietary Modifications.''' 

A large part of the longstanding
debate between free and open source
software advocates concerns proprietary modifications.
Software derived from free software cannot
be made proprietary. The “copyleft” provisions of
the GNU General Public License (GPL) and similar


The restrictions placed on the gated code with respect
to commercial use, modification, and distribution all
licenses mandate that all derivative works be distributed
under the same licensing terms as the original
software, thereby ensuring that code remains free
(Stallman 2001). In contrast, the open source definition,
while inclusive of free software licenses, allows
proprietary modifications to be made (Open Source
Initiative 2004). There exist examples of successful
projects governed by both types of licenses, although
GPL-style licenses appear to dominate the landscape
(Lerner and Tirole 2005)."
(http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Motivation,%20Governance,%20Hybrid%20Forms.pdf)



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Governance]]