

=Description=

URL = http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/

'''1.'''

"We are a diverse and growing group of families and friends who want to help solve the global problem of climate change one neighborhood at a time — starting with our own. Mt. Pleasant Solar Coop aims to make rooftop solar power convenient and affordable for everybody in our neighborhood which is located in central Washington D.C. near the National Zoo.

We are working with other communities to build a network of neighborhoods committed to solar energy and taking real action to reduce our dependence on carbon polluting energy."
(http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/)



'''2.'''

"We are an association of 70-plus households in the Mt. Pleasant community of the District of Columbia. We were founded in the fall of 2006 by neighbors Anya Schoolman and Jeff Morley and their teenage sons, Walter Lynn and Diego Arene-Morley, because of the urgent need we felt to reduce our impact on global warming.

Two ideas led us to the coop model.

First, if we were going to go through all the work to figure out how to install solar technology, we decided we would have more impact by including more people in the project.

Second, we needed a way to make solar power less expensive. We hoped that through bulk purchase, and sharing expenses and expertise we could significantly bring down the cost.

The immediate goal is to make solar affordable, easy and widely available in our neighborhood. Our ultimate goal is to develop a model that can be tested in Mt Pleasant and then rolled out across any neighborhood in D.C. Washington.

The idea is that members will merely have to sign up—and they will get solar power installed on their roof."
(http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/about.htm)

==More Information==

#Faq, http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/faqs.htm
#Video via http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/takingaction-wewentsolar.htm
#News coverage: http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/news.htm
#Sister coops in D.C. area, http://www.mtpleasantsolarcoop.org/sistercoops.htm


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]