
=More information=

'''* Article 1: Transmigrants" but not "Nomads": Mouride Transnationalism in Italy. Murid Transnationalism in Italy. by Bruno Riccio. Cahiers d’études africaines, 2006/1 (No 181)'''

URL = https://www.cairn-int.info/resume.php?ID_ARTICLE=E_CEA_181_0095

"To take into account what seems a new way to live the experiences of migration some scholars shaped new concepts such as that of "transnationalism".   This term is used to describe the processes through which migrants create social fields, which cut across geographical and political boundaries.   Wolof mouride migrants in Italy are a good example of such a transnational migration.   After an introduction to the debate over the transnational approach to migrations, in the first part I discuss the activities that allow mouride migrants to organize their mobility and their temporary settlement thanks to the transnationalisation of their social and religious networks.   Yet, there exists a general tendency within the transnationalism literature to assume that such a migratory organization necessarily implies multiple identifications to various contexts and a "nomadic" way of life.   On the contrary, as I show in the final section, mouride migrants do not seem to change their existential point of reference.   Many of the migrants preserve and contribute towards shaping a strong sense of identity.   They are oriented towards a return and invest materially and emotionally in Sénégal."


'''* Article: ''Senegal is our home: the anchored nature of Senegalese transnational networks''. B RU N O RICCIO. Chapter 5 of the book: New Approaches to Migration? Transnational Communities and the Transformation of Home. Taylor and Francis, 2001''' 

URL = https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781134523788/chapters/10.4324%2F9780203167144-12

"In this chapter, I argue against the assumption that the development of transnational communities necessarily implies a change towards a multidimensional or globally oriented meaning of home. The chapter relies on research among Senegalese migrants abroad and on my own multi-sited ethnography in Italy and Senegal (cf. Marcus, 1995; Kearney, 1995).1 I highlight how, although living within transnational social fields and benefiting from transnational networks, most Senegalese migrants preserve and contribute towards shaping a strong sense of identity that reinforces rather than undermines the concept of Senegal as their homeland."

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Senegal]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Italy]]