

=Description=

"Motuv or [Movement of the Unified Voice] is an organization rooted in the belief that civilized culture has lost touch with the wild and naturally renewing state of the world on which we depend. We believe to change this it’s as much about living by example as it’s about organized political action, thus instead of hardened cynicism we look for attainable solutions and ways to actualize them not in twenty years but right now. Our focus is on the promotion and construction of agricultural, economic, social and idealogical systems putting the place of people back in the natural system as opposed to outside or “in control” of it. By localizing, living within our means, producing responsible well made goods + services and acquiring full knowledge of the cost and consequences of our wants, needs and actions we can establish truly enriching lives with strong individual and community + land bases in urban and rural environment alike. It is only once we respect the reality that consumption based life dealing with products and services that have no real intrinsic or cyclical value un sustainable and detrimental to our interpersonal and ecological relationships to ourselves and the true source of our resources both renewable and otherwise that we can begin to reconnect to the animate landscape. In short there is no waste in nature absolutely everything is used. I often believe it is our job as a generation to fully realize that we as a civilized culture are on a speeding train heading full tilt boogie towards a cliff and thus work as hard as we can to stop. It is thus up to the generation of our young adults and children to accept that we don’t have to travel on this train at all,l that the natural world HAS a culture and by looking at concepts like bio-mimicry we can learn the language of this culture and devise new goals and institutions that demand and necessitate new ways of thinking about transportation both in metaphor and reality. The Iroquois say that we do not inherit the earth from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children and that a truly bountiful person can see what it called the 7th generation. This is when you can look back and see your great grandfather and also your great grandchild so that you begin to think multigenerationally using only what can then be given back and renewed."

=More Information=

YOU ARE IMPORTANT, YOUR ACTIONS MATTER AND CAN HELP! Visit motuv.org for more information or email: dreamdofollowthrough@gmail.com

[[Category:Movements]]