Move Digital

URL = http://www.movedigital.com

=Description=

From the site:

"The focus of the service is centered on moving your digital data (hence the name). So beyond just publishing BitTorrents, the service also does direct download publishing as well as mobile phone video and audio publishing (just like our publishing of torrents, we convert your video and audio to mobile phone format for you, and then also take care of the streaming to your 3G cell phone).

There's a lot more too. We've created this very cool web widget that makes it very simple to reblog your MoveDigital links. And included with this web widget, via its 'Share' button, is a notion we're calling '''[[Social Bandwidth Sharing]]''' which allows other users to directly add bandwidth into your account from wherever you may have placed your widget. Moreover, MoveDigital bandwidth is different than what you'll find anywhere else. For direct downloads, we only deduct bandwidth from your account for completely delivered files. You don't get penalized if someone stops downloading half way through. As well, your bandwidth always rolls over to your next membership period, so it's always there for you."

=More Information=

See our entry on [[Distributed File Storage]]

Blog on the project at http://blog.movedigital.com 


Commentaries on Move Digital:

http://www.techcrunch.com/2006/07/18/movedigital-launches...

http://mobilecrunch.com/2006/07/18/movedigital-means-movies-on-your-mobile/


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]

[[Category:Media]]