
URL = http://MoveOn.org 

=Description=

Lee Bruno:

"From its inception 10 years ago, MoveOn has made the Internet both the glue and the engine of its activism. (There are two separate MoveOn organizations: MoveOn.org Political Action, which engages in partisan politics; and MoveOn.org Civic Action, which is nonpartisan. This article focuses on the former, MoveOn.org Political Action.) Two California-based software developers, Joan Blades and Wes Boyd, founded the organization after starting an online petition to oppose the impeachment of then President Bill Clinton. Since that first online campaign, MoveOn has given millions of busy citizens ways to voice their political views in a system dominated by big money and big media.

In his new position, Koechley came across a political science research paper called “Social Pressure and Voter Turnout: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment,” which was published in the February 2008 issue of the American Political Science Review (APSR). The paper’s authors, who include Alan S. Gerber and Donald P. Green of Yale University, discovered that direct mailings informing people that their neighbors would find out whether they voted profoundly increased voter turnout. Mailings that urged people to perform their civic duty, in comparison, drove fewer people to the polls.

It was no accident that Koechley read the paper; the MoveOn staff follows the academic literature on voting very closely. “We had worked with Gerber and Green before to analyze our various programs,” Koechley says. “We were especially attuned to their work.”

Direct mailings that exert social pressure are also far cheaper than telephone or door-to-door canvassing, finds the APSR research. The mailings cost between $1.93 and $3.24 per vote, far outperforming the roughly $20 per vote for door-to-door canvassing or $35 per vote for phone banks.

Many of MoveOn’s other Web 2.0 campaigns apply social pressure through the Internet’s various channels. For instance, one humorous Internet advertisement, “Talk to Your Parents About John McCain,” warns young voters of the telltale signs that parents may be tempted to vote for the Republican candidate. Much like public service announcements about teen drug use, the ads’ young actors deadpan with such lines as “Lemme give you a little straight talk.” A page called “The Talk” invites viewers to share how they talked with their parents about their voting intentions. It also offers a sample e-mail with links to Obama’s positions. The text of the sample e-mail: “Hi, I’ve been thinking a lot about the election and how important it is to our family. I’ve decided to support Barack Obama, and wanted to let you know why. There are many rumors floating around out there, so here’s some information about Barack’s positions on things I know are important to you. …” This video release was popular, with more than a half million viewings on YouTube, but didn’t register the big numbers like the CNNBC news spoof video.

Other strategies rely not so much on the Internet’s ability to leverage pressure as its ability to remove barriers. A MoveOn video contest called “Obama in 30 Seconds,” for example, invited viewers to submit a 30-second testimony as to why Barack Obama should be the next president of the United States. Viewers next voted on the videos to produce a list of finalists. A panel of movie stars, musicians, and directors, including Oliver Stone and Matt Damon, then selected the winner. Anyone could enter, and anyone could vote, allowing the “wisdom of the crowd” to reign, says Blades."
(http://www.ssireview.org/site/printer/millennials_moveon)


=More Information=

Full article at http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/1239/



[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]