

=Interview=

'''* Tom Llewellyn: Can give a brief history of how Movement Generation came to be and explain some of the work that you do?'''

''Michelle Mascarenhas-Swan'': Movement generation started about 13 years ago. We are a collective of organizers who came out of union organizing, environmental justice, economic justice, workers rights, racial justice, a range of different organizing fronts. It was at a moment in which many of our sectors of the movement were not necessarily engaging with an understanding of how climate change was going to impact our understanding of what it was going to take to transform the situations that our communities find themselves in.

Hurricane Katrina had just hit in New Orleans. Our social movements that were so rooted in racial justice were caught flat footed, and really didn’t have a very integrated way to respond to that moment and really an integrated understanding of even what was happening. So we began to hold conversations and retreats to support organizers to learn about food and water and energy and biological and cultural diversity to be able see those from a justice lens. Knowing that social inequity is in itself a form of ecological erosion.

After 500 years plus of pillage and plunder of many, many, places on the earth and of many peoples, we see that the life support systems of the very planet we depend on are increasingly unstable in terms of the way that we humans have needed them to be to sustain life. We understand that the planet is going to be okay, momma earth is gonna continue, there will be a new balance that will be found, our places will find a new balance, the climate will find a new balance.

The question is, how is that transition going to go? Is it going to be one that continues on a path of inequity, violence, scarcity and the hoarding of resources by some while others go without? Or is it going to be a Just Transition?

I have a really strong belief that people can come together based on our human values. I see it in people all the time, how much care, concern, heart, and vulnerability is possible. It moves me constantly. Our ancestor, Grace Lee Boggs, would say all the time to many of us, “what time is it on the clock of the world?” And “how are you moving from that place, or that understanding that you are here for a reason, at this time on the clock of the world? You can move people, other people can move you, and we can move together.”
(https://www.shareable.net/navigating-a-just-transition-through-covid-19-and-the-climate-crisis-a-qa-with-michelle-mascarenhas-swan-of-movement-generation/?)

[[Category:Movements]]