'''The Mozilla Manifesto'''

URL = [http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/mitchell/archives/2007/02/the_mozilla_manifesto_introduc.html]


=Background=

Mitchell Baker:

"The Mozilla project is about more than simply producing new versions of Firefox. Firefox is important, of course, and our major focus right now. However, Firefox is also important to achieving a broader goal, and it’s important for the project to articulate that goal.

With the help of a number of Mozilla contributors, I have created a draft document called the Mozilla Manifesto. The Manifesto sets out a vision of the Internet as a piece of infrastructure that is open, accessible and enriches the lives of individual human beings. It includes a pledge from the Mozilla Foundation about taking action in support of the principles of the Mozilla Manifesto. It extends an invitation to others to join us, either by working directly with the Foundation or through other activities that support the Mozilla Manifesto."
(http://blog.lizardwrangler.com/2007/02/13/introducing-the-mozilla-manifesto)


=Text=

==Introduction==

Text from the [[Mozilla Foundation]] at 
[http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/mitchell/archives/2007/02/the_mozilla_manifesto_introduc.html]


"The Internet is becoming an increasingly important part of our lives.

The Mozilla project is a global community of people who believe that openness, innovation and opportunity are key to the continued health of the Internet. We have worked together since 1998 to ensure that the Internet is developed in a way that benefits everyone. We are best known for creating the Mozilla Firefox web browser. 

The Mozilla project uses a community-based approach to create world-class, open source software, and to develop new types of collaborative activities. We create communities of people involved in making the Internet experience better for all of us.

As a result of these efforts, we have distilled a set of principles that we believe are critical for the Internet to continue to benefit the public good as well as commercial aspects of life. We set out these principles in the Mozilla Manifesto presented below.

These principles will not come to life on their own. People are needed to make the Internet open and participatory - people acting as individuals, working together in groups, and leading others. The Mozilla Foundation is committed to advancing the principles set out in the Mozilla Manifesto. We invite others to join us and make the Internet an ever better place for everyone.


==Principles==

The Internet is an integral part of modern life - a key component in education, communication, collaboration, business, entertainment and society as a whole. 

The Internet is a global public resource that must remain open and accessible.


The Internet should enrich the lives of individual human beings.


Individuals' security on the Internet is fundamental and cannot be treated as optional.


Individuals must have the ability to shape their own experiences on the Internet.


The effectiveness of the Internet as a public resource depends upon interoperability (protocols, data formats, content), innovation and decentralized participation worldwide.


Free and open source software promotes the development of the Internet as a public resource.


Transparent community-based processes promote participation, accountability, and trust.


Commercial involvement in the development of the Internet brings many benefits; a balance between commercial goals and public benefit is critical.


Magnifying the public benefit aspects of the Internet is an important goal, worthy of time, attention and commitment. 


==Advancing the Mozilla Manifesto==

There are many different ways of advancing the principles of the Mozilla Manifesto. We welcome a broad range of activities, and anticipate the same creativity that Mozilla participants have shown in other areas of the project. For individuals not deeply involved in the Mozilla project, one basic and very effective way to support the Manifesto is to use Mozilla Firefox and other products that embody the principles of the Manifesto.


==Mozilla Foundation Pledge==

The Mozilla Foundation pledges to support the Mozilla Manifesto in its activities. Specifically, we will:

- build and enable open-source technologies and communities that support the Manifesto's principles; 

- build and deliver great consumer products that support the Manifesto's principles; 
use the Mozilla assets (intellectual property such as copyrights and trademarks, infrastructure, funds and reputation) to keep the Internet an open platform; 

- promote models for creating economic value for the public benefit; 

- and promote the Mozilla Manifesto principles in public discourse and within the Internet industry."
(http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/mitchell/archives/2007/02/the_mozilla_manifesto_introduc.html)


=Status Update=

#Glyn Moody on How Mozilla should execute its vision, at http://www.linuxjournal.com/content/how-should-mozilla-execute-its-vision


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]