
'''Book: Multi-Stakeholder Governance and the [[Internet Governance]] Forum. Jeremy Malcolm. Terminus, 2008'''

URL = http://press.terminus.net.au/igfbook/


=Description=

From the publisher:

"Multi-stakeholder governance is a fresh approach to the development of public policy, bringing together governments, the private sector and civil society in partnership.  The movement towards this new governance paradigm has been most marked in areas involving global networks of stakeholders, too intricate to be represented by governments alone.  Nowhere is this better illustrated than on the Internet, where it is an inherent characteristic of the network that laws, and the conduct to which those laws are directed, will cross national borders.

Thus momentum has developed to bring multi-stakeholder governance to the Internet, through reforms such as the Internet Governance Forum (IGF).  In this groundbreaking and incisive book, Jeremy Malcolm examines the new model of multi-stakeholder governance for the Internet regime that the IGF represents.  In doing so Jeremy outlines the state of the regime as it preceded the IGF's formation, and provides a faithful yet accessible account of international law, international relations, democratic theory and consensus decision-making as they bear on the topic.  He then builds a compelling case for the reform of the IGF to enable it to fulfil its mandate as an institution for multi-stakeholder Internet governance."
(http://press.terminus.net.au/igfbook/)


=More Information=

Blog: http://igfwatch.org/


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Governance]]