

=Description=

By Lorenza Victoria Salati and Giulio Focardi:

"The Multifactory  Model reﬂects our approach, our ﬁlter, our vision. It focuses on the idea of a community made up of economically minded subjects, such as SMEs, craftspeople, free-lancers, or artists and non-proﬁts that adopt an entrepreneurial approach in the search for economic sustainability. 

In a multifactory, each company keeps its own operational in-dependence and private spaces and is responsible together with all the others for the common parts and strategic choices concerning territorial development (calls, institutional relations, common events). 


The three key principles of the multi-factory model are:

* to be a community project, 
* have diversity and 
* a productive vocation.


A multifactory is a community project since all the companies that are part of it are also members of the managing body of the multifactory itself. All companies are responsible for the decisions and performance of the multifactory.


...


A multifactory is ﬁrst and foremost a community of purpose,where the common purpose of its members is to work and d-velop their own businesses. In this context, mutual support ia shared tool that helps them to work better, not a moral principle to defend. The everyday experiences and sharing of work and existential challenges then turn the community of purpose into a community that takes care of a place, but also of shared values that emerge over time."
(https://www.academia.edu/41043179/THE_RISE_OF_COMMUNITY_ECONOMY_From_Coworking_Spaces_to_the_Multifactory_Model)



=Source=

'''* Article:  The rise of community economy : from coworking spaces to the multifactory model. By  Lorenza Victoria Salati, Giulio Focardi. - Sarajevo : Udruženje Akcija, 2018.'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/41043179/THE_RISE_OF_COMMUNITY_ECONOMY_From_Coworking_Spaces_to_the_Multifactory_Model

"We want to understand and to show this new idea of workplaces: local, fast, easy, versatile, sustainable under a social and environmental point of view. ... The result of this research is the Multifactory Model, a model of intervention designed to be a guide for all those who want to create, from scratch, a shared workspace based on concepts of collaboration, mutual aid, social innovation, sustainability, and the free ﬂow of knowledge"


=More information=

* [[Multifactory Models for the Community Economy]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]