'''= concept and book'''

=The Concept =

'''= "The MCS is the world’s first and only context-based triple bottom line accounting system and is specifically adaptable to the reporting requirements of Benefit Corporation Statutes in the U.S. and elsewhere".''' [http://www.sustainableorganizations.org/]

==Description==

"The MultiCapital Scorecard (MCS) is a free and open-source management tool (a public good) that organizations can use to measure, manage and report their performance in a fully integrated (Triple Bottom Line) way. In principle, the MCS is based on the idea that performance is best understood in terms of what an organization’s impacts on vital capitals are relative to organization-specific and context-based sustainability norms. Managing performance, therefore, boils down to managing impacts on vital capitals, a basic tenet of [[Multicapitalism]].

The main theory of performance behind the MCS, then, is that in order to perform well, an organization must not put either the sufficiency of vital capitals or the well-being of stakeholders who depend on them at risk. In the case of internal economic/financial capitals, for example, the relevant norms or standards might consist of sector-specific targets for not-less-than returns on equity (lower limits); for human, social/relationship or constructed capitals, they might take the form of not-less-than levels of capital production and/or maintenance (again, lower limits); and for natural capitals, they will typically consist of not-more-than levels of consumption (upper limits). And because performance also depends on both local and global circumstances that will almost always vary by organization, the MCS is context-based — no two organizations are alike and performance accounting in the new economy should be oriented accordingly.

Indeed, the MCS is the world’s first and only context-based integrated measurement, management and reporting system that makes it possible to assess performance across all aspects of the Triple Bottom Line in terms of impacts on vital capitals. It is the only system extant, that is, that can help answer the questions all organizations should be asking themselves: How much is enough to be sustainable, and are we?"
(https://www.multicapitalscorecard.com/multicapital-scorecard/?)

==Process==

Mark W. McElroy:

• A context-based approach to TBL measurement
and reporting (defines company-specific standards
of performance on a bottom-up basis)


* A three-step process:
*# Scoping and Materiality – Identify duties and obligations for what an organization’s impacts on vital capitals must be in order to be sustainable; results in identification of related Areas of Impact (AOIs)
*# AOI Development – Define company-specific goals and standards of performance for each AOI, context-based metrics and associated data collection protocols
*# Scorecard Implementation – Operationalize Scorecard in order to measure, manage and report performance "

==Discussion==

"Ever	since	the	term	Triple	Bottom	Line	(TBL)	was	first	introduced	by	John	Elkington	in	 1997,	managers	in	organizations	have	been	looking	for	ways	to	do	it	–	that	is,	to	 operationalize	the	measurement	and	reporting	of	organizational	performance	in	all	of	
its	dimensions:	social,	economic	and	environmental.	
		
Many	attempts	have	been	made	to	implement	the	TBL,	including	the	Global	Reporting	 Initiative	(GRI),	the	world’s	leading	sustainability	reporting	standard.		Most	such	efforts	
have	fallen	short,	however,	largely	because	of	their	failure	to	adequately	address	
Sustainability	Context.		GRI	itself	suffers	from	this	shortcoming.	
Indeed,	Sustainability	Context	is	indispensable	for	measurement	and	management,	too,	 not	just	reporting.		It	requires	that	social,	economic	and	ecological	thresholds	in	the	 world	be	taken	explicitly	into	account	when	attempting	to	assess	the	performance	of	
organizations.		Integrated	reporting,	that	is,	must	be	context-	and	thresholds-based.	
		
The	sustainability	of	water	use,	for	example,	cannot	be	ascertained	without	first	 determining	how	much	water	is	available	in	a	particular	place	and	how	much	of	it	
should	be	assigned	to	a	specific	user.		A	rate	of	use	can	then	be	compared	to	a	
sustainable	rate	of	supply.		Sustainability	thresholds	can	similarly	be	defined	for	other	
areas	of	impact,	including	social	and	economic	ones.		Performance,	in	turn,	can	then	be	
assessed	in	consistent	integrated	terms.		The	MCS	makes	this	possible."
(http://www.multicapitalscorecard.com/MultiCapital_Scorecard_Intro.pdf)


----
=The Book=

* '''Book: The MultiCapital Scorecard.By Martin Thomas and Mark McElroy. Chelsea Green Publishing, 2017.'''

"The Consultants Martin Thomas and Mark McElroy have developed a format that provides a practical way to oversee such expansive sustainability. You choose what you wish to measure – what you feel is important – and even the weights you want to give to the various items. But they provide, thorough their MultiCapital Scorecard, a means for managing and evaluating that broader view of the organization.

It’s an important book because when you fall short of sustainability – an unpalatable workplace, polluting the environment, or being unproductive and winding up in the financial red – you are eroding capital, be it societal or corporate, and that’s destructive. And even if you find a multicapital approach wrongheaded or the authors’ system too elaborate, the method may include useful ideas you can borrow for your own situation."
(https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/careers/management/the-multicapital-scorecard-a-practical-guide-to-sustainability/article33849941/)

=More Information=
* [[Multicapitalism]]
* [[Context-Based Sustainability]]

(http://www.sustainableorganizations.org/Multiple_Capital_Accounting.pdf)

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]