
Report: * Shooting the Rapids: [[Multilateralism and Global Risks]]. A paper presented to heads of state at the Progressive Governance Summit, 5 April 2008. By Alex Evans and David Steven.

URL = http://globaldashboard.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/04/Shooting_the_rapids.pdf


==Executive summary==

"The international system is becoming more complex, as growing numbers of actors
are confronted by fluid and interlinked threats.

Two drivers of change stand out: scarcity, limits to the sustainable consumption of
highly strategic commodities such as energy, land, water, food and ‘atmospheric
space’ for emissions; and instability, the tendency for complex systems to experience
unpredictable and unsettling shifts.

As a result, the multilateral system needs to get better at managing global risks and
building resilience to their impacts. But we need reform to cut deeper and move faster
than it has in the past.

The first step, we argue, is to start with function rather than form. In other words,
leaders should focus on the outcomes they want from the international system, rather
than its organisations, structures, and other institutional paraphernalia.


Three kinds of outcome are important:

1. '''Shared operating systems for global risks''': the beliefs, thinking and structures that
represent an institutional ‘solution’ for a particular problem. The end point is to
rewire our collective response and create a framework for joint action.

2. To do that, '''we need shared awareness'''. This is not about a report or ‘stakeholder
dialogue’, but about a concerted attempt to build a common understanding of an
issue around which a coalition can coalesce.

3. Once the necessary degree of shared awareness exists, it will be possible to
move to '''shared platforms''': the networks of state and non-state actors who can
campaign around a collective goal or vision, providing the foundation on which a
new operating system can be built.


Leaders have an important role to play. They can force debate on the most
contentious questions, while setting out ideas that coalitions can cluster around.
However, they must aim for a distributed approach, cultivating alliances around global
challenges.

Change is most likely to happen at a time of crisis, but only if like-minded
governments have plans in place for when space opens up for radical solutions. This
requires a renewed commitment to progressive values and a willingness to fight for
an international system that has a vision of the future at its heart.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Governance]]