
'''= example of the network form of [[Phyles]], characterized by a powerful work ethic based not on accumulation, but on community recognition.'''


=Discussion=

David de Ugarte:

"A particularly interesting example is that of the
Muridi or Murides, a Wolof-speaking transnational
community with more than two million members spread
out through a dozen countries, based on small trade and
the textile industry.

All of us who have spent our holidays in Europe in
recent years have occasionally come across them. These
were those new peddlers who could be found on European
beaches and opened bazaars and small shops selling
typical African fabrics, clothes and products.
The Muridiyya or Muride was originally a Sufi
brotherhood founded by Ahmadou Bamba, a Marabout
who preached pacifism and the doctrine of sanctification
through work in Senegal in 1883. As opposed to the Sufi
tradition of modesty through begging, working on the
community lands plays a central role in the Muridi path of
spiritual perfection. Hence the Murides were often called
móódu-móódu (peanut-peanut), as they worked in the
harvesting and processing of peanuts for export.

In 1912, the Murides started to settle in the grazing
lands outside the Wolof country, in Fula10 areas only
nominally under the control of the French colonial
government. The Talibes, followers of the Marabout, were
given food and lodging during the rainy seasons. After ten
years, they were entitled to ownership of a land plot, due
to which Muridi communities provided the basis for the
urbanisation and Wolofisation of Senegal.

When in the seventies the international price of
peanuts dropped and production fell, the Muridi economy
came to depend on trade. By then, the Muride had
already spread to the Ivory Coast, Cameroon, Gabon,
Congo, Chad, and had reached the Maghreb.
In the nineties, the Muridi trading networks
reached South Africa and Southern Europe. A significant
portion of the community being already transnational,
Muridi institutions mutate and develop a new form,
content and structure for the daïras, the traditional
Koranic schools which constitute the centre of everyday
life for Sufi brotherhoods in West Africa.
Daïras have become, in the diaspora, communities
in which housing, work, savings and resources are shared,
constituting an economic unit for shelter and
empowerment. Daïras accumulate and generate capital
through no-interest credit systems based on established
immigrants with a good economic position. Their start-up
and functioning do not require a centralised planning.
Every Muridi has the duty to give shelter, work, and tools
to any brother who comes to him. Then,

- ''the newcomer takes the lowest rung in the guild structure, from which he will be able to prosper thanks to his work and dedication to the brotherhood. There is a similarity between the initiation rite into adulthood and the migration process. In the first stage, the móodu-móodu is a daxar (a tamarind, in Wolof), who undergoes economic hardship, clandestineness, and socioeconomic exploitation: an apprenticeship in living outside his community of origin in an unfavourable environment. Having passed these tests, he earns the status of goulou, an established immigrant with the knowledge and means for moving and being a reference for other immigrants: that is, an adult man (Fall, 1998:29). This is the level of Muridi entrepreneurs, who deal mostly in international import-export trade between
their places of residence (Spain, France, Italy, Saudi Arabia, and the United States) and Senegal. Some of them include in the names of their companies the word "Touba," the sacred city where Amadou Bamba, the founder of the brotherhood, is buried.''

The Marabout thus becomes a keeper of the network,
among whose functions is taking care of the movement of
goods and of the generation of business flows and
opportunities among the different Muridi nodes.

The Muridi network was gradually transformed.
From the rigorous hierarchical and decentralised model,
with the Caliph at the apex, the model has become one of
distributed relations between nodes which still retains
that internal hierarchical model – which apparently is
what generates most doubts among its youngest
members.

These internal transformations are also reflected in
the identitarian aspect of the model. The Muridi imaginary
has gradually mutated from the ethnic Wolof imaginary,
through the (national) Senegalese imaginary, to finally
rely upon its own history and features within the
universalistic view of the Muslim Umma.

The European and American daïras, completely
different from those in Senegal, feel less and less
identified with the conservative reality of their Senegalese
counterparts, and yet the latter constitute the main
source of income of the former, due to which no
significant breaks seem probable. The Murides change
and will change more from the periphery towards the
centre, that is, from guild to phyle."
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/phyles.pdf)


Source of the quote: Rafael Crespo, “Los ‘móodu-móodu’ y su impacto en la
sociedad de origen”, en Empresariado étnico en España,
CIDOB, Barcelona, 2007.


=Source=

*  Book: [[Phyles]]: [[Economic Democracy in the Network Century]]. by David de Ugarte 

URL = http://deugarte.com/gomi/phyles.pdf 

[[Category:Cases]]