

=Source=


From the article: "Listen Marxist" (excerpt), http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/anarchist_archives/bookchin/listenm.html


=Text=


Murray Bookchin:

Our concern here is with those honest revolutionaries who have turned to 
Marxism, Leninism or Trotskyism because they earnestly seek a coherent 
social outlook and an effective strategy of revolution. We are also 
concerned with those who are awed by the theoretical repertory of Marxist 
ideology and are disposed to flirt with it in the absence of more systematic 
alternatives. To these people we address ourselves as brothers and sisters 
and ask for a serious discussion and a comprehensive re-evaluation. We 
believe that Marxism has ceased to be applicable to our time not because it 
is too visionary or revolutionary, but because it is not visionary or 
revolutionary enough. We believe it was born of an era of scarcity and 
presented as a brilliant critique of that era, specifically of industrial 
capitalism, and that a new era is in birth which Marxism does not adequately 
encompass and whose outlines it only partially and onesidedly anticipated. 

We argue that the problem is not to "abandon" Marxism, or to "annul" it, but 
to transcend it dialectically, just as Marx transcended Hegelian philosophy, 
Ricardian economics, and Blanquist tactics and modes of organization. We 
shall argue that in a more advanced stage of capitalism than Marx dealt with 
a century ago, and in a more advanced stage of technological development 
than Marx could have clearly anticipated, a new critique is necessary, which 
in turn yields new modes of struggle, or organization, of propaganda and of 
lifestyle. Call these new modes whatever you wish. We have chosen to call 
this new approach post-scarcity anarchism, for a number of compelling 
reasons which will become evident in the pages that follow.


'''THE HISTORICAL LIMITS OF MARXISM'''

The idea that a man whose greatest theoretical contributions were made 
between 1840 and 1880 could "foresee" the entire dialectic of capitalism is, 
on the face of it, utterly preposterous. If we can still learn much from 
Marx's insights, we can learn even more from the unavoidable errors of a man 
who was limited by an era of material scarcity and a technology that barely 
involved the use of electric power. We can learn how different our own era 
is from that of all past history, how qualitatively new are the 
potentialities that confront us, how unique are the issues, analyses and 
praxis that stand before us if we are to make a revolution and not another 
historical abortion.

... 

Is it conceivable that historical problems and methods of class 
analysis based entirely on unavoidable scarcity can be transplanted into a 
new era of potential abundance? Is it conceivable that an economic analysis 
focused primarily on a "freely competitive" system of industrial capitalism 
can be transferred to a managed system of capitalism, where state and 
monopolies combine to manipulate economic life? Is it conceivable that a 
strategic and tactical repertory formulated in a period when steel and coal 
constituted the basis of industrial technology can be transferred to an age 
based on radically new sources of energy, on electronics, on cybernation? 

...


As a result of this transfer, a theoretical corpus which was liberating a 
century ago is turned into a straitjacket today. We are asked to focus on 
the working class as the "agent" of revolutionary change at a time when 
capitalism visibly antagonizes and produces revolutionaries among virtually 
all strata of society, particularly the young. 

...

The critical question we face is this: can we explain the transition from 
a class society to a classless society by means of the same dialectic that 
accounts for the transition of one class society to another? This is not a 
textbook problem that involves the judging of logical abstractions but a 
very real and concrete issue for our time. 

...

The worker becomes a revolutionary not by becoming more of a worker but 
by undoing his "workerness." And in this he is not alone; the same applies 
to the farmer, the student, the clerk, the soldier, the bureaucrat, the 
professional--and the Marxist. The worker is no less a "bourgeois" than the 
farmer, student, clerk, soldier, bureaucrat, professional--and Marxist. His 
"workerness" is the disease he is suffering from, the social affliction 
telescoped to individual dimensions."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]