
'''* Thesis: Fifty Years on the Fringe: Murray Bookchin and the American Revolutionary Tradition, 1921-1971. By Aaron David Hyams. The University of Montana, Graduate Student Theses, Dissertations, & Professional Papers. 446. (2011)'''

URL = https://scholarworks.umt.edu/etd/446

=Summary=

"Murray Bookchin was an American revolutionary and political theorist born in New York
City in 1921. His career as both an activist and a theorist through the thirties, forties, fifties and
sixties, made him an active participant and influential voice for both the American Old Left, and
the New Left. Writing for Contemporary Issues, a left wing journal edited by Josef Weber,
Bookchin became an important part of the schismatic Left, a loose conglomeration of Marxist
and Materialists who were both anti-Liberal and anti-Soviet. Bookchin worked with Weber until
the latter‘s death in 1959. The two men formed a powerful intellectual and personal relationship
that influenced Bookchin‘s career well into the 1960s. After Weber‘s death, Bookchin became a
controversial and eclectic anarchist theorist. He developed Social Ecology, a comprehensive
critique of advanced industrial capitalism that fused classical Anarchism with Neo-Marxist
theory and British ecological theory. By the 1970s, Social Ecology had evolved into a standalone
school of thought that became a guiding influence for the American Environmental Movement
and bioregionalism."

=Contents=

* Chapter 1: The Old Left and the Origins of Social Ecology 1921-1959 6
* Chapter 2: Social Ecology (1962-1969) 30
* Chapter 3: Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1964-1971) 54
* Chapter 4: 1969

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]