'''* Article: “Fifth structure”- emergence in economics: Observations through the thermodynamic lens of world history. By [[Peter Pogany]]'''.

URL = http://www.humanthermodynamics.com/Fifth_Structure_Emergence_in_Economics.pdf

International Gebser Society Conference, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY. 15th - 17th October 2009

==Description==

[[Peter Pogany]]:

"Gebser’s archeology of consciousness, augmented by its graciously non-positivistic (open
destiny) eschatology through archaic-originary projection, presumes the epiphenomenon
of socioe-conomic transformation. Since the history of consciousness is also a history of
social consciousness, which is never without economic interpretations, it is mirrored by
the history of economic thought.

The thermodynamic conceptualization of the human journey provides further warrant to
Gebser’s caveat that the mutation of the prevalent mental-rational structure of
consciousness into the integral-arational (“fifth”) constellation is a sine qua non for
dignified survival. This crucial moment in collective psychohistory is inseparable from a
change in the global socioeconomic system, which cannot occur without transcending
mainstream orthodoxy in economic sciences. "

Note: Gebser identified five structures of consciousness (archaic, magic, mythical, mental-rational, and integralarational)
and showed that mutation of the currently dominant mental-rational structure into the last, “fifth
structure” gathered momentum at the turn of the last century.


==Excerpts==

===Economics as the institutionalized ideology of mental-rational consciousness===

"Geographic globalization was complete by the end of the 15th century. The visualization
of Earth as a three-dimensional object became a powerful catalyst to spatial thinking and
the path was cleared for the gradual coming to dominance of mental-rational
consciousness. The birth and development of economics as a specialized field of interest
coincided with this process.

After the discovery of the Americas, increased agricultural productivity and the massive
transatlantic flow of monetary metals facilitated the rapid growth of commerce, industry,
and urbanization in Europe. The nation state revealed itself as the viable intermediary
unit of organization between local socio-economic milieus and the world at large --
tending toward an exhaustive distribution of the planet. Thinking about social conditions
and history brought to life the motivation to quantify phenomena, to build comprehensive
analytical models. The rationality of science and technology began to imbue individual
behavior with the harsh directedness of cost-benefit calculus.


Nakedly self-centered materialism was elevated to the foundational principle of a world-organizing
socio-economic model with the 1776 publication of Adam Smith’s The Wealth
of Nations. Many economic historians consider this work the true genesis of economics
as an independent field of academic inquiry.

Laissez faire (classical) capitalism drew its ideological sustenance and prescriptions for
individual and national conduct from The Wealth of Nations. An ideological conviction
took root that blossomed into the following general view: Scientific progress and the
magic power of the market are destined to make man (the subject) the master of nature
(the object). The free market credo effectively locked the repertoire of socio-economic
behavior into the narrow closet of calculative, money-metric self-interest and turned the
past into the prehistory of a rationally assessable, eternally valid, equilibrium-centric
order.

Although classical capitalism went through a major transformation during 1914-1945 to
become incorporated into our contemporary global system (mixed economy/weak
multilateralism -- or modern capitalism); its hypostasized ideological core (demanding,
thriving on, and conserving mental consciousness in its inflated rationalist mode) has
survived to our epoch.


The following quote from the 1991 Nobel Prize lecture of Ronald H. Coase vividly avers
this:

“During the two centuries since the publication of ‘The Wealth of Nations’ the main
activity of economists, it seems to me, has been to fill the gaps in Adam Smith's system, to
correct his errors and to make his analysis vastly more exact. A principal theme of ‘The
Wealth of Nations’ was that government regulation or centralized planning were [sic] not
necessary to make an economic system function in an orderly way. The economy could be
coordinated by a system of prices (the "invisible hand") and, furthermore, with beneficial
results.”


Coase explains that a major task of economists has been to elaborate this proposition and
to adapt it to new circumstances.

It is telling that contemporary economic orthodoxy identifies Adam Smith’s complex
social philosophy, which puts simple economics in a broad ethical context in ways that
remain surprisingly relevant today, with the “invisible hand,” an expression that occurs
only once in Smith’s 1000-page work.

If worshipful references to Adam Smith are the political rallying cries for market
fundamentalism, the “theory of rational expectations” and the “efficient market
hypothesis” remain caricature-like attachments to the deficient mode of mental-rational
consciousness.

Originated by John Muth in the early 60s, the “theory of rational expectations” became
influential in the 90s through the writings of Nobel Laureate Robert Lucas. It is based on
the flattering proclamation that the individual is rational and therefore, preoccupation 
with one’s own welfare will alter expectations attached to government policy: Microlevel
decisions alter macro-level policy measures. The dogmatic nature of this elegant
theory is revealed only if one remembers that it takes extant conditions (the
socio-economic environment with its system and associated axiomatic assumptions about
collectively instilled and fully internalized values and beliefs) for generally valid,
elementary, and eternal facts.

Praised, criticized, extended (particularly into sociology through rational choice models),
amended with psychological dimensions that remove the brutally “selfish” label from
mini-max behavior, virtually disabled with damaging arguments and commentaries, the
theory has survived as a powerful prop for neoliberal propaganda against the economic
and social-welfare-promoting role of the government.

The “efficient market hypothesis” (made famous by Eugene Fama) divides information
into the knowable and the unknowable. What is known is already incorporated in traded
assets (real or paper). Thus, markets already know what can be known. Consequently,
prices have very short memories or none at all. They do not remember where they were a
few minutes ago on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Psychological-behavioral
factors were stacked against it, alternative theories negated it completely, yet the
“hypothesis” left an indelible mark on traditional economics to which pilgrims of rational
purism regularly return.

Nowhere is academic readiness to conserve values and expectations implicitly linked to
mental-rational dominance more openly demonstrated than in awarding Nobel Prizes in
economics. Ostensibly liberal as the annual selection of laureates may have appeared
over the past four decades, “The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in
Memory of Alfred Nobel” has always been awarded to those who could best improve and
protect the prevalent socioeconomic world order dedicated to the basic notion that human
beings are homogeneous entities with a “propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one
thing for another” (the words of Adam Smith).

Foucault’s complaint about a robust, yet flexible, reciprocity between knowledge and
power comes to mind. Through technical jargon and phraseology, study programs,
conferences, faculty appointments, prestige- and notoriety-promoting honors, the line of
demarcation between “the well known” and “the generally valid” has become
systematically blurred.

The conservative ideology of contemporary economics reinforces convictions that keep
the potential of individual behavior in a thin enclosure. The maximization of
consumption and the accumulation of monetarily measurable assets as the ultimate goals
of life is its vehemently protected, enshrined centerpiece. At the bottom of this
complicated dynamism silently lies the mistaken belief that humanity’s psychohistory is
complete and over."


===[[World History as a Thermodynamic Process]]===

Peter Pogany:

"The present analysis is interfused with the thermodynamic theory of world history, which
is briefly summarized below.

Human population and produced artifacts together may be perceived as a material entity,
an aggregation of atoms or, even more generally, that of subatomic particles. This entity,
culture, has undergone exponential growth through human activity (extended
reproduction both biologically and economically), a process called cultural evolution.

As elaborated by Ilya Prigogine, the father of modern disequilibrium thermodynamics, a
material entity that gains in size while becoming increasingly complex (where
complexification is defined as growing volumes of information generated and transmitted
among the entity’s decision centers) must undergo an alternation between relative
(dynamic) steady states and bifurcations (chaotic transitions).

By the end of the 18th century, cultural evolution demanded global-scale organization to
maintain its accelerating mode. The chaotic transition that began with the French
Revolution and ended in the early 1830s led to the establishment of the world’s first
global system (GS1), characterized by laissez faire and metal money. It lasted from
approximately 1834 (the “birthday of the industrial proletariat” [Polanyi], a year of
intense legislation in Britain concerning the poor) until the outbreak of World War I in
1914. 

The period 1914-1945 was another chaotic transition that brought the second and current
global system (GS2) -- mixed economy/weak multilateralism -- into existence. (Until the
end of the Cold War, socialism remained an unsuccessful alternative for global self-organization.)


At present, physical limits are beginning to slow cultural evolution. Its demand for free
(accessible) energy (in the form of low entropy matter and energy carriers), and capacity
to absorb pollution are coming into conflict with non-expendable terrestrial constraints. As
a consequence, the world has either entered or is on the verge of entering another period
of chaotic transition.

A new global system (GS3), two-level economy/strong multilateralism, will be needed to
create a sustainable balance between culture and humanity’s ecological niche. Micro-activities
will have to be made legally subject to globally-determined and nationally
allocated macro-constraints. The required transformation of individual behavior and
institutions will be vast. "
(http://www.humanthermodynamics.com/Fifth_Structure_Emergence_in_Economics.pdf)


===Integral-arational consciousness is not prophetic utopianism, it has great practical significance===

Peter Pogany:
 
"The growing anxiety about the failure to perceive the terrestrial sphere as the aggregate
material constraint is, therefore, a sign of groping toward the “fifth structure.”
As far as economic activities are concerned, the world will eventually have to move from
the “cowboy” to the “Dutch” mentality (Kenneth Boulding’s word play). I.e., it will have 
to learn how to prosper subject to natural constraints as if they were protective levies and
dunes. The cowboy in us will have to be reserved for the conquest of outer space to
ensure the species’ long-term survival. Multi-year cosmic travel (most immediately to
Mars) will require an outlook on life and associated self-comportment that only integral
consciousness can secure.

Back on Earth, increased leisure in the context of enhanced social protection and
international security will open new vistas for individual creativity, which -- as Gebser
told us -- is an evidence of the origin. The fear of not using our time wisely (the “time is
money” meme) will dissipate. Angst about seeing one’s life slip away will be mitigated
by teleia philia, the Aristotelian idea about friendship based on the mutual recognition of
complete, instinct-like selflessness. The dying individual, sharing ultimate desires and
transgenerational goals with others, would have a firm sense of continuity. Unconditional
compassion expressed through social institutions would remove concern about the
welfare of those left behind.

Thus, if the objectification of humanity’s material conditions and goals is necessary for
survival, only integral-arational consciousness can perform the tasks implied. Ideally, the
GS3 persona will integrate the rationality of the accomplished scientist with a magicmythical
“we” sense. Space-time freedom (the “conscious form of non-dimensionality”)
rather than ego-consciousness will dominate thought, behavior, and institutions."


===Mutation as a process must be macromutation through chaotic transition===

Peter Pogany:

"Since institutions cannot drastically change unless socioeconomic behavior is modified to
a commensurate degree and since this cannot happen unless a profound institutional 
transformation occurs, mutation into the new form of global self-organization must be
accomplished through a quasi-simultaneous change of institutional design and a
corresponding reorientation in thinking, attitudes, moral values, expectations, and
intentionality. A period during which the world is out of control, drifting in search of new
bearings is implied by both physics and history.
The initially large number of suggestions, plans, and blueprints need to distill into
historically significant blocks that will subsequently clash until a new mold is forged
from the molten amalgam of ex ante feasible solutions. This process led to GS1 through
the chaotic transition (or macrohistoric leap) of “1789-1834” and to GS2 through “1914-
1945.

The laws of disequilibrium thermodynamics, as applied to self-organization amidst
growth and complexification, render the above-capsulated history an epiphenomenon of a
physical process, provided, of course, that we regard the web of interpersonal relations in
the socioeconomic sphere as a materially-conceivable entity; that is, if we accept with
proper qualifications that social history is part of natural history.
A new period of macrohistoric turbulence is on the horizon.

Living within the limits of renewable natural resources and being directly concerned with
the imperatives of environmental sustainability implies a more cooperative and less
competitive civilization than the current one. However, since personal traits and selfconduct
associated with integral consciousness in the socioeconomic realm can become
general only under propitious external conditions created by matching institutions; while
the development of such institutions presupposes the presence of behavioral characteristic
imputed to integral consciousness, global-scale mutation into the “fifth structure” will
have to occur through a new chaotic transition."
(http://www.humanthermodynamics.com/Fifth_Structure_Emergence_in_Economics.pdf)


===Concluding remarks===

"Gebser’s contention that signs of aperspectival consciousness emerged and intensified
during the 20th century has been confirmed in the field of economics.

Based on adjusted and telescoped Gebserian criteria, we may assert that although this
process has not been even; i.e., it shifted over time among strands of endeavors as
captured by the three composite criteria, its overall strength has remained intact and may
indeed have been even on the aggregate.

Nevertheless, economics, as it is taught and practiced today, remains a significant
contributor to the preservation of mental-rational consciousness with its associated
institutions, ethics, behavior, and historical narratives. “Maintained Theory,” open and
liberal as it may appear, fails to incorporate ecological (resource and environmental)
issues into its analysis, discourse, and public commentary. Although integral
attentiveness as represented by heterodox critique is growing, it still has not passed
beyond marginal significance.

The future role of economics, whether as a catalyst or an obstacle of the contemplated
macro-mutation, is open."



==Discussion==

===[[Gebser’s 19 Criteria to Appraise Aperspectival Movements and Tendencies]]===

Peter Pogany:

'Satisfaction of CC1 is registered when mankind is considered an integrum with a
singular, common past and future, when institutions and matching individual behavior
conducive to a physically, socially, and economically sustainable and dignified life for
the entire global population are invoked. All explicit thoughts with such contents or
implicit (perhaps concealed) tâtonnement in the same direction tend to diminish the
pervasive role the prevailing, deficient mode of mental-rational structure imputes to
“egoity.”

Therefore, CC1 is met by theoretical work that treats the world economy as a single unit
of analysis. It is met to an even greater extent when our culturally inculcated so-called
“rational behavior” is unmasked and challenged by showing that consumption-metric
utility maximization and the pursuit of corresponding micro- and macroeconomic
objectives is a losing, dead-end ideology.

CC2 mirrors the apprehension of humanity’s thermodynamic context. The “efficient”
absorption of time into consciousness presupposes a scientific recognition of the
equivalence between time and energy, as made explicit by criterion 12. 

Therefore, CC2 is fulfilled by theories that treat the economy as a substratum of nature
rather than vice versa; incorporate time (dynamics, inter-temporal analysis, hysterisis)
and energy; show awareness of environmental and resource constraints.3

It is fulfilled even more by theories that expose the nonsensical proposition of eternal
economic growth in our thermodynamically closed terrestrial sphere, that surmount overconfidence
in the totality of mechanical-rationalist, selectively causal explanations and,
consequently, abandon belief in the unfailing recurrence of cycles and the exclusive
validity of equilibrium-trending dynamic models in the spirit of Newtonian physics.

Economic thought that fosters the supersession of patriarchy (no. 15) and renunciation of
dominance and power (no. 16), the two criteria that comprise CC3, is the easiest to
recognize. By various degrees, CC3 is also satisfied by calls to complete and expand the
social safety net, by the promotion of distributive justice, international and intergenerational
solidarity, and by criticizing the notion that self- and national interests are
the only human aspirations that any organization of global polity can consider axiomatic.

Since CC3 is the most directly applicable to movements and tendencies in economic
theorizing, and since the application of CC1 requires more intense conceptual distillation
than CC2, composite criteria represent a descending order of demand for reductive
adjustment in the process of making them practicable for the task at hand."


===Typology of post-classic economic schools with arational intuitions===

"Truly heterodox orientation wants to get rid of the conceptual universe of “infinite wants”
economics. It proposes to replace mainstream’s preoccupation with market equilibrium,
debt money, and interest with empirical energy accounting and nonmarket economic
approaches. Some heterodox scholarship proclaims its origin in the adaptation of new
theories that have developed outside economics and have affected diverse scientific
fields.

Technocracy was born during the New Deal with the establishment of “Technocracy
Incorporated,” an organization that has remained active to present day.

Sustainable material wealth production in harmony with the long-run availability of
physical resources is the fundamental tenet of a technocratic future. Economic growth in
industrialized countries is possible through enhancing the efficiency of the current level
of capital stock. Technocracy advocates a radical new approach to controlling the
evolution of technology.

Dependency Theory developed in the 1950s under the guidance of Raul Prebisch
(Director of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America). It set forth
the notion that resources tend to flow from poor and underdeveloped states ("periphery")
to wealthy states ("core"), enriching the latter at the expense of the former.
Despite losing most of its heterodox edge over the decades, Dependency Theory keeps
resurfacing in new forms and remains a constant reference in economic development
literature.

Structurtalist Economics emerged also in the 1950s through the activities of the
Economic Commission for Latin America and it is closely related to Dependency Theory.
Adherents contend that structural and institutional rigidities retard and otherwise
negatively influence economic development in the Third World. The discipline has gone
through several renewals but retained its critical spirit.

Thermoeconomics dates to the early 1960s. Myron Tribus (MIT, Nobel Laureate) and
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen played crucial roles in its development.

The Encyclopedia of Human Thermodynamics links economists to other scholars in a
broader field dedicated to the energy-based analysis of social issues, including the
relationship between economic activities and the ecological order (i.e., sustainability).
Neo-Ricardism (“sraffian economics”) promulgates insight into the economic process
based on a new, closer reading of David Ricardo’s (as well as Marx’s) labor theory of
value by Piero Sraffa during the 1960s. The critique originally leveled at the classics
turned into an attack on the marginal school.

While the dispute over whether or not “sraffian economics” can be made compatible
with the prevailing doctrine of time-resistant, equilibrium-bound economic order has
remained inconclusive, the strand has inspired much heterodox research and exposed
the fruitlessness of building ever more sophisticated and extensive mathematical
models around unquestioned neoclassical axioms.

World Systems Theory crystallized around the writings of Immanuel Wallerstein,
particularly since the 1974 publication of his “The Modern World-System.” Despite its
failed prediction that the Cold War would end through rapprochement and integration 
between what was believed to be two separate world systems, the theory is still
considered relevant in exploring the development and current problems of capitalism.
Bioeconomics began its career in the 1980s. It unites biology and economics in order to
develop comprehensive theories about the relationship between the economy and the
environment; to apply the concepts and methodologies of life sciences to economics.
Practitioners of the field make a point of exposing the lacuna between academic
economics and lived reality.

Ecological Economics entered the scene with the 1987 publication of the like-named
book by Spanish economist Juan Martinez-Alier (Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona,
Spain). Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, Kenneth E. Boulding, and Herman E. Daly are
among the many prominent figures with foundational significance in this branch.
In contradistinction to mainstream economics, which considers nature part of the
economic process (i.e., the provider of agricultural and mining products), the starting
point of Ecological Economics is that the satisfaction of material needs is forever and
unchangeably constrained by physical conditions. At least at the global level, output
should be considered a throughput that society must bring in line with a judicious use of
exhaustible natural resources and with the ecosystem’s absorptive and regenerative
capacity.

By combining social and natural sciences, Ecological Economics is interdisciplinary in
both its conceptualization and methodology. It places a heavy emphasis on the laws of
thermodynamics.

Ecofeminism is a program within Ecological Economics that emphasizes the feminine
perspective over environmental and resource problems. Its beginning is dated to 1974 and
is closely related to the work of Françoise d'Eaubonne.

Evolutionary Economics has its roots in the works of Marx and Engels, particularly their
Darwinian perspective on social evolution. The “American Pragmatic School” (Peirce
and Dewey), and the institutionalists, e.g., Veblen, have been cited as early predecessors.
Its modern version began during the early 1980s with the works of Richard Nelson
(Columbia University) and Sydney Winter (University of Pennsylvania). The
compendium entitled The Evolutionary Foundation of Economics (2005), edited by Kurt
Dopfer, brought together related research activities in a shared framework.
Evolutionary Economics discards homo oeconomicus, the rational optimizer, as the
cornerstone of theorizing. Its suggested approach renders the concept of “object of
choice” multifaceted and, by taking biological evolution as its model, it finds markethistorically
established eternal returns without irreversibility wholly inadequate for the
purpose of understanding economic problems.  

Econophysics dates back to the beginnings of general equilibrium analysis (in particular
to Walrasian modeling) in the early 20th century. It reemerged in the mid-1990s, thanks to
the work of Jing Chen (University of Northern British Columbia) and Yi-Cheng Zhang
(Institut de Physique Theorique, Fribourg, Switzerland)

Econophysics as we know today first focused on financial data, trying to apply statistical
physics to stock market fluctuations. Later, the interest expanded to general economics.
The field is interdisciplinary by design and retains a critical perspective on mainstream
economics.

Feminist Economics assumed its current scope in 1990 with the establishment of the
“International Association for Feminist Economics,” later recognized by the United
Nations as an NGO.

Feminist Economics cultivates “gender aware theory and analysis” and has become an
outspoken critic of traditional academe’s limited views on the individual, the household,
labor issues, and international economic relations.

Post-autistic Economics (a purposefully caustic term) sprang from student
disenchantment with the limited and limiting nature of mainstream economic instruction
and scholarship in the year 2000. It enjoys top quality professional support and is openly
hostile to the neoclassical capture and domination of academic institutions and
government positions.

Green Economics began in 2004 with the founding of the Green Economics Institute in
the UK. By appending the discoveries and concerns of Ecological Economics to a social
agenda, the adherents of the discipline have created a political lobby. The International
Journal of Green Economics is the main outlet for research produced in the field. 

Complexity Economics began in 1984 with the establishment of “The Santa Fe Institute”
(SFI) in New Mexico. SFI is dedicated to the study of complex systems in general.
Complexity Economics starts out by considering productive activities an endogenously
evolving, adaptive aggregate.

Cybernetics first saw daylight in centrally planned countries in the 1960s. Economists,
deprived of signals inherent in market prices, tried to comprehend the broader meaning of
system and structure and to quantify interactions between the part (e.g., enterprise) and
the whole (e.g., an industry or the national economy). The branch has retained relevance
in the post-communist epoch as science -- insufficiently informed about the ecological
impact of human activities -- tries to render feedback loops and circular causality
between the economy and the environment more concrete. 
(http://www.humanthermodynamics.com/Fifth_Structure_Emergence_in_Economics.pdf)

==More Information==
* [[Peter Pogany]]

[[Category:Change Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Transition]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]