


=Description=

From an interview of William van den Broek, one of the Co-Founders of the Mutinerie coworking spaces in Paris, conducted by Eileen McNulty:

"Mutinerie is a community of independent workers; entrepreneurs, startupers and freelancers based in Paris. Our headquarters is a coworking space of 400 square meters in the north-east of the city.

We are about 160 active members. Some of those work in our space almost every day, and others only come in a few days per month. Our patrons are developers, designers, architects, journalists, translators, consultants, artists- the list goes on. Mutinerie is glad to have a huge diversity of skills. Sharing values is the most important part. Being able to share commons goals and principles with others, trusting and respoecting each other are the keys to build the micro society in which good things can bloom.

We also host and organizes events, workshops and celebrations. Mutinerie has many goals and no limits!"


'''* What differentiates your space from other coworking spaces?'''

We don’t try so hard to be different, we just try to be good!

The first thing was to find good people and to work hard to deliver a good quality of service. But at the same time, we have high expectations on what is a community of coworkers. Coworkers are not in Mutinerie to show off or promote their own stuff. There is an authentic atmosphere, with authentic people who trust each other.
We managed to find a good balance between core coworkers, more infrequent patrons and travelers. Doing so, Mutinerie remains an open community with strong relations between members.

At Mutinerie, you will always have someone welcoming you and explaining how things work within the community. The result is that ideas and relationships can grow quick and strong.
(http://dataconomy.com/hackathons-smart-cities-and-startups-life-inside-a-coworking-space/)


=Status=

* '''What’s in store for Mutinerie in 2015?'''

"The opening of another space in the south of Paris! We found another great spot to dwell in, a magnificent 800 square meter building in the 14th arrondissement of Paris. It will open in the beginning of June.

We are already planning a lot of events, formation and celebration in Paris as well as in Mutinerie Village, a rural coworking space with accommodations in the countryside.

You can follow our adventure on Facebook, Twitter and our weekly newsletter. And of course, feel free to visit us in Paris if you need a place to work for a few days."
(http://dataconomy.com/hackathons-smart-cities-and-startups-life-inside-a-coworking-space/)


=More Information=

* [[Coworking]]

[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:France]]