

=Description=

Danny Spitzberg:

"I propose “Mutiny Metrics” as a starting point to build better community with cooperatives, guilds, and commons of all kinds. While marketing is about revenue, a basic necessity for any enterprise, organizing is about community power, a moral high-road.

The MORAL acronym stands for:

* Membership — users become members and get a vote

* Ownership — they contribute equity/investment

* Reciprocity — they practice mutual aid

* Association — they create a structure of belonging

* Leveling — they maintain equality and fairness throughout the platform


These metrics are far from precise or linear, and their application for community engagement is open-ended.

For example, whenever Loomio’s team sees groups use the platform in innovative ways, the team invites them to share insights with others and play it forward with new users. Growing this community of practice can produce beautiful results for meaningful association, full of participation. And as Loomio grows their business in the US, they might get creative sharing ownership through community investment through a Direct Public Offering or better yet, through non-extractive finance. A quick review of Mutiny Metrics can generate many more ideas for better community."
(https://medium.com/@daspitzberg/the-thin-community-we-get-from-marketing-2e9803b81ef0)


=Characteristics=

Danny Spitzberg:

"First, they focus attention on intention. For getting users and growing revenue, we have Pirate Metrics. Cultivating community power requires a different approach. And instead of prescribing actions, Mutiny Metrics are flexible and adaptive, a natural fit for what MobLab calls open campaigns.

Second, they invite pleasant surprises from community participation. Campaigners at SumOfUs hacked Pirate Metrics for community engagement, but their framework is still a one-to-many model. Mutiny Metrics go beyond user experience design to what we might call member experience co-design.

Finally, these metrics are a work in progress. Try them and see if they help make community participation easier or democracy more possible."
(https://medium.com/@daspitzberg/the-thin-community-we-get-from-marketing-2e9803b81ef0)




[[Category:P2P Accounting]]