

=History=

In the UK/USA, by Tony Bryant:

"In the UK the idea of mutuals, in the form of building societies,
dates from the late 18th century when groups of people got together to pool
assets so that between them they could eventually buy the land, materials and
other resources needed to build a house for each of them. The earliest of these
were all ‘terminating societies’; so once everyone had a house the organization
was wound up, with any residual funds being distributed amongst the members.

The last example of this in the UK was the First Salisbury Society, which
was only dissolved in 1980. By the late 19th century, however, other forms of
building society were developed, permanent ones, as places where people could
invest their savings with some degree of security. One of their key roles was to
act as mortgage providers, balancing the funds they held as savings against the
funds they provided to lenders financing their house purchases. Their financial
position was constrained far more than was the case for traditional clearing and
investment banks, and this also applied to account holders so that, for instance,
savers could not overdraw their accounts as was the case for most bank customers.
In the US the Savings & Loans movement was a direct off-shoot of the
UK building societies, but it evolved differently and ended in large-scale disaster
in the 1980s and 1990s.

Building societies were initially governed by legislation for what were termed
‘friendly societies’, which included burial societies and other forms of cooperative;
but during the course of the 19th century specific legislation was
brought in applying to the building societies, particularly when permanent societies
began to emerge. In general there was strong government support for
these organizations, since they encouraged people to save, and in general provided
a very cost effective service: Although it is worth noting that some of
the legislation was required to deter investors looking for a fast return, often
based on questionable practices. This phenomenon of investors looking for a
fast return recurred in the era of de-mutualization as investors sought to open
accounts in building societies and then campaigned for a majority vote for demutualization
which would result in lucrative financial returns to all account
holders regardless of how long they had actually held any accounts.

This has clearly been a recurring and continual source of aggravation, as
Amartya Sen points out in his recent New York Review of Books article,
where he notes that Adam Smith already warned about the tendency for people
to ‘overspeculate’ in their incessant search for profits. In the context of pressures
for demutualization of 20th century UK building societies such people were
termed ‘carpetbaggers’, for Smith they were ‘prodigals and projectors’. As
Sen notes, Smith was keen to advocate state regulation to protect the capital
of the country from those who promoted unsound loans leading to waste and
destruction.

The distinction between banks and building societies in the UK came to an
end in 1986 when a new Act came into effect that allowed de-mutualization.
This was not widely taken up until the 1990s, but eventually by the time the
Bradford and Bingley de-mutualized in 2000, most of the larger building societies
had opted for this. Moreover, prior to this many of the smaller building societies
had been taken over by those that later de-mutualized; the Bradford and Bingley
being something of a predatory case in point. At present the size of the mutual
sector is small, both in terms of the number of organizations and their overall
funds; but in 2008 there was significant growth in lending by mutual funds;
although the figure is still very small in comparison with the finance sector as
a whole (see CDFA—Community Development Finance Association).

Until the recent liquidity crisis, it might have seemed as if the concept of
mutuality was a remnant of a bygone era, superseded by the Reaganomics and
Thatcherism of the 1980s, and the wider spread of de-regulation that followed
under later administrations. But with the ever-worsening credit-crunch and
general economic melt-down, it is perhaps time to dust off some of the old ideas
and examine them as possible alternatives; or better still, look at ways in which
potential alternatives can be developed by combining lessons from the past with
new possibilities from the present.

The current position, particularly with regard to the banks is somewhat
ambiguous. Following the various bail-outs and rescue packages, euphemistically
termed ‘TARP’ [Troubled Assets Relief Program], there is a case to be made
that the recipient banks and other financial institutions are already state-owned;
in some cases with the state actually holding a majority of the shares. So it is not
a major leap from this de-facto position to de-jure nationalization; something
advocated by various economists and politicians of note. On the other hand,
there are many who are bitterly opposed to this, and advocate a continuation of
private ownership. This of course includes most of the pre-bail-out shareholders,
although they severely weaken their position by clamouring for compensation
while seeking to retain ownership in some form; it seems as if when the going
gets tough, the free-marketeers get civic-minded, but only to a limited degree.

In the light of this, calls for a form of mutuality might seem to smack of
something from the 19th century, but it might also be an alternative well worth
pursuing. Moreover it is possible to glimpse mutuality in some far more recent
manifestations that may themselves present ways of moving forward from the
current morass. Most people have heard of, if not used, Wikipedia; many use
packages such as Firefox, Apache or Open Office. Even those who don’t, probably
use software that itself builds on these and other open source systems.

And it is the model upon which open source is based that presents an exemplar
of 21st century mutuality. In fact most people familiar with the Web will have
come across another manifestation of this – [[Web 2.0]] ."
(http://www.opendemocracy.net/files/mutuality.pdf)


=More Information=

#[[Mutuality 2.0]]


[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Credit Commons]]