

=Discussion=

Nick Dyer-Whiteford in [[Red Plenty Platforms]]:

"Perhaps the idea of everyone watching mobile screens lest they
miss, not a Facebook poke, but voting the seventh iteration of the
participatory plan, duplicates unattractive features of everyday life in
high-tech capitalism. So we might speculate further, and suggest that
what decentralized collective planning really needs is not just
council media but communist agents: communist software agents.
Software agents are complex programmed entities capable of acting
‘with a certain degree of autonomy... on behalf of a user (or another
program)’ (Wikipedia, 2013b: np). Such agents manifest ‘goal-
direction, selection, prioritization and initiation of tasks’; they can
activate themselves, assess and react to context, exhibit aspects of
artificial intelligence, such as learning, and can communicate and
cooperate with other agents (Wikipedia, 2013b: np).

[...] 

the arena in which such
agents truly excel is in the financial sector, where high frequency
trading is entirely dependent on software ‘bots’ capable of
responding to arbitrage possibilities in milliseconds.

One can’t help but ask, however, what if software agents could
manifest a different politics? Noting that Multi-Agent System
models can be thought of as a means to answer problems of resource
allocation, Don Greenwood (2007: 8) has suggested they could be
geared toward solving the ‘socialist calculation problem’. As
planning tools, Multi-Agent Systems, he notes, have the advantage
over real markets that ‘the goals and constraints faced by agents can
be pre-specified by the designer of the model’ (Greenwood, 2007:
9). It is possible to design agents with macro-level objectives that
involve more than just the maximization of individual self-interest;
two ‘welfare’ principles that economists have experimented with
incorporating are equality and environmental protection
sustainability.

[...]

Within capital, automation threatens workers with unemployment
or production speed-up. If, however, there were no dominant
structural tendency for increases in productivity to lead to
unemployment or greater output without reduction in labour time,
automation could systematically yield to less time spent in formal
workplaces. In a communist framework that protected access to the
use value of goods and services, robotization creates the prospect of
a passage from the realm of necessity to freedom. It reintroduces the
goal – closed down both within the Stakhanovite Soviet experiment
and in the wage-raising trades unionism of the West – of liberating
time from work, with all this allows both in terms of human self-
development and communal engagement.

Juliet Schor’s (1991) estimate, that if American workers had taken
gains won from productivity increases since the 1950s, not in wages
but in time off, they would by 2000 have been working a twenty
hour week. [Added note: that seems like too many hours. Paul Goodman in 1950 estimated one day a week.] It indicates the scale of possible change. 

Proposals for a ‘basic income’ have recently figured in left politics. There are
certainly criticisms to be made of these insofar as they are advanced
as a reformist strategy, with the risk of becoming merely a
rationalized welfare provision supporting neoliberal precarity. But it
would be hard to envision a meaningful communist future that did
not institute such measures to acknowledge the reductions in
socially necessary labour time made possible by advances in science
and technology, destroying Hayek’s calculation problem by
progressively subtracting from it the capitalist ur-commodity, labour
power.

[...]

An abundant communist society of high automation, free software,
and in-home replicators might, however, as Fraise (2011) suggests,
need planning more than ever – not to overcome scarcity but to
address the problems of plenty, which perversely today threaten
shortages of the very conditions for life itself. Global climate change
and a host of interlinked ecological problems challenge all the
positions we have discussed to this point. Bio-crisis brings planning
back on stage, or indeed calculation – but calculation according to
metrics measuring limits, thresholds and gradients of the survival of
species, human and otherwise. Discussing the imperatives for such
ecosocialist planning, Michael Lowy (2009) points out how this
would require a far more comprehensive social steering than mere
‘workers control’, or even the negotiated reconciliation of worker
and consumer interests suggested by schemes such as Parecon.
Rather, it implies a far-reaching remaking of the economic systems,
including the discontinuation of certain industries, such as industrial
fishing and destructive logging, the reshaping of transportation
methods, ‘a revolution in the energy-system’ and the drive for a
‘solar communism’ (Lowy, 2009: np).

[...]

By revealing the contingency of conditions for species survival, and
the possibility for their anthropogenic change, such ‘knowledge
infrastructures’ of people, artifacts, and institutions (Edwards, 2010:
17) – not just for climate measurement, but also for the monitoring
of ocean acidification, deforestation, species loss, fresh water
availability – reveal the blind spot of Hayek’s catallaxy in which the
very grounds for human existence figure as an arbitrary ‘externality’.

So-called ‘green capital’ attempts to subordinate such bio-data to
price signals. It is easy to point to the fallacy of pricing non-linear
and catastrophic events: what is the proper tag for the last tiger, or
the carbon emission that triggers uncontrollable methane release?
But bio-data and bio-simulations also now have to be included in
any concept of communist collective planning. Insofar as that
project aims at a realm of freedom that escapes the necessity of toil,
the common goods it creates will have to be generated with cleaner
energy, and the free knowledge it circulates have metabolic
regulation as a priority. Issues of the proper remuneration of labor
time require integration into ecological calculations.

[...] 

The Soviet experience, of which the
cyberneticians featured in Red Plenty were part, was only a narrow,
historically specific and tragic instantiation of this capability, whose
authoritarianism occludes the most crucial point in the Marxist
concept of planning, namely that it is intended as a means of
communal election of which, of a variety of trajectories, collective
human ‘species-becoming’ might follow (Dyer-Witheford, 2004).

A new cybernetic communism, itself one of these options, would, we
have seen, involve some of the following elements: use of the most
advanced super-computing to algorithmically calculate labour time
and resource requirements, at global, regional and local levels, of
multiple possible paths of human development; selection from these
paths by layered democratic discussion conducted across assemblies
that include socialized digital networks and swarms of software
agents; light-speed updating and constant revision of the selected
plans by streams of big data from production and consumption
sources; the passage of increasing numbers of goods and services
into the realm of the free or of direct production as use values once
automation, copy-left, peer-to-peer commons and other forms of
micro-replication take hold; the informing of the entire process by
parameters set from the simulations, sensors and satellite systems
measuring and monitoring the species metabolic interchange with
the planetary environment."

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]