
'''* White paper: MyData – A Nordic Model for human-centered personal data management and processing. By Antti Poikola, Kai Kuikkaniemi and Harri Honko. Ministry of Transport and Communications, Finland, 2018'''

URL = https://www.lvm.fi/documents/20181/859937/MyData-nordic-model/2e9b4eb0-68d7-463b-9460-821493449a63?version=1.0

Also an international initiative and organization, see 'status'

=Description=

"This white paper presents a framework, principles, and
a model for a human-centric approach to the managing
and processing of personal information. The approach –
defined as MyData – is based on the right of individuals
to access the data collected about them. The core idea is
that individuals should be in control of their own data.
The MyData approach aims at strengthening digital human
rights while opening new opportunities for businesses
to develop innovative personal data based services
built on mutual trust."

=Contents=

* MyData Principles 2
* 1 – What is MyData? 3
* 2 – What are the benefits of MyData? 4
* 3 – Why is MyData an infrastructure level approach? 5
* 4 – How does MyData approach work in practice? 6
* 5 – Why is MyData focused on consents? 7
* 6 – Why should companies be interested in MyData? 8
* 7 – How does MyData help me manage my privacy? 9
* 8 – What are the next steps? 10
* 9 – Give me some examples! 11
* Links and references

=Principles=

"The MyData Principles:

1. Human centric control and privacy: Individuals
are empowered actors, not passive targets,
in the management of their personal lives
both online and offline – they have the right
and practical means to manage their data and
privacy.

2. Usable data: It is essential that personal data
is technically easy to access and use – it is accessible
in machine readable open formats via
secure, standardized APIs (Application Programming
Interfaces). MyData is a way to convert
data from closed silos into an important,
reusable resource. It can be used to create new
services which help individuals to manage their
lives. The providers of these services can create
new business models and economic growth to
the society.

3. Open business environment: Shared MyData
infrastructure enables decentralized management
of personal data, improves interoperability,
makes it easier for companies to comply
with tightening data protection regulations, and
allows individuals to change service providers
without proprietary data lock-ins."

=Status=

* "The nonprofit MyData Global organisation will be founded Oct 11th: We invite you to participate the official founding meeting online or in one of the physical meetings that will be organised around the globe in the places with MyData local activity."

URL = https://mydata.org/who-we-are/organisation/


[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Big Data]]

[[Category:Policy]]