
'''= " a global currency platform founded on the belief that economic and social progress depends on fundamentally changing the way we value nature".''' [http://www.mydropintheoceans.org/about-mydio/]

URL = http://www.mydropintheoceans.org/

=Description=

"Currently many of the true costs to nature from human activity remain hidden. We need to make a shift in the way we see nature and our relationship to it, recognising that our lifestyles bear a cost to nature that needs to be compensated. Money is one of the most effective tools to empower human behaviour. We are redesigning money to empower people to value nature.

Inspired by the very simple idea of returning value to nature, we have created a platform that brings together consumers and businesses to a place where everybody and every action can count.  My Drop in the Oceans is a global community of people attracted by smarter, more enriching lifestyles, conscious about their quality of life today and tomorrow.

We have created [[DIO]], a complimentary currency that returns value to nature by rewarding consumers and businesses for their sustainable actions. For consumers, we are turning environmental costs into purchasing power to help empower people to make smart and responsible choices. For businesses, we provide opportunities to engage with consumers and sustainability in ways that bring value to their business and the environment."
(http://www.mydropintheoceans.org/about-mydio/)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Ecology]]