'''* Book: Exploring MycoFi: Mycelial Design Patterns for Web3 and Beyond. By n by Jeff Emmett & Jessica Zartler. A MYC OPUNK PUBLICATION FROM THE GREENPILL NETWORK, 2024.'''

URL = https://greenpill.network/pdf/mycofi.pdf

''"MycoFi is a movement to consciously apply lessons from the mycelial world to cryptoeconomics."''


=Contextual Quote=

"A “fungal turn” is indeed taking the world by spore — although, if we connect deeply enough with the prehistoric transitions of this planet we call home, it becomes clear that the rich tapestry of life’s collective history has always been stitched together with the hyphal threads of the humble mushroom. Since the dawn of life on this planet — and especially in times of great geological shift — fungi have played a pivotal role in the networked redistribution of life-sustaining resources on a global scale. Everything alive today owes a debt of gratitude to the upward trophic flows of energy resulting from the infinitude of resource-sharing interconnections among mycelial economies over time immemorial. For millennia, we understood this economic interconnection intuitively. For most of humanity’s time on this planet, we existed inseparably within communal ecosystems of redistribution and respect for nature, in alignment with the ebb and flow of the seasons."

- Jeff Emmett [https://medium.com/block-science/from-monoculture-to-permaculture-currencies-a-glimpse-of-the-myco-economic-future-31b3be18c439]



=Description=

"Exploring MycoFi: Mycelial Design Patterns for Web3 and Beyond guides readers on an underground exploration into the world wise web of mycelial networks, the most prolific producers of public goods on Earth. 
This book examines how the evolutionary adaptability of fungi could help us imagine biomimetic alternatives to status-quo economic systems that demand infinite growth on a finite planet. If there is any hope for a transition away from extraction, domination, and planetary overshoot, towards regeneration, equity, and planetary healing, our economies must be realigned with nature’s ecologies - and for that, we can’t a! ord to ignore what mushrooms have to teach us. If we aim to design regenerative economies, what better place to start than with the thriving evolutionary patterns of nature? 

MycoFi translates six design patterns of mycelial ecologies to Web3 economies: 

* Network Infrastructure 

• Fractal Nature 

• Emergent Coordination 

* Dynamic Flow 

• Mutual Reciprocity 

• Polycentric Pluralism "


=Excerpts=


Excerpt from the introduction:

'''1.'''

"This book is a creative excursion into the nexus between
mushrooms, economics, and technology. It explores six mycelial
design patterns and their potential applications to address
modern challenges in political economics, using Web3 tools as
emancipatory technologies.

Many of the ideas expressed in this book were inspired by
countless authors, researchers, and developers, drawing from
extensive bodies of research on the fascinating capabilities of
mycelium and distributed ledger technologies. This book presents
a fungal remix of some of those concepts, oriented toward a
Web3 audience. For those interested in further reading, you can
fi nd a series of links and references in the appendix.

While we take an optimistic outlook in these pages, we aim to
avoid the appeal to naturalistic fallacy ≠ the oversimplified perspective
that everything natural is good for us. Instead, we seek to identify
and unpack useful, pro≠ social patterns that could be applied in
contexts where they increase collective flourishing.

MycoFi is fundamentally a pluralistic and emergent meme,
requiring many voices to interweave a polyphonic chorus ≠
including those who came before, as well as those yet to come. If
you feel the call to contribute to the growing folklore of mycelial
solutions, we have included information on connecting with
communities of change≠ makers in the last chapter. We o! er this
book as one step to an ecology of mind nurtured in the world of
mycelial intelligence and all it has to teach us. There is so much
more to be written, experienced, and embodied, and we warmly
invite you to join in the exploration."


'''2.'''

==Designing from Fungal Foundations==

"In our search for regenerative economic design patterns, the answers
we seek may be hidden right beneath our feet. Over billions of years
of evolution, mushrooms - and the underground mycelial networks to
which they belong - have been iterating design patterns for distributed,
autonomous infrastructures used for intelligent resource distribution
and collective signaling between countless living organisms worldwide.
Decades of study into the interaction patterns of mycelial networks
in natural ecologies have offered us a glimpse into a cooperative
underground world where resources flow dynamically between flora,
fauna, and funga to generate thriving ecosystems. 

If Web3 technology
holds the potential to craft new economic paradigms, mycelial design
patterns may just show us the way back to a more ecological future.


==Mycelium as Nature’s Public Goods Infrastructure==
As one of the oldest and largest organisms alive, mycelium is a grand
architect of nature. Fungi were among the planet’s earliest multicellular
lifeforms, and along with their algae symbiotes, they terraformed planet
Earth from a ball of cooled magma into the green paradise we know
today.

Mycelia form underground in a structure of networked tubes, which
provide the “pipes” for a large proportion of nutrient distribution within and
between most plants worldwide. From the earliest days of life on Earth,
fungi have been breaking rock and networking through the soil, building
a vast and interconnected mesh across the face of the planet. Like most
well-operating public goods infrastructure, they remain underground and
almost entirely invisible, even as they serve as a keystone network of
species sustaining life on Earth.


==Mushrooms Leak So Much Alpha==

Adaptively evolving to shifting climates, food sources, and ecological epochs,
mushrooms not only provide essential services for all life on Earth through their
distributed infrastructure, but they have demonstrated an evolutionarily honed
capability for collective coherence and intelligent resource allocation in genetically
diverse collectives. They transact resources using market-like exchange mechanisms
with trading partners, address free rider problems in permissionless networks, and
take advantage of arbitrage opportunities in the remediation of damaged ecosystems.
They display strategies of mutual reciprocity with their trading partners, even keeping
stumps and other non-producing members of the forest alive in what is essentially an
underground economic support network. If nature has any alpha to guide us toward a
flourishing future, perhaps the mushrooms will let us in on the drop.


==MycoFi is Economic Biomimicry==

With their pivotal role in the fl ow of nutrients in natural ecosystems, mycelial networks
are the physical medium on
which nature’s economies
run. These organisms o! er
us a conceptual bridge between
economies and ecologies - two
realms that we must reconnect
to have any chance of
surviving on this planet for the long term.


'''MycoFi is a movement to consciously apply lessons from the mycelial world to cryptoeconomics''', and encourage Web3 builders to “think like a mushroom” about
the systems they are designing. Incorporating nature’s evolutionary design patterns
into our economies could alleviate much of the disharmony we see between
human economies and nature’s ecologies, gesturing towards a future of economic
permaculture.3 This is also the basic premise of ecological economics4 - that we
must move away from singular notions of value and orient our economies to refl ect
the interdependent coevolution of multiple forms of value fl ows, just as we see in
nature. In that sense, this book can be considered a beginner’s guide to ecological
economics, seen through the eyes of fungi."


=More information=

==Bibliography==

Sheldrake, Merlin. Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds & Shape Our Futures. First edition, Random House, 2020.

Stamets, Paul. Mycelium Running: How Mushrooms Can Help Save the World. Ten Speed Press, 2005.
Simard, S. Finding the Mother Tree: Discovering the Wisdom of the Forest. First edition, Alfred A. Knopf, 2021.

Margulis, L., 1998 The Symbiotic Planet — A New Look at Evolution, Weidenfield & Nicholson.

Noë, Ronald, and E. Toby Kiers. ‘Mycorrhizal Markets, Firms, and Co-Ops’. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, vol. 33, no. 10, Oct. 2018, pp. 777–89. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2018.07.007.

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Design]]