

URL = http://name.space.xs2.net/

=Discussion=

"In 1996 PaulGarrin founded the NAME.SPACE project to catalyze the divestiture  of the U.S.- sanctioned monopolies that control the internet Domain Name System (DNS) and to create and publish new and expressive extensions or Top Level Domains ("TLDs") such as .NYC, .SPACE, .SUCKS and others while reforming domain policy, an initiative that continues to this day. Project NAME.SPACE under Paul Garrin's direction was the first to envision and actually create hundreds of Top Level Domains as early as 1996 while others spread falsehoods that large numbers of TLDs were not technically possible and that the creation of such would harm or even "break" the Internet. As an early proponent of a shared TLD registry system, 

NAME.SPACE helped shape the adaptation of a wholesale-retail domain registration market. The NAME.SPACE v. Network Solutions, Inc. antitrust lawsuit (based on the successful MCI v. ATT that broke up the telephone company monopoly in the USA in 1983) gave momentum to the restructuring of the domain name registration market from a single monopoly based system to a wholesale-retail one. The public benefit is lower domain registration costs. Before NAME.SPACE v. Network Solutions a domain name registration cost $100; today a domain name can be registered for under $10 depending on the TLD and the retailer. Although Network Solutions violated the antitrust laws by refusing to add NAME.SPACE TLDs to the ROOT (the master domain name database), the court granted Network Solutions immunity casting NAME.SPACE TLDs into limbo as they were unable to fully bring them to market. NAME.SPACE pursued every option put before it to have its TLDs added to the DNS ROOT including participation in the U.S. Department of Commerce IFWP during the summer of 1998 and its year 2000 application to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). In 2000 only ICANN Chair Esther Dyson voted to accept NAME.SPACE as other ICANN board members recused themselves from the vote while their applications were voted in by the other board members. ICANN absconded with NAME.SPACE's $50,000 appplication fee leaving NAME.SPACE out of the ROOT and its application unresolved. NAME.SPACE continues to pursue recognition of its TLDs through the ICANN process and otherwise, and reserves all rights to its TLDs. Some of the TLD service mark properties that NAME.SPACE owns and endeavors to bring to market are: .SPACE, .SHOP, .NYC, .ART, .ZONE, .ONLINE, .MUSIC, .BOOKS, .CULTURE, .PRESS, .COMICS, .MAIL, .CITY, .HOTEL, .CAFE, .RESTAURANT, .FOOD, .WORLD, .RADIO, .SHOW, .CHANNEL, .TALK, .GUIDE, .WEATHER, .NOW, .TODAY, .TECH, .SUCKS, .SPORTS, .CLUB, .GAMES, .DESIGN, .MEDIA, .FREE, .CHAT, .FASHION, .WAR, .PEACE, .LOVE, .SEX, .MOVIES, .FILM, .CINEMA, .THEATER, .DANCE, .BLOG, .GAY, .CAM, .CHURCH, .UNION, .PROPERTIES, .GALLERY, .INC, .LLC, .LLP (more see:  http://namespace.org/vote) "
(http://pg.mediafilter.org/)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]