
=Discussion=

Nick Dyer-Whiteford:

"Nancy Fraser (2017) writes of a “hegemonic crisis” in US politics, produced by the collision of three projects:  the “progressive neoliberalism of the Obama administration, and two competing “populisms”— “reactionary” (Trump), and “progressive” (Sanders). These projects can be seen as responses to changes in the class composition of capital, changes in large part arising from the new circulatory paths of US capital, paths in whose making digital technology have provided a crucial infrastructure and in which giant digital corporations often blazed the way. These include the offshoring of manufacturing jobs to China and other low wage areas (a process in which Apple and Microsoft were leaders0; the replacement of factory -work by lower paid service and logistic labour (in 2019 Amazon became the second largest private employer in the US, after Walmart); an increasing reliance on an intensely digitized  financial sector, whose 2008 Wall Street catastrophe was redeemed by the stock market ascent of Big Tech, whose billionaire leaders became iconic figures of the 1% of super-wealth accumulated through these processes

These changes were socially traumatic in terms of unemployment, precarity and inequality. Each of the hegemonic projects identified by Fraser addressed this trauma in different ways. Obama’s “progressive neoliberalism”—by far the most comfortable with the growing power of Silicon Valley—essentially doubled down on the project of a dollar-dominated globalization, decking it out with meritocratic affirmations of identity politics of race and gender. Against this Trump’s reactionary populism asserted a white-supremacist US nationalism, asserting liberal elites and foreign migrants as enemies of the people, while Sanders attempted a left assertion of the people against corporate oligarchs.

Accepting this characterization, it is evident that each of these three hegemonic projects—but particularly the two populisms—have used, and in part been constituted by, the communicative powers Big Tech has unleashed, becoming “digital parties” (Gerbuado 2018). The electoral powers of social media were first thoroughly exploited by Obama’s 2012 campaign. These same powers were then used to in a deeper, more covert iteration to destroy progressive neoliberalism as Steve Bannon and other Trump strategists orchestrated their brilliant and scandalous Facebook/Cambridge Analytica/alt-right meme factory/Russian cyberwar blitzkrieg of 2016. Meanwhile Sanders attempted to activate a countervailing digital activism flowing from the Occupy movements.

Each of these contending projects has also grappled with the issue not only of how to use platform capitalism, but also of how to rule it—of how to fit the towering economic and cultural influence of Big Tech into a viable “hegemonic bloc”. Thus, Obama’s Blackberry-flourishing embrace of Silicon valley was succeeded by the contradictory “love-hate” relation between Trump and the tech titans, in which the infatuation of the President, and his alt.right supporters with tweets and memes coexists with accusations of censorship and threats of conservative regulation. At the same time, the mounting “techlash” against info- oligopolies shaped left populist efforts with, gig-economy labour reforms and anti-trust regulation figuring prominently in the political platforms of both Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, whose promise was, however, extinguished in the muffled opacities of a Biden/Harris Democratic ticket.

Hegemony theory provides a useful lens through which to examine the permutations of the US electoral parties and Big Tech. However, haunting such an analysis is the question of whether platform capitalism has reconfigured and perhaps even undermined the very grounds of hegemonic struggle. Discussing the Trump regime, Mike Davis (2018) has suggested that the  neoliberal logics US capital has unleashed worldwide have now so far recursively  disintegrated the social and institutional fabric of the planet’s prime capitalist power to such a degree as to throw into question the possibility of a coherent, collective national  political project for the US.

Amongst these disintegrative forces, most of which involve the increasing transnational circulation of capital, must be counted Big Tech itself. Its contributions to the decompositionary logic include both the fissiparous inequalities of its employment models, but also speed, volatility and amplifications, of a so-called social media, whose superimposition of “universal discourse” on a polis already riven by social antagonisms generates intensely “antisocial” outcomes (Marantz 2019). The most disturbing question about Big Tech and hegemony is therefore  that of how far its circulatory accelerations of political processes has undone the conditions of the long drawn out and gradual Gramscian hegemonic “war of position” imagined by so much of left theory today, opening rather onto a more fluid, destabilizing  and dangerous “war of maneuver” phase, or even onto some form of post-hegemonic politics, tilting even towards the possibilities (seen by both Marx and Foucault on the horizon of bourgeois society) of civil war."

(https://projectpppr.org/about)

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]