'''= "The urban commons are assets ... functional to the exercise of fundamental rights considered by the city of Naples as collectively owned and therefore removed from the “exclusive use” proprietary logic to be
governed through civic “direct management”.''' [https://labgov.city/theurbanmedialab/pooling-urban-commons-the-civic-estate/]


=Description=

Christian Iaione:

"Naples’ Urban Civic Uses policy is characterised by the way artists, creatives, innovators and
city inhabitants are entitled to organise themselves to establish forms of self-government
for critical social infrastructure including urban commons such as abandoned, unused or
underused city assets."
(https://labgov.city/theurbanmedialab/pooling-urban-commons-the-civic-estate/)

=Characteristics=

==The [[Civic Uses]] Principle==

Christian Iaione:

"During the last decade, the city of Naples has been experimenting with new urban
governance tools to give new life to abandoned and/or deprived buildings. Different
movements and informal organizations have highlighted the need for such spaces to be
used and managed by city inhabitants in common through self-organization mechanisms
that turn such spaces into new institutions. The civic use of these empty buildings implied a
temporary use and it represented a starting point for their “renaissance”. It also created a
stimulus to start searching for innovative mechanisms to use such spaces as communitymanaged or a community-managed estate.

By revisiting the ancient legal institution of “civic use” and adapting it to the urban context,
the administration structured a new form of participatory governance that intends to go
beyond the classic “concession agreement model”, which is based on a dichotomous view of
the public-private partnership.

The civic use recognises the existence of a relationship between the community and these
public assets. This process makes community-led initiatives recognisable and
institutionalised, ensuring the autonomy of both parties involved. On one hand the citizens
are engaged in the reuse of the urban commons and on the other hand the city
administration enables the practice.

The first asset recognised as common property, to be managed through the collective
governance mechanism of the civic use, was the ex-asilo Filangieri, an URBACT Good
Practice (resolution of Naples City Council n. 893/2015). It is there that the first Declaration
of Civic and Collective Urban Use was carved out.

One year later, 7 other public properties were recognised by Naples City Council as
“relevant civic spaces to be ascribed to the category of urban commons”: ex-Convento delle
Teresiane: Giardino Liberato; Lido Pola; Villa Medusa; ex-OGP di Materdei; ex-Carcere
Minorile – Scugnizzo Liberato; ex-Conservatorio S. Maria della Fede; ex-Scuola
Schipa (resolution n. 446, 27 May 2016).

The recognition will be finalised with appropriate agreements after the communities
managing the spaces draft a Declaration of Civic and Collective Use."

=More information=

* 2020, Transfer Plans for urban Commons Policies, https://iris.luiss.it/handle/11385/195467#.X2C8ohAzZhE

* 2020, Civic eState-Legal Principles and Tools for Urban Commons Policies, https://iris.luiss.it/handle/11385/195465#.X2C8oxAzZhE

[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Italy]]