'''= Natalie Lee San Pang is a [[Commons]] researcher and advocate based in Singapore, who also collaborates with the P2P Foundation'''

==Bio ==
* University Librarian UNIV ADMIN, NUS LIBRARIES, SINGAPORE 1 Jul 2022 - 30 Jun 2025
* Deputy Head ARTS & SOC SC, CNM, SINGAPORE 1 Jan 2022
* Senior Lecturer, National University of Singapore, Dept of Communications and New Media, SINGAPORE 1 Jul 2019
* Principal Investigator, National University of Singapore, Centre for Trusted Internet and Community, Singapore, Feb 2020
* Senior Research Fellow,  National University of Singapore, Institute of Policy Studies, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, SINGAPORE 18 Sep 2017 - 30 Jun 2020
* Doctor of Philosophy, Monash University, Information Technology / Humanities & Social Sciences, AUSTRALIA 2009
* Master of Science in Information Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Sciences, SINGAPORE 2003
* Bachelor of Commerce, University of Melbourne, Administration & Management Sciences, AUSTRALIA 1999
&mdash; https://discovery.nus.edu.sg/11678-lee-san-natalie-pang/about

=== (as at 2011) ===
Natalie Pang (Assistant Professor, Division of Information Studies, Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information, Nanyang Technological University) obtained her Ph.D. in Information Management, Social Science from Monash University in 2009, where her research was also awarded the Vice Chancellor’s Commendation for Doctoral thesis excellence and the Faculty of IT doctoral medal. A graduate of Melbourne University and Nanyang Technological University, Natalie has worked on research projects in Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, China and Italy. She has served as a Research Associate of Museum Victoria (History and Technology), the Victorian Association of Tertiary Libraries, and Research Fellow of the Centre for Community Networking and Research (CCNR), Monash University. Natalie has also taught courses in social informatics and computing, information management, information organization, and information sources and searching. Prior to joining Nanyang Technological University she has also worked in The Gallup Organisation, where she was involved with Gallup’s research in behavioural economics and The Gallup World Poll. She is versed in both qualitative and quantitative research approaches, as well as action research methodologies in developing communities.

== Teaching interests ==

"My teaching philosophy is centred on key principles of social constructivism, where learning for a student is internalised in the context of what is meaningful for him/her. In the classroom, knowledge is produced and synthesised through team-based peer interactions as well as through an individual student's interactions with his/her social environment via the core concepts taught. My teaching is also informed by my background and research training in socio-technical systems - in an increasingly complex society that we now live in, it provides a critical apparatus to encourage students to actively learn about the use and role of technology in a non-binary or unidirectional manner. Students in my classroom go through a process of self-discovery, reflexive learning, and connected competence. 

Self-discovery: When one is part of a module especially with a large cohort of students, it is easy to feel 'lost'. But every student is unique and has exceptional talents and experiences, and I believe that it is important to encourage them to internalise their learning with these unique talents and experiences. In the modules that I teach, students are hence asked to customise projects in a way that is meaningful to them. During lectures and tutorials, they are asked to work on problems that are relevant and current. They also reflect on their own learning styles while I ‘facilitate’ such discovery with different teaching methods and resources. 

Reflexive learning: Students are encouraged to engage with their social environment through new conceptual lenses that they learn. I believe that learning is most effective when students relate through concrete experiences and active experimentation. As such, concepts cannot simply be learned in the classroom; students must be given opportunities to follow up with applications. But that alone is inadequate, as for learning to be synthesised connections should also be made between the application experiences and reflective reasoning. My approach to teaching and research supervision is therefore a process that usually begins with a deep engagement with theoretical concepts that are intertwined with application scenarios and hands-on experiences, and finally followed up with reflections to allow them to internalise and make sense of what they experienced, revisit abstract theoretical concepts, reflect on their pre-conceived assumptions and biases, and develop their own knowledge.

Connected competence: In How philosophy can save your life (2009), Marietta McCarty began a chapter on possibility with a story of a young tennis player. “The astonished looks of beginning tennis players when they hit the ball over the net for the first time and realise in an instant that it is possible for them to do it again…” (ibid, p. 261). I think about the look on this young tennis player, and aim for my students to leave my class with this look. It is about going beyond learning how to code or acquiring conceptual clarity – it is helping students to realise how their acquired competencies can impact other people and issues that they care about. Students develop themselves as engaged citizens and competent scholars, while recognising their unique talents and creatively apply them. This is what connected competence means to me, and across the modules that I teach, I write assignments, tutorial activities and lectures that provides opportunities for students to make meaningful connections between the classroom and their social environments."

(Source: https://discovery.nus.edu.sg/11678-lee-san-natalie-pang/teaching 2021)

== Research interests ==

Natalie Pang's research lies at the intersection of technology and society, and her research projects are organised under the themes of digital citizenship, digital equity and well-being, digital humanities and data cultures in smart cities. She has led external research grants worth over a million dollars in total in these projects. She incorporates mixed methods in her research, including digital methods as well as survey methodologies. She is also experienced in longitudinal panel studies. 

She has authored and co-authored over 40 journal articles and over 50 conference papers, book chapters, commentaries and encyclopedia entries. She has also worked on translation research in the form of policy papers and reports for public agencies in Singapore as well as international tech firms and forums, including Mozilla Foundation, Facebook and the Internet Governance Forum. 

As an ExCo Member at the Singapore Heritage Society and Board Member of the Southeast Asian Cultural Heritage Alliance (SEACHA), she has an abiding interest in heritage and the role of civil society in shaping the urban environments of Asian cities. 

Current projects include: 
# Editorial: two special journal issues on digital mortality and digital equity;
# Current Projects: 
#*  Achieving Digital Well-being: A community-based approach funded by the Centre for Trusted Internet and Community (CTIC);
#* Data innovations and cultures in smart cities funded by the Konrad Adenauer-Stiftung; 
#* Internet and General Election in Singapore funded by the Institute of Policy Studies; 
#* Digital equity and home-based work (NUS Internal funding)
(Source: https://discovery.nus.edu.sg/11678-lee-san-natalie-pang/grants 2021)

== Publications ==
* Her [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Natalie_Pang page on ResearchGate]
* Her [https://discovery.nus.edu.sg/11678-lee-san-natalie-pang/publications publications page at National University of Singapore]
Selected publications on commons or p2p-oriented research:
* Pang, N. (2012). Collaborative Production, the Knowledge Commons and the Application of Open Content Licenses. In Sasaki, H. (Eds.), Information Technology for Intellectual Property Protection: Interdisciplinary Advancements (pp. 237-260). IGI Global. http://doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-135-1.ch009 [https://www.igi-global.com/gateway/chapter/full-text-html/60558 HTML]; [https://www.igi-global.com/gateway/chapter/full-text-pdf/60558 PDF]
* Pang, N. (2011). The paradox of the health commons: The benefits and trouble about participation. International Journal of Organisational and Collective Intelligence, Special Issue on Social Media in e-Health: Emergent issues in ethics, trust and privacy. https://dx.doi.org/10.4018/joci.2011070101 Full text [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220366724_The_Paradox_of_the_Health_Commons_The_Benefits_and_Trouble_about_Participation_and_Co-Creation available via ResearchGate]
* Pang, N. (2010). Cultivating the women on farms gathering community: A digital approach. International Journal of Community Informatics, Special issue on Gender in community informatics, Available online: https://openjournals.uwaterloo.ca/index.php/JoCI/article/view/2434/3005
* Pang, N. (2010). Seeking Utopia: Collectives and the commons in the contemporary media environment. In D. Haftor and A. Mirijamdotter (eds.), Information and Communication Technologies, Society and Human Beings: Theory and Framework (Festschrift in honour of Gunilla Bradley) (pp. 386-398), IGI Global. https://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-60960-057-0.ch031 [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266559131_Seeking_Utopia_Collectives_and_the_commons_in_the_contemporary_media_environment Available via ResearchGate]
* Ang, P.H. and Pang, N. (2010). Going beyond talk: Can international internet governance work? Proceedings of the 5th Annual Symposium of the Global Internet Governance Academic Network (GigaNet), 13 September 2010, Vilnius, Lithuania.
* Pang, N. (2010). Land, livelihood, and IT: Commons in Asia depend on more than the consent of a village (translated into German). INKOTA-Brief, 153(September), p. 13-15.
* Pang, N., et al. (2010) Cultivating the Women on Farms Gathering (WoFG) community: A digital approach. [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266675439_Cultivating_the_Women_on_Farms_Gathering_WoFG_community_A_digital_approach Available via ResearchGate]
* Pang, N. (2009). The role of participatory design in constructing the virtual knowledge commons. In D. Akoumianakis (ed), Virtual Communities of Practice and Social Interactive Technologies:  Lifecycle and Workflow Analysis (pp. 86-100), IGI Global Inc. https://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-60566-376-0.ch005
* Pang, N., Denison, T., Williamson, K., Johanson, G., and Schauder, D. (2008). Augmenting Communities with Knowledge Resources: The Case of the Knowledge Commons in Public Libraries. In A. Aurigi and F. De Cindio (eds.), Augmented Public Spaces: Articulating the Physical and Electronic City (pp. 185-199), Ashgate Publishing.
* Pang, N. (2008). The Knowledge Commons in Victoria and Singapore: An Exploration of Community Roles in the Shaping of Cultural Institutions. PhD Thesis, Monash University. [https://au-east.erc.monash.edu.au/fpfiles/7341578/monash_8325.pdf PDF]
* Pang, N. (2007). Cultivating communities through the knowledge commons: the case of open content licenses. In H. Sasaki (ed), Intellectual Property Protection for Multimedia Information Technology (pp. 260-277), IGI Global. https://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-59904-762-1.ch013
* Pang, N., Johanson, G., Denison, T., Schauder, D., and Williamson, K. (2007). Public libraries as communal knowledge commons. In L. Stillman and G. Johanson (eds.), Constructing and Sharing Memory: Community Informatics, Identity and Empowerment (pp. 87-100), Cambridge Publishing.
* Pang, N. and Schauder, D. (2007). The Culture of Information Systems in Knowledge-Creating Contexts: Rethinking User-Centred Design. Informing Science Journal, Special Issue: A double helix relationship of use and redesign in Information Systems, 10, 203-235.
* Pang, N. et al. (2006) User-centred design, e-research, and adaptive capacity in cultural institutions: The case of the Women on Farms Gathering collection. Conference: Asia-Pacific Conference on Library & Information Education & Practice, 2006. Full text [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228980171_User-centred_design_e-research_and_adaptive_capacity_in_cultural_institutions_The_case_of_the_Women_on_Farms_Gathering_collection available via ResearchGate]

== More Information ==
* [[Natalie Pang on Access Issues and the Digital Commons]]
* [[Learning Commons]]
* [[Knowledge Commons]]
* [[Structuration Theory]]
* [[Commons – Governance]]

* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]

* [https://discovery.nus.edu.sg/11678-lee-san-natalie-pang/about About page, NUS]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Singapore]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Knowledge Commons]]