Many of the books listed below are available for free at [http://www.bookzz.org/ bookzz.org]. I like to read. [mailto:knuggy@gmail.com Send]your suggestions. If you have trouble absorbing written text, consider using a text-to-speech program like IVONA reader. Text is highlighted while vocalized and can help you retain what you read and increase reading speed.
<br><br>
Ordered accordingly. 

=Books=

==Timelines==
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1_5pgvIOpTS_L5X6-au6p_kzKsz4mxM2Hl_eevklbkxY Anti-Capitalist Dictionary]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1yBlQcDDVtDEJ_R_gOHj7rYijfEXUE3kD5VKRWeMubpk How The Web Was Born]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1f7uKVhclVAtqFcfuMIbI_DHJGxo_A9V5jCXPKVW3jmA London. A Biography.]

==Reference Shelf==
* The Dictionary of Alternatives: Utopianism and Organization. Martin Parker, Valerie Fournier, Patrick Reedy

==Right Society==
* Desigining Freedom. Stafford Beer
* Operating Manual For Spaceship Earth. Richard Buckminster Fuller
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1v_rGAcH9YeaTMCJMXclgTb9iYzXMeaZzp1fA5S96oeo Kevin Smith. Free is Cheaper]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=15ncwoRfEUd4OVfb7KWC1E-p2auz37J1RNONI6b1-GwM Kropotkin. Colin Ward. Workshops Tomorrow]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1CuxjqrVYvMu-GcSkmFM8krXhbddxf8N2mJ5Qn-Vo2vA Envisioning Real Utopia]

==Executive Program==
*[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1m1uDzf0D0CmlyrIiEcHrg0ZR2VvFWnM2303BvY73l34/edit?usp=sharing Exponential Organizations. Salim Ismail et al.]
*[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rtYxkBP9ve4beV9s0h30-nFpYoYCmUSwI8NuZli2LFg/edit?usp=sharing BOLD: How to Go Big, Create Wealth and Impact the World. Peter Diamandis & Steven Kotler] 

==Economics==
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_236cskmncd6 Lewis Hyde. The Gift]
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_346cv9phjhm Carlota Perez. Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1Sabxn8sE-lcYi1Mzz6BmIM4Of3pxXXaVkoUon6-7pIc Raj Patel. The Value of Nothing]
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_164k4pcsqft Immanuel Wallerstein. World Systems Analysis: An Introduction]
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_119gcjqnmgx Robert Theobald. The Guaranteed Income]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1f7oLuMwoiShggdu1sUK4Y29ovqdxePE3loq5BRDPas8 Robert Freedman. Marx on Economics]

==Inequality==
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=12wTKNfQNlKegVFBt6Kmv-xkdWvNp4ayrdKbrqexa3JA Spirit Level]

==History==
* The Robber Barons. Mathew Josephson
* The Quest for AI. Nils J. Nilsson
* [https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/openmanufacturing/0o1ovwviJP8 Paul Clark & Julian Freeman. Design] 
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1PTa93vkQwCMdS0ym595S0Xr6OuCSAfAWeIP7VZnqcrc Paul Lafargue. Evolution of Property]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1FyUbkzCDEGRllQoPgtqVm6OfP2Ir43yRzL76pAoYHKE David Petegorsky. Left-wing Democracy in the English Civil War: Gerrard Winstanley and the Digger Movement] 
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1wEb859Kk5XqRA2c91uFY8yrbXrMQW_9cndnMGKnZSuM Martin Cohen. Political Philosophy: From Plato to Mao]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1oLVRjnJO8IyGtVDfhXtAoO6GIA2ZLhyaFG94uhxZ6nE Anthony Hall. Earth into Property]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1eBAAbkbsd8d1ma72Me46vkEi2nL8-hQ3q76YFOpvfeY Noam Chomsky. Occupy]

==Peer Production==
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_197gff727c8 Clay Shirky. Here Comes Everybody]
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_193cj5qz6hj Chris Anderson. The Long Tail]
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_187gpbqzsgf Matt Mason. The Pirates Dilemma]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1QQk0Iw80juWo7enf-OGXBF-Km2PisDPqPrvDXVtHG7c Richard Sennet. Together: Rituals, Pleasures, and Politics]

==Innovation==
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=15qqHUjrDvuIeV2XpM0O3V9lIqpi4OPrD1MxzxrYnnjM Steven Johnson. Where Good Ideas Come From]
* [https://docs.google.com/document/pub?id=1ixdl_yavGsG_TJ2hLsSxAII46VHkteEQXF6htxEgcy0 Atul Gawande. The Checklist Manifesto]

==Intelligence==
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_188gkbrgfdm Marvin Minsky. Emotion Machine]

==Inspiration==
* [http://docs.google.com/View?id=dg2jzdft_88ccpwjxz9 Alan Watts. In My Own Way]

=Child Education=
*[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bLadw_NCLOVUfOVLFIIApszDoWEi1m5_6EMf4rWqkbk/edit?usp=sharing Child Home Education]

=Lectures=

* [[Cryptoparty London Notes]]

==P2P==

* [[4th Inclusiva - Michel Bauwens - Peer Production]]
* [[4th Inclusiva - Kirsty Boyle and Catarina Mota - openMaterials]]

==Intelligence==

*[[CSAIL. Marvin Minsky. Emotion Machine]]

=Life Systems=
==Food==
*[http://mitcityfarm.media.mit.edu/ MIT City Farm]
==Housing==
==Energy==
==Communications==
==Fabrication==
==Transportation==
==Common Stores==
*Freeshops
*Tool Librarys