
'''= "The Coalition’s activities focus on global stakeholder engagement, focused research and development of methods for natural capital accounting".'''

URL = http://www.naturalcapitalcoalition.org/

=Description=

"On November 6th 2012 international leaders from business, government and NGOs gathered in Singapore to celebrate the official launch of the TEEB The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity for Business Coalition Headquarters. The ceremony took place as part of the Responsible Business Forum on Sustainable Development.

The Coalition brings together global stakeholders to study and standardise methods for natural capital accounting to enable its valuation and reporting in business. This is the business application of the G8+5 and UNEP supported TEEB programme, led by Pavan Sukhdev. This provides a compelling economic case for the conservation of natural capital and is the cornerstone of current Green Economy policy.

The Coalition’s activities focus on global stakeholder engagement, focused research and development of methods for natural capital accounting. The Coalition’s founding members have pioneered much of the science and business case for natural capital valuation and accounting, providing a credible platform to take the business application of this forward. These existing activities will be built on to ensure the necessary stakeholders from business, government, support organizations, academia and NGOs inform effective and pragmatic methods. This will maximise uptake and enable the transformative change that valuing natural capital in business can bring."
(http://www.naturalcapitalcoalition.org/about/the-ncc.html)

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Movements]]