
'''* Article: Natural Resources in a Planetary Perspective. By Harald Sverdrup & K. Vala Ragnarsdóttir. Geochemical Perspectives, Volume 3, Number 2, October 2014'''

URL = http://www.geochemicalperspectives.org/online/v3n2 [http://www.geochemicalperspectives.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/v3n2.pdf pdf]


=Abstract=

"This Perspective summarises the current and future availability of many natural resources. But the main focus is on the most important metals and on phosphorus. The metals are grouped into the big six (iron, chromium, manganese, aluminium, copper and zinc), with some shorter discussion of precious (gold, silver and platinum group metals) and other metals. These other metals are those needed for steel (niobium, vanadium, nickel, molybdenum), for technology (tantalum, zircon, indium, gallium, germanium), for new technological developments in the renewable energy industry (europium, terbium, neodynium, lithium), and the chemical industry (platinum group metals, cobalt and rare earth elements).

The sobering common aspect for all of these resources is, that available data suggests that their production has either peaked already or will peak within the next 50 years. Throughout history, the major part of the economy of the world´s nations has been driven directly or indirectly by access to and use of natural resources, and this still remains so. Our main findings are that the world is heading towards a restricted access to the key resources that are used by humanity today and these restrictions will have a profound impact on the world economies and life styles of future generations. The challenge is to accept this knowledge, and to find the necessary solutions and adaptions for the future while we still have time and possibility to so. History will judge how well we responded to current resource challenges."



[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]