

=Description=

Ernesto Van Peborgh:

"Here’s a radical idea:

 '''What if the next global currency was backed by nature?'''

Consider this: according to UBS’s “Bloom or Bust” white paper, 60% of the world’s GDP depends on biodiversity. Everything from agriculture to pharmaceuticals relies on the natural systems we’re rapidly destroying. We’ve already breached multiple planetary boundaries, including biodiversity loss, and the consequences are becoming existential. If we continue to erode the planet’s life-support systems, there will be no economy to save.

The 30 by 30 Agreement, which aims to protect 30% of the planet’s land and oceans by 2030, and the Global Biodiversity Framework are more than international accords — they are humanity’s first halting steps toward acknowledging that our economy and ecology are not separate systems. They are the same system. But protecting nature isn’t enough. We need to create a financial system that rewards its restoration.

Imagine a new type of currency — a “nature dollar,” if you will — that is tied to measurable improvements in biodiversity. Instead of printing money based on debt, central banks would issue currency based on the growth of forests, the restoration of wetlands, or the health of coral reefs. These currencies would be secured by the most tangible and essential asset of all: the planet’s capacity to sustain life.

This shift wouldn’t just stabilize the financial system — it would transform it. A nature-backed currency would align economic incentives with ecological health, creating a virtuous cycle. Investors, businesses, and governments would have a direct financial stake in restoring ecosystems, doubling the world’s biodiversity, and staying within planetary boundaries.

This is not utopian thinking. It’s pragmatic. The current system is failing. Debt levels are unsustainable. Biodiversity loss is accelerating. And as we hurtle toward collapse, the need for a new story — backed by a new asset — has never been clearer.

Nature-based currencies could become the bedrock of a regenerative economy, one that couples the monetary system with the most enduring form of value we have: the living systems that sustain us. In this new paradigm, the economy wouldn’t just extract value from nature — it would create value by restoring it."

(https://ernestovanpeborgh.substack.com/p/the-dawn-of-regenerative-finance)


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]