
'''= greek project which organizes workshops for the  Workshops for the self-management of Food, Health, Energy, Clothing and Shelter'''

URL = http://neaguinea.org/english/


=Description=

"The “Nea Guinea” non-profit organisation is a project that began in September of 2009, placing as a central objective the self-reliance of some of our basic everyday needs such as food, energy, health, shelter and clothing. Through theoretical and practical workshops we try to gather and to evolve the necessary knowledge and craftsmanship, in order to get involved actively in the production process and to conquer higher levels of self-sufficiency and autonomy in our daily lives.

At the same time, we search for and we try to shape, new, economically sustainable and socially just processes that enable us to break free from the exploitation of paid labour and in this manner to redefine our everyday lives in parallel, but also in antagonism to the dominant economic system. By interacting with similar projects, we aim in the creation of cooperative structures and solidarity networks that will support the transition to a more just, ecological and sustainable society.

The project, focuses in both the development and transfer of technical know-how, and in the production of goods. The manner with which the public workshops are organised, gives an opportunity to the participants to familiarise themselves with the idea of self-management, developing at the same time appropriate skills in order to produce their own goods or to manufacture objects that they need.

Moreover, goods are produced in the workshops in order to satisfy the basic needs of the people that work for the collective and at the same time these goods are sold in eco-festivals and in networks of producers/consumers in order to contribute financially to the economic viability of project.

«Nea Guinea» is a distant destination, a point in the future. A place where respect and solidarity define the development of everyday relations and a place where human activity is determined by natural balances and by the limits of surrounding ecosystems. To reach this destination, we begin from where we stand right now, and we walk in the path that we create while walking. Through our daily practices, we try to ground this utopia, here and now."
(http://neaguinea.org/english/)


[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]