
=Description=

Summary via Grok, April 2025:

"Neal Spackman: Permaculture and Desert Greening

Neal Spackman’s work, particularly through projects like the Al Baydha Project in Saudi Arabia, focuses on transforming degraded desert landscapes into productive ecosystems using permaculture principles. His approach emphasizes water harvesting, soil regeneration, and agroforestry to create sustainable food systems in arid regions.


Relation to Economic Benefits:

Agricultural Productivity: Spackman’s work demonstrates how restoring barren land can yield food crops and fodder, directly boosting local agricultural output. For example, the Al Baydha Project turned desert into grazing lands and orchards, supporting Bedouin communities with new income sources, aligning with the 10-20% yield increases noted globally.

Job Creation: His projects train local communities in permaculture techniques, creating jobs in restoration and farming. This mirrors the ILO’s estimate of 395 million jobs from nature-based solutions, as locals gain skills to maintain productive landscapes.

Supply Chain Stability: By diversifying crops and restoring native vegetation, Spackman’s work reduces reliance on imported food, stabilizing local economies and supporting industries like agriculture and agroforestry.

Example: In Al Baydha, Spackman’s team built swales and check dams to capture rainwater, leading to vegetation growth that supported livestock and fruit trees. This not only improved food security but also created economic opportunities through sustainable land use, contributing to the $9-$30 return per $1 invested in restoration.

Reference: While specific publications by Spackman are limited, his work is documented in permaculture circles and videos like those from the Permaculture Research Institute, which highlight Al Baydha’s economic and ecological impacts (e.g., permaculture.org.au)."


=More information=

* [[John D. Liu on the Ecosystem Restoration Camps]]

* [[John D. Liu on Large-Scale Ecosystem Restoration Projects]]

* [[Alan Savory's Holistic Management of Grasslands]]


[[Category:Bioregional]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Saudi Arabia]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]