= A contemporary model for a self-managed, non-market socialism is Pat Devine's model of negotiated coordination. Negotiated coordination is based upon social ownership by those affected by the use of the assets involved, with decisions made by those at the most localized level of production. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-managed_economy]


=Discussion=

Pat Devine:

"A distinction is drawn between market exchange,
involving the sale and purchase of the output of existing
capacity, and market forces, which in capitalist economies
bring about changes in the structure of capacity through
atomistic decisions on investment and disinvestment that are
coordinated ex post. Market exchange remains an integral part of
our model but market forces are replaced by a process of
negotiated coordination in which the groups principally affected
coordinate decisions on investment and disinvestment ex ante.
Negotiated coordination is a process of deliberative democratic
decision-making. The social owners of the assets involved in
decisions on investment comprise the enterprises in the
industry, the communities in which they are located, suppliers
and customers, planning commisions, and other groups with a
legitimate interest in the outcome. They are able to draw on
relevant quantitative and qualitative information in the
deliberative process through which they interact and negotiate.
They do not seek to aggregate given and unchanging preferences,
rather they engage in an evolutionary process of collective
learning through which they seek to arrive at an agreed
decision. We argue that such a process enables the tacit
knowledge of the participating groups to inform the decisions
made. Thus, recognition of the importance of tacit knowledge
does not vitiate the possibility of planning, conceptualised as
a deliberative democratic process, pace Hayek and the Austrian
school."
(http://ces.univ-paris1.fr/membre/seminaire/heterodoxies/Pdf/Devine2.pdf)


==Ex Ante vs. Ex Post Coordination==

"Hodgson also argues that it is wrong to think of market forces
as coordinating investment decisions only ex post since such
decisions involve expectations about the future and in any case
futures markets exist. This is to misunderstand the crucial
distinction between ex post and ex ante coordination. In the
former, of course enterprises contemplating major interdependent
investments develop expectations about one another's investment
plans and future prices and make estimates of the expected
profitability of their investments. In the end, however, the
investment decisions are necessarily made atomistically. The
extent to which expected profitability is realised depends,
inter alia, on the type and amount of investment undertaken in
the aggregate, which has not been agreed in advance. In the
light of the outcome, each enterprise then decides on its next
investment programme, again atomistically, and the process is
repeated.

With ex ante coordination, by contrast, agreement on major
interdependent investments is reached before the investments are
undertaken, thus removing one important source of uncertainty.
Of course, other sources of uncertainty remain, captured in the
phrase inter alia above[6], and therefore the process of ex ante
coordination involves constant revision in the light of past
outcomes. It is indeed a dynamic process."


==Mobilizing Tacit Knowledge==

"While the modern Austrian school emphasises the importance
of individual tacit knowledge, it also posits a process though
which society is able to discover, to learn, which tacit
knowledge is socially useful and which is not.

However, despite the strengths of this modern Austrian position,
a major weakness is its individualistic conception of tacit
knowledge and the exclusively ex post nature of the discovery
process it postulates.[8] It is now widely accepted that tacit
knowledge is largely social, residing in the shared experience,
conceptions, conventions and routines of groups or teams. This
is certainly the position shared by Hodgson and ourselves.
However, somewhat tendentiously, Hodgson argues that this "does
not save the Adaman-Devine proposal from fatal criticism" since
"the question remains as to how the economic organizations
encompassing those teams are to be coordinated", a problem not
solved by "handwaving in the direction of `social knowledge'"
(Hodgson 1998: 419).

Although his text frequently suggests otherwise, Hodgson
recognises that we do not propose "completely centralized
planning", understanding us instead as proposing "an
interlocking network of negotiation committees to formulate the
plans". However, he argues that "the same central problem
remains. How can these committees discuss and deliberate on
matters which individuals (or groups) may `know but cannot
say'?" (Hodgson 1998: 418). Although he does not put it this
way, indeed seems unaware of it, Hodgson can be interpreted here
as raising the important question of the different levels at
which social tacit knowledge is generated and the related
question of how the social tacit knowledge residing in different
groups can be brought together and mobilised in a cooperative
undertaking.

In the model of negotiated coordination several different
levels, intersecting in different dimensions, can be identified:

the workplace, the enterprise, the industry or sector, the
economy as a whole; the locality, the region, the country, the
inter- or cross-national region, the world. 

To return to the firm, tacit social knowledge is generated and institutionalised
at both the divisional and headquarters levels. Shared
conceptions and routines are developed to enable these different
knowledges to be drawn upon, where appropriate, in order to
inform decision-making and implementation at each level. Hodgson
seems to be suggesting that committees do not generate and draw
upon tacit knowledge, yet decision by committee (i.e., groups of
people working together) has long been the norm in the economy
and the polity. The question raised by our insistence on
participatory decision-making is whose tacit knowledge is drawn
upon, whose interests inform the decision-making process.
Our general proposal is that, at each level of decision-making,
those who are affected by the decisions participate in making
them. The decision-making bodies would have available to them
two sorts of knowledge: explicit, "objective", frequently
quantitative; and implicit, "subjective", tacit, typically
qualitative, provided by the contributions of the groups taking
part in the process."



=Critique=

"Since the innovative
process is continuous, it follows, according to Hodgson, that
decisions on the use of existing capacity cannot be separated
from decisions on investment and disinvestment. Since tacit
knowledge can only be acted on by those who have acquired it, it
cannot inform decisions on investment made by committees.
Participatory decision-making would inhibit entrepreneurial
initiative and stifle innovation. Hodgson's underlying argument
is that innate cognitive limitations severely restrict the scope
for deliberative decision-making. Thus, an overemphasis on
participatory processes would, in his view, lead to information
overload and bureaucracy, threatening rather than promoting
democracy."
(http://ces.univ-paris1.fr/membre/seminaire/heterodoxies/Pdf/Devine2.pdf)

=More Information=

* http://linkesdsgruppe3.minuskel.de/fileadmin/linke.sds/MCH_Reader/Pat_Devine_-_Participatory_Planning_Through_Negotiated_Coordination.pdf

* Article: Participatory Planning as Deliberative Democratic Process. Pat Devine et al.

URL = http://ces.univ-paris1.fr/membre/seminaire/heterodoxies/Pdf/Devine2.pdf


References in the above text:

#Adaman, Fikret and Devine, Pat (1994) `Socialist renewal:lessons from the "calculation debate"', Studies in Political Economy 43 (Spring): 63-77.
#Adaman, Fikret and Devine, Pat (1996) `The economic calculation debate: lessons for socialists', Cambridge Journal of Economics 20(5): 523-37.
#Adaman, Fikret and Devine, Pat (1997) `On the economic theory of socialism', New Left Review 221 (January-February): 54-80.
#Adaman, Fikret and Devine, Pat (2002) `A reconsideration of the theory of entrepreneurship: a participatory approach', Review of Political Economy 14(3): 329-355.
#Blackburn, Robin (1991) `Fin de siecle: socialism after the crash', New Left Review 185 (January-February): 5-66.
#Cockshott, Paul and Cottrell, Allin, Socialism, Nottingham: Spokesman.


From Pat Devine:

#Devine, Pat (1988) Democracy and Economic Planning: The Political Economy of a Self-governing Society, Cambridge: Polity Press.
#Devine, Pat (2002) `The institutional context of entrepreneurial activity', in F. Adaman and P. Devine (eds) Reciprocity, Redistribution and Exchange: Embedding the Economy in Society, Montreal: Black Rose Books.

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]