==Description==

Charlotte Hess:

"Neighborhood commons incorporate both urban and rural commons where people living
in close proximity come together to strengthen, manage, preserve, or protect a local
resource. This sector is closely related to [[Cultural Commons]].
        

The growing number of works on shared public space is bringing awareness to a
goldmine of new commons issues. 

Foster writes:

- only through a rethinking of the city commons can we begin to take social capital
seriously in land use policy and law. Instead of conceptualizing the city as an
aggregation of private property rights, we should instead seek to identify and protect
common resources and interests in the city commons through limited access rights and
collaborative governance strategies that preserve and draw upon existing social
networks to manage common city resources. (S. Foster 2006: 526)
        
Low and Smith (2006) explore issues around the increasing enclosure of public
space particularly in U.S. cities. Anand (2000) studies “commons” behavior with solid
waste management in Madras, India. Clapp and Meyer (2000) analyze brownfields as
urban commons. Nagle and Nagle (2007) write about “predatory planning” practices that
are endangering the urban cultural commons in post-Katrina New Orleans.
        
Most of us are familiar with the battles between neighborhood groups and city
governments over the rights to gardens grown on abandoned land. The gardens become a
kind of community action commons when a government begins to sell them as private
property—thus creating a new kind of enclosure movement (Rogers 1995; Assadourian
2003; Saldivar-Tanaka and Krasny 2004). Karl Linn was an especially effective voice in
building community gardens and neighborhood commons (Linn 1999, 2007).
       
Housing arrangements can be good examples of types of commons. Yang (1995)
and Hawkins, Percy, and Montreal (1997) have written about homeowners’ associations
as commons; French and Hyatt (1997)—community associations; Choe (1993)—
apartment buildings; I. Lee (1998)—residential communities; Kleit (2004)—public
housing. A few have looked at playgrounds (Abu-Ghazzeh 1998; Delehanty 1992);
sidewalk and street vending (Kettles 2004; Anjaria 2006); and local streets, parking, and
public spaces (Epstein 2002; D. Cooper 2006). Brian Steed and Burney Fischer (2007) at
Indiana University are the first to study street trees as commons.
        
A wide number of other subjects can fall under the heading “neighborhood
commons.” The effect on homeless populations by certain types of urban enclosures of
the commons have been examined by Headington (2003) and Mitchell and Staeheli
2006). Iliich (1983) has written on silence as a commons and Mace, Bell, and Loomis
(1999) on the effects of noise on the commons.10 Local security issues have been written
about as commons in Blackstone et al. (2007), Benson (1994), Wagenaar and Soeparman
(2004), and Krebs, Sever, and Clear (1999). Jenny, Feuntes, and Mosler (2007) analyze
the incentives for sharing and rule compliance in a Cuban urban commons."
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1356835)

Source: Hess, Charlotte, [[Mapping the New Commons]] (July 1, 2008). [http://ssrn.com/abstract=1356835]

==More Information==
* [[Mapping the New Commons]]
        
#Some interesting websites relating to neighborhood commons are Resource Guide for the Commons. http://www.yesmagazine.org/article.asp?ID=441 . 
#Related areas to the neighborhood commons are: barn-raising, community organization, deliberative democracy, public sphere, self-governance, [[Social Capital]], [[Urban Commons]].
#[[Community Garden Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Commons]]