
-- Neil Gershenfeld:

"From this combination of passion and inventiveness I began to get a
sense that what these students are really doing is reinventing
literacy. Literacy in the modern sense emerged in the Renaissance as
mastery of the liberal arts. This is liberal in the sense of
liberation, not politically liberal. The trivium and the quadrivium
represented the available means of expression. Since then we've boiled
that down to just reading and writing, but the means have changed
quite a bit since the Renaissance. In a very real sense post-digital
literacy now includes 3D machining and microcontroller programming.

I've even been taking my twins, now 6, in to use MIT's workshops; they
talk about going to MIT to make things they think of rather than going
to a toy store to buy what someone else has designed. The World Bank
is trying to close the digital divide by bringing IT to the masses.

The message coming back for the fab labs is that rather than IT for
the masses the real story is IT development for the masses. Rather
than the digital divide, the real story is that there's a fabrication
and an instrumentation divide. Computing for the rest of the world
only secondarily means browsing the Web; it demands rich means of
input and output to interface computing to their worlds. There was an
amazing moment as I was talking to these Army generals about how the
most profound implication of emerging technology for them might not
lie in designing a better weapon to win a war, but rather in giving
more people something else to do. So we're now at a cusp where
personal fabrication is poised to reinvent literacy in the developed
world, and to engage the intellectual capacity of the rest of the
world."
[http://groups.google.com/group/openmanufacturing/browse_thread/thread/3440ce2f875c1043/770f9bc0d0a4f364?show_docid=770f9bc0d0a4f364&pli=1]