

=Discussion=

==Twelve Theses on Neo-Classical Economics==

John  Barry:

"1. the fact that the ‘economy’ is the material/metabolic foundation/bridge/link between the human and non-human worlds also affects relations of power within human societies;

2. neo-classical economics’ purported objectivity, ‘scientific’ status, or ‘value neutrality’ is false since it is as value-laden and based on ethical and political judgements, as other ethical or political position and prescriptions;

3. related to that, this lends economics the illusion of being able to definitively establish the ‘truth’, mostly through its use of quantitative and numeric methods, what Stephen Marglin (2008: 136) calls the algorithmic ‘ideology of knowledge’ of economics;

4. modern capitalist economics regards itself as defined by its methodology and approach, which has (almost) universal application to all human affairs, rather than a subject matter, ‘the economy’ per se ;

5. the ‘naturalising’ of the institutions of the modern market economy – such as ‘the market’, ‘private property’, ‘competition’, ‘efficiency’ etc. – in such a way that these are both ‘natural’ (beyond the capacity of humans to alter) and also ‘good’, if we want economic growth and material well-being;

6. which in turn establishes ‘economics’ and ‘economists’ as the professional ‘experts’ on how the economy works, thus ‘crowding out’ or marginalising ‘non-economic’ and thus ‘non-expert’ commentary on or views about the economy;

7. allowing its analyses and aims – most crucially the concept and objective of orthodox ‘economic growth’ – to be accepted within a pluralist social context, i.e., it is something almost all value/normative and political positions can accept, endorse, and support as a self-evident ‘common good’ (think of how both left and right promote orthodox undifferentiated economic growth uncritically);

8. its capacity to deliver (albeit unequally) material benefits to enough people often comes via hiding, externalizing, or sequestering the social and environmental costs of economic growth, but nevertheless it is regarded and promoted as a form of knowledge that ‘works’;

9. its supposed ‘non-political’ character –related to 2 above, which;

10. supports powerful interests, groups, forms of thinking, and institutions within society, and allows the by-passing of ethical, political debate, and perhaps more crucially of all;

11. its position as the ‘master discipline’ or form of knowledge within policy-making and political decision-making by the state such that all discourse and debate must ultimately be translated into a form acceptable to neo-classical economics.

12. which means that as well as ‘crowding out’ rival accounts of the economy, as well as political and ethical debate, neo-classical economics ‘colonises’ non-economic areas of life, such as health, family, the domestic sphere, community, and politics, i.e. , it moves outside its own subject area.

While all of these ‘theses’ are interlinked, it is the imputed ‘value-free’ (and therefore supposedly non-ethical and non-political) character of modern neo-classical economics that I particularly wish to focus on here. Simply put, the study of the economy is not, and never can be, either a politics- or ethics-free zone.

My own work on critically examining orthodox, undifferentiated GDP-measured economic growth as a permanent feature of the economy has led me to analyse not just growth but neoclassical/capitalist economics as by turns a form of ideology, myth, religion, and cultural meme (Barry, 2015). Revealing the ideological core of capitalist/neoclassical economics is of course central to Norgaard’s essay.

The ideological power of capitalist economics cannot and should not be underestimated. Its comprehensive failure to predict the current global economic crisis has led neither to its displacing as a useful paradigm nor to the reforming and reformulating of the paradigm (Barry, 2012). Rather, we have witnessed what John Quiggin provocatively but correctly denotes as 'Zombie economics' (Quiggin, 2010). That is, dead, analytically useless (but politically and ideologically powerful) ideas and nostrums that still reign over us in terms of informing everything from 'commonsense' and everyday understandings of the economy, to state economic policy, to the political platforms of political parties (Barry, 2012). This entails recognizing the ‘commonsense’ and ‘taken for granted’ nature of capitalist economics and its emphasis on growth, i.e. that almost everyone seems to at least tacitly, if not explicitly, accept it. Thomas Homer-Dixon captures this well in his statement that:

“The tacit arrangement among our elites, our experts, and the rest of us is essentially symbiotic - a mutually gratifying and self-sustaining cycle of denial and delusion. Through our acquiescence in and often active support of modern capitalism, we legitimize our elites' and experts' status and power, while those elites and experts give us an overarching ideology of permanence, order, and purpose that lends our lives a sense of place and meaning. According to this ideology, economic growth is a panacea for all our social and personal problems. Growth equals health. Unfortunately when we’re in denial, we can't think about the various paths that we might take into the future. Nor can we prepare to choose the best path when the opportunity arises. Radically different futures become literally inconceivable - they are ‘beyond imagining’ in the same way the heliocentric cosmos was inconceivable to many people prior to the Copernican revolution.” (Homer-Dixon, 2006: 219)

And we need to always remember that orthodox, capitalist economists are called up to comment on the media not because what they say is correct or true, but because they are asked, because they are presumed to be and present themselves as the authority on ‘the economy’. That is, it is from the fact that orthodox economists have privileged access to some objectively verifiable truth that their power and authority stems. Rather, it is because ideologically we all accept that they so possess this power: the power to discern whether the ‘market fundamentals’ are sound, to detect the prevailing or anticipated moods of the Gods of the market. How different is this from shamanism? Indeed, how different is the dogma of austerity as cure for our current economic woes from other societies that sacrificed their children to assuage the Gods and ensure the harvest?"
(Great Transition website, November 2015)


[[Category:Economics]]