

=Discussion=

==Saskia Sassen: Neoliberalism and democracy==

Saskia Sassen summarizes 6 trends which have undermined legislative power in western democracies:


"The first trend is the growing power of particular state agencies because of corporate economic globalisation: the treasury, the federal reserve, the office of the trade representative, and other agencies in the case of the US. These and equivalent institutions in other countries played a major role in building this global corporate economy - it was not just an achievement of "the free market". Their growing power in turn empowered the executive branch. This pattern repeats itself across the world as states from the 1980s on have become incorporated into the global economy.

Second, the policies associated with this incorporation of national economies into the global corporate economy - deregulation and privatisation - on the one hand remove various oversight functions from legislatures, and on the other actually add power to the executive branch. This power gain happens through the establishment of specialised commissions for finance, telecommunications, trade policy, and the other key building-blocks of the new economy. In other words, the oversight functions lost by congress reappear as specialised commissions, mostly staffed by people from the concerned industries in the private sector. All this amounts to a kind of shadow operation inside the executive branch - most famously illustrated by vice-president Dick Cheney's environmental panel whose membership and agenda were declared secret.

Third, intergovernmental networks centred largely in the executive branch have grown well beyond matters of global security and criminality. The participation by the state in the implementation of a worldwide economic system has engendered a range of new types of cross-border collaborations among specialised government agencies; these focus on the globalisation of capital markets, international standards of all sorts, competition policy, guarantees of contract for global firms, and the new trade order.

Fourth, the major global regulators - notably the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organisation, as well as many lesser known ones - negotiate only with the executive branch. As the global corporate economy began to grow from the 1980s, these global regulators (pre-existing, or emerging) gained enormous power. This too was a dynamic and self-reinforcing process. By around 2006, when corporate globalisation had been more or less completed, their power was beginning to wane. But the institutional changes that had consolidated the executive branch were in place - and most (such as the specialised commissions referred to above) are there still.

Fifth, a critical component of post-1980s economic deregulation is the privatisation of formerly public functions. Prisons and the outsourcing of some welfare functions to private providers are among the most familiar cases, now supplemented by the outsourcing of soldiering to private contractors even in war theatres such as Iraq. The result is to reduce the oversight role of the US Congress while increasing that of the executive branch through specialised commissions. (An example that brings some of these issues to light is the extent to which Congress has been denied information about the amount of taxpayers' money going to private contractors who now handle a growing range of US military activities).

Sixth, there is the alignment of the executive with global corporate logics in a range of domains. The case of the Dubai Ports World corporation, whose expanding operations in the US would have given it control over the security of several major port operations if a planned purchase in 2005-06 had gone through, is illustrative. Here was a George W Bush administration driven by neo-conservatives and engaged in a "war on terror" targeting majority-Muslim states and imprisoning thousands of civilians without trial, prepared to allow a corporate contract from an (albeit friendly) Muslim country. The decision was reversed after a media-populist outcry - a mistake in my view, and also an indication that the alignment with global corporate logics can have a "progressive" aspect."
(http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/the-new-executive-politics-a-democratic-challenge)


[[Category:Governance]]