=Description=

Wim Grommen:

"The Neolithic transition was the most radical transition for mankind. This first agricultural
revolution (10000 – 3000 BC) forms the change from societies of hunter gatherers (20 – 50
people) close to water with a nomadic existence to a society of people living in settlements
growing crops and animals. A hierarchical society came into existence. Joint organizations
protected and governed the interests of the individual. Performing (obligatory) services for the
community could be viewed as a first type of taxation. Stocks were set up with stock
management, trade emerged, inequality and theft. Ways of administering justice were invented to
solve conflicts within and between communities and war became a way of protecting
interests.The Neolithic revolution started in those places that were most favorable because of the 
climate and sources of food. In very cold, very hot or dry areas the hunter gatherer societies
lasted longer.

Several areas are pointed out as possible starting points: southern Anatolia, the basins the
Yangtze Kiang and Yellow river in China, the valley of the Indus, the present Peru in the Andes
or what is now Mexico in Central America. From these areas the revolution spread across the
world. The start of the Neolithic era and the spreading process are different in each area. In some
areas the changes are relatively quick and some authors therefore like to speak of a Neolithic
revolution. Modern historians prefer to speak of the Neolithic evolution. They have come to
realize that in many areas the process took much longer and was much more gradual than they
originally thought."
(http://basisinkomen.nl/wp-content/uploads/The-present-crisis-a-pattern-paper.pdf)

Source: The Economic Crisis: Time For A Paradigm Shift ~ . Towards a Systems Approach
January 24-25, 2013 - International Symposium Universitat de València


=More Information=

* [[Industrial Revolution]]

[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Transitions]]