
=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"The defeat of the New Left meant not only a defeat of their radical agenda, but
the defeat of the social democratic consensus that had dominated the West since the
end of World War II. It resulted in the triumph of neoliberalism with an agenda to free
markets from government controls and to dismantle the welfare state. Neoliberalism
as a movement was initiated by the Austro-Hungarian minor nobility whose
comfortable lives had been disrupted by the breaking up of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire after their defeat in World War One (Slobodian, 2018). Ludwig von Mises and
Friedrich von Hayek were the leading figures in this. The problem as they saw it was
the involvement of the masses in politics. Foucault identified the beginnings of
neoliberalism in a conference at Freiburg University in 1938, although it has since been
shown to have originated earlier. It began as a reaction to Bolshevism and Woodrow
Wilson’s support for the right of nations to self-determination. Neoliberals lumped
together communism, Naziism and social democracy as mass movements leading to
serfdom, and embraced Walter Lippmann’s argument in The Phantom Public of 1927
that the world have become too complex for democracy and ruling elites should
manufacture the consent of the rest of the population. After World War II they met at
Mont Pèlerin in Switzerland to establish a movement to create a global market and to
impose markets on all facets of life, reversing developments associated with
Keynesian economics and the emerging social democratic consensus, recreating the
kind of order that existed in the Austro-Hungarian Empire on a global scale. They
looked for support from big business, and big business was advancing rapidly in the
post-war era with the development of transnational corporations. With this financial 
support they set up think-tanks around the world and penetrated the economics
departments of universities and even tried to influence schools (Mirowski, 2009). They
were most successful at the University of Chicago where they recruited Milton
Friedman. While, neoliberal economics was the main vehicle for promoting their
agenda. it was supported by the revival of social Darwinism through the development
of sociobiology based on the notion that organisms are merely vehicles for the
reproduction of selfish genes (as its most famous exponent, Richard Dawkins put it),
which in turn could be understood as information encoded in DNA molecules, and
psychology defending genetic determinism and arguing that some races are
intellectually inferior to others. Von Hayek (1976) and Friedman (1962/1982, p.2f.)
dismissed the quest by governments for social justice.

The threat from the New Left together with the problems of stagflation in the
1970s provided the crisis they needed to push through their policies. Effectively, they
succeeded in a struggle for cultural hegemony, not just against the New Left, but
against the social democratic consensus of the post-war era. Neoliberals were able to
dominate the policy formation of governments, both right and more significantly, the
left from the late 1970s onwards, utilizing the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and the World Trade Organization to impose these policies on recalcitrant
nations, or where it was deemed necessary, assassinating political leaders or invading
countries. Policies involved eliminating trade barriers and constraints on the
movements of capital, dismantling the welfare state, privatizing (or rather,
plundering) public assets, undermining trade unions, reducing taxes on corporations
and eliminating where possible redistributive taxation systems, while expanding
security systems to control the population. It also involved imposing a new
management philosophy on public institutions to make them function like business
corporations. This included education and research institutions.

Through such policies the labor movement was effectively destroyed, globally
and in almost every country apart from North Western Europe. China was included
in this world order after the death of Mao and the rise of Deng Xiaoping, so workers
in First World countries found themselves having to compete for work with Chinese
workers working 12 hours a day, sometimes seven days a week, and living in
dormitories. The collapse of the Soviet Union and its empire in Eastern Europe in 1991
added these countries to the global market, suppling cheap educated labour to
Western Europe and America. These developments were facilitated by advances in
information technology allowing easy communication within transnational
corporations, control of the mass media, and unprecedented levels of surveillance. The
development of container ships, which made international transport far cheaper, was
also important. The outcome was a global corporatocracy based in transnational
corporations operating in a global market ruling over fragmented communities and
isolated individuals. Margaret Thatcher’s claim that “there's no such thing as society.
There are individual men and women and there are families” was becoming a reality.

This transformation involved the hollowing out and effectively subverting
what democracy there had been. This has been well analysed by Carl Boggs (2000). To
achieve this, far more effort had to be devoted to the manufacture of consent. This
involved massive spending on public relations and advertising, the new mind control
industries, and where possible, transforming education. This was achieved by taking
up themes of the New Left and reformulating them. For instance, the New Left were
reacting to constraints on freedom imposed by institutions, and the burden of being
locked into a career. This was associated with the defence of libertinism by some of
the New Left. Illustrating this strand in New Left thought, Dany Cohn-Bendit, one of
the leaders of the New Left in Paris in 1968, later ran a kindergarten and claimed to
have engaged in sexual activities with very young children, describing it as a beautiful
experience. Elsewhere, the use of drugs was defended. In general, it amounted to what
Marcuse had characterised in One Dimensional Man (1964) as “repressive
desublimation.” The Neoliberals argued that the way to freedom is through free
markets, where everyone is free to do what they like, providing life and property are
respected. Many former New Leftists embraced this project and joined the corporate
world to make capitalism more flexible, attacking the role of the welfare state,
advancing what Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello (2007, p.195ff.) described as The New
Spirit of Capitalism. With this new spirit, the impositions of trade unions were
dissolved, eliminating the protection they provided for workers. People could also be
free from lifetime commitment to a particular career. In this way, the precariarization
of work was portrayed as liberating. People were relieved of the onerous demands of
being citizens and could define themselves as consumers. Such freedom could be
extended to freedom to take drugs and to have one’s own opinions without others
questioning them and asking for their beliefs to be justified. In this way the life of
dialogue, essential for democracy, could be closed down. People could be relieved of
the obligation to make commitments, and be allowed to live for the present. The
extreme anti-elitism of some of the New Left (which later led them to embrace
postmodernism) was harnessed to oppose those valuing education as the formation
of character, which implied that people who had had their humanity cultivated by
education were superior to other people. All hierarchies, except those associated with
income or sport, were devalued (Bourdieu, 1984, p.370f.; Gare, 1995, p.18f.).
Essentially, there was a largely successful project to depoliticise the population while
those with wealth were given the freedom to buy politicians and political parties, buy
control of the institutions of the state, buy control of people’s minds through the mind
control industries and control of the media, and plunder public assets, all the while
being relieved of responsibility to society. In short, in accordance with the image of
humans as homo economicus, people were urged to act in their own selfish interests and
focus on consumption, forgetting about democracy, the common good and notions of
justice."

(https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves)

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Movements]]