For a list of pages see [[:Category:Nepal]].

Compilation originally from Frederick Noronha with the assistance of Hempal Shrestha.

For updates, see the Delicious tag at http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Nepal

Very complete directory at http://wikis.bellanet.org/asia-commons/index.php/Pointers_to_Nepal



=Organizations and Initiatives=

* FOSS Nepal Community: FOSS Nepal Community is a team of volunteers who believe in the usage of Free/Open Source Software (FOSS). The primary objective of the community is to promote and diversify the usage of Free/Open Source Software in Nepal.http://www.fossnepal.org

** To raise awareness among general public, government bodies, private sector, civil society, educational institutions and media for expanding the scope of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) via Free and Open Source Software
** To sensitize general public, government bodies, civil society and media for the implementation of e-governance by means of FOSS; the optimal solution for e-gov
** Advocacy for Alternatives in Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) specific to ICT
** To enhance the capacity of IT professionals by promoting inclusion of Free and Open Source Software in educational system and providing platform for IT professionals to make them globally salable 

==Education==
 
* Digital Educational content in Nepal: Sixyadaan is the Open Courseware Project in Nepal. It is 
** 1. Is a free and open educational resource (OER) for educators, students, and self-learners
** 2. Is a publication of Course materials & Researches in Nepal 
** 3. Requires no registration to access the materials 
** 4. Requires a free registration to contribute 
** 5. Is not a degree-granting orcertificate-granting activity 
http://sixyadaan.org [Site not accessible as on Feb 13, 2008] Also: http://parvez.stumbleupon.com/tag/sixydaan-nepal-ocw/

* LTSP e-Library concept : {Link to be added}

*   Open Learning Exchange Nepal : In order to fulfill its mission, OLE Nepal is working in partnership with the government of Nepal to: 
**  Develop high-quality free and open-source interactive digital learning materials that conform to Nepal's national curriculum. 
**  Maintain a web-based repository of these resources. 
**  Build the government's capacity to design, develop and maintain ICT-based materials. 
**  Implement a plan to provide universal access to primary and secondary school level ICT-based teaching-learning materials by 2015. 
**  Research and evaluate the effectiveness of different ICT based learning approaches.
http://www.olenepal.org/



==Technology==

* OLPC Nepal: OLPC Nepal (One Laptop Per Child Nepal) is a non-profit organization. Our objective is to address Nepal's development challenge through it's root cause, Education. Our goal is to provide every child of Nepal with new opportunities to explore,  experiment, and express themselves. We believe that Nepal's asset is the knowledge-based economy but the bitter truth is that, we are still below the threshold. We need an efficient and effective tool to leapfrog the gap. The adoption of the appropriate technology is the only way out. OLPC Nepal aims to provide the solution with "Mero Sanu Sathi", an inexpensive, durable, and highly power-efficient laptop as a learning tool, for each and every child of Nepal. http://www.olpcnepal.org/

* Telecenter movement in Nepal: Bringing Wi-Fi technology to create new opportunities in the Himalayan region of Nepal. We had started the Nepal Wireless Networking Project as a pilot project from a small and remote area of Nepal with the help of foreign supporters and     volunteers. We did several testing in  2002 to find out if it is possible to connect the villages to the nearest ISP in Pokhara. The test was successful. In September 2003, we had connected five villages and expanded the network to two more villages later on. So far have networked seven villages. The name of the villages are Nangi, Paudwar, Ghara, Tikot, Sikha, Ramche, Khibang and Ghorepani of Myagdi district, Nepal. The network is running despite some problems mainly the shortage of power and wireless devices. Now we have 13  villages connected in the network. http://www.nepalwireless.net/

=Communities=

MUSIC, BLOGS AND COMMUNITY SITES of Nepali communities.

* United We Blog! for a Democratic Nepal: Mission: United We Blog! 
Wants democracy and peace to be restored in Nepal as soon as possible. We accept articles related to Nepal from people all over the world. Email UWB: unitedweblog(at)gmail.com We are a group of like-minded journalists working on various media outlets in Kathmandu and other parts of Nepal. This is our forum to express things that we can't in our media because of various reasons like space and time constraints in traditional media. http://blog.com.np/

* MySansar.com In Nepali. "This is not a news site, it's a blog."
Publishes national Nepali and political news. http://mysansar.com

* Sajha: Sajha.com aims to be the internet destination for all
Nepalese living in Nepal and abroad, and for anyone interested in Nepal - to provide a internet space where we take a little break from
the monotony once in a while to indulge in gupp-supp to tickle our intellect, to talk about Nepal and the Nepalese, and to remind the
fact that we are Nepalese no matter where we are and what we do. http://ww.sajha.com


==Mapping==

* Nepal on http://www.openstreetmap.org/ Localities covered include, *
Nepal, Nepal * Patan, Nepal * Kathmandu, Nepal * Birgunj, Nepal * Birātnagar, Nepal * Bharatpur, Nepal * Taweche, Nepal * Dharān Bāzār,
Nepal * Siddharthanagar, Nepal * Kathmandu, Nepal * Setī Zone, Nepal * Sagarmāthā Zone, Nepal * Rāptī Zone, Nepal * Nārāyanī Zone, Nepal * Mechī Zone, Nepal * Mahākālī Zone, Nepal * Lumbinī Zone, Nepal * Kosī Zone, Nepal * Karnālī Zone, Nepal


==Wiki's==

* Wikipedia, in Nepali. Over 2500 entries, according to the last count. http://ne.wikipedia.org
* Wictionary in Nepali. http://ne.wiktionary.org/
* Wikibooks in Nepali: http://ne.wikibooks.org/
* WIkinews in Nepali (proposed): http://ne.wikinews.org/wiki/
* Nepal on Wikipedia: http://nepalonwikipedia.notlong.com  (6200 links)

* Wikitravel on Nepal: http://wikitravel.org/en/Nepal
** Mid-west Nepal: http://wikitravel.org/en/Mid_Western_Nepal
** Annapurna: http://wikitravel.org/en/Annapurna
** Kathmandu Valley: http://wikitravel.org/en/Kathmandu_Valley
** Kathmandu: http://wikitravel.org/en/Kathmandu
** Bhaktapur: http://wikitravel.org/en/Bhaktapur
** Biratnagar: http://wikitravel.org/en/Biratnagar
** Birgunj: http://wikitravel.org/en/Birgunj
** Dharan: http://wikitravel.org/en/Dharan
** Namche Bazaar: http://wikitravel.org/en/Namche_Bazaar
** Nepalgunj: http://wikitravel.org/en/Nepalgunj
** Patan: http://wikitravel.org/en/Patan
** Pokhara: http://wikitravel.org/en/Pokhara


=Digital Content Initiatives=

==Open Access==

* digitalhimalaya.com (http://www.digitalhimalaya.com/): Books and publications available in Creative Commons, FDL, Open Content in Nepal.  A project to develop digital collection, storage, and distribution strategies for multimedia anthropological information from  the Himalayan region. Conceived of by Professor Alan Macfarlane and Dr. Mark Turin as a strategy for archiving and making available   valuable ethnographic materials from the Himalayan region. Based jointly at the Department of Social Anthropology at Cambridge  University and the Anthropology Department at Cornell University, the project began in December 2000. Three primary objectives: 
** To preserve in a digital medium archival anthropological materials from the Himalayan region that are quickly degenerating in their current forms, including films in various formats, still photographs, sound recordings, field notes, maps and rare journals  
** To make these resources available over broadband internet connections, coupled with an accurate search and retrieval system useful to contemporary researchers and students 
** To make these resources available on DVD to the descendants of the people from whom the materials were collected by making them both  easily transportable and viewable in a digital medium. Five ethnographic collections representing a broad range of regions, ethnic  groups, time periods, and themes were slated for digitisation in the first phase of the project, along with a set of maps of Nepal and important journals on Himalayan studies.  

* Open Knowledge Network Project-Nepal has played a vital role in the creation, development and dissemination of local content. ENRD was one of the implementation partner in this project which was implemented in the Multi-stakeholder partnership (MSP) model. http://www.enrd.org/contentdev.php 

* Nepal on the Directory of Open Access Journals: http://www.doaj.org/doaj?func=findJournals&hybrid=&query=Nepal

==Open Access in in Science and Medicine==

** Bhaktapur: http://wikitravel.org/en/Bhaktapur
** Biratnagar: http://wikitravel.org/en/Biratnagar
** Birgunj: http://wikitravel.org/en/Birgunj
** Dharan: http://wikitravel.org/en/Dharan
** Namche Bazaar: http://wikitravel.org/en/Namche_Bazaar
** Nepalgunj: http://wikitravel.org/en/Nepalgunj
** Patan: http://wikitravel.org/en/Patan
** Pokhara: http://wikitravel.org/en/Pokhara

* Nepal-related commons material http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Special:Search?search=Nepal&fulltext=Search

* Nepal on the Directory of Open Access Journals: http://www.doaj.org/doaj?func=findJournals&hybrid=&query=Nepal
** Journal of Nepal Medical Association 
*** ISSN: 00282715
*** EISSN: 1815672X
*** Subject: Medicine (General) --- Public Health
*** Publisher: Nepal Medical Association
*** Country: Nepal
*** Language: English
*** Keywords: health, health care system, medical education
*** Start year: 1999
*** http://www.doaj.org/doaj?func=openurl&issn=00282715&genre=journal

** Kathmandu University Medical Journal
*** ISSN: 18122027
*** EISSN: 48122078
*** Subject: Medicine (General)
*** Publisher: Kathmandu University
*** Country: Nepal
*** Language: English
*** Keywords: medical education
*** Start year: 2003
*** http://www.doaj.org/doaj?func=openurl&issn=18122027&genre=journal

** Nepal Journal of Neuroscience
*** ISSN: 18131948
*** EISSN: 18131956
*** Subject: Neurology
*** Publisher: Neuroscience Forum
*** Country: Nepal
*** Language: English
*** Keywords: neuroscience
*** Start year: 2004
*** http://www.neuroscienceforum.org.np/index.html

** Our Nature
*** ISSN: 19912951
*** Subject: Biology --- Environmental Sciences
*** Publisher: Nature Conservation and Health Care Council
*** Country: Nepal
*** Language: English
*** Keywords: biological sciences, ecology, environmental sciences
*** Start year: 2003
*** http://www.nepjol.info/index.php/


=Software=

'''1. Nepalinux''' (For more information visit: http://www.nepalinux.org/ )

NepaLinux is a Debian and Morphix based Linux distribution focused on desktop usage in Nepali language computing. It contains applications for desktop users like OpenOffice.org, Nepali GNOME and KDE desktops, Nepali input method editor, etc.

The development and distribution of NepaLinux is done by Madan Puraskar Pustakalaya. Version 1.0 was produced as part of the PAN Localization Project, with the support of the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada. NepaLinux is an effort of promoting Free and Open Source Software in Nepal. (Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NepaLinux)


2.  Formation of '''Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) Nepal Community''' (For more information visit: www.fossnepal.org )

FOSS Nepal Community is a team of volunteers who believe in the usage of Free/Open Source Software (FOSS). The primary objective of the community is to promote and diversify the usage of Free/Open Source Software in Nepal.


3.  Some of the '''BellaSap publication on FOSS''' which might be of your interest

 
* Free and Open Source Software Toolkit in Nepali. Author : Hempal Shrestha, Rudra Poudel, Manish Regmi

For download: http://www.sapi.org.np/List.php?type=Publications

 
* Guide to Open Content Licences (in Nepali). Author : Lawrence Liang

For download:  http://www.sapi.org.np/List.php?type=Publications

 
* Guide to Open Content Licences (in Hindi). Author : Lawrence Liang

For download: http://www.sapi.org.np/List.php?type=Publications

 
[[Category:Asia]]
[[Category:Nepal]]
[[Category:Country]]