
Nerd TV is a weekly online TV interview program at PBS, for technology enthusiasts.

URL = http://www.pbs.org/cringely/nerdtv/

NerdTV is a new weekly online TV show from PBS.org technology columnist Robert X. Cringely. NerdTV is essentially Charlie Rose for geeks - a one-hour interview show with a single guest from the world of technology. Guests like Sun Microsystems co-founder Bill Joy or Apple computer inventor Steve Wozniak are household names if your household is nerdy enough, but as historical figures and geniuses in their own right, they have plenty to say to ALL of us. NerdTV is distributed under a Creative Commons license so viewers can legally share the shows with their friends and even edit their own versions. If not THE future of television, NerdTV represents A future of television for niche audiences that have deep interest in certain topics.

NerdTV is MPEG-4 video. You can download the shows and play them with any MPEG-4 player you like, most likely QuickTime. Still in development but coming soon is a Mediaframe Open Source Java applet player, which will play NerdTV video right in your browser.

There are two versions of the complete show -- one with subtitles and one without -- and three audio-only versions for those who prefer to compute by radio. Yes, NerdTV is a Podcast, too. Ogg Vorbis plays in WinAmp or Sonique with a special plugin. AAC plays on an iPod or in iTunes. MP3s play in most media players. 

2005 Guests

Macintosh OS programmer Andy Hertzfeld (9/6/05)

PayPal co-founder Max Levchin (9/13)

Sun Microsystems co-founder Bill Joy (9/20)

Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle (9/27)

Internet publisher Tim O'Reilly (10/4)

Father of RSS Dave Winer (10/11)

Autodesk co-founder Dan Drake (10/19)

Intel Capital co-founder Avram Miller (10/28)

Anina High Fashion Meets High Tech (11/9)

Spreadsheet inventor Dan Bricklin (11/25)

Computer mouse inventor Doug Engelbart (12/9)

TCP/IP inventor Bob Kahn (1/30/06)

Internet entrepreneur, Judy Estrin

Former Lotus chief scientist Jerry Kaplan

Apple Computer co-founder Steve Wozniak

Former Apple chief scientist Larry Tesler

Google CEO Eric Schmidt

The father of Linux, Linus Torvalds

[[Category:Webcasts]]