'''* Book: The Net Delusion: How Not To Liberate The World. By Evgeny Morozov. Allen Lane, 2010'''


=Reviews=


==Pat Kane:==

" it's strange to read this truculent but extremely well-informed critique of "cyber-utopianism" and "internet-centrism" - with its demolition of such phenomena as the Iranian "Twitter Revolution", never mind Clinton's vapors about digital freedom - in the aftermath of the structural shock-waves that Wikileaks has set off around the world.

Morozov builds up an almost unarguable case that the internet is easily deployable by authoritarian states to serve the time-honoured oppressors' trinity of censorship, surveillance and propaganda. Much of his book is a useful tour d'horizon of the ways that the security regimes in Russia, Iran, China, Turkey, his homeland Belarus and many others are matching, mimicking and populating the best of Web 2.0 - all those idealised "social tools" from the coding labs of California.

Yet we've seen an American establishment successfully putting pressure on some of the poster-boys of the network society - be it Amazon, Paypal, Mastercard, Visa and now Apple - to cut off the digital and financial supports of Wikileaks. Federal employees and students have been blocked or banned from visiting the site; prominent politicians and columnists have called for Wikileaks' founder, Julien Assange, to be assassinated.

It's getting a little difficult to discern one repressive cyber-regime from another these days.

One wonders whether Morozov's dull antennae towards Wikileaks' potential in this book (though ironically enough, he's making up for it now, in his unstoppable stream of tweets at @evgenymorozov) comes from his own institutional conditioning. From his days as a scholarship schoolboy, Morozov has been sponsored by Soros's Open Society institute, on whose board he now sits. This has clearly been an entree to fellowships at Stanford, Yahoo! and the New America Foundation, generating bylines at the Economist, the FT, the Wall Street Journal and Newsweek.

And throughout The Net Delusion, Morozov shows a degree more sympathy for the kind of diligent, time-and-people-intensive democracy promotion of the diplomatic classes revealed by the Wikileaks cables, than he does for the crackers, hacker and platform-makers of digital evangelism.

Indeed, his central caution is that the unthinking Western promotion of cyber-tools as enablers and organisers of dissent under authoritarian regimes - sometimes driven by Cold-War nostalgia, sometimes by a lazy and mistaken search for "diplomatic efficiency" - can sometimes make things worse for those concerned.

Encouraging dissidents to use Twitter, YouTube, Facebook or mobile texting - even if those services protect the identity of users and don't cave under state pressure (whatever the state) - still provides a stream of social data which can reveal networks of activists, or alerts regimes to protests and concerns well in advance.

...

The Net Delusion is most useful as a reminder of how fleet-footed, rather than leaden and second-rate, many authoritarian regimes are in their cyberpolicies. China is a veritable powerhouse of disinformation-technology - not only building effective mobile, social networking and gaming platforms in which users trade off efficiency for surveillance, but also inducing the required netiquette on those services.

The Fifty-Cent Party, for example, is an army of blog-commenters who get paid for every dissident blog they snow with patriotic, party-approved rebuttals. And more subtly, China encourages blogging that highlights local corruption or poor services, while keeping a ceiling on more ambitious political critiques.

It's also a delight to be reminded that, in their search for ever-better propaganda techniques, a most honoured guest of the Central Party School in 2001 was one Peter Mandelson, there to "share his insights about the re-invention of the British Labour Party". China is inspiring the same burst of innovation in many other regimes: and Morozov usefully reminds us that loyal nationalism and patriotic service can be as much a motivation for the young socio-technical operative as the bohemian anarchisms of Julien Assange and his pals.

Which makes it imperative that the demonisation of Wikileaks stops, and a clear-sighted engagement with the shift in power that it heralds, begins. Morozov himself set out the options in a superb Financial Times editorial recently: these info-hackers, present and future, could become either a new "Transparency International" or a new "Red Brigades".

That is, their desire to be a new "fifth estate" - true to the spirit of the American "First Amendment" which holds a free press to be the best friend of accountable democracy - can be steadily answered by a non-panicked establishment. Or if things go pear-shaped (or bloody) for the likes of Assange, an info-insurrection may be unleashed that could leave considerable swathes of our comfortable, well-functioning knowledge society in ruins.

"Internet freedom", in short, is a valiant sword with a number of blades, existing in several dimensions simultaneously. As we go down the rabbit-hole of Wikileaks, Morozov's humane and rational lantern will help us land without breaking our legs."
(http://www.theplayethic.com/2011/01/my-indepdendent-review-of-evgeny-morozovs-the-net-delusion.html)



==Cory Doctorow==

In a nutshell, this is the assessment by Cory Doctorow in the Guardian, in a quite detailed review [http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2011/jan/25/net-activism-delusion].

Excerpts:

"At its core, there is some very smart stuff indeed in The Net Delusion. Morozov is absolutely correct when he forcefully points out that technology isn’t necessarily good for freedom – that it can be used as readily to enslave, surveil, and punish as it can to evade, liberate and share. Unfortunately, this message is buried amid a scattered, loosely argued series of attacks on a nebulous “cyber-utopian” movement, whose views are stated in the most general of terms, often in the form of quotes from CNN and other news agencies who are putatively summing up some notional cyber-utopian consensus. In his zeal to discredit this ideology (whatever it is), Morozov throws whatever he’s got handy at anyone he can find who supports the idea of technology as a liberator, no matter how weak or silly his ammunition.

...

It seems that Morozov wants to see the chaos of popular, grassroots movements replaced with a kind of orderly, top-down style of regimented activism led by intellectuals whose thoughts can’t be pithily expressed in 140-character tweets. Whether or not Morozov sees himself as one of those intellectuals is never explicitly stated.

...

“The real problem with Morozov’s exposé of “net-utopians” is that it bears no resemblance to the movement I know intimately and have been a part of for a decade. Where Morozov describes people who see the internet as a “deterministic one-directional force for either global liberation or oppression,” or “refusing to acknowledge that the web can either strengthen rather than undermine authoritarian regimes,” I see only straw-men, cartoons drawn from CNN headlines, talking head sound bites from the US administrative branch, and quips from press conferences.

Everyone I know in this movement – from donors to toolsmiths to translators to front-line activists to UN wonks – knows that the internet presents a risk as well as an opportunity. But unlike Morozov, these people have a program for minimising the risks arising from internet use (which is why there is so much campaign activity around the privacy and censorship problems arising from proprietary software, social networking services, and centralised data-collection systems such as Google) and maximising its efficacy as a tool for liberation, through the development of software and training that provides better anonymity, better communications security, and even abstract tools like zero-knowledge networking system that allow for the broad dissemination of information among large groups of people without revealing their identities.

Morozov is right to assert that the west’s politicians have a simplistic view of the internet’s relationship to foreign policy, but this isn’t merely a foreign policy problem – the same politicians have fantastically failed to come to grips with the internet’s implications for copyright, free speech, education, employment, and every other subject of import. Morozov is right that cold war metaphors like “Great Firewall” obscure as much as they illuminate (The Net Delusion would be worth the price alone for its brilliant assertion that dictatorships use “fields” as much as “walls” in their internet strategies, which need to be “watered” rather than “strengthened” or “demolished”).

But in his zeal to awaken policy-makers to the nuance and non-technical aspects of foreign policy, he is sloppy and lazy. He asserts that ihe Internet is different from a samizdat-era fax machine, because the internet is useful to oppressors and oppressed alike – though I’ve never met a bureaucrat who didn’t love his fax.”

Cory Doctorow concludes that we need a constructive way to pinpoint the internet’s weaknesses as a medium of advocacy and popular organisation, and that the Net Delusion fails to deliver this approach.

In conclusion, what we need to do:

“Dissidents require systems of communication and organisation. Every human endeavour that requires more than one person’s effort has to devote a certain amount of resources to the problem of coordination: the internet has greatly simplified this problem (think again of the hours activists used to spend simply addressing postcards with information about an upcoming demonstration). In so doing, it has provided a disproportionate benefit to dissidents and outsiders (who, by definition, have fewer resources to start with) than it has to the incumbent and powerful (who, by definition, have amassed enough power to squander some of it on coordination and still have enough left over to rule).

The internet makes it possible for more people to speak and participate, which, inevitably, means that protest movements will have a more diffuse set of goals than was common in the era of top-down, authoritarian revolutions. But Morozov romanticises the consensus of revolutions gone by – whether it was 1776, 1914 or 1989, every successful revolution is a fragile coalition of conflicting interests and views, held together by the common desire to abolish the old system, even if there was no consensus on what to replace it with.

Meanwhile, the internet has become so integral to the daily functioning of the world’s states that it’s hard to credit Morozov’s fear that in the event of a real revolutionary threat, governments will simply pull the plug. As Morozov himself points out, Burma’s brutal junta kept the internet running day after day during its brutal crackdown on political riots, despite the global black eye it received courtesy of the reports that emerged thanks to the net; China depends so much on the net for its internal functioning that it’s impossible to contemplate a national net shutdown (and even the regional shutdowns such as the one in Xinjiang province during the Uighur unrest are notable by dint of being such a rarity).

The world needs more people seriously engaged with improving the lot of activists who make use of the net (that is, all activists). We need to have a serious debate about tactics such as the Distributed Denial of Service – flooding computers with bogus requests so that they can’t be reached – which some have compared to sit-in demonstrations. As someone who’s been arrested at sit-ins, I think this is just wrong. A sit-in derives its efficacy not from merely blocking the door to some objectionable place, but from the public willingness to stand before your neighbours and risk arrest and bodily harm in service of a moral cause, which is itself a force for moral suasion. As a tactic, DDoS has more in common with filling a business’s locks with super glue, or cutting its phone lines – risky, to be sure, but closer to vandalism and thus less apt to convince your neighbours to look sympathetically on your cause.

We need to fix the mobile internet, which – thanks to closed networks and devices – is more amenable to surveillance and control than the fixed-line variety. We need to fight the move – driven by entertainment companies and IT giants such as Apple and Microsoft – to design devices to work covertly and without the consent of their owners in the name of protecting copyright.

We need to pay heed to Jonathan Zittrain (another scholar whom Morozov both dismisses and then later inadvertently agrees vigorously with), whose The Future of the Internet warns that the increase in crime, sleaze and fraud on the net will cause user fatigue and make people more willing to accept locked-down devices and networks that can be used to control, as well as protect them.

We need all of this, and a serious critique and roadmap for the future of net activism, because the world’s oppressive regimes (including supposedly free governments in the west) are availing themselves of new technology at speed, and the only way for activism to be effective in that environment is to use the same tools.”
(http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2011/jan/25/net-activism-delusion)


==Zeynep Tufekci==


“But I disagree that the reason online protests do not work is that they are
online, or they are easy. The reality, at this juncture in history, is that
nothing really works. The Internet is not the problem; global citizen
disempowerement is. It’s not the technology that is failing politics but it is
our politics that has failed. …

Political activism is not failing because people are too busy watching cat
videos online, but because of a fundamental collapse of citizen leverage on
institutions of power like governments and corporations. I find it ironic that,
after correctly warning about the dangers of an Internet-centric worldview in
which everything is perceived through the prism of the Net, Morozov himself is
caught in a net-centric analysis of political activism’s decline.
If surveillance, censorship and propaganda are the three pillars of
authoritarianism, information, organization and leverage are the counter-pillars
of citizen power. And the Internet provides the best and most appropriate
infrastructure for strengthening all three. Morozov correctly claims that it
does not do so in an unmitigated manner but unmitigated is not the same as
ineffective or irrelevant.

In this regard, the Internet is the greatest antidote to anti-communitarian
forces. Frankly, I find even the most mindless lolcat sites on the Internet to
be an improvement over canned-laughter-filled sitcoms. The point of lolcats is
not the lolcats themselves, but to share them with friends, comment on them,
make more of them, and enter the community via the joke. It’s the community, not
the cat, that matters. (If you doubt this, try selling a book of lolcats and see
how well it does.) I write this review in the aftermath of an atrocity; the
assassination attempt in Arizona on a Congresswoman that claimed the lives of
six others including a child. Every Internet community I am part of is roiled
and there is widespread discussion on most of them about the event. Fifteen
years ago, we’d all be watching TV, not communicating with each other.” 
(http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/01/delusions-aside-the-nets-potential-is-real/69370/)



==Dave Parry==

"In my reading Morozov has three separate but intertwined theses in The Net Delusion, and it is important to distinguish between them in order to both engage the book on its own terms and understand its limits/shortcomings. And more importantly I want to make the claim that it is only by understanding how each thesis builds on the prior that one is able to understand both the ground Morozov is trying to stake out, and why his position does or does not resonate with other readers."

More at http://profoundheterogeneity.com/2011/01/deluded-that-the-internet-transforms-power-structures/

David Parry:

First Thesis: "The first, and in my estimation the most important, and certainly most effective of theses in The Net Delusion centers not around the internet itself, but the way that we talk about the internet. This is a crucial point to understand, at least on this level, Morozov is not talking about the internet, but talking about how we talk about the internet. Our discursive production about the internet and democracy is far more important here than many of the actual practices (that comes later). Morozov’s claim here, and I think he is pretty persuasive on this point, is that cultures, especially Western liberal democratic cultures, essentialize technology, treating it as the primary (sometimes only) ingredient necessary for success. Large sections of the book are dedicated to examining and exposing the history of this techno-determinism."


Second Thesis: "The second thesis, is not as strong as the first, at least in my estimation. That is while at least mostly true, I think it isn’t as nuanced as it needs to be, or as persuasive as Morozov perhaps wants it. But a good portion of the book is dedicated to demonstrating that the internet can just as easily be used by authoritarian regimes to oppress, surveil, and deprive its citizens of liberties as it can be used for social justice or advancing democratic aims.

Morozov tries to persuade his readers that this is true through a long series of examples. And it isn’t that these examples aren’t true, or shouldn’t give us reason for pause, but rather that I felt at times that Morozov was pilling on, example after example, giving his readers 20, 30, 40 (I lost count) ways in which authoritarian regimes can use these technologies for nefarious purposes."


Third Thesis: "Morozov in my estimation seems to be arguing that there is nothing particularly new about the internet. That is that we can understand this moment as homogenous to the prior, the net is just the next step in technological change (I don’t think he would call it evolution), and nothing about this technology fundamentally re-orders power or the way that power operates, or if it does it only enhances these power dynamics (often for the worse not the better) not revolutionizes them. To be sure this is a subtle thesis throughout the book, not one as directly argued as the other two. But to see how this operates I point, not to the book itself but to a column Morozov did for The Browser outlining what he thought were the five most important books on the philosophy and history of technology. Now I am not going to break down the list, you can go read it yourself, but it is pretty clear to me that given the books he selects, and his take on them he is 1. firmly against techno-determinism. 2. Against any philosophical or historical take which argues technology is revolutionary, instead treating technology as transformative but transformative with a continuous narrative, influenced by other stronger forces such as politics and economics."

=Discussion=

==Against Cyber-Utopianism==

Adam Thierer:

"In the opening pages of The Net Delusion, Morozov explains it is his mission is to beat back “cyber-utopianism,” at least as it relates to international affairs and diplomacy.  He defines cyber-utopianism as “a naïve belief in the emancipatory nature of online communication that rests on a stubborn refusal to acknowledge its downside.” He blames “the starry-eyed digital fervor of the 1990s” and the “former hippies… [now] ensconced in some of the more prestigious universities in the world” for giving rise to the notion that “the Internet could deliver what the 1960’s couldn’t” in terms of building a better, more peaceful world. (p. xiii)  He also aims to counter what he has elsewhere referred to as “the public’s penchant for fetishizing the engineer as the ultimate savior.”

Much of the scorn he heaps on the cyber-utopians is well-deserved, although I think there are far fewer of them around than Morozov imagines. Nonetheless, there certainly is a bit too much Pollyanna-ish hyper-optimism at play in debates about the Net’s role in advancing liberation of those peoples who are being subjected to tyrannical rule across the planet.

But Morozov simply doesn’t know when to quit. His relentless and highly repetitive critique goes overboard when it veers into all-too familiar territory already plowed by other Internet pessimists and cultural critics beginning back in the 1980s with the late social critic Neil Postman.  Indeed, what Postman’s Amusing Ourselves to Death (1985) and Technopoly (1992) were to early discussions about information technology and culture, Morozov’s Net Delusion is to modern debates about the Net and political change.

Like Postman, Morozov wants us to believe that increased access to entertainment and communications technologies breeds societal indifference, and that increased consumerism breeds civic lethargy.  Morozov paints a portrait of world affairs in which the Internet inevitably pushes us into something akin to Idiocracy; it’s a world in which all these digital gadgets, communications devices, and entertainment options turn us all into unthinking, anti-intellectual, apolitical pawns who can be easily manipulated by the State.  “Where new media and the Internet truly excel is in suppressing boredom.  Previously, boredom was one of the few truly effective ways to politicize the population denied release values for channeling their discontent, but this is no longer the case.” (p. 80)  He continues on: “Those of us rooting for the further spread of democracy around the globe must stop dreaming and face reality: The Internet has provided so many cheap and easily available entertainment fixes to those living under authoritarianism that is has become considerably harder to get people to care about politics at all.” (p. 81)

Morozov thinks that the “ridiculously easy group-forming” that his leading nemesis Clay Shirky described in his recent book Cognitive Surplus is, in reality, leading largely to cognitive crap, at least as it pertains to civic action and political activism.  Indeed, at one point in Chapter 7 (the creatively-titled, “Why Kierkegaard Hates Slacktivism”), Morozov speaks of the development of what we might think of as a “tragedy of the civic commons” (my term, not his).  


He argues that:

- ''When everyone in the group performs the same mundane tasks, it’s impossible to evaluate individual contributions, and people inevitably begin slacking off… Increasing the number of participants diminishes the relative social pressure on each and often results in inferior outputs''. (p 193)

It’s an interesting theory, as far as it goes, but Morozov doesn’t muster much more than a handful of anecdotes in support of it.  He notes, for example, that even back in the Berlin Wall era, young East German students were more likely to know intimate facts about popular American dramas like Dallas and Dynasty than current political affairs.  And, echoing the recent laments of Andrew Keen (Cult of the Amateur) and Lee Siegel (Against the Machine), Morozov worries about the “narcissism” and “attention seeking” of social networking denizens. “There’s nothing wrong with the self-promotion per se, but it seems quite unlikely that such narcissistic campaigners would be able to develop true feelings of empathy or be prepared to make sacrifices that political life, especially political life in authoritarian states, requires.” (p 187)

But this ignores many legitimate forms of social organization / protesting that have been facilitated by the Net and digital technologies.  Despite what Morozov suggests, we haven’t all become lethargic, asocial, apolitical cave-dwelling Baywatch­ rerun-watching junkies.  If all Netizens are just hooked on a cyber-sedative that saps their civic virtue, what are we to make of the millions of progressives who so successfully used the Net and digital technologies to organize and elect President Obama? (Believe me, I wish they wouldn’t have been so civic-minded and rushed to the polls in record numbers to elect that guy!)

Similarly, Morozov belittles some of the online communities that have formed to support various charitable or civic causes by arguing that if you divide the number of members of such online groups by the aggregate amount of money they raise, it comes out to mere pennies on the dollar per community member. But so what?  Do we know if those communities or causes would have come together at all or spent more money without digital communications and networking technologies?  It is certainly true that merely setting up a new cyber-cause and giving a few bucks to it isn’t the same as going on a mission to Africa to build homes and water systems, but does Morozov really want to us to believe that more of that sort of thing would happen in the absence of the Net and digital technology?  Were African relief charities better off in the days when Sally Struthers lectured us on late-night TV about giving more to such causes?  I find that very hard to believe.

Regardless, here’s where we can all agree: Technology is just one of many tools that can be harnessed to keep the power of the State in check or advance important civic / charitable causes.  I am entirely sympathetic to Morozov’s argument that other factors and forces play an even more important role in promoting democracy and, in particular, ending tyranny. (Personally, I think we’d do more to assist repressed dissidents by sneaking them copies of Guns and Ammo or Soldier of Fortune instead of Wired, but I digress.)  “The calculus of measuring quality of life demands a few more steps than simply adding all the efficiencies and subtracting all the inefficiencies,” he says, “it also requires a good understanding of what particular values are important in a particular context of human relations.” (p. 198) Who could disagree with such a statement?

Yet, in his zeal to counter those who have placed too great an emphasis on the role of information technology, Morozov himself has gone too far in the opposite extreme in The Net Delusion by suggesting that technology’s role in transforming States or politics is either mostly irrelevant or even, at times, counter-productive.  I’m just not buying it."
(http://techliberation.com/2011/01/04/book-review-the-net-delusion-by-evgeny-morozov/)


==On the Voluntary Surrender of Privacy via Social Sharing Technologies==

Morozov is on somewhat stronger footing in highlighting the paradoxical danger of voluntary information exposure in an age of ubiquitous digital connectivity and communications. “While it is tempting to encourage everyone to flock to social networking sites and blogs to avoid the control of the censors, it would play into the hands of those in charge of surveillance and propaganda. The more connection between activists it can identify, the better for government,” he notes. (p. 83) “[I]n too many contexts,” he argues, “it empowers the strong and disempowers the weak.” (p. xvii)  In another creatively-titled chapter, “Why the KGB Wants You to Join Facebook,” he goes so far as to argue that “membership in a [social] network is a double-edged sword: Its usefulness can easily backfire if some segment gets compromised and their relationships with other members become common knowledge.  Before the advent of social media, it took a lot of effort for repressive governments to learn about the people dissidents are associated with,” but “today, they simply need to get on Facebook,” Morozov argues. (p. 156)

This is a fair point, and one that is much harder to know how to deal with.  But let’s say it is true that social networking tools and other digital technologies which allow greater online personalization and socialization also potentially facilitate increased government surveillance by the State.  What are we to do about that?  Again, we’re right back at the specter of information / technology repression and, once again, Morozov largely dodges that discussion. (Instead of direct regulation, I would think the better answer would be to educate users about sensible use of those sites or technologies and then work to empower them with more tools to better manage their privacy and/or evade surveillance).

Moreover, Morozov once again overplays his hand here.  He spends so much time arguing that digital technologies have made our lives more transparent to the State that he underplays the myriad ways it has simultaneously made government activities more visible than at any point in history.  It is extraordinarily difficult for even the most repressive of States today to completely bottle up all its secrets and actions.  Morozov says modern China, Putin’s Russia and Hugo Chavez are embracing new digital technologies in an attempt to better control them or learn how to use them to better spy on their citizens, and he implies that this is just another way they will dupe the citizenry and seduce them into a slumber so they will avert their eyes and ears to the truth of the repression that surrounds them.  Sorry, but once again, I’m not buying it.  Repressive regimes really do face a tension when they embrace modern information and communications technologies. It does force them to make certain trade-offs as they look to modernize their economies.  Morozov thinks this so-called “dictator’s dilemma” hypothesis is largely bunk, but he seems to expect this process to unfold overnight once new technology moves in.  In reality, these things take more time. The general progression of things in most states is toward somewhat greater transparency and openness, even if it does not magically spawn regime change overnight.

Importantly, he never really offers a credible cost-benefit analysis of the life of citizens in those regimes today relative to the past. Are we seriously supposed to believe that information-deprived Chinese peasants of the Mao era were somehow better positioned to influence positive regime change than the more empowered modern Chinese citizen?  It’s a tough sell.  Are their downsides associated with those new technologies (especially the potential for citizen surveillance)?  Yes, of course.  But let’s not use that as an excuse for marching backwards, technologically-speaking."
(http://techliberation.com/2011/01/04/book-review-the-net-delusion-by-evgeny-morozov/)




[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Politics]]