'''[[Networked Publics]] Conference and Media Festival April 28 + 29'''
Annenberg Center for Communication
University of Southern California
April 28-29, 2006

URL = http://netpublics.annenberg.edu/about_netpublics/networked_publics_conference_and_festival

=Conference Information=

This two-day event is bringing together new media scholars and practitioners to exhibit and discuss the roles of audiences, activists, and producers in maturing networked media ecologies. The event is organized by the Networked Publics fellowship program (netpublics.annenberg.edu) at the University of Southern California’s Annenberg Center for Communication.

The conference includes a media festival and an academic program.

• “Do-It-Yourself: Emergent Networked Culture,‿ is an experimental news and entertainment media festival featuring new kinds of viral, remixed, and amateur media works enabled by current networked ecologies. Categories of curated work include: political remix videos, the digital handmade, anime music videos, machinima, alternative news, network hacks and hacked networks.

• The academic program is dedicated to three topics: Politics, Infrastructure and Place. For each of these topics, netpublics fellows will convene a session to interrogate current issues and controversies related to emergent networked ecologies.


netPublics explores the roles of audiences, activists, citizens, and producers in maturing networked media ecologies. These changes include but are not limited to the changing relationship between production and consumption, viral and peer-to-peer distribution, and networked lateral political mobilization. Although the Internet is clearly a central player, we consider media forms both old and new as part of a much broader media ecology undergoing profound social, technical, and cultural transformation. 



=Speakers=

[[Networked Publics]] Highlights:

Marc Tuters : Locative Space, Situated and Interconnected

Mark Kann : Digital Democracy in the Internet Age

Adrienne Russell : Truth and the New News

Chris Anderson : The Long Tail

Mike Liebhold : The Geospatial Web and Mobile Service Ecologies

Mimi Ito : Intimate Visual Co-Presence and Pervasive Image Capture and Sharing

Anne Friedberg : Place, Ubiquity and the Things

Marc Tuters and Kazys Varnelis : Beyond Locative Media

Geoff Bowker Lecture : What's Memory Got to do With It?

Mimi Ito : Power to the Cyborgs


[[Category:Conferences]]