

=History=

Jose Ramos et al.:

"The emergence of the network form in futures studies predates the birth
of the internet, when in Oslo in 1967 the seeds of the World Futures Studies
Federation (WFSF) were sown in a gathering called Mankind 2000. According
to van Steenbergen, the Oslo meeting was a reaction to the close ties US futures
studies had with the military-industrial-complex. Thus, the WFSF emerged as the
network association which would hold an alternative position with respect to global
political-economy. And while allied and supported by UNESCO it would have
“features of an international social movement more than of a strictly professional
and academic organization” (van Steenbergen, 2005, p356). Ronfeldt (1996,
p.15), drawing on Gerlach and Hine (1970) argued the modern emergence of the
network form emerged with new social movements or “segmented, polycentric,
ideologically integrated networks” (SPINs). Parallel to this was the founding of the
World Future Society (WSF) in 1966, which brought together diverse professionals
from around the world in conference meetings. Like WFSF, the WFS also operated
like a platform for networking and exchange, rather than a strictly professional
and academic organization. Both organizations embodied elements of cultural
‘horizontalism’ (Tormey, 2005), a feature that paralleled the horizontal-izing nature
of the internet.

The Global Business Network, founded in 1987, drew a network of colleagues
and associates together, who acted as a think tank to consult for clients. The shift
from think tank as institution (e.g. RAND) to network would later be (somewhat
ironically) paralleled by Arguilla and Ronfeldt’s research from within RAND on
the emergence of the network form (Ronfeldt, 1996). In Australia, the Futures
Foundation, founded in 1996, played a similar role, linking government and
corporate clients with a network of futurists.

Early practices in crowd-sourcing foresight can be seen in two prefigurative
examples from the 1990s. The Millennium Project (MP) was founded in 1996 as
a global distributed think tank that would grow to 40 nodes and more than 5,000
contributors. From these contributions the MP then publishes its State of the Future
report. The TechCast Project, founded in 1998 by Georgetown professor William
Halal, created a virtual think tank which brings together hundreds of experts from
around the world in a network process of forecasting, which is then used to advise
government, business and civil spheres. Both these early examples showed an
emergent capacity for engaging a global civil sphere in collaboration on future
oriented collective goods (Ronfeldt, 1996, p.17).

Shaping Tomorrow first launched in 2003 and went on to become one of the
first web 2.0 participatory foresight platforms in 2005 when the site was changed
to allow anyone to add their own scanning hits. Shaping Tomorrow was set up with
the ambitious target of helping “every organization in the world to use foresight
in their strategic decision making.” To support this aim, Shaping Tomorrow offers
a variety of pay-for services that augment the core website including tailored
consulting and stand-alone versions of the site. The core site is publicly available
and free to join, additional materials and the ability to keep some material private
depends on subscriptions and level of service. Parallel to this, Wikistrat claims to
have created the world’s first Massively Multiplayer Online Consultancy (MMOC),
bringing subject experts together using an interactive crowd-sourcing methodology
for strategic forecasting.2 Other commercially sponsored sites such Vodafone’s
FutureAgenda developed an interactive site to promote discussion on megatrends.

Here, it is important to note that, while the network form is ascendant, this does
not preclude hybrid forms. Indeed hybrid forms may be a key feature of networked
foresight initiatives in a world dominated by Institutional and Market actors.

Further to this hybridity, government institutions are adopting the network
form as a mode of strategic foresight intelligence. Finpro, a core member of the
Finish Foresight Network (KEV), is a consulting service which supports the
internationalisation of Finish companies, and employs a crowd-sourcing method
using its staff members as scouts. Employees are incentivised to capture a number
of emerging issues each month. Employees load these emerging issues on to a
website developed by Data Rangers, a data mining software company. The target is
set low enough to not create a significant overhead for staff. These issues are then
analyzed by the core Foresight team. The results are reported as trends or scenarios
which highlight weak signals. These are used by Finnish businesses in their strategy
and innovation processes (Hiltunen, 2011). Likewise, the UK’s Sigma Scan 2.0 is a
repository of futures research and interview material intended to provoke and disturb
future oriented assumptions.4 The European Commission created the iKnow futures
project, which like Shaping Tomorrow allows for crowd-sourced and collaborative
environmental scanning, as well as large-scale analysis of research databases,
applied to foresight and innovation. Prediction Markets are mostly concerned with
short term predictions of discrete events, and thus should not be considered true
futures research. Nevertheless, they are potentially significant because they are
very new and still being refined, with funding connected to the US intelligence
community through the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA),
which funds two projects, Forecasting World Events and Forecasting Ace.5
The Institute For The Future (IFTF) is perhaps the best example of hybridity,
straddling Institutional, Market and Network forms. IFTF, founded in 1968,
was a spin-off of the RAND corporation, with an early focus on academic and
government advising, and later corporate services. Importantly, it played a critical
role in researching the impacts of the Advanced Research Projects Agency
Network (ARPANET), which would later become the internet, and the impacts of
collaborative (later ‘web 2.0’) software. IFTF later developed the Foresight Engine,
one of the most successful innovations in crowd-sourcing foresight. Recent clients
include the Myelin Repair Foundation, the US Navy and Magnetic South (on behalf
of the City of Christchurch, New Zealand), and the Rockefeller Foundation. In each
case a short introduction video is made available to the (as much as 10,000) players
to set the scenario context. They then play cards such as ‘Positive Imagination’ and
add Twitter length text explaining their forecast. Players can add a new card of their
own or add to another’s card. This adding to or challenging another’s card allows
a conversation style development of the original idea. Points and awards are given
to the players with the best ideas (as judged by the IFTF and client analysts) adding
to the overall ‘gamified’ nature this process. Catalysts for Change, sponsored by
the Rockefeller Foundation, is the most recent iteration (2012) aimed at addressing
global poverty and is “based on the premise that collaboration on a global scale can
yield unique insights into ways to create a more prosperous, equitable future.”

These last few examples are more indicative of a more mature network form:
The Open Foresight Project (OFP), led by Venessa Miemis, has run ‘The Future
of Money’ and ‘The Future of Facebook’ series. The first was initially developed
for SIBOS (a finance conference) in 2010 which included a presentation and video.

This was followed up by the Future of Facebook. Similar to the Future of Money,
most of the project was crowd-funded, and made use of existing network resources
such as: YouTube, Twitter, Quora and Facebook. Fifteen questions based on the
STEEP model were developed and used in video interviews with thirty experts;
these questions were also put on the Quora site to enable public participation. The
best responses were incorporated into the video series along with the expert analysis.
The videos are in the process of being loaded onto the Future of Facebook website
at the time of writing.

Evolver is a global, progressive social network which emerged from the
online magazine site "Reality Sandwich" in 2009. Initially conceived as an online
networking site for the reader community of Reality Sandwich, the management
team - apparently noting the emergence of localised groups in the network -
launched "Evolver Spores" in late 2009. Spores are local, in-person meetings of
Evolver members. A Spore meeting is organised around a theme (such as "Water",
"Noosphere", "Unified Field Theory") and organisers bring together local speakers
on the topic and relevant movies or other media with interested audiences. These
themes are globally coordinated by the management team in New York City using
a deliberative process in consultation with local leaders through the medium of a
discussion list. Spores happen all over the world on roughly the same theme (local
leaders have latitude to adapt the theme) at roughly the same time (within the same
week or so).

Recently, Noah Raford (2011) developed “large-scale participatory futures
systems” for web 2.0 style scenario generation, building a variety of systems for
a number of clients, the International Futures Forum (IFF), Cognitive Edge and
Superflux.

Not all of these are examples of AD per se, but they do provide a rich picture
of the emergence of the network form in the futures studies field. These examples
provide a starting point to consider the network form’s implications for AD."
(http://p2pfoundation.net/Peer-Producing_Alternative_Futures)


[[Category:Network Theory]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:P2P Futures]]