= a proposal by Tiberius Brastaviceanu


=Discussion=

Tiberius Brastaviceanu:

"What I see here, in terms of tools, is '''the creation of an NIP (Network Intangible Planning) as a parallel system to an NRP (Network Resource Planning), or an extension of the NRP in the intangible dimension.''' Thus, the layer of intangibles can be better coupled to the layer of tangibles, which means coupling happiness to the real economy, connecting processes that make people happy to processes that make people innovative and productive.

Technically, I see a path towards that. First inspiration is '''Verna Allee's treatment of intangibles for corporations''' (the real economy), through the concept of value networks. Note that Verna wrote her papers long time ago, some of the may be outdated, but the lesson here is that the wealth of corporation is largely driven by intangibles, which the management  layer doesn't even know they exist and don't monitor. These intangibles are not affected by organizational boundaries, they flow through human to human relations from one firm to another, which is what she calls value network. Verna calls on CEOs and managers to become conscious about intangibles and their flows, and put in place policy that captures and converts these intangibles into tangibles. Now that's a BIG lesson. 

Another piece to this puzzle is Arthur Brock from [[Holochain]] with his [[Metacurrency Project]]. Using his concept of current-see, Art describes symbolic systems that have the ability to influence and even organize or structure flows in society, and these current-sees can be applied to tangibles as well as to intangibles.
Therefore, one can apply Art's concept of current-see to Verna's flows of intangibles, to create symbolic systems that shape the flows of intangibles.

One can use Blockchain and use tokens of non-monetary nature to do just that, experiment and see what happens. This is precisely what wee do in [[Sensorica]] with OVN, using various [[Benefit Redistribution Algorithm]]s to incentivize collaboration. No one knows what scheme works best in context, one needs to try and good patterns will emerge."

(via email, December 2024)

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]