'''* Article: The Network of Global Corporate Control by Vitali et. al.'''

URL = http://arxiv.org/pdf/1107.5728v1


=Abstract=

"The structure of the control network of transnational corporations aﬀects global market competition and ﬁnancial stability. So far, only small national samples were studied and there was
no appropriate methodology to assess control globally. We present the ﬁrst investigation of the
architecture of the international ownership network, along with the computation of the control
held by each global player. We ﬁnd that transnational corporations form a giant bow-tie structure and that a large portion of control ﬂows to a small tightly-knit core of ﬁnancial institutions.

This core can be seen as an economic “super-entity” that raises new important issues both for
researchers and policy makers."


=Summary=

"This paper finds, through extensive network analysis, that a small group of tightly intertwined financial institutions control the bow of the global financial system.  It is in effect, the world's first super-organism.  147 trans-national companies that the global core that is owned by itself (3/4 of the ownership of firm's in this organism are owned by firms in the organism).  This organism is beyond governments.  If it is self serving (and this shouldn't be too hard to assume), it is the equivalent of a biological cancer that has metastasized."
(http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2011/08/journal-global-financial-cancer.htm)


=Excerpt=

excerpt of pdf 

"… nearly 4/10 of the control over the economic value of transnational corporations in the world is held, via a complicated web of ownership relations, by a group of 147 transnational corporations in the core, which has almost full control over itself. The top holders within the core can thus be thought of as an economic “super-entity” in the global network of corporations. A relevant additional fact at this point is that 3/4 of the core are financial intermediaries."
(http://www.pauljorion.com/blog_en/?p=406)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]