
'''Report: Network Citizens: Power And Responsibility At Work. Demos, 2008'''

URL = http://www.demos.co.uk/publications//networkcitizens

Full Text Available At http://www.demos.co.uk/files/Network%20citizens%20-%20web.pdf


=Descriptions=

"Humans are social animals, spinning intricate webs of relationships with friends, colleagues, neighbours and enemies. These networks have always been with us, but the advance of networking technologies, changes to our interconnected economy and an altering job market have super-charged the power of networking, catapulting it to the heart of organisational thinking.

Social networks are providing tremendous opportunities for people to collaborate. But until now, thinking has focused only on how organisations can respond to and capitalise on networks. This report argues that we have to look equally at how networks use organisations for their own ends. That is where the new contours of inequality and power lie that will shape the network world. We have to face networks’ dark side, as well as their very real potential.

'''Bringing together in-depth case studies of six organisations, Network Citizens maps the key fault-lines that people and organisations will have to address in the future world of work.''' Not doing so puts at risk the very qualities we had invested in them: openness, innovation, collaboration and meritocracy. Since networks can act for good or ill, incubating the talents and ideas of the many, or promoting the interests of the few, the need for a new set of responsibilities is growing. If we are network members, we must be network citizens, too."
(http://onlinesocialnetworks.blogspot.com/2008/10/network-citizens-power-and.html)



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Business]]

[