* See also: Click 'Discussion' for the material by Bob Haugen on '''NRP-CAS''' for a specific case of NRP tooling. '''Do not redirect!'''


=Context=

Tiberius Brastaviceanu:

"The world of makerspaces and material peer production is very different from the current web3 world, focused on digital infrastructure and digital services. Material peer production is not only different, but also much more complex. There is no simple solution to bring to this world... If we want these existing makerspaces to embrace p2p infrastructure and be able to federate globally into a new physical infrastructure for the new material economy we need to provide them with a critical mass of functionality. This is nothing short of an NRP (an ERP for networks). In other words, provide them the tools to manage their own resources (digital and physical), their processes, to do their accounting, i.e. to manage their business. If these tools are properly designed, they could allow, by default, these spaces to interlink at the economic level, i.e. to provide each other's access to resources, to processes, allow agents to move from one makerspace to another and transport their credentials / reputation, etc. '''That's why an ERP is not sufficient, because these tools are built for independent enterprises and they only provide an inside-out view of economic processes. An NRP provides a network view and thus it allows autonomous makerspaces to easily interoperate.'''"

(email, December 24, 2023)


=Description=

'''1. Bob Haugen:'''

"NRP means Network Resource Planning. Its purpose is to coordinate
economic networks.

A [[Supply Chain]] is an [[Economic Network]], with a head, which is the agent
producing end products for consumers, and a tail, which is a tree of
agents that supply them with components. A value system also includes
the demand chain, which includes all of the agents who distribute the
products from the head of the supply chain to consumers. It's shaped,
as you may imagine, like an X.

A [[Business Ecosystem]] is more complex, shaped like a directed graph. See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_ecosystem

“An economic community supported by a foundation of interacting
organizations and individuals—the organisms of the business world. The
economic community produces goods and services of value to customers,
who are themselves members of the ecosystem. The member organisms also
include suppliers, lead producers, competitors, and other
stakeholders. Over time, they coevolve their capabilities and roles,
and tend to align themselves with the directions set by one or more
central companies. Those companies holding leadership roles may change
over time, but the function of ecosystem leader is valued by the
community because it enables members to move toward shared visions to
align their investments, and to find mutually supportive roles.”

Linux, Raspberry PI, and Android are examples of business ecosystems.
Enspiral, Sensorica, and Fair Coop are examples of potential 
business-like ecosystems for a better economic system.

If Enspiral, Sensorica, and Fair Coop converged with the Mutual Aid
Networks, the P2P Foundation, a permaculture community, and a
small-to-medium-sized city or two, they could become an economic
network.

Capitalism is an economic network.

NRP in its present state is only able to coordinate small economic
networks. If the current convergence and refactoring project succeeds,
it will be able to coordinate larger ones. If the Value Flows project
succeeds, it will be able to coordinate economic networks of any size.

The next economic system will be an economic network."

(email, March 2017)


'''2. Apostolis Xekoukoulotakis:'''

"New software is emerging designed for OVNs producing material goods. One such application is Network Resource Planning (NRP), which is ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) for networks.  NRP is being developed by a collaboration between Sensorica (described above), and some open-source software developers who have experience in “lean manufacturing” supply chains (http://mikorizal.org).

This is operational software, for running an open value network as an economic organization. It logs contributions, coordinates work, and distributes income to contributors. It also does multi-party accounting: that is, accounting reports for each participating person and organization, covering their activities within the network. It does not do ecommerce or social networking."

(http://commonsfest.info/en/2015/anichta-diktia-axias/)

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]