

=Discussion=

'''Dan Gallin:'''

I believe you are also right in saying that there is a critical mass
out there for a militant union and left-socialist movement, very
inchoate at this time, but when I mentioned critical mass in my last
e-mail I meant something else, I meant the critical mass it would take
to create the spark. Many of us come from a tradition which encourages
one to think that one can provide the spark all by oneself, if one has
the correct policy (which is the brownish residue left at the bottom
of the pan after many splits have boiled the water away) and if one
works hard enough. After an at this point long militant life I have
finally come to the conclusion that this is nonsense.

The spark we want cannot come from any one of us, it can only come
from a combination/interaction of many of us.(In other words, forget
the vanguard party, the network is the vanguard).


If I am right, what we have to do is to build the network. This can
happen in different ways: adding existing networks, developing new
ones, by any one of us or by several of us acting in concert, etc.

...


I think I should explain a little more about what I meant with "the
network is the vanguard". In the first place: I now reject the
Leninist concept of the vanguard party, which has been interpreted in
a terrorist way by the Stalinist Comintern and its successors
(including Maoism, etc.), and which has crippled the Trotskyist
movement through endless splits. I entirely subscribe to Rosa
Luxemburg's concept that "the masses are in reality their own
leaders". We need to advance on a broad front, with an inclusive
movement, and with a program of radical democracy. That is what I mean
by "network". The revolutionary potential today is actually more
widespread and potent than it has ever been, but spread out and
fragmented, with a diversity that makes it impossible to assemble it
all under one exclusive "brand". It is not, however, (I believe)
impossible to get it to move in the same direction: there are not many
directions to chose from."
(http://www.unionbook.org/profiles/blogs/dan-gallin-on-the-future-of-labour-internationalism-the-vanguard)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Politics]]