

'''= helps workers, unions, labour networks, labour advocacy NGOs and campaigns to understand the dynamic developments in the fields of P2P networking and the Web 2.0 and adopt relevant innovations into their daily reality'''


URL = http://networg.wordpress.com/

=Description=

Orsan Senalp:

"NetwOrg is a not-for-profit and for-benefit initiative. It helps workers, unions, labour networks, labour advocacy NGOs and campaigns to understand the dynamic developments in the fields of P2P networking and the Web 2.0 and adopt relevant innovations into their daily reality. In order to be able to translate such dynamic phenomenon into the context of its partners NetwOrg prepares and delivers:on-line and face to face trainings, exchange workshops, strategy meetings, and policy/project advice. While learning form them, we search and find together the best ways of benefiting from the transforming power of the ground-breaking and rapid technological developments. Such trans-level empowerment would allow individuals, their networks and collective organizations. So that they could reach out the segments of society that are more difficult to reach by using traditional methods; to inform or ‘organize’ or, ‘network’ with them. Tools and capabilities we teach enable our clients to engage with existing member base or peers in their networks more actıvely, activate them; or realize stronger relationship, participation and organizational democracy. So they can collaborate with maximum variety and amount of actors who share or support their objectives.

...

Since the early 2000s, accelerating developments in the field of information and telecommunication technologies,  has brought about new  and massive organizational capacities for networks. While organizations have gained powerful networking capacities. In this context new organizing is becoming networganizing, while networg is emerging to replace both organization and network. So networganizing is about how this emerging form  functions. It  differs both from organizing and networking since it refers to a higher level synthesis, which goes beyond the previous syntheses between the network and the organization. Namely, the networked organisation and the organised network . Networg is about reaching out like-minded key peers, linking them and their network bases into each other strategically. While shaping a dynamic social space and agenda in a collaborative way a networg could ideally canalize the emerging social and communication power to the dynamically identified targets. Therefore it potentially would be able to create a maximum amount of unpredictable impact. Combining and embedding peer to peer relational dynamics and technologies into its internal processes as well as its external relationships, networg would eventually hyper-empowers all the nodes involved."
(http://networg.wordpress.com/about/)

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Media]]