'''* Draft PhD: The Network State in the Blockchain Ecosystem: Potential Impact on Global Governance. Francisco Tuñez. Humboldt University / USAL, 2026, Bi-national Doctoral Programme in Global Studies.'''

URL = 

''"Conceptual Definition and Immersive Research on Network States within the Blockchain Ecosystem and their Potential Impact on Decentralized Global Governance."''


=Contextual Quote=

"By integrating blockchain-based governance tools (DAOs, smart contracts, decentralized finance) and
fostering transnational digital communities, Network States seek to redefine citizenship, economic
participation, and governance in the digital age."

- Francisco Tunez



=Description=

Francisco Tunez:


'''1.'''

"This study is structured around three fundamental research questions:

1. What are Network States, and how do they function within the blockchain ecosystem?

2. To what extent can Network States serve as a governance alternative to centralized
institutions?

3. What insights can be drawn from the most active Network States regarding their governance,
sustainability, and real-world applications?"


'''2.'''

"The contemporary global order is facing an unprecedented polycrisis, characterized by overlapping
and interconnected crises in economics, governance, ecology, and technology (Biermann, 2020).
Traditional governance structures—whether state-centric, corporate-driven, or international
institutions—have increasingly demonstrated their inability to address complex systemic risks in an
efficient and adaptive manner (Castells, 1996; Keohane & Nye, 2000). This reality has led to an
emerging interest in decentralized governance models, particularly those enabled by blockchain
technology.

However, it is critical to avoid a technological determinism approach, where blockchain is seen as an
automatic solution to governance failures. Instead, the aim is to evaluate whether and under what
conditions decentralized governance models can effectively address the core challenges of the
polycrisis while ensuring legitimacy, scalability, and inclusivity (De Filippi & Wright, 2018).


CENTRAL HYPOTHESIS

The dissertation is grounded in the following hypothesis: "In the context of an accelerating polycrisis
and the incapacity of centralized global governance institutions, Network States within the blockchain
ecosystem represent an innovative governance experiment that may offer scalable, decentralized
solutions to global systemic risks."

The study contends that Network States—enabled by blockchain technology and operating beyond
the constraints of traditional nation-states—could introduce new models of sovereignty,
coordination, and collective decision-making, reshaping how governance is conceptualized and
implemented at a planetary scale.


BLOCKCHAIN AS AN ENABLER: FROM TECHNOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE TO GOVERNANCE INNOVATION

Blockchain, originally conceived as a distributed ledger technology for financial applications such as
Bitcoin (Nakamoto, 2008), has evolved into a broader governance innovation tool (Srinivasan, 2022).
The ability to coordinate actors without central intermediaries, create transparent rule enforcement
through smart contracts, and enable financial and governance mechanisms without centralized trust
has positioned blockchain as a potential alternative to traditional institutions.
However, this research does not assume a wholesale replacement of existing governance structures
but rather a hybrid evolution where decentralized and centralized models coexist and interact
dynamically.


Challenges in Governance Integration:

● Coordination without central authority: How can decentralized systems ensure collective
decision-making efficiency without governance bottlenecks?
● Scalability vs. decentralization trade-off: Can blockchain-based governance mechanisms
scale without concentrating power in a few actors?
● Incentives and legitimacy: Do decentralized systems provide incentives for broad
participation, or do they risk replicating existing power structures?"


=Contents=

Projected chapters:

Chapter 1: Introduction 

Chapter 2: Polycrisis and Global Governance (Biermann, Wallerstein, Schwab) 

Chapter 3: Technology and Blockchain (Castells, Bauwens, Antonopoulos) 

Chapter 4: Network States (Srinivasan, Kostakis, Bauwens) 

Chapter 5: Empirical Analysis – Interviews and Findings (Srinivasan, Ostrom, GitcoinDAO) 

Chapter 6: Conclusions and Future Implications


=More information=

==Bibliography==

REFERENCE BIBLIOGRAPHY

===GENERAL GOVERNANCE AND POLYCRISIS STUDIES===

● Biermann, F. (2020). The Future of Global Governance: The Role of Polycentric Governance in
Addressing Systemic Risks.
● Wallerstein, I. (2004). World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction. Duke University Press.
● Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution. World Economic Forum.
● Keohane, R. & Nye, J. (2000). Power and Interdependence: World Politics in Transition. Little,
Brown & Co.


===BLOCKCHAIN AND DECENTRALIZED GOVERNANCE===

● Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
● Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Wiley-Blackwell.
● Bauwens, M. (2013). The Structure and Practices of Commons-Based Peer Production.
● De Filippi, P., & Wright, A. (2018). Blockchain and the Law: The Rule of Code. Harvard
University Press.
● Srinivasan, B. (2022). The Network State: How to Start a New Country.
● Antonopoulos, A. (2018). Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Cryptocurrencies. O'Reilly
Media.
● Kostakis, V., & Bauwens, M. (2014). Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative
Economy. Palgrave Macmillan.


===NETWORK STATES AND CASE STUDIES===

● Srinivasan, B. (2022). The Network State: How to Start a New Country.
● Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action.
● GitcoinDAO (2023). Gitcoin Whitepaper.
● Draper Nation, Liberland, Satoshi Island, Praxis, Prospera - Empirical case studies.


===DECENTRALIZED FINANCE AND CRYPTO-ECONOMICS===

● Harvey, D. (2010). The Enigma of Capital and the Crises of Capitalism. Profile Books.
● Potts, J., Takagi, S., Swan, M., Tasca, P., & Witte, F. (2021). The Economics of Blockchain.
● Prasad, E. S. (2021). The Future of Money: How the Digital Revolution is Transforming
Currencies and Finance.







[[Category:Governance]

[[Category:Network_Nations]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:Research]]