'''* Report: Connecting Makers to Markets through Networked Local Manufacturing. FINAL REPORT on the MakerNet pilot project in NAIROBI, KENYA. Anna Lowe with additional authors Jessica Berlin & Andrew Lamb. MakerNet, 2017''' 

URL = http://www.makernet.global/ [https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5ee8cb0bb163e3076bc30db0/5ef06ba42a1f376e5f8afe2d_MakerNet%20Pilot%20Report.pdf pdf]

"Cisco,	IBM,	and	the	German	Federal	Ministry	for	Economic	Cooperation	and	Development	 (BMZ)	financially	supported	the	MakerNet	pilot	project."

=Description=

'''1. The Vision:'''

"Our	 vision	is	 of	millions	 of	 sustainable	 small-scale	manufacturing	 enterprises	 all	 over	 the	 world,	
where	 not	 just	 knowledge	 but	 know-how	 is	 shared	 globally	 and	 openly,	 and physical	 things	 are	
made	close	to	where	they	are	used.	Entrepreneurs	and	makers	are	producing	items	needed	in	their	
communities	from	locally	sourced	materials,	and	creating	sustainable	businesses	by	doing	this.	But	
this	is	not	a	return	to	craft	production.	
This	is	the	fourth	industrial	revolution	and	the	circular	economy,	
driven	by	digitally	networked	local	manufacturing.


The	manufacturing	infrastructure	that	already	exists	in	so	many	parts	of	the	world	– the	informal	
sector	welding	shops,	the	backyard	carpenters,	as	well	as	the	midsize	factories	and	the	craftspeople
who	can	fix	any	mechanical	problem	– is	fully	integrated into	this	global	supply	ecosystem,	and	is	
more	 competitive	 as	 a	 result.	 It	 is	 supplemented	 by	 new	 additive	 manufacturing	 techniques,	
smaller-scale	 and	 greener	methods	 of	 electronics	 production,	 new	 types	 of	 knowledge	 and	 skills.	
Analogue	 and	 digital	 manufacturing	 technologies	 combine	 to	 enable	 new	 methods	 of	 sharing	
knowledge,	earning	money,	and	checking	quality."



'''2. From the introduction:'''

"In	2016,	an	international	group	of	organisations	working	on	the	cutting-edge	of	technology	for	development	(Tech4Dev),	entrepreneurship,	and	community	empowerment
came	together	to	found	the	MakerNet	Consortium.	Their	aim was	to	develop	and	test	
concepts	for	strategic	infrastructure,	systems	
and	tools	that	consolidate	and	streamline	the	
efforts,	expertise	and	resources	of	individual	
makerspaces	and	makers,	and	connect	makers	to	existing	manufacturing	infrastructure	
and	market	opportunities in	their	communities.


A	 proof-of-concept	 pilot	 project	 in	 Kenya	
was	 conceived	 to	 explore	 business	 models	
and	 digital	 tools	 for	 connecting	 Nairobi	
makers	and	manufacturing	capacity	(supply)	
to	 potential	 hardware	 customers	 in	 the	 aid	
industry (demand).	The	project	was	supported	 by	the	 German	 Federal	Ministry	 for	 Economic	 Cooperation	 and	 Development	
(BMZ)-financed	GIZ Digital	World	Program,	
the	Cisco	Foundation,	and	IBM.


This	paper	is	one	of	the	outputs	of	that	pilot	
project	and	covers	the	following	topics:

• Description,	analysis,	and	lessons	learned	
from	the	MakerNet	pilot	in	Kenya

• Insights	 and	 analysis	 on networked	 local	
manufacturing, drawing	on	 the	prior	and	
on-going	work of	the	MakerNet	Consortium	 on	 related	 topics	 in	 other	 countries,	
such	 as Ghana,	 Haiti,	 Jordan,	 Myanmar,	
Nepal,	UK,	et	al.

• Next	steps	and	recommendations	 for	 further	work

• Research	and	Mapping

• Digital	 tools	 and	 infrastructure	 development

• Pilot	 use	 cases	 in	 further	 countries	 and	
sectors


MakerNet	is	conceived	as	a	system	of	makers,	manufacturers,	tools,	business	models,	
supply	chains,	and	markets.	Its	purpose	is	to	
enable	local	production	of	supplies	that	meet	
humanitarian	and	sustainable	human	development	demands	and	aspirations. We	call	
this	production	approach	Networked	Local	
Manufacturing.


Networked	Local	Manufacturing has	 the	potential	 to	 improve	 the	 availability	 of	 useful	
products	 &	 technologies	 and	 therefore	 improve	quality	of	life,	at	the	same	time	as	creating	business	opportunities	and	jobs.	 It	is	a	
route	 to	 sustainable	 industrialisation	 and	
delivering	 on	 the	 Sustainable	 Development	
Goals.	
The	 pilot	 project	 undertaken	 in	 Nairobi,	
Kenya	 focussed	 on	 simple	 medical	 devices."	

(https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5ee8cb0bb163e3076bc30db0/5ef06ba42a1f376e5f8afe2d_MakerNet%20Pilot%20Report.pdf)


3. Objectives of the [[MakerNet Consortium]]

"This	pilot	project	was	the	first	step	in	a	long-term	mission	intended	to:

§ Design	 globally,	 make	 locally: Make	it	possible	 for	anyone,	anywhere	 to	
share	and	collaborate	on	open	source	product	designs	that	benefit	humanity;	and	for	manufacturers	close	to	the	point	of	need	to	then	adapt	those	designs	for	local	reality	and	turn	them	into	physical	products.	

§ Connect	makers	 to	markets: Create	business	models	that	enable	makers,	
manufacturers,	and	makerspaces	to	become	suppliers	to	their	communities	
and	regions

§ Grow	Industry	4.0: Develop	and	support	the	evolution	of	sustainable	models	of	production	and	consumption."

(https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5ee8cb0bb163e3076bc30db0/5ef06ba42a1f376e5f8afe2d_MakerNet%20Pilot%20Report.pdf)

=Excerpts=

==Summary & Conclusions==

"The	MakerNet	 pilot	has demonstrated	 that	locally	 made	 products	 can	 be	 economically	 competitive with	 imported	 equivalents	 even	 without	 taking	 into	 account	the	additional	benefits	such	as	job	creation,	improved	supply,	better	tailoring	
of	products	to	the	local	market,	and	the	ability	to	lead	to	innovation.


A	number	of	 the	trends	 in	 aid	 delivery	 fit	 well with	 the	idea	of	networked	local	
manufacturing	– including	moves	 towards	 giving	 recipients	 greater	choice	 (such	as	
cash	 programming)	 and	 the	 recognition	 that	 one	 size	 does	 not	 necessarily	 fit	 all	
when	it	comes	to	products	they	supply	to	beneficiaries.	In	aid	agencies, the	frustration	with	current	procurement	methods	is	there	but	we	do	not	expect	to	see	change	
happen	fast,	so	it	will	be	necessary	to	devise	 structures	 that	 can	work	with	 current	 organisation	 structures	 and	 processes – particularly	 centralised	 procurement	– as	well	as	helping	to	build	the	infrastructure	for	an	alternative	vision	of	procurement	decisions	being	taken	more	locally.


The	key	to	catalysing	the	market	is	developing	and	sharing	business	models,	
such	 that	 the	 right	 incentives	 exist	 for	 different	 types	 of	 stakeholder	 to	 play	 their	
part. It	will	be	essential	to	facilitate	connections	between	makers,	manufacturers,	and	markets to	avoid	the	Catch-22	situation	of	no	demand	because	there	is	no	
capacity	 to	 supply,	 and	 no	 supply	 capacity	 because	 there	is	 no	 demand.	 There	 are	
already	organisations	that	can	do	this.


Many	 existing	 projects,	 organisations,	 and	 tools are	 relevant	 to	 some part	 of	 the	
MakerNet	concept.	We	need	a focused	effort	to	connect existing	initiatives	with	
each	 other	 and	 fill	in	 the	gaps between	 them to	enable	 the	promise	of	networked	
local	manufacturing	to	be	realised.


MakerNet aims	 to	 build	 these	 bridges	 between	 makers,	 markets,	 and	 the	 other	
stakeholders	 in	 this	 ecosystem.	 Our	 ambition	 is	 to	 bring	 about	 a	 future	 in	 which	
people	everywhere	can	leverage	open	technologies	and	systems	to	realise	and	share	
their	ideas,	and	are	more	able	to	make	and	sell	their	products,	use	their	skills,	create	
their	own	opportunities,	– a	future	in	which	people	are	empowered	to	create	rather	
than	merely	consume,	and	can	actively	build	sustainable	livelihoods	 for	themselves	
and	their	communities."

(https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5ee8cb0bb163e3076bc30db0/5ef06ba42a1f376e5f8afe2d_MakerNet%20Pilot%20Report.pdf)

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Africa]]
[[Category:Kenya]]