
Really interesting material, still of value in 2010, of a Barcelona seminar in 2006.

URL = http://www.onlinecreation.info/wp-content/uploads/2007/12/readerbarcelonaii.pdf

(Networked politics: A reader of work in progress. Barcelona seminar for an inquiry into political organisation in an era of movements and networks.)

=Contents=


1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE INQURY AND ITS FOUR
LINES OF RESEARCH AND OUTLINE OF SEMINAR


2. THE INSTITUTIONS LINE OF INQUIRY page 5

i. Elements of institutional crisis and transformation, by Joan Subirat

ii. Democracy, Citizens’ Participation and Social
Transformation, by Joan Subirat.

iii. Modernising Public Administration from the Left , by Quim Brugue


3. THE MOVEMENT LINE OF INQUIRY page 42

i. A first map of issues issues, by Macro Berlinguer

ii. Report of Bolgnia meeting, by Marco Berlinguer

iii. Problemas de la politica autonoma: pensando el pasaje de
lo social a lo politico, by Ezequiel Adamovsky

iv. About networks (and social movements?) by Joan Subirats

v. Networks, swarms, microstructures, by Brian Holmes

vi. Social forums and their margins: networking logistics and
the cultural politics of autonomus space, by Jeffrey S. Juris


4. THE POLITICAL PARTIES PARTIES / REPRESENTATION LINE
OF INQUIRY page 99

i. Rethinking political parties in an era of movements and
networks, by Hilary Wainwright

ii. Brief report of Manchester workshop for the ‘inquiry in
rethinking political organisation in an era of movements
and networks’, by Hilary Wainwright

iii. Are there lessons to be learnt from the experience of the
German green-alternative left?, by Frieder Otto Wolfe.

iv. The left parties in government: the Norwegian case,
by.Asbjorn Wahl

v. Lula’s lament, by Hilary Wainwright


5. TECHNO-POLITICAL TOOLS LINE OF INQUIRY. page 168

i. Hot issues/questions on techno-political tools by Mayo
Fuster

ii. Free/Open sourced politics, starting points & proposals, by
Jaume Naulart

iii. Cathcart’s List : A brief review of current movements and
trends in information politics, by Jamie King;

iv. The Dilemmas of an inevitable relationship: democratic
innovation and the technologies of information and
communication, by Joan Subirat

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Articles]]