=Typology=

By Andrej Zwitter and Jilles Hazenberg:

'''1. Forms of networked power:'''

"• Networking power: the power that actors and organizations have that constitutes the core of the network. This power pertains to the ability to include and exclude others, and thereby controls the makeup of the network.

• Network power: the power that results from the standards required to coordinate interactions. This primarily concerns the imposition of rules within a network.

• Networked power: the power that actors have over one another within a network. This power mimics traditional conceptions of power but the way in which it is exerted differs per network.

• Network-making power: the power of an actor or organization to constitute or re-program a network according to its values and specific interests."

(https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/blockchain/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2020.00012/full)


=Discussion=

By Andrej Zwitter and Jilles Hazenberg:

"Within governance literature, '''Mode 2 governance''' is sometimes depicted as “network governance.” Within this strain of governance literature, the “network” is employed primarily as metaphor to exemplify the increasingly horizontal structures of Mode 2 governance and mechanisms of compromise and negotiation. We refer to decentralized network governance as the governance of a network (e.g., a blockchain network) through a network (the multiplicity of actors that exert power in continuously changing roles and relationships). Moreover, literature that describes Mode 2 governance as “network governance” often focuses on the relationships and mechanisms of coordination within institutions, for instance, regulatory agencies or public administrations. The present conceptualization does not confine itself to such a limitation. See Klijn (2008); Koppenjan and Klijn (2004), and Lewis (2011).

Manuel Castells conceptualizes networked power as the dominant form of power exerted within modern networked societies. This is not the time or place to argue for or against this conceptualization of societal powers that structure modern societies. We employ these forms of network power as they directly relate to new powers that emerge within networks. The cyber domain is thus conceived as network, and its most prominent exemplifications are literally so without necessarily conceiving of societies themselves as networks."

(https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/blockchain/articles/10.3389/fbloc.2020.00012/full)


=More information=

* Details on Mode 1,2, and 3, via [[Decentralized Network Governance]]

* Castells, M. (2011). A Network Theory of Power. Int. J. Commun. 5, 773–787.

[[Category:Network_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]