

URL = http://netglobalcapitalism.wordpress.com/about/


=Description=

"The Network for Critical Studies of Global Capitalism was established at the International Conference on ‘Global Capitalism and Transnational Class Formation’, which took place in Prague on September 16-18,  2011. Sponsored by the Centre of Global Studies (Prague), the Global Studies Association of North America, and the International Sociological Association Research Committee RC02 (Economy and Society), this was the first international conference devoted to transnational capitalist class (TCC) theory and global class formation. Over the past decade a growing body of work has established TCC theory as an important theoretical approach for examining global capitalism. The conference set out to provide a place to share research, debate and explore this newly emerging network of scholars and activists focused around global capitalism and transnational class analysis. Around 70 scholars from 20 countries came to Prague from Western, Central and Eastern Europe, Russia, North and South America, Australia, China, Hong Kong, Japan, S. Korea, Turkey and Iran.

The panels and sessions covered a wide variety of topics in the context of critical studies of global capitalism, notably transnational capitalist class and working class formations; transnational capitalist class and national capitalist class relations; elite networks; immigration and migration; global capitalism; production networks and commodity chains; global finance; transformation of the nation-state; the transnational state; transnational governance; information technology and globalization; the military/industrial complex and the state.

The conference concluded with a business meeting that established the Network for Critical Studies on Global Capitalism as a framework to facilitate ongoing contact among the 70 who came to Prague, many others who were unable to attend but would have liked to have done so, and to inform others with an interest in the theme of the first conference: ‘Global capitalism and transnational class formation’. A number of publications, including one edited volume were produced with papers from the conference.

Our second conference was held at Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia in July of 2013.  The theme focused on ‘Global Capitalism in Asia and Oceania’. An edited volume with the same title as the conference is forthcoming.

Our third conference will be held in early 2015 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. More information on this will soon be released."
(http://netglobalcapitalism.wordpress.com/about/)


=More Information=

All those interested in joining the Network and/or participating in forthcoming activities are invited to contact Jerry Harris at gharris234@comcast.net.


[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]