
'''= coalition of tech activists against the creation and use of databases for repression and discrimination'''

URL = http://neveragain.tech/

See also: [[Tech Solidarity]]

=Text=

"We commit to the following actions:

* We refuse to participate in the creation of databases of identifying information for the United States government to target individuals based on race, religion, or national origin.


* We will advocate within our organizations:

** to minimize the collection and retention of data that would facilitate ethnic or religious targeting.
** to scale back existing datasets with unnecessary racial, ethnic, and national origin data.
** to responsibly destroy high-risk datasets and backups.
** to implement security and privacy best practices, in particular, for end-to-end encryption to be the default wherever possible.
** to demand appropriate legal process should the government request that we turn over user data collected by our organization, even in small amounts.


* If we discover misuse of data that we consider illegal or unethical in our organizations: We will work with our colleagues and leaders to correct it.


* If we cannot stop these practices, we will exercise our rights and responsibilities to speak out publicly and engage in responsible whistleblowing without endangering users.

* If we have the authority to do so, we will use all available legal defenses to stop these practices.

* If we do not have such authority, and our organizations force us to engage in such misuse, we will resign from our positions rather than comply.

* We will raise awareness and ask critical questions about the responsible and fair use of data and algorithms beyond our organization and our industry."

(http://neveragain.tech/)


[[Category:Big Data]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]