

URL = http://neweconomycarddeck.wikia.com/wiki/NewEconomyCardDeck_Wiki

=Description=

Tom Atlee:

"The New Economy Card Deck is intended to allow everyone, regardless of prior expertise or familiarity, to play with the kinds of thinking that is going on between transformational economists who are looking closely and critically at our existing economic paradigm and exploring both small tweaks and wholesale alternatives.

Each card in the deck describes an economic concept in simple terms. The cards make economic design elements tangible and accessible in order to facilitate games and "what if" questions -- such as "what if the world actually worked like this...how would it change my professional practice, my life, my world?" The intention is for people to begin to see the economy as a design problem we can solve rather than an unquestioned paradigm that we simply have to accept and attempt to survive within -- and then move beyond that into thinking how we can, in our lives, begin to shift into the new patterns we now see as possible and preferable.

This is a collaborative process, with plenty of room for dialogue, development of new cards and alternative starter decks for specific audiences, along with deeper data and resources, and exploration of real world efforts to implement some aspect of this new economy. Again, the Deck is meant to make economic concepts accessible to all, not provide a final answer as to what such a new economy looks like or is called. Whether seeking a "Local Economy", a "Sustainable Economy," a "Living Economy," a "Slow Economy," a "Sacred Economy," or something else, the more we talk about these concepts and try them out in practice the more we all can begin to make an economy that supports the things we care about.

The concept of the New Economy Card Deck along with the content of the Starter Deck are [soon to be] under a Creative Commons Licence. Feel free to download, modify, and use the cards and decks as desired, with reference to this initiative. Feel free to add additional cards and create your own aggregated sets; however under the terms of the CC Licence, these too must be freely available for others to use and modify."


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]