
URL = http://www.thenewsignificance.com/about/

=Description=

"“The New Significance” was set up to explore possibilities for revolutionary change in the 21st Century. This effort rests on some underlaying propositions. For example:

Proposition One: The organization of society as it appears today is neither the best possible outcome of history, nor of human nature, nor of previous social struggle, nor of gods.

Proposition Two: People have the capacity to self-consciously govern their lives and society both as individuals and collectively with others.

Proposition Three: Existing societies based on class rule, racism, sexism, or any other unjustified authoritarianism  must be self-consciously transformed for a new society that is autonomous, classless, self-managing, mutually-aiding, solidaridous, diverse, and participatory across all spheres of life.

Proposition Four: Possibilities for this new society always exist, however change as social and material conditions change, and as a consequence, activate new agents for revolution. Although everyone is a potential agent of change, some lay dormant while others organize and rebel. Agents of revolutionary change are those most self-consciously seeking to change their circumstances in fundamentally defining ways as well as activate others to seek their own empowerment in concert with all.

Proposition Five: Revolution, is not the continuation of society’s defining institutions, or what is otherwise called “evolution,” but is instead the fundamental transformation — through big and small changes — of these institution’s defining roles and relationships as well as the social and material outcomes they produce."
(http://www.thenewsignificance.com/about/)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]