

=Discussion=

Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"Despite the fall of actually-existing socialism, the idea of
computerized economic planning continued to be developed by
small groups of theorists, who have advanced its conceptual scope
further than anything attempted by Soviet cyberneticians. Two
schools have been of particular importance: the ‘New Socialism’ of
Scottish computer scientists Paul Cockshott and Alan Cottrell
(1993); and the German ‘Bremen School’, which includes Peter
Arno (2002) and Heinz Dieterich (2006), the latter an advocate of
Venezuelan-style ‘Twenty First Century Socialism’. These
tendencies have recently converged (Cockshott, Cottrell &
Dieterich, 2010). However, because little of the Bremen group’s
work is translated, the focus here will be on the New Socialism of
Cockshott and Cottrell.

The distinguishing mark of the New Socialist project is its classic
Marxist rigor. Accordingly, its twenty-first century super-computer
planning follows to the letter the logic of the late nineteenth century
Critique of the Gotha Program (Marx, 1970), which famously
suggests that at the first, ‘lower’ stage to communism, before
conditions of abundance allow ‘to each according to his needs’,
remuneration will be determined by the hours of socially necessary
labour required to produce goods and services. In the capitalist
workplace, workers are paid for the reproduction of the capacity to
labour, rather than for the labour actually extracted from them; it is
this that enables the capitalist to secure surplus value.

The elimination of this state of affairs, Cockshott and Cottrell
contend, requires nothing less than the abolition of money—that is,
the elimination of the fungible general medium of exchange that,
through a series of metamorphoses of money in and out of the
commodity form, creates the self-expanding value that is capital. In
their new Socialism, work would be remunerated in labour
certificates; an hour’s work could be exchanged for goods taking, on
a socially average basis, an equivalent time to produce. The
certificates would be extinguished in this exchange; they would not
circulate, and could not be used for speculation. Because workers
would be paid the full social value of their labour, there would be no
owner profits, and no capitalists to direct resource allocation.
Workers would, however, be taxed to establish a pool of labour-time
resources available for social investments made by planning boards
whose mandate would be set by democratic decisions on overall
social goals.

Labour time thus provides the ‘objective unit of value’ for the New
Socialism (Cockshott & Cottrell 2003: 3). It is at this point that its
proponents invoke the capacities of information technology."


'''2.'''

"However, to speak of planning in such
panoptic contexts is to inevitably invoke fears of omniscient state
control. The New Socialists come from a vanguard Marxist-Leninist
lineage, with a self-avowed ‘Jacobin’ centralist perspective
(Cockshott, Cottrell, & Dieterich, 2011). To consider how
cybernetic planning might be developed in more transparent and
participatory modes, we need to look to different communist
traditions."
(http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)


=More Information=

==Books==

* Cockshott, P. & Cottrell A. (1993) Towards a New Socialism.
London: Spokesman Books.

* Cockshott, P., & Zachariah, D. (2012) Arguments For Socialism, June
2: www.lulu.com

* Cockshott, P., Cottrell, A., Dieterich, H. (2010) ‘Transition to 21st
Century Socialism in the European Union’:
http://reality.gn.apc.org/econ/Berlinpaper.pdf

* Dieterich, H. (2006) Der Sozialismus des 21. Jahrhunderts –
Wirtschaft, Gesellschaft und Demokratie nach dem globalen
Kapitalismus. Berlin: Homilius.

* * Peters, A. (2001) Computer Sozialismus: Gespräche mit Konrad Zuse.
Berlin: Verlag.


[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Economics]]