

URL = http://www.newmediarights.org/


=Description=

"New Media Rights (NMR) provides pro bono legal resources and its free media studio to creators - artists, filmmakers, podcasters, citizen journalists, bloggers, open source software projects, as well as nonprofits.

NewMediaRights.org is a community dedicated to an open discussion of technology, creativity, and the law where all are welcomed to comment and participate. 

NMR is a diverse community of creators, nonprofits, and attorneys dedicated to an open and free Internet.  We offer

* freely available copyright, licensing, trademark, and other legal expertise 

* public interest advocacy before federal regulatory agencies (Copyrighti, USPTO) 

* a free media studio for citizen creators and nonprofits of all types 
technological know-how and assistance 

NMR protects and fosters citizen-created, grassroots content and media on the Internet.

NMR seeks to help creators understand the legal uses of content (fair use, parody, mash-ups, sampling, re-mixing, etc) and facilitate the creation of new and exciting content that is not currently supported/funded by mainstream business models.

NMR seeks to encourage widespread adoption of open-source creative tools and new media distribution alternatives, while helping consumer/creators (now one in the same) understand their legal rights online.

NMR believes no one should hold a monopoly over creativity, and seeks to encourage a vibrant, citizen created grassroots, non-hierarchical creative community that provides alternatives to traditional media. Over time the use of creative commons and other open source type licensing will result in a more robust public domain.

Our philosophy is to listen carefully to the needs of those we serve, and shape our services and advocacy accordingly.

New Media Rights (NMR) is affiliated with the non-profit Utility Consumers' Action Network and a partner with Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet Society in the Online Media Legal Network."
(http://www.newmediarights.org/about_us)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Resources]]