
'''= an up-coming documentary film, aims to show the evolution of human species through the evolution of collective intelligence'''

URL = 


=Description=

"Everywhere on the planet we see a new social fabric emerging in humankind. Small or big, local or global, these emergent groups become infused with a new form of collective intelligence called holomidal collective intelligence. This new form relies on the Internet, social media, the sharing of knowledge and resources, a mutualist economy, distributed leadership, individuation, a systemic, holistic and ecological understanding of the world.

Pyramidal collective intelligence gave birth to civilizations thanks to the invention of writing.  It operates through chains of command, concentration of power and wealth, a market economy based on competition, extraction of resources, labor division.

Holomidal collective intelligence succeeds pyramidal collective intelligence. Today pyramidal collective intelligence has become powerless to address tomorrow’s high stakes complexity. Holomidal collective intelligence, still in its infancy, has already shown unprecedented social creativity in new forms of technical, scientific and artistic innovation.

We now live in the midst of a fascinating transition phase. A time when all the facts appear to show a planet on the decline.  In this time of forecast catastrophes, objectivity requires that we explore the new social ecosystem that grows on the old declining one. How does it organize itself? How does it redefine the public element — the res publica? How does it address education, health, transportation, ecology, food and energy? How does it innovate? What new paths does it offer that today’s conventional world cannot see?

Humanity reinvents itself via social innovation. Everywhere amazing projects flourish.

The creative and artistic act plays a key role in our evolutionary process. Tomorrow’s world won’t arise because of our reactions, it will emerge from our creations, mostly by building the next collectives. The New Republics aims to create a high level of artistry and strong aesthetics within the documentary form, embodying our claim that we cannot reduce today’s world into a sum of complex problems (climate change, ecological catastrophes, wars, etc) which we will solve with the correct mental understanding.

The New Republics invites us on the journey. It offers new perspectives and triggers our creativity. It narrates the dream of humanity conquering itself.

This movie doesn’t address the future as a problem to solve (the usual activism or “save the dying world” tone), but as a reality to invent as creative human artists. We emphasize the creative power of evolution through past examples.

We take Jacques-Yves Cousteau’s documentaries as an inspiring model (see example). They opened a new way to share the unknown and the extraordinary. They sent us to far away, unknown places. They shared the wonder and the beauty, grounded with scientific facts. They interviewed the right specialists and offered a new perspective on our planet.

The New Republics will stick to hard facts and science. Through an epic narrative, we will share the wonder and beauty of human ecosystems and how they evolve. Just like the oceans in their time, we want to open a new way to “film the unknown” in the depth of social complexity."
(http://thenewrepublics.org/about/)



[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]