'''Book: New Perspectives on Investment in Infrastructures Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam 2008 G. Arts, W. Dicke and L. Hancher (eds.)'''

= was it really a good idea to privatize infrastructures?

URL = http://www.wrr.nl/content.jsp?objectid=4454

=Description=


Summary:

"Over the last two decades most infrastructures were subject to significant regime change. Once a state monopoly, infrastructures have now been liberalised or even fully privatised, thereby introducing new actors and new levels of decision making. Regime change has led to an increased emphasis on service delivery, lower prices and enhanced consumer choice, together with a greater concern for efficiency. What are the effects of regime change and the resultant short-term focus for the long-term investment in physical infrastructures? 

The essays in this bundle analyse the effects on long-term investment in different infrastructures and from different perspectives and disciplines."

From the preface:

"Modern societies could not exist without dykes, a supply of drinking water,
sewers, roads, electronic communication, airports, waste processing and electricity.

For a long time these infrastructures were in the hands of the government.

However, processes of liberalisation, privatisation, breaking up into
smaller entities, commercialisation and internationalisation over the last 15 years mean
that many of these infrastructures now operate at arm?s length from the government.

Long-term investment is a condition for the continued adequate functioning of
infrastructures now and in the future. This not only means investments
in maintenance; there is an urgent need for investment in the future because all
infrastructures face major challenges: climate change, reduction of co2 emissions,
global capital flows, to name but a few. Meeting these challenges will
demand major investments.

The compilation of this Investigation was prompted by growing concerns which
are emerging in the political, social and academic debate that the
shift in operational
roles from the government to other actors in such infrastructures means
that long-term investments could be jeopardised. The central question
in this Investigation is how and by whom long-term investments in
infrastructure can continue to be assured under the new operating conditions that have
arisen as result of the regime change, in the light of the future challenges
which the infrastructures
in question will have to deal with. With this in mind, this collection
essays analyses the relationship between regime changes (such as
liberalisation and privatisation) and long-term investments in infrastructure.

The essays in this collection focus on different infrastructures. Some of them
describe one specific infrastructure, while others are concerned with
themes relating to investments in various infrastructures. These themes
include things such as the public interest, strategic activity and private equity.

The collection is multidisciplinary in its approach: investments in infrastructure are
analysed from an economic, legal, administrative and technical perspective.
This Investigation shows that regime change has led to significant
changes in infrastructures: some intended, some unintended and some undesirable. No
unambiguous policy recommendations are offered in this collection - that is done in the Report - but different perspectives are outlined from which
these problems can be considered.

In publishing this investigation, the wrr is seeking to contribute to
continuing the reflection on these issues which are so vital for our society.
After all, without investments, it not only be the infrastructure that is in danger, but
also the present and future functioning of our society. The report Infrastructures.

Time to Invest is based in part on the preliminary studies and essays
published in this Investigation. Through this publication, the Council is also seeking
to make these studies more accessible to a wider public. All papers/essays with the
exception Lavrijssen/Hancher, were completed in 2007. The Council wishes to thank the
authors for their willingness to collaborate in the preparation of the report."


=Contents=

Table of Contents:

1 Stuck on the Tracks? Empirical Study for Investments in the Dutch
Railway Infrastructure - Rudi Bekkers
2 Regulering en investeringen in infrastructuur - Theon van Dijk
3 Planning van weginfrastructuur: Enkele aanknopingspunten voor verbetering - A.A. van Duijn
4 European Regulators in the Network Sectors: Revolution or Evolution? - Saskia Lavrijssen-Heijmans and Leigh Hancher
5 Investments in Infrastructures: Strategic Behaviour - Ernst ten Heuvelhof
6 The Impact of Technical Characteristics of Network Industries upon the Governance of Infrastructure Adequacy  - Hamilcar Knops
7 Europe and Investment In Infrastructure With Emphasis on Electronic Communications - Pierre Larouche
8 Private Equity Funds and Public Utilities: Where Incentive Structures
Collide - William Melody
9 Publieke belangen, overheidsbeleid en investeringen in infrastructuur - Jan de Pree
10 Infrastructure Investments on the Edge of Public and Private Domains - Geert Teisman
11 Concessiestelsel en overheidsaandeelhouderschap - Kirsten Wilkeshuis


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Policy]]