

A [http://nobostrategy.blogspot.com blog] and forum exploring participative forms of business organization.


URL = http://nobostrategy.blogspot.com


=Description=


Rosalind Cannell: "I’ve recently received my Sociology Masters in Organisations and Social Change from City University, London. My dissertation was an ethnographic study of human relationships in online social business networks. I host the New Order of Business Organisation (NOBO) forum on Ecademy. We explore new approaches to business organisation enabled by Web 2.0 technologies. Before studying at City University, I worked for over 20 years in Information Technology at Barclays Bank specialising in Enterprise Architecture. Visit and interact with Ros and others at her Nobo forum on Ecademy

URL = http://www.ecademy.com/club/New+Order+of+Business+Organisation


'''This club is a discussion forum for turning our imaginations into real, practical ideas about how to enable business organisations of the future.'''

We are currently exploring the following NOBO challenges:

1. Understanding how to initiate actions that will lead to empowering ‘ordinary’ people

2. Understanding what ‘effective leadership’ is in an empowered network of distributed decision-making.

3. Identifying and creating the conditions for a self-sustaining, deep support culture.

4. Communicating vision, direction and purpose for the whole network.

5. Understanding productive NOBO behaviour and managing different levels of ‘consciousness’ in the network.

6. Enabling network-centric organising.

7. Developing and delivering a central repository of knowledge (top-sight?) with navigation tools to prevent information overload.

8. Understanding, cultivating and co-ordinating the life-cycles of a self-sustaining business ecosystem.

9. Development of a ‘maturity’ model depicting the emergence and dynamics of an evolving complex networked organisation.

10. Articulating the tangible and intangible value of implementing education and explanation capabilities in a learning, networked business organisation."


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Governance]]