
'''* Article: ‘THIS SYSTEM DOES NOT PRODUCE PLEASURE ANYMORE’. AN INTERVIEW WITH BERNARD STIEGLER. Pieter Lemmens. Krisis, 2011, Issue 1'''

URL = http://www.krisis.eu/content/2011-1/krisis-2011-1-05-lemmens.pdf


=Summary=

Pieter Lemmens:

"It is the systematic annexation of the new technical milieus of the mind
(first of all the network of digital information and communication technologies:
Internet) by capitalism that is the principal cause of the cognitive
and emotional proletarianization that affects all strata of contemporary
society. Capitalism today exploits the mnemotechnical milieu for capturing
the attention and desires of populations for the purpose of promoting
consumption and creating consumer subjects. This phenomenon is called
psychopower by Stiegler, in analogy to Michel Foucault’s notion of biopower.
Its ultimate result is the destruction of the libido and with it the
sublimatory capacities of humanity, which lie at the basis of every civilization.
Today’s cognitive and consumer capitalism is first of all a capitalism
focused on the control of libidinal energy – of consumers and employees
as well as financiers. Criticizing it presupposes the development of a critique
of libidinal economy.

In this interview, Stiegler talks about today’s processes of proletarianization
and addresses some of the pernicious consequences of capital’s exploitation
of the technical milieu of the mind, among them the many
psychopathologies and addictive behavior patterns that agonize ever more
people, especially since the rise of the purely speculative, short-term based
finance capitalism invented by the neoliberals and the neoconservatives.

By subjecting technological innovation completely to the logic of the
market, the so called ‘conservative revolution’ led by Thatcher and
Reagan has engendered a cultural and spiritual regression of unprecedented
magnitude, transforming the whole of society into a machine for
profit maximization and creating a state of ‘systemic carelessness’ and
‘systemic stupidity’ on a global scale.

Notwithstanding his rather bleak diagnosis of contemporary society,
Stiegler is not pessimistic with regard to the future. Whereas today’s capitalism
is headed for destruction, it is precisely in the digitalized networks
through which it tries to control the populations that a new kind of
economy is emerging, one that is not only inventing new modes of production
like open source and peer-to-peer, but that is also slowly creating
a new economy of desire that could lead to the invention of new ways of
life, new modes of individual and collective existence. A new society could
arise on the same technological base that is now still predominantly destroying
the social bonds. The digital networks might be the prime catalysts
in the transformation from today’s consumer society into what he
calls a ‘society of contribution’. In this context he talks in this interview
about technologies in terms of pharmaka (a term derived from Plato and
from his teacher Derrida) that can act both as a poison, destroying sociality
and proletarianizing human existence, as well as a medicine, producing
social ties and deproletarianzing human existence. 

‘My books want to serve struggles [servir des luttes]’, Stiegler writes in one
of his prefaces. The struggles he refers to are struggles in the context of a
‘battle for the mind’, a battle in which the forces of a capitalism that has
become nihilistic stand opposed to a humanity that needs to develop a
new, global consciousness and collectivity in order to challenge the global
multicrisis that is closing in upon it. Philosophy, according to Stiegler,
should engage itself in the global struggle for the mind against a capitalist
system that is systematically degrading and brutalizing human existence,
destroying desire, intelligence and the joie de vivre. And philosophers
should focus their attention on the digital network technologies, which
are still predominantly factors of the erosion of consciousness and sociality
but which could – and should – become a new technical milieu for the
life of the mind, for a renewed spiritual and intellectual culture (in
Stiegler’s terms: a libidinal economy). With this enormous task in mind,
Stiegler and some colleagues have established Ars Industrialis, an international
association for the promotion of an industrial politics of spirit,
based in Paris. Existing since 2005, it organizes conferences, debates, seminars
and international meetings and it has published two manifestos and
two books as well."
(http://www.krisis.eu/content/2011-1/krisis-2011-1-05-lemmens.pdf)

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]