

=Directory=

Chosen by the [[REconomy Project]], June 2013:

"Welcome to the UK’s top twenty ‘Transition oriented’ social enterprises. Combined these enterprises have a turnover of £3.5 million and provide paid employment for more than 100 people.

#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Bath__West.pdf Bath & West Community Energy]	Bath, Somerset	Energy – renew. generation
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Big_Lemon.pdf The Big Lemon]	Brighton	Transport – bus
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Bristol_Bike.pdf The Bristol Bike Project]	Bristol	Transport – bike
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Bristol_Pound.pdf Bristol Pound] (with Bristol Credit Union)	Bristol	Finance – local currency
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/DE4_Food.pdf DE4 Food]	Matlock, Derby	Food – distribution
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/DotDotDot.pdf DotDotDot Property Guardians]	London	Housing – empty buildings
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Handmade_Bakery.pdf The Handmade Bakery]	Slaithwaite, Yorks	Food – bakery
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Hestia_care.pdf Hestia Care at Home]	Totnes, Devon	Health – care
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/iSmooth.pdf iSmooth Community Café]	Ammanford, Wales	Food – café
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/London_Creative_Labs.pdf London Creative Labs]	London	Services – employment/enterprise
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Norwich_FarmShare.pdf Norwich FarmShare]	Norwich	Food – CSA
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Raven_Inn.pdf The Raven Inn]	Llanarmon-yn-Ial, Wales	Food – pub
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/R_ECO.pdf Renewable Energy Co-operative]	Truro, Cornwall	Energy – renewables installation
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Repowering_London.pdf Repowering London]	London	Energy – renew. generation
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/restart.pdf The Restart Project]	London	Waste – re-use & repair
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Robert_Owen_Comm_Banking.pdf Robert Owen Community Banking]	Powys, Wales	Finance – loans & investment
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Spare_Wheels.pdf SpareWheels]	Dunbar, Scotland	Transport – car club
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Totnes_Sust_Construction.pdf Totnes Sustainable Construction]	Totnes, Devon	Housing – retrofit/construction
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Transition_Homes.pdf Transition Homes]	Totnes, Devon	Housing – affordable new builds
#[http://www.reconomy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Uig_Shop.pdf Uig Community Co-operative Shop]	Isle of Lewis, Scotland	Retail – community shop


=Discussion=

Michelle Denton & Fiona Ward:

"Each of these enterprises demonstrates a different way of working from business as usual – they are sustainable, offer some social benefits and have shared ownership, while providing essential goods and services for the community in which they make their home. They provide jobs for local people, as well as volunteering opportunities, and they buy from other local independent businesses. Most have emerged from a local Transition group or have links to Transition in some way.

Individually they are great examples, but the transformative potential is really clear when we picture them all operating together in one place… and we suggest that all of these enterprises are needed everywhere, given they meet our basic needs including food, energy, transport and housing. They illustrate what a new kind of community-led, place-based economy might look like, and show that the building blocks – the viable business models – are already in place and highly replicable.

We know there’s a large market opportunity for a re-localised economy based around local, independent businesses and supply chains. This has been quantified in 3 sectors so far – food, renewable energy and retrofitting homes – in REconomy’s Local Economic Blueprint work earlier this year. This top 20 provides working models for the kinds of enterprises that can turn this opportunity into reality. We offer this report as a stimulus for government, funders, the Transition movement and other community groups and entrepreneurs to see the enormous potential in the community enterprise sector.

 

'''The story behind the list'''

Our top twenty coops, charities, community interest companies and social enterprises are about people – people who have the vision, passion and creativity to identify a new, more sustainable way of doing business and, in the process, are changing their communities, local economies and the world one step at a time.

In the case studies that follow, each enterprise tells us, to one degree or another, how they are guided by a different approach to doing business and sharing profits and how they impact and interact with their community, society and the environment. In other words, we think they meet the definition of a “Transition oriented social enterprise”: a financially viable trading entity that fulfils a real community need, delivers social benefits and has beneficial, or at least neutral, environmental impacts."
(http://www.reconomy.org/the-new-economy-in-20-enterprises/)


[[Category:Companies]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]