'''Article: “Such a Body We Must Create:” New Theses on Integral Micropolitics. Daniel Gustav Anderson'''

URL = http://integral-review.org/documents/Anderson,%20Such%20a%20Body.%20Micropolitics,%20Vol.%204%20No.%202.pdf


=Abstract:= 

"This essay proposes a rigorously postmetaphysical integral praxis, defines
what this means and how such an intervention may be premised, and demonstrates
throughout some methodological and practical advantages this approach may have over
extant metaphysically-oriented integral theories. Beginning with an interpretation of post-
Hegelian historical and dialectical materialisms informed by the Buddhist dialectical
tradition of Madhyamika, a series of coordinated and interrelated theses address problems
proper to fields such as phenomenology, hermeneutics, semiotics, historiography, and
subaltern studies. The claimed purpose of this project is to coordinate subjective
(psychological, spiritual) and objective (social, political, economic) transformational
imperatives into a coherent, non-ontological “counterproject.” It takes as its aim the
production of a radically democratized, responsible, and sane subjective and objective
space, where responsibility is characterized as critical clarity, competence, creative
consciousness, and compassion."
(http://integral-review.org/documents/Anderson,%20Such%20a%20Body.%20Micropolitics,%20Vol.%204%20No.%202.pdf)


=Excerpts=


==The theses==

"Thesis One: Any “thing” as such is a coherent product in time of multiple causalities and cocausalities:
a double articulation and a work-in-progress, a coherence.

Thesis Two: This co-causal articulation is a totality. Due to specific causes, totalities may be
stratified and therefore characterized by internal or external conflict. This conflict is also coconditional.

Thesis Three: The coherence arises, persists, and decomposes in time; it can change in time
mechanically, consciously by accumulating developments to a stable regime, or consciously by
transforming said regime. Transformation may be necessary to produce responsible results.
Theory can help (if responsible) or hinder (if not) any transformation.

Thesis Four: Responsible intervention can produce real transformation in the totality. The
first intervention is to recognize the nature of a given situation; the second is to maintain
relationship with it over time. Responsibility is characterized by critical clarity, competence,
consciousness, and compassion.

Thesis Five: Where duality (form) is an aggregate of co-conditioned products-in-process,
nonduality (emptiness) is immanent, unconditioned. Recognizing and remembering this are the
subjective valences of the first and second interventions, respectively.

Thesis Six: Coherences are best understood when read responsibly, each in their own
specificity and with reference to their own histories (as form), not exclusively or absolutely by
any developmental or classificatory scheme of values (which are also coherences with histories).
Thesis Seven: New values may be made, emergent cultural forms do arise, but “New Ages”
do not “emerge” mechanically or Providentially. New regimes, like new values, are responsibly
made.

Thesis Eight: The current regime produces unacceptable results. If a “New Age” is to be
made, transformative practice must be radically democratized, and resist commodification."
(http://integral-review.org/documents/Anderson,%20Such%20a%20Body.%20Micropolitics,%20Vol.%204%20No.%202.pdf)

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]