'''* Book: New World of Indigenous Resistance. Noam Chomsky and Voices from North, South and Central America. Edited by Louis Meyer and Benjamin Maldonado Alvarado, City Lights Books, 2010, pp. 416.'''


=Review=

Davide Torri:

"New World of Indigenous Resistance
explores the meaning of indigenous
unrest at the beginning of the 21st
Century. This is done through long
interviews with Noam Chomsky
and the answers he received from a
wide selection of American Voices,
often speaking directly from the
field.

The starting point is the Oaxaca
Movement, in Mexico: in 2004 an
indigenous movement broke out,
requesting dignity and equal rights
for the population. An innovative
educational project was launched,
based on the links between
scholarisation, language(s) and
communities. The Mexican stateformation
process was leaving
behind indigenous communities,
and scholarisation was, under a
veneer of modernisation, just a way
to homogenise them into an obedient
class of low-waged workforce. At
the same time, it was destroying
local cultures and communities.

In a couple of years, in 2006,
the movement was so strong and
diffused that it was able to seize
the power for seven months. During
that time, Oaxaca was administered
through the Popular Assembly
of the People of Oaxaca (APPO,
Asamblea Popular de los Pueblos
de Oaxaca). Conflict with the State
was inevitable, and bloody: Oaxaca
Popular Assembly was defeated and
many people were killed.

The book revolves around the
concept of comunalidad as a new
category of thought in the dialectic
of power between State and Society.
An indigenous category, elaborated
through the practice of conflict
and resistance against Statepromoted
initiatives: ‘Indigenous
Comunalidad reaches far beyond
Western ideas of cooperation,
collectivization, or social concern
for the other, addressing the
philosophical, moral, even spiritual
question: what, or who, is the
very ground of existence, both
human and cosmic?’ (p. 23). For
the indigenous communities, on a
deeper ontological level, the land
does not belong to those who work
it. This could appear like a great gap
between the Indigenist and Marxist
thought, but, as Chomsky points out
quoting Rosa Luxemburg: ‘we are
never going to have socialism until
there is a spiritual transformation
among the population to recognise
a different array of values’ (p. 353).

The school is another battlefield
for the Indigenist movement,
and an ambiguous one: as one
commentator says, in Bolivia
during the first half of the twentieth
century the movements fought for
access to scholarisation and access
to the Spanish language; then, in
the second half, for the equally
important preservation of their own
languages. Several commentators
deal with the state-controlled
and organised school system as
an instrument of oppression used
against marginal communities.

But they also recognise the
progressive role a local-centered
and administered school could
have: the use of local idioms and
knowledges together with the usual
school subjects will produce a
conducive environment for the new
generations.

The book explores also the
implication of NAFTA agreements,
and the alternatives brought forth by
the Zapatistas, Via Campesina and
the leftist governments of Brasil,
Venezuela, Bolivia. The book is
intended as an ongoing conversation
offering a vision of indigenous
resistance, survival and possibly a
new hope for the future."
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/old/journal_04.pdf)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Neotraditional]]