
* Special Issue: For the global emancipation of labour:  new movements and struggles around work, workers 
and precarity. Ed. by Peter Waterman, Alice Mattoni et al. Interface: a journal for and about social movements. Volume 4 (2): 1 - 14 (November 2012)

URL = http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Interface-4-2-editorial.pdf (editorial)


=Introduction=

From the editorial: 

"If at the level of formal organisation trade unions remain unchallenged as the 
leading actors of the labour movement, today we see many other movement 
forms emerging from the bases and the margins of labour, often with far more 
active participation. The relationship between “old” and “new” labour 
movements varies hugely from country to country and industry to industry; here 
what we want to stress is that a simple identification of “the labour movement” 
with “trade unions” is both politically and intellectually unhelpful. 

Firstly, from the bases we find movements of workers, often in alliance with 
local communities or other social movements. They are to be found not only in 
advanced industrial and “postindustrial” economies, but also — more 
dramatically — at the capitalist periphery. Labour movements were important 
in the recent Tunisian and Egyptian uprisings (2010-2011). In the world’s 
second biggest economy, China, labour has been flexing its muscles in the most 
repressive of circumstances. Labour struggle has also begun to revive in the 
United States, and in the most dramatic fashion with the occupation of the 
legislature in Wisconsin (2011) and the strikes of Chicago teachers (2012). 

Secondly, we see those who are situated at the margins of labour markets and 
who experience continuous uncertainty. Increasingly addressed as the 
“precariat”, this includes both high- and low-skilled workers in the old 
metropoles of the global North as well as in the slums and fields of the global 
South. The precarious are often younger people, women and migrants, but 
increasingly those previously full-time workers whose rights and conditions are 
under attack due to the current economic crisis. 

The margins also include the un- and under-employed. Since the end of the long 
boom, orthodox economics accepts a higher rate of unemployment in the global 
North as “full” employment. Meanwhile, the reserve army of labour in the 
majority world also lays the basis for precarious and marginal work. As Shaikh 
puts it, 
 
Finally, as capitalism develops, so too does its level of mechanisation, so that it is 
progressively less able to absorb labour. In the developed countries, this 
manifests itself as a growing mass of unemployed people at any given “natural” 
rate of unemployment. In the Third World, as the incursion of capitalist relations 
lays waste to earlier social forms, the mechanised processes which replace then 
are able to pick up only a fraction of the huge numbers previously “set free”. Thus 
the rising productivity of capitalist production is accompanied by a growing pool 
of redundant labour all across the globe. The presence of starving masses in the 
Third World, as well as of floating populations of unemployed in the developed 
capitalist world, are bitter reminders of these inherent tendencies. (1990: 77) 
 
New movements are taking place at the local, national and transnational level, 
signalling the ongoing transformation of workers’ struggle all over the world. As 
capitalism reorganises, expands and reinvents, so too does resistance to its  
exploitation and subjugation. Some trade unions are struggling to organise 
amongst workers who do not conform to the model of the full-time, male, 
family-wage-earning worker, and are seeking new ways of mobilizing and 
organising. This appears to be the case with “informal” workers in Ghana and 
Zambia, as with “undocumented” or “excluded” labour in California. Yet both 
trade unions and the labour movements at the bases and at the margins of the 
labour realms, women, men and youth are experimenting with radical new 
forms of struggle, new demands, new places / spaces of articulation, and 
perhaps re-discovering or re-inventing a global movement for “the 
emancipation of labour”. 

In this issue of Interface: a journal for and about social movements, we aim to 
reflect both this immense richness of experiences linked to workers’ movements 
and to articulate what has been learned in one place in ways that may be useful 
for activists elsewhere. The articles in the special section provide a wide range of 
perspectives on workers’ struggles across the globe. In doing this, they reveal 
the complex patterns of political organization and political resistance that show 
the geography of labour struggles in the 21st century, from the local 
mobilizations of precarious workers who engage in the autonomous 
organization of conflict to the transnational coalitions in which trade unions 
engage in international advocacy actions. 

A related question, when looking at the role of trade unions in international 
labour struggle, is their role at the global - or at least transnational - level. The 
recent coordinated strikes, protests and general strikes against austerity 
measures in 23 European countries (14 November 2012), show that after years 
of economic crisis national trade unions are taking a first shy step towards the 
construction of common struggles at the European level. But this is not the 
only way in which trade unions position themselves in the international space of 
labour struggle. 

The voices in this issue are as varied as the shapes and trajectories of current 
workers’ movements. Our perspectives, and those of the authors who 
contributed to this issue, are multiple ones but all in different ways shaped by 
our new context. Some authors are active trade unionists of long standing; 
others are researchers on or in labour movements of different kinds. Some 
voices represent the discontents of “actually-existing” unions and the struggle to 
break the stranglehold of social partnership; others speak from newer 
organizing processes and the world of precarity. Others again, as participants in 
other movements, are coming to recognise the importance of “work” as a major 
site of alienation, of workers as agents of emancipatory movements, and of new 
or renewed labour movements as partners and allies in the global struggle for 
human liberation. Taken together, the voices to be heard in this special issue of 
Interface help us to consider some crucial questions when it comes to workers 
movements in the 21st century. 
 

=Contents=

(selection only)

"Focussing on the childcare service sector in Quebec, Martine D’Amours, Guy 
Bellamare and Louise Briand illustrate how changes in the nature of work 
within contemporary societies contribute to the development of a unionism that 
goes beyond the traditional boundaries of the single factory (and the single 
company), ceases to represent only the traditional unionized workforce, and 
leads to alliances with political and social actors usually outside the sphere of 
unionist activities. The authors show that when unions embrace these 
transformations they shift the logic of action to demands and claims addressing 
identity issues and the whole lives of workers, also outside their working place. 

Considering the case of Italy, Annalisa Murgia and Giulia Selmi discuss two 
recent struggles of precarious workers that did not involve the presence of 
traditional trade unions as agents of bargaining in the workplace: firstly the 
“network of precarious editors”, a group of precarious editors working in 
different publishing houses and secondly the “SEA girls”, a group of precarious 
hostesses working in the main airport of Milan. The two case studies highlight 
the ability of self-organization and self-advocacy of precarious workers beyond 
traditional trade unions. Murgia and Selmi, in fact, argue that the problem is 
not really the impossibility of organizing precarious workers. The real challenge 
seems to be to imagine and then bring into existence unions with structures that 
take into consideration the peculiarities of the living and working conditions of 
precarious workers. 

On a similar vein, Alberto Arribas Lozano discusses the concept of “social 
unionism” through the experience of the Oficinas de Derechos Sociales, a loose 
network of activist groups spread in different Spanish cities. First organized in 
2004-2005, the Oficinas de Derechos Sociales elaborated a political praxis 
rooted in the daily lives of precarious workers, going beyond the “politics of the 
[protest] events”, to produce and circulate critical knowledge on precarity. In 
particular, Arribas discusses one of the main aim of the Oficinas de Derechos 
Sociales: the production of connections between migrant and non-migrant 
precarious workers in the attempt to construct common collective struggles. 

Elise Thorburn’s article discusses the changing composition of the working class 
and proposes that the assembly is distinguishing itself as an emergent mode of 
organising in recent struggles, by comparison with party and bureaucratic union 
models. She argues that this may open the possibility of a “politics of the 
common”, not mediated by the state or capital. Thorburn explores the 
theoretical and historical lineages of autonomist discussions, using the Greater 
Toronto Workers’ Assembly as an example of an effective process of rethinking 
working class organising pointing towards the creation of a new world. 

Tristan Partridge’s action note looks at the organization of everyday life in an 
indigenous village in Ecuador. He shows how community-based collective 
projects aim to counter the negative effects of precarity and temporary labour 
migration in remaking a dignified and sustainable way of life."
(http://www.interfacejournal.net/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Interface-4-2-editorial.pdf)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]