'''New Communications Podcast Directory'''

This consultancy and think thank keeps tracks of some podcasts in the area of 'new communications'.

URL = http://www.newcommblogzine.com/?p=375


Amongst the programs listed:

# An Interview with PHIL GOMES, Senior Counsel, Online Communications, Edelman (Sept. 29, 2005) 

# An Interview with MATT GALLOWAY, blogger at The Basement, WOMM enthusiast (Dec. 3, 2005) -

# An interview with JEREMIAH OWYANG, global web marketing manager of Hitachi Data Systems. (Feb. '06)


More titels are listed here at http://www.newcommblogzine.com/?page_id=196

'''More Examples:'''


# Across the Sound
Each week marketing gurus Joseph Jaffe and Steve Rubel discuss the world of new marketing, media and PR on the Across the Sound podcast. Please subscribe to our podcast using the podcatcher of your choice.
# Blawgzine.com Podcast
Analysis and commentary on the law as it relates to evolving communications tools and technologies and the media. Hosted by Elizabeth L. Fletcher.
# Digital Masters
Digital Masters is a new audio program where experts discuss how technology is changing the business of media. Brought to you by the Ecast national network of ad-serving, digital-downloading jukeboxes in thousands of restaurants and taverns nationwide.
# Doc’s Podblog
Where Doc Searls houses personal podcasts and show notes
# For Immediate Release: The Hobson and Holtz Report
A podcast from Neville Hobson & Shel Holtz a pair of communication professionals who think they have something to say. Hobson is based in Amsterdam, and Holtz is located in California. Their podcast is updated on Mondays and Thursdays.
# Lubetkin's Other Blog
Steve Lubetkin comments on journalism, communications, and public relations issues of importance, and encourages a dialogue with readers. He's a veteran public relations practitioner and a long-time national leader in the PRSA.
# New Communications Conversations
The latest feature from the New Communications Blogzine is New Communications Conversations, a podcast that will feature interviews with industry leaders, as well as highlight unsigned music.
# PodSafe Music Network
The best in new music and music podcasts from the creators of PodShow.com
# San Francisco Chronicle Business Podcast
Audio Highlights and the "Stories Behind the Stories'' from the weekly Personal Technology section of The San Francisco Chronicle, Northern California's Largest Newspaper. Hosts: Benny Evangelista, Marcus Chan
# Tech Media This Week
The SWMS Tech Media This Week podcast
# The Big Sessions
Want to know what's on the biggest minds in interactive and traditional advertising? That's the kind of stuff The BIG Sessions will uncover in our frank, exclusive interviews with the industry's most influential players. With Jon Raj.



[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]