

'''= a utopian socialist settlement in Paraguay founded by the Australian New Australian Movement.'''

URL = http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Australia 


=Discussion=

David Week:

"New Australia was a utopian socialist settlement in Paraguay founded by the Australian New Australian Movement. The colony was officially founded on 28 September 1893 as Colonia Nueva Australia and comprised 238 adults and children.

Paraguay was chosen as the site of the settlement. Lane recruited many, and the first ship left Sydney in July 1893 for Paraguay, where the government was keen to get white settlers and had offered the group a large area of good land. 

The founding of the settlement was of interest to left-wing thinkers worldwide; of the settlement Peter Kropotkin said,

The fact that men and women, who have made Australia what it is, are compelled to migrate from it, speaks volumes in itself. 'Make the land, be the dung which renders it productive, build the centres of civilisation which render it valuable – and go away!' That is the true picture of modern capitalist management. The same here, the same at the antipodes – always the same!
[http://www.argentinaindependent.com/travel/travelfeature/new-australia-the-australian-colony-in-paraguay/]

William Lane’s autocratic leadership soon led to dissent. The pledges to teetotalism and the ‘colour line’ he had required of the new settlers had seemed logical back in Australia – but here, surrounded by the temptations of beautiful Guaraní women (in a country where roughly 80% of the population were female) and caña, the local sugar-cane rum, they proved highly contentious.

As one of the colony’s descendents, famous comic-book writer Robin Wood, put it to me: “Lane had two rules: 1) No booze. A group of Irish, Scots and Australians? Come on! And 2) No hanky-panky with the natives. For a socialist, he was very racist, and very stupid.”

Riven with tension and disagreement, the colony soon split into two. The original New Australia abandoned communal ownership, dividing up into private family plots, while Lane established a new colony, Cosme. Even more isolated than Nueva Australia, Cosme struggled on until 1909 – but Lane himself left in 1899 after it became obvious his grand plan was doomed to failure.
[http://www.migrationheritage.nsw.gov.au/exhibition/objectsthroughtime/1893-the-new-australia-colony-collection/]

Paraguay was desperately trying to rebuild itself after the devastating Triple Alliance War of 1864-1870 wiped out most of the nation’s young men. Paraguay’s population was reduced from 525,000 to 220,000, leaving a majority of women, children, old and disabled.

Mary Gilmore eventually returned to Australia and in a 1959 interview Gilmore said:

It was purely communistic. I wouldn’t say it was a success, but I certainly wouldn’t say it was a failure. The reason it had to break up, or disappear, is because William Lane would only have British people in it…

About 2,000 Paraguayans can trace their ancestry to the 500 unionists who have names like Wood, McLeod, Burke and Murray. Some of their descendents are still on the same farms today.

Many descendants of the New Australian utopians have since migrated to Australia. Despite this however the Australia Government does not grant the descendants of the New Australian utopians special migration consideration."


[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Paraguay]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P History]]