

=Text=

Produced by Michael Shuman and Gilbert Rochecouste:

"The New Local Principles

==Place==

Placemaking is the art of creating meaningful, inclusive
and connected places. It is the collaborative process
of making places that benefit all people, everyday. A
thriving place is a place where the environment and
community are vibrant, vital and resilient.


==Regeneration==

Regeneration is where we put back more into our
ecological and social fabric than we take out. It
addresses the whole system and strives to make it
better and more resilient. The goal of regeneration is
to increase our ecological fabric, while also increasing
our social and cultural cohesion, to enhance local life
supporting systems. Regeneration empowers local
enterprises to be part of their place and feel pride
in contributing to it, supporting them to think about
what they can do to improve the local environment.


==Connectivity==

Connectivity matters for the New Local in two ways.
First, success in economic development can no longer
depend on one indicator like jobs or GDP but instead
must integrate and be attentive to all ten principles.
In short, think and act holistically. Second, it’s helpful
to find inspirational municipal models not only in
Australia but across the planet.


==Ownership==

Local ownership of business matters. A growing body
of evidence shows that, compared to outside-owned
businesses, local businesses generate per dollar of
production more income, wealth, jobs, and charitable
contributions. Moreover, communities with higher
levels of local ownership have more social equality,
civic engagement, and sustainability.


==Diversification==

While traditional economic development encourages
the nurturing of a small number of “world class”
industries to achieve comparative advantages, the
New Local encourages economic diversification,
greater self-reliance, and stronger reliance.
Paradoxically, a community that is more self-reliant is
often wealthier and has many more promising export
sectors.


==Reinvestment==
Reinvestment means helping local residents,
businesses, and governmental bodies redirect their
capital from global businesses to local ones. It means
more local banking, more local securities, more local
investment funds, and more localized superannuation
options.


==Democracy==

Democracy is about power to the people, where
empowered citizens directly participate in the
decisions affecting their lives, communities and
local ecologies. A new approach to resilience and
economic development has a foundation of authentic
engagement at its core, supported by powerful
engagement and governance tools and models.


==Equity==

Social equity is broadly defined as the more equal
distribution of public resources, infrastructure and
goods. It is about providing equitable access to these
basic needs and opportunities, readily and locally,
irrespective of race, class and other dimensions of
social identity.


==Culture==

Culture is about the rituals, customs, ideas and
expressions of people. Culturally rich places are
shaped through freedom of expression, creative
risk-taking and showcasing diverse voices. Strong,
collective community values and cultural assets
enhance a sense of place and local identity, which can
occur when communities are empowered to innovate
and express themselves creatively.


==Innovation==

Innovation means continuously looking for ways
to expand and improve existing businesses, and
successfully launch new ones. It means providing
entrepreneurs with the technology, assistance,
space, mentors, networks, and finance to succeed.
Entrepreneurs, moreover, include not just the “best
and the brightest” but all parts of the population,
such as the young, retirees, immigrants, people of
color, the chronically unemployed, and the disabled."

[[Category:Localization]]