
'''* Article: La richesse au-delà de la valeur. Jean-Marie Harribey. Revue du MAUSS 2005/2 (no 26), pages 349 à 365'''

URL = https://www.cairn.info/revue-du-mauss-2005-2-page-349.htm

=Summary=

From the reading notes of Michel Bauwens, 2006:

This article discusses new visions of wealth and value:

1) The French critique of the concept of wealth of classical political economy, with authors like Dominique Meda and Patrick Viveret

2) The US work on alternative metrics. Jean Gadrey et Florence Jany-Catrice recently (2005) summarized these types of contributions.

3) A third tendency (Negri, Moulier-Boutang), i.e. the analysts of cognitive capitalism, stress the origins of wealth outside of the economy.


The author is not convinced by the latter and wants to return to the first critieuqe, so as to get at an enriched definition of wealth and value.

The author says that non-monetary services should not be 'reduced' and added to GDP metrics.


GDP only measures the monetary sphere, i.e.
    
- 1) the for-profit sector based on exchange value
    
- 2) the non-profit sector based based on use value; where profit is replaced by collective  funding.


But it does not measure non-monetary services! It only counts as value what is produced for capital. (Similarly, Marx and Smith considered domestic services to be unproductive because they did not generate capital)

The author says that non-monetary services should not be 'reduced' and added to GDP metrics.

=French-Language Abstract=

From the introduction:

"Un renouveau de la réflexion sur la richesse a été amorcé depuis quelques années. Sans doute est-il dû à la prise de conscience de l’immensité des dégâts provoqués par le capitalisme mondial qui, pour élargir la base productive de son accumulation, a besoin de pousser jusqu’à son paroxysme la marchandisation des activités humaines. Portée par les récents mouvements sociaux contre le néolibéralisme, la critique de la marchandisation du monde va alors de pair avec une reconsidération de la richesse, c’est-à-dire avec une remise en cause de ce que le capitalisme considère comme étant de la richesse légitime, celle dont il lui importe d’assurer la croissance perpétuelle.

Les travaux théoriques s’inscrivant dans cette perspective de renouveau adoptent des voies différentes."

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]