
'''= "Initiative is organized by reState Foundation and Dark Matter Labs".'''

URL =


=Description=

"New Realities Design Lab is an interdisciplinary project aiming to design a full-spectrum planetary transition strategy, building new social, economic, environmental, and governance systems for the world, along with a detailed operational manual for delivering each of its components. The strategy considers planetary boundaries and the wellness of living beings, as well as technological and organizational innovation. It provides new institutional infrastructure to build capacity across structures.

Both the strategy and the operational manual would serve as a point of reference for governments, international organizations, and communities, and will be widely distributed through all available channels within and outside the sphere of influence of individuals and organizations involved in their creation. Building the strategy and the operational manual will be followed by a “road show” to distribute the results at global events and among decision-makers.

In a series of New Realities Design Lab intimate gatherings happening in 2024-2025, the project brings together 5-6 top-level intellectuals at a time: theorists and practitioners pioneering innovative ideas and frameworks for societal organization, system change, and governance innovation. Through facilitated discussions and experiences, they merge their ideas into a growing planetary paper that will eventually become the operational manual to transition humanity to the next phase of its consciousness, implemented and tested in innovative governance spaces (private cities, islands, free zones, supranational arrangements, and bioregions etc.), followed by traditional systems.

Each gathering will focus on a particular aspect of the alternative planetary strategy: planetary civics, oceans, governance, economic models, education, etc. Each gathering produces a planetary paper and an operating manual on a specific subject.

The resulting full strategy and manual, consisting of inputs from all gatherings, will be turned into a living wiki-like resource for the public to contribute to in a participatory way. The resource will be shared with governments and international organizations, and promoted at various international events, making it an action plan for the public and private sectors to follow.

Further steps can include developing regulatory sandboxes and sites to prototype new models.

The initiative is organized by [[reState Foundation]] and [[Dark Matter Labs]], with more system change partners joining the alliance at a later stage."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1izwNKNhLJrMnRAhH2x-j8shcT7waZcCSrTSeOXWXfJw/edit])


[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Research]]