
'''= Shareable has compiled the following list of favorite Twitter users who are posting news and information about the new sharing economy.''' 

Top Sharing Tweeps, http://shareable.net/blog/top-sharing-tweeps-to-learn-more-about-the-twittersphere

=Directory=

==Top Sharing Tweeps==

#@ShareableDesign   That's us folks. Shareable Magazine's Twitter stream covering the sharing trend and offering the largest collection of sharing how-to posts. 
#@mbauwens Founder of p2pfoundation with updates on open and free, participatory, and commons developments.
#@onthecommons On the Commons is a citizens’ network that highlights the importance of the commons in our lives, and promotes innovative commons-based solutions.
#@rachelbotsman  Author on the power of collaborative technologies to transform business, public services and the way we live.
#@collcons  Collaborative Consumption is the explosion in traditional sharing, lending, renting and swapping redefined through tech and peer communities
#@camerontw  Sustainable service systems designs, critical design thinking from the Chair of Design Thinking and Sustainability department, School of Design Strategies, Parsons
#@instigating  Lisa Gansky, entrepreneur and author of The Mesh, a book about the sharing economy and more. 
#@rushkoff  Influential media theorist, author of Life, Inc. and Program or be Programmed, and convener of the upcoming Contact p2p festival.
 
==Art and Life==

#@rowdykittens  Social change through simple living. 
#@creativecommons  A nonprofit corporation dedicated to making it easier for people to share and build upon the work of others.
#@ninaksimon Designs participatory, interactive, slightly strange museum exhibits all over the place.
#@freeculture  A diverse, non-partisan group of students and young people who are working to get their peers involved in the free culture movement.
#@GAFFTA Gray Area Foundation for the Arts is dedicated to building social consciousness through digital culture. They nurture connections between art, design, sound and technology.
#@writesinlaLos Angeles freelance writer covering culture, literature and sustainable living.
 
==Business==

#@trustcurrency Alternative economy - coops, timebanking, currencies, community self-sufficiency, and more.
#@opensourceway#Open source as applied to everything in work and life.
#@harkopen Open source hardware community. News, projects and tutorials from the first dedicated open hardware hosting service.
#@Deskmag  Twitter account for the magazine about coworking.
#@jenangel  Media activist and publicist interested in food, activism, media, communications, and progressive business development
#@accesstrumps News and insights around the sharing economy
#@socialadvoc8 Collaborative consumption and social innovation tweeter extraordinaire.
 
==Cities==

#@TracyDavis Planning commissioner & civic blogger, tweeting about land use and local issues.
#@LocalManagers City/County Management Association: Leaders at the Core of Better Communities
#@urbandata  Local & global urban affairs: City planning, health equity, governance 2.0, design, data & community indicator
#@BrokenCityLab Broken City Lab is an artist-led collective working in art and collaborative social practice, interested in the city, tactics, interventions, Windsor & Detroit.
#@MikeLydon Founding Principal of The Street Plans Collaborative. Co-Author of The Smart Growth Manual. Life is better on two wheels.
#@UrbanSubversion Passionate about acitivites that broaden our usage of urban functionality
#@ehooge Cities and social innovation in the digital age.  Tweets a steady stream of urban goodness with a European perspective.
#@pps_placemaking  The Project for Public Space's news stream of the placemaking movement.
 

==Communities and Neighborhoods==

#@leoromero  A great source of neighborhood community building tools and insights.
#@rentalic  A fast growing peer to peer rental service.
#@NeighborGoods  Save and earn money by sharing your stuff with your neighbors.
#@hyperlocavore  Hyperlocavore.com is a yardsharing community.
#@ShareSomeSugar  Social & Community Entrepreneur, Brand & Business Strategist, Design Management.
#@sharethemesh  A global community where access to goods and services trumps ownership.
#@cohousing   A news stream of the cohousing movement, US focus. 
 

==Gov 2.0==

#@govfresh  Gov 2.0, open gov news, guides, TV, tech, people. Focusing on open air government.
#@digiphile Alex Howard, the Gov 2.0 Radar Correspondent for O'Reilly Media.
#@codeforamerica Recruiting top web professionals to give a year of service building web 2.0 apps for city governments.
#@ushahidi Africa-based non-profit tech company that specializes in developing free and open source software for information collection,visualization and interactive mapping.
#@Tech4Dev Using mobile technologies to support & strengthen humanitarian work in the fields of global health & disaster relief.

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Resources]]