=Bio=

Alexei Anisin:

"Berdyaev was  born  in  the  Russian  empire  (1874),  and  was  part  of  the  original  Slavophil  intellectual  movement.  He  made  noteworthy  contributions  to  philosophy  – especially   to   personalist   and   existentialist   types.   Politically,   he   rejected   Bolshevism,  the  Russian  Orthodox  Church,  as  well  as  Communism  and  capitalism. At the height of the second Russian Revolution, he was among dozens of  other  intellectuals  that  were  exiled  by  Lenin  and  the  Bolsheviks.  Gaining  passage into Europe by way of the famous “philosopher’s ship,” Berdyaev spent the remainder of his life in France. He was among the few 19th century Russian philosophers that ended up engaging with subjects in both East and West, and in the latter years of his life, he engaged with notable French and British intellectuals in  a  time  that  was  marked  by  the  emergence  of  existentialism  in  philosophical thought. Berdyaev’s dealings with philosophy were diverse – he engaged with thinkers ranging from Plato, Aristotle, Hegel, Kant, Nietszche, Kierkegaard, Heidegger, Jaspers, Camus, to Jacob Boehme and E.T.A Hoffmann, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Honore ́ de Balzac, among others. Berdyaev described himself as a philosopher of personalism and creativity –   personality was arguably the foremost componentof his thought. Personality for Berdyaev is not equatable to individualism as each personality  is  spiritual,  unique,  and  outside  the  realm  of  objectivity  (Berdyaev  1955). Personality is not a natural phenomenon but a spiritual one and is greatly subjective.  Through  exercising  personality,  one  can  pursue  the  highest  truth,  which Berdyaev assumed to belong to the spiritual realm rather than to the realm of  Caesar  (the  realm  of  objectivity)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646)


=Excerpts=

Via [http://ahistoryofthepresentananthology.blogspot.com/search/label/Berdjaev]:

A selection from The End of Our Time (aka A New Middle Ages), 1924, and The Fate of Modern Man, 1935, by Nicholas Berdjaev.


Although these are two works are quite separate, a continuity of themes connects them. In the preface of The Fate of Modern Man Berdjaev said that it was a kind of epilogue to The End of Our Time which covers the 11 years since its publication. For these reasons we will treat them here together.


"In his book about the 'new Middle Ages', the Russian emigrant Berdjaev gave his view on the difference between Western elements of European culture... and the Eastern elements... . He felt the future lay in the Eastern element, because it held the remedy against the mechanistic and atheistic spirit of the West."

- Henk Wesseling (A Cape of Asia: Essays on European History by , 2011).


==The End of Our Time ('A New Middle Ages')==

  
"When he [man] broke away from the spiritual moorings of his life he tore himself from the deeps and went to the surface; and he has become more and more superficial. When he lost the spiritual centre of Being, he lost his own at the same time.

Faith in the ultimate political and social salvation of mankind is quenched. We have reached settlement-day after a series of centuries during which movement was from the centre, the spiritual core of life, to the periphery, its surface and social exterior. And the more empty of religious significance social life has become, the more it has tyrannized over the general life of man.  … The world needs a strong reaction from this domination by exterior things, a change back in favour of interior spiritual life, not only for the sake of individuals but for the sake of real metaphysical life itself. To many who are caught up in the web of modern activities this must sound like an invitation to suicide. But we have got to choose. The life of the spirit is either a sublime reality or an illusion: accordingly we have either to look for salvation in it rather than in the fuss of politics, or else dismiss it altogether as false. When it seems that everything is over and finished, when the earth crumbles away under our feet as it does today, when there is neither hope nor illusion, when we can see all things naked and undeceiving, then is the acceptable time for a religious quickening in the world. We are at that time… .



==The Fate of Modern Man.==

From Chapter 1: A Judgement on History-- The War

"It has become a banality to say that we live in a time of historical crisis, that a whole epoch is ending, and a new one, as yet without a name, is beginning. Some are glad for this, others sorry, but all agree upon the fact. In reality what is happening is something even deeper. We are witnessing a judgement upon not one epoch in history, but upon history itself. And in this sense we live in an apocalyptic time; in this sense only, and not in the sense of the swift arrival of the end of the world. There is such a thing as the internal apocalypse of history. The apocalypse is not merely a revelation of the end of the world: it is also a revelation of the inner events of history, of the internal judgement upon history itself. And this is what is happening now.

There is a meaning of history, and the recognition of this meaning belongs to Christianity.

Hegel spoke of the cleverness of the spirit of history, a cleverness which deceives man for the purpose of gaining its own ends. It may be said that in fact the subject of history is not man, not even mankind, but a non-human reason or spirit... . 

Hegel was a sort of incarnation in thought of the spirit of history.

Against Hegel and against his idea of a universal spirit, revealing itself in history, men like Dostoevsky and Kirkegaard rose in protest. The objectivization of a spirit in history, which held the mind of Hegel, really breaks away from the inner mystery of human existence... .
 
The religious and historic consciousness of Hinduism puts history aside, it is anti-historical. [...]  Christianity is·historic: it recognizes the meaning of history and operates in history. The Incarnation took place in history. But Christianity, although it is a historic force and although it has made all Christian nations historic, has never been able to realize itself within history. [...] Christianity accepts history, operates within it, even battles against it, and its spirit would be unrecognizable in an historic objectivization.  In a certain sense, every single human soul has more meaning and value than the whole of history with its empires, its wars and revolutions, its blossoming and fading civilizations. And because of this, the break with history is inevitable- a judgment upon history must be passed.

Once the veil of civilization was torn aside by the war, the prime realities were revealed in all their nakedness. The faith in mankind... was finally shattered. [...] The humanist myth about man was exploded, and the abyss yawned at the feet of mankind. The wolf-like life of capitalist society was not able to encourage and support the faith in man.

The war was the catastrophic moment which disclosed that chaos moves beneath the false civilization of capitalism.

The enthusiasm of Nazi youth... is pathological in character, and resembles animation produced by an injection of camphor, rather than the springtime of national life. The German people are in a state of collective insanity, resulting from the degradation and misfortune to which they have been subject.

The search for leaders indicates the fall of democracy and decline into Caesarism... . [...] ...only one positive, creative force reigns-- the power of technics.
Man is entering a new cosmos. All the elements of our epoch were present in the past, but now they are generalized, universalized and revealed at last in their true aspect. In these days of the world's agony we feel keenly that we are living in a fallen world, torn asunder by incurable contradictions. [...]  We discover that we are living in a world of crime and phantasms. The world was all this before, but we have just now discovered it.

The world is living in a period of agony which greatly resembles that of the end of antiquity. But the present situation is more helpless, since at the close of antiquity Christianity entered the world as a new, young force, while now Christianity... is old and burdened with a long history in which Christians have often sinned and betrayed their ideal. And we hall see that the judgement upon history is also a judgement upon Christianity in history.

The youth of the whole world is seeking a new order, a world-revolution is in progress. But we do not feel the joy of the birth of new life: shadows cover the world. A cycle of cosmic catastrophes and collapses has begun. But for Christians specially this consciousness brings no despair, and it should not deter us from realizing justice and serving the truth in everyday life. We are witnessing a return to the first sources, to the final depths. Christianity is not optimism, but Christian pessimism can be only relative, since beyond the world of unreason and meaninglessness Christianity sees a meaning. The judgement upon history is the voice of reason: it presupposes reason. The inner apocalypse of history is a revelation of the results of not realizing in history the Kingdom of God, i.e., meaning. To accept history is to accept revolution as well. Those who disavow revolution and consider it a crime, forget that to a large degree history is a crime. He who does not approve of crime, should strive for the realization of the Kingdom of God."


=Discussion=

==Nicolas Berdyaev's role in the Cosmist movement==

Alexei Anisin:

"The  futuristic theme in the book under attention is where Berdyaev’s place in Russian Cosmism can be made intelligible. Cosmism was an intellectual movement that emerged in the late 19th century and was developed throughout the first third of the 20th century. Cosmists (the most prominent of which was Nikolai Fedorov) were in favor of technological development and viewed technology as a means to overcome  death  and  achieve  universal  salvation.  The  progress  of  science  was  viewed  to  be  indefinite,  and  with  science,  humans  can  become  immortal  and  even  reincarnate  old  historical  persons.  Eventually,  scientific  progress  would  enable human beings to be in control of the cosmos and to fulfil the biblical idea of resurrection. Today, Cosmism is gaining increasing ideological prevalence in technocratic  circles  in  Russia  (Faure  2021).  


Young  (2012)  defines  Russian  Cosmism in the following way, 

- ''“a highly controversial and oxymoronic blend of activist    speculation,    futuristic    traditionalism,    religious    science,    exoteric    esotericism, utopian pragmatism, idealistic materialism – higher magic partnered to higher mathematics” (Young 2012, 3).''

  
Russian Cosmism intersects between a heterogeneous collection of topics and in this “loose, diverse, and complex tendency,” (Young 2012, 11), Berdyaev’s work on the Russian soul (in his, the Russian Idea) is drawn upon by Young to describe Berdyaev’s eschatological ideas on the Russian soul and its position in achieving Russia’s  eschatological  destiny.  Interestingly  enough,  Young’s  (2012)  analysis  of  Russian  Cosmism  features  an  autobiographical  chapter  of  Berdyaev’s  life,  mentions his name 127 times throughout the book as a whole, but does not cite or engage with the Realm of Caesar and the Realm of Spirit and its five stages. This is significant because the historical time periods that are categorized in this work, especially the final (fifth) period, appear to share more similarity with Heidegger’s ideas   on   technology,   rather   than   with   the   technological   and   scientific   characteristics  shared  by  Cosmists.  

Young  (2012)  classifies  Berdyaev  into  the  “religious Cosmist” category. The religious type stands in contrast to the scientific type and figures as Tsiolkovsky or Chizhevsky, yet it would be farfetched to think that  Berdyaev  was  in  any  way  a  proponent  of  technological  advancement.  Similarly,  although  Young  acknowledges  Berdyaev  is  somewhat  different  than  other  Cosmists,  for  example,  in  explaining  the  collectivist  character  of  Russian Cosmists, Young notes that,  if  conflict  should  arise  between  the  interests  of  the  individual  particle  and  the  interests of the whole, the Cosmists would almost unanimously (Berdyaev being the possible dissident) prefer the interests of the whole. (Young 2012, 240). The issue in such a categorization is that there is too much evidence pointing to  Berdyaev’s  philosophy  as  being  incompatible  with  the  ultimate  aims  of  Cosmism.  In  Truth  and  Revelation  (1953),  Berdyaev  put  forward  a  number  of  additional  points  about  what  spiritual  transformation  and  an  era  that  will  be  dominated by spirit. The entire basis of Berdyaev’s projection of a future spiritual transformation is that it will take place in the demarcated realm of spirit, away from the realm of Caesar (Berdyaev 1953, 142). Specifically, “the era of the spirit can be nothing but a revelation of sense of community which is not merely social but also cosmic, not only a brotherhood of man, but a brotherhood of men with all cosmic life, with the whole creation” (Berdyaev 1953,149). This emancipatory transformation   will   free   human   beings   from   social   objectification   and   sociomorphisms   that   Berdyaev   identified   in   the   first   four   periods   of   his   framework.  

Berdyaev  most  likely  would  have  viewed  Cosmisist  ideas  of  space  colonization,  scientifically  prolonged  life  spans,  immortality,  and  resurrecting  figures of the past (beginning with Adam and Eve; Tucker 2017) to be a dangerous transgression  of  the  Realm  of  Caesar  because  such  attempts  constitute  human  efforts of replacing God.    Another  example  can  be  observed  in  Berdyaev’s  assessment  of  the  most  notable  of  Cosmists  (N.  Fedorov)  Berdyaev  described  Fedorov’s  framework  as  one that was undesirably projective because it shifted the sphere of existing to the sphere of necessity, into projectivism. This shift from what exists to what should exist is projectivism and can also be considered as constituting a brash form of normativity (Medzibrodszky 2014). While I will not problematize Young’s (2012) inclusion   of   who   can   be   considered   to   be   a   Russian   Cosmist   or   not   (Medzibrodszky  2014  identifies  several  inconsistencies  about  the  typology  as  a  whole),  it  is  worth  considering  that  Berdyaev  believed  the  spiritual  aspect  of  human  nature  would  take  precedence  over  the  technical  side,  specifically  that  spirituality  would  rid  society  of  technocratic  elites.  This  runs  counter  to  the  Cosmisists’  ideas  that  the  state  could  support  some  form  of  transformative  and  emancipative  future  in  which  science  and  technology  could  lead  to  universal  salvation  and  immortality.  Perhaps  the  most  powerful  statement  that  Berdyaev  put forward against scientific practice is as follows, [S]cientific  discoveries  and  technical  inventions  represent  the  terrible  danger  of  more  and  more  war.  The  chemists,  perhaps  quite  unselfishly,  discover  at  least  partial  truth,  but  the  result  has  been  the  atomic  bomb,  which  threatens  our  destruction. This goes on in the realm of Caesar. Salvation can come only by the light of integral Truth, which is revealed in the realm of Spirit. (Berdyaev 1952, 22)"

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646) 

=More information=

==Publications==

Berdyaev, N. The Nightmare of an Evil Good. Journal Put', jun-jul. No. 4, 103-116, 1926. Accessible at: http://www.berdyaev.com/berdiaev/berd_lib/1926_312.html

Berdyaev, N. Solitude and Society, tr. George Reavey. London: Geoffrey Bles, 1938. 

Berdyaev,  N.  The  Realm  of   Spirit  and  the  Realm  of   Caesar.  Trans.  by  Donald  A.  Lowrie.  London: Victor Gollancz, 1952. 

Berdyaev.  N. The Meaning of  the Creative Act. Trans. by Donald A. Lowrie. London: Victor Gollancz, 1955.

Berdyaev. N. Truth and Revelation. New York, NY:  Harper & Brothers, 1953


==About==

Bourke, V. J. ‘The Gnosticism of N. Berdyaev’s Thought’. Fordham University Quarterly 11, no. 3: 409-422, 1936.

Calian, C. S. The Significance of  Eschatology in the Thoughts of  Nicolas Berdyaev. Brill Archive, 1965

Dye, J. W. ‘Nikolai Berdyaev and His Ideas on the Fundamental Nature of All E n t i t i e s ’.   Ultimate Reality and Meaning, 2, pp. 109-134, 1979.

Kiseleva,  M.  S.  ‘Understanding  History:  The  Decisions  of  Nikolai  Berdyaev’.  Russian Studies in Philosophy 53, no. 4, pp. 305-323, 2015.

Lowrie, D. Christian Existentialism. A Berdyaev Anthology, New York, 1965

Porus, V. N. ‘Nikolai Berdyaev on the “Spirits of the Russian Revolution’. Russian Studies in Philosophy55, no. 3-4: pp. 210-226, 2017.

Slesinski, R. ‘Berdyaev and the Relation of Sex, Love and Marriage’. In Proceedings of the American Catholic Philosophical Association, vol. 60, pp. 245-252, 1986

Wright, D. 1962."The Philosophy of Berdyaev."Learning for Living 1, no. 3: 13-16


==Commentaries on his contributions==

Alexei Anisin:

"Due to the heterogeneity of his ideas and the number of different thinkers and philosophers Berdyaev engaged with, a variety of different books  and  scholarly  articles  have  been  published  on  his  contributions  to  philosophy  and  history  in  the  half  century  since  his  passing.  

These  include:  

# accounts  of  Berdyaev’s  decision  making  throughout  pivotal  periods  of  early  twentieth century history (Kiseleva 2016), 
# on his views on the spiritual causes of the 1917 Russian revolution (Porus 2017), 
# his contributions to our understanding of  creativity  (Zhukova  2016),  
# to  philosophy  and  existentialism  (Herberg  1957;  Wright  1962),  
# to  understandings  of  nihilism  (Vishnyakova  2011),  
# to  existential  conceptions of time (Gordon 2012), 
# to the relationship between tragedy and God (Hartshorne  1957),  
# to  our  understanding  of  eschatology  (Calian  1965),  
# to  perceptions of reality and materialism (Dye 1979), 
# to gnosticism (Bourke 1936), 
# to love   and   marriage   (Slesinski   1986),   
# social   unity   (Harold   2010),   
# artistic   representations (Tarasov 2011), 
# Christian existentialism (Lowrie 1965), 
# orthodox theology  (Valliere  2000),  
# freedom  (McLachlan  1992),  
# among  numerous  other  topics including Russian Cosmism (Young 2012)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]