
=Bio=

"Professor Nigel Shadbolt is Deputy Head (Research) of the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the University of Southampton. He is a Director of the Web Science Trust, and of the Web Foundation – organisations that seek to advance our understanding of the Web and promote the Web’s positive impact on society.

In June 2009 together with Sir Tim Berners-Lee he was appointed a Government Information Advisor to help transform public access to Government information – work which resulted in the data.gov.uk site. In May 2010 the Coalition Government appointed him to the Public Sector Transparency Board that oversees public data release. He is also Chair of the Local Public Data Panel within the Department of Communities and Local Government – this seeks to coordinate and promote local open data.

Nigel has researched and published over a wide range of topics; ranging from cognitive psychology to computational neuroscience, Artificial Intelligence to the Semantic Web. He was one of the originators of Web Science – this calls for a systems level approach to the Web that recognises the social and technical factors that shape its development. He has also been heavily involved with the commercial exploitation of research. Recent companies he has helped found include Garlik, Tacit Connexions and Seme4. 


=More Information=

More details of his research and other activities can be found at users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/​nrs/​

Video at http://okcon.org/​2011/​programme/​ the-power-promise-and-perils-of-open-government-data


[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Bios]]