


=Typology=

==Types  of  Nihilism==

David Storey:

"Crosby  describes  five  types  of  nihilism:    political,  moral,  epistemological, cosmic, and existential.  

Crosby is more concerned with the last two types.  He  cites  Schopenhauer  and  Russell  as  unlikely  bedfellows  representing  these  views.  For Schopenhauer, he says, “All striving is rooted in deficiency and need, and thus  in  pain.    Each  organized  form  of  nature,  including  human  beings,  everywhere  encounters resistance to its strivings and must struggle to wrest from its surroundings whatever satisfaction it can achieve” (SA 28).  For Russell, the cosmos is alien and inhuman and the values we cherish have no realization in it.  We must learn to accept that the natural world is oblivious to all distinctions  between  good  and  evil  and  that  it  is  nothing  but  an  arena  of  blind  forces  or  powers...that  combined  by  sheer  chance  in  the  remote  past  to  effect  conditions conducive to the emergence of life (SA 27).  Whereas   Schopenhauer   holds   that   the   cosmos   has   no   intelligible   structure   whatsoever,  Russell’s  view  is  less  extreme,  in  that  he  holds  that  mathematics  and  natural  science  can  provide  us  with  an  accurate  picture  of  nature,  but  one  that  will  not  include  human  values.    Russell’s  universe  is  rationally  knowable  but  finally  meaningless.  Cosmic nihilism is then something of an oxymoron, since it means that there is no such thing as a “cosmos” in the sense of an intelligible and moral order in nature that humans can discover and conform to.  From here, it is a short step to existential nihilism.  This view has been advanced most pointedly by writers such as Sartre and Camus.  Honesty demands that we face the   absurdity   of   our   existence   and   accept   our   eventual   demise;   religion   and   metaphysics are dismissed as happy hedges against death.  The mature person accepts all of this and slogs through, manufacturing meaning through projects chosen for no reason.  He cannot provide a reason for living, for the particular life he chooses, or for choosing not to live.   Now  Löwith,  as  noted  above,  saw  the  rise  of  existentialism  and  nihilism  as  consequences of the collapse of a view of nature as cosmos or creation.  Crosby notes the  major  shift  from  the  medieval  to  the  modern  view  of  nature:    “The  medieval  method  made  the  needs,  purposes,  and  concerns  of  human  beings  the  key  to  its  interpretation of the universe; the scientific method tended to exclude human beings altogether  from  its  concept  of  nature,  thereby  leaving  the  problem  to  philosophy  of  how  to  find  a  place  for  humans  in,  or  in  relation  to,  the  natural  order”  (SA  202).    Moreover,  whereas  the  modern  method  conceived  nature  as  a  uniform  plane  of being, the medieval method “took for granted...the twin notions that the universe was a  domain  of  quality  and  value,  and  that  it  was  a  hierarchically  ordered,  pluralistic  domains, consisting of fundamentally different levels or grades of being” (SA 203).  Moderns  of  different  stripes  all  accept  the  former  prejudice.    The  positivist  and  the  existentialist  may  have  quite  different  views,  but  they  share  the  presupposition  of  cosmic nihilism.  My point here is that existential nihilism—the type that garners the most  attention,  both  literary  and  philosophical—is  derivative  of  cosmic  nihilism.    Here  I  think  Crosby  is  wrong  in  claiming  that  existential  nihilism  is  the  primary  philosophical type of nihilism.  Cosmic nihilism (a view about the status of nature) is more fundamental than existential nihilism (a view about the status of human beings)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/257/379)



=History=

==Origins of Nihilism==

David Storey:

"Nihilism originated as a distinct philosophical concept in the 18th century.  As Michael Gillespie  reports,  “the  concept  of  nihilism  first  came  into  general  usage  as  a  description of the danger [German] idealism posed for the intellectual, spiritual, and political  health  of  humanity.    The  first  to  use  the  term  in  print  was  apparently  F.  L.  Goetzius  in  his  De  nonismo  et  nihilism  in  theologia  (1733).”3    Tracts  portraying  Kantian  critical philosophy as a form of nihilism appeared near the end of the century, but it would  fall  to  F.H.  Jacobi  to  give  the  first  explicit  formulation  of  the  concept.    Convinced  that  idealism  posed  an  existential  threat  to  traditional  Christian  belief,  Jacobi  attacked  both  Kant  and  Fichte,  the  former  in  his  essay,  “Idealism  and  Nihilism,” and the latter in a letter to Fichte in 1799.  He branded Fichte’s philosophy as  nihilism  by  drawing  a  stark  contrast  between  a  steadfast  faith  in  a  God  beyond  human subjectivity and an insatiable reason that, as Otto Poeggeler puts it, “perceives only   itself”   and   “dissolves   everything   that   is   given   into   the   nothingness   of   subjectivity.”

Jacobi  believed  that  idealism  entailed  a  lopsided  focus  on  human  subjectivity  that  not  only  shut  out  the  divine,  but  severed  itself  from  any  external  reality whatsoever, including nature.  If things-in-themselves cannot be cognized, and actuality  itself  is  but  a  category  of  the  understanding,  then  it  seems  to  follow  that  things-in-themselves do not actually exist.  Idealism shifts, to use Gilson’s formulation, from the “exterior to the interior,” but does not make the move from the “interior to the  superior”;  in  fact,  it  does  not  “move”  at  all,  since  the  exterior—nature—is  regarded as a realm of mere appearances.  For Jacobi, it is only through a decisive act of  will,  a  recognition  of  the  stark  either/or  before  us  and  a  resolute  commitment  to  God, that humans can find their proper place.  As Jacobi challenges Fichte: “God is and is outside of me, a living essence that subsists for itself, or I am God.  There is no third possibility.”5Three  things  stand  out  in  this  passage.    First,  Jabobi  is  simultaneously  charging  Fichte with pantheism and atheism, positions he regards as basically identical.  Before mounting  his  assault  on  idealism,  Jacobi  had  argued  that  Spinoza’s  pantheism  was  actually  atheism.    Jacobi  seems  to  have  regarded  Fichte’s  idealism  as  a  doomed  attempt  to  marry  the  focus  on  freedom  in  Descartes  and  Kant  to  Spinoza’s  holistic  and divinized view of nature.  So nihilism is portrayed as emerging, roughly speaking, out  of  attempts  to  integrate  modern  conceptions  of  freedom  and  nature.    Second,  Jacobi’s denial of a “third way” is, as we will see, a common complaint among critics of  nihilism,  or  of  philosophies  alleged  to  be  nihilistic.    Those  who  cannot  accept  the  basic  dualities  and  either/or’s  of  existence,  so  the  thinking  goes,  attempt  to  sublate  them  in  elaborate  monistic  philosophies  that  bend  logic  and  language  beyond  their  breaking  points  in  order  to  chart  a  third  way--to,  in  Kierkegaard’s  turn  of  biblical  phrase,  join  what  God  has  separated.    The  attempt  to  include  everything  ends  up  embracing nothing.  Third, it is more than a little ironic that Jacobi’s fideistic focus on the will, intended as an antidote to nihilism, would later be pointed to as a symptom of nihilism by Nietzsche because the will is directed toward a false object (God) and by Heidegger  because  the  triumph  of  the  will  in  modern  thought  is  the  fruition  of  the  ancient seed of metaphysics, the drive to frame being as presence."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/257/379)


==Sources of Nihilism==

David Storey:

"Crosby  traces  many  religious  and  philosophical  sources  of  nihilism  through  the  Western  tradition,  but  here  I  just  want  to  focus  on  two  of  the  more   general   ones,   since   they   bear   directly   on   our   conceptions   of   nature:      anthropocentrism and value externalism.  Anthropocentrism, he explains, involves the subordination  of  nature  to  human  beings  and  stems  from  the  Judeo-Christian  assumption  that  nature  must  revolve  around  us:    “we  humans  are  either  at  the  pinnacle  of  a  nature  regarded  as  subservient  to  our  needs  and  concerns,  or  we  are  nowhere.  Everything  in  the  universe  must  focus  mainly  on  us  and  the  problems  and  prospects  of  our  personal  existence,  or  else  the  universe  is  meaningless  and  our  lives  are   drained   of   purpose”   (SA   128).      Once   these   unrealistic   expectations   are   disappointed  and  we  fall  back  to  earth,  the  alternatives—dualism  and  materialism—seem unsatisfying.  It is as though we had resided so long on a mountaintop that the lowlands  came  to  seem  inhospitable.    But  Crosby  points  out  that  our  pique  at  realizing  we  are  not  the  center  of  the  universe  is  conditioned  by  our  clinging  to  anthropocentric  views.    Hence  while  Crosby  laments  the  loss  in  the  transition  from  the  medieval  to  the  modern  view  of  nature  that  I  mentioned  above,  he  approves  of,  e.g., Nietzsche’s critique of the Christian view:  “Nietzsche is correct when he claims that  the  anthropomorphic  assumption  is  a  fundamental  cause  of  nihilism.  ‘We  have  measured the value of the world,’ he says, ‘according to the categories that refer to a purely  fictitious  world....  What  we  find  here  is  still  the  hyperbolic  naievete  of  man:  positing  himself  as  the  meaning  and  measure  of  the  value  of  things’”  (SA  129).    The  premodern cosmos is thus criticized as (at least in part) an unwarranted projection of human  interests,  qualities,  and  desires.    Whitehead  shows  how  this  is  echoed  in  the  modern  period:    “The  individual  subject  of  experience  has  been  substituted  for  the  total drama of reality.  Luther asked, ‘How am I justified?’; modern philosophers have asked,   ‘How   do   I   have   knowledge?’   The   emphasis   lies   upon   the   subject   of   experience.”22This brings us to the second source of nihilism, what Crosby calls the “externality of value.”  This notion, he says, “requires that we deny that nature has, or can have, any intrinsic significance; it supposes that the only value or importance it may have is that  which  is  externally  bestowed”  (SA  131).    Originally  this  assumption  took  root  in  the Judeo-Christian tradition, the idea that the goodness of nature and natural beings lay  in  the  fact  that  they  were  created  by  God.    Later,  however,  once  the  cosmos  is  collapsed and God disappears, humans replace him as the value-bestowers in chief.   In conclusion, Crosby thinks that though nihilism has considerable problems as a philosophy—especially  its  embrace  of  “false  dichotomies” such as “faith in God or existential despair, a human centered world or a meaningless world” --it is a necessary halfway   house   between   untenable   modern   and   premodern   philosophies   and   something  new  (SA  364).    In  addition  to  having  a  useful  debunking  function  and  a  laudable  emphasis  on  human  freedom,  it  drives  home  the  “perspectival  nature  of  all  knowledge, value, and meaning” (SA 366).  When viewed against the backdrop of the Western  tradition,  perspectivism—such  as  that  of  Nietzsche—comes  off  as  a  great  calamity  and  a  crass  relativism.    But  Crosby  submits  that  this  reaction  is  not  necessary:  “To be finite and time-bound is no disaster but simply the character of our life in the world.  The philosophy of nihilism can help us to acknowledge and accept our  finite  state  by  forcing  us  to  give  up  the  age-old  dream  of  attaining  a  God’s-eye  view  of  things”  (SA  366).  Though  Crosby  appears  to  cast  Nietzsche  as  a  nihilist,  I  think this was precisely Nietzsche’s conviction:  that nihilism is a painful but necessary and  even  salutary  stage  through  which  humans  come  to  terms  with  the  interpretive  aspect of their view of nature, abandon otherworldly visions, and realize that nature is an  ever-evolving  complex  of  perspectives,  none  of  which  command  a  total  view  of  reality.  Nihilism opens us up to a “constructivist” view of nature; the difficult part, as Crosby  notes,  is  not  lapsing  into  a  radical  idealism,  where  nature  is  dissolved  into  a  positum of the human subject, precisely Jacobi’s critique of Fichte.  But here we just need  to  note  that  Crosby,  one  of  the  most  astute  contemporary  scholars  of  nihilism,  draws the connection between nihilism and nature."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/257/379)

=More information=

* Special Issue: OVERCOMING NIHILISM. Ed. by  Arran Gare. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 7, no. 2, 2011 

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/273/431

A special issue of the ever excellent Cosmos and History, dedicated to progressive critiques of nihilism, edited by Arran Gare. From the introductory article:

"The inertia of most people in affluent Western nations in the face of the corruption of the   core   institutions   of   their   democracies,   including   their   universities,   their   disempowerment,  the  plundering  of  public  wealth,  growing  economic  injustice  and  economic insecurity, environmental degradation and the threat of a global ecological collapse, has impelled a search for explanations, and in doing so, has forced people to confront  the  nihilism  of  modern  civilization.  It  appears  that  the  devaluation  of  the  highest values, and of life itself, and the consequent loss of meaning in people’s lives, is having practical consequences. Nihilism threatens our liberty, the future of civilization and  even  the  global  ecosystem  which  sustains  the  conditions  for  life.  The  papers  collected in the present edition were not solicited; nevertheless they can all be seen as grappling with and attempting to overcome this nihilism, and as such form a coherent body of work."


'''* Article: NIHILISM, NATURE, AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE COSMOS. David Storey. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 7, no. 2, 2011 '''

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/257/379

"Though nihilism is a major theme in late modern philosophy from Hegel onward, it  is  only  relatively  recently  that  it  has  been  treated  as  the  subject  of  monographs  and  anthologies.    Commentators  have  offered  a  number  of  accounts  of  the  origins  and  nature  of  nihilism.    Some  see  it  as  a  purely  historical  and  predominantly  modern  phenomenon,  a  consequence  of  the  social,  economic,  ecological,  political,  and/or  religious  upheavals  of  modernity.  Others think it stems from human nature itself, and should be seen as a perennial problem.  Still others think that nihilism has ontological significance and issues from the nature of being itself.  In this essay, I survey the most important of these narratives of nihilism to show how  commonly  the  advent  and  spread  of  nihilism  is  linked  with  changing  conceptions  of  (humanity’s  relation  to)  nature.    At  root,  nihilism  is  a  problem  about  humanity’s  relation  to  nature,  about  a  crisis  in  human  freedom  and  willing  after  the  collapse  of  the  cosmos,  the  erosion of a hierarchically ordered nature in which humans have a proper place.  Two themes recur in the literature:  first, the collapse of what is commonly called the “great chain of being” or  the  cosmos  generally;  and  second,  the  increased  importance  placed  on  human  will  and  subjectivity and, correlatively, the significance of human history as opposed to nature."

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]