=Description=

By Alexei Anisin:

In  the  final  years  before  his  passing  (the  late  1940s),  Berdyaev  observed that humanity was set to experience a crisis  of  a  new  totality,  a  crisis  that  had  hitherto  never  been  seen.  The  crisis  was  believed  to  be  based  on  the  onset of a profound lack of balance between spirituality with relation to political organization and modern technology (Berdyaev 1952, 48). It would emerge in the latter half of the twentieth and in the specific fourth historical period as classified in his final book. 


In this understudied work, Berdyaev put forward five historical periods  that  illustrate  past  and  future  relationships  that  human  beings  have  to  nature and the cosmos:

* '''Period one) our submersion to cosmic life''' in which human life depended on the natural world –   a time when personality was not fully developed and humans did  not  fully  conquer  nature;  

* '''Period  two) humans  became  freed  from  cosmic forces''',  from  spirits  and  demons  attributed  to  nature  – the  emergence  of  elementary forms of economics and serfdom; 

* '''Period three) humans carried out mechanization  over  nature  through  scientific  and  technical  control'''  – the development  of  industry,  capitalism,  a  new  necessity  of  selling  one’s  labor  for wages; 

* '''Period  four)  an  era  marked  by  the  disruption  of  cosmic  order,  the  dissolution  of  organic  forms  of  human  organization  and  the  development  of  various autonomous spheres – where one of them claims totalitarian recognition'''. An era marked by a terribly augmented power that humans have over nature and their  enslavement  to  their  own  discoveries;  

* '''Period  five)  an  eschatological  revolution, the decline of the realm of Caesar, the dissolution of state power, labor emancipation, spiritual transmutation''' (Berdyaev 1952, 47).

The  first  three  periods  precede  the  twentieth  century,  whereas  the  fourth  period begins with the era of WWII and spans into the twenty first century – a time which Berdyaev believed would feature the rise of an all-powerful state that would stake a total claim of objectivity over all of social and natural phenomena. This  was  not  only  the  final  stage  of  realm  of  Caesar,  but  also  the  last  possible  stage of this realm. Berdyaev describes this meta-historical trajectory succinctly:  where  once  man  feared  the  demons  of  nature  and  Christ  freed  him  from  demonolatry, now man is in terror before the world-wide mechanization of nature. The power of technics is the final metamorphosis of the realm of Caesar". (Berdyaev 1952, 48).

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646)


=Characteristics=


==The Cycles==

"The  five  periods  are  best  thought  of  as  a  meta-historical  framework.  They  specifically were laid out in the chapter titled, “Man and the Cosmos –   Technics” then  developed  in  subsequent  areas  of  the  book.  The  main  themes  under  attention  in  these  periods  are  two  realms  that  Berdyaev  categorizes  – those  of  spirit (subjectivity) and of Caesar (objectivity and authority). The length of some of the historical periods (for example, period one) may appear to be elongated as Berdyaev  places  emphasis  on  particular  ruptures  that  changed  how  spirituality  and  objectivity  were  conceived  at  different  points  in  time.  Such  ruptures  are  historically rare, finite, and unique. They are assumed to change the trajectory of human affairs. These phases are “typological and not chronological, although the  passage  of  time  plays  a  certain  part”  (Berdyaev  1952,  47).  Moreover,  these  periods must be interpreted with knowledge of one of Berdyaev’s key assumptions about  human  nature  – in  that  the  human  being  is  “at  once  a  natural,  a  social,  and a spiritual being” (Berdyaev 1952, 57). Hence, at varying points throughout history,  we  were  succumbed  and  have  even  been  enslaved  to  different  tiers  of  being.  The  different  periods  classified  by  Berdyaev  center  around  a  dichotomy  of  two  realms  –    the  realm  of  spirit  and  the  realm  of  objectivity.  The  latter  is  interchangeably referred to as the realm of Caesar and is equivalent to latent (and historically variant) large scale forms of political organization such as empires or states.   

The   two   realms   feature   the   intersection   of   the   aforementioned   characteristics in Berdyaev’s assumption of what constitutes the human being and human nature. In the future, Berdyaev foresaw that the Realm of Caesar would dissipate as human beings would move into a more harmonious form of existence that would be spiritual in essence. Freedom would come from within (subjective practices) and not from without (state institutions and social objectification). To get  to  this  point  however,  wide  spread  adversities  were  predicted  to  be  experienced human beings in an era that would be dominated by technology.  Previous insights into technology and its impact on human beings, especially in  terms  of  its  enslaving  characteristics,  have  been  identified  by  a  variety  of  thinkers.  

In  1819,  Jean  Charles  Léonard  de  Sismondi  took  a  position  against  laissez-faire economics and argued that technological development exacerbated the adverse impacts on society that market based systems could have (Israel 2019, 373). Russian Cosmists ranging from Vasily Karazin to Nikolai Fedorov, also held deeply intriguing views on technology and its relationship to the human condition but believed that technology could be positively channeled and enable humans to achieve scientific immortalism and evolve to a new form of humanity (Young 2012).  In  contrast,  Heidegger,  a  philosopher  that  Berdyaev  heavily  studied  and  was  influenced  by,  put  forward  a  wide-reaching  argument  on  technology  in  which  he  conceptualized  it  as  an  ontological  condition  that  humans  must  overcome. Technology arose with industrialized society and was integral to the historical emergence of such a society. The threat posed to humans by technology was not a direct one but constitutes an ontological condition that we can be saved from (Dreyfus 1997, 42). As subsequent sections of this paper will demonstrate, it is likely that Heidegger’s views on technology had greater influence on Berdyaev’s categorization  of  the  fifth  and  final  historical  period  in  his  framework  when compared to Russian Cosmism as well as other technological perspectives.  

'''We  now  turn  to  the  first  period'''  of  Berdyaev’s  framework  and  begin  our  assessment  in  a  time  ''when  human  beings  were  very  much  entangled  in  the  natural world'' and lacked social and spiritual development.


===Period one===

We  begin  at  an  early  stage  of  history  in  which  human  beings  were  “bound  to  Mother-earth” (Berdyaev 1952, 48). This first stage is temporally vast as it ranges from early hunter gatherer societies, orders based around primitive agriculture, to the height of the Roman empire. In this period, humans were submerged into natural  and  organic  surroundings  including  having  established  deeply  rooted relationships  with  vegetation,  animal  life,  and  seasonal  patterns.  Humans  were  within cosmic life and the order of the cosmos, argued Berydaev. They did not yet have any notable wide reaching control over nature and its forces. Spiritually, before  the  historical  emergence  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Christianity,  populations  across the world were largely paganistic or polytheistic. They attributed causality to nature and natural occurrences while simultaneously nature determined their conceptualization  of  group-based  spiritual  existence.  

Berdyaev  describes  this  period  as  being  marked  by  the  determination  of  natural  forces  over  spiritual  beliefs. In the first period, personalism was unknown to the pre-Christian world (Berdyaev  1952,  60).  Although  though  there  was  greater  harmony  between  humans  and  their  natural  surroundings  during  the  first  period  than  in  any  subsequent period, paganistic worldviews were prevalent and personality had yet to develop.

Berdyaev  describes  such  world  views  as  being  demonstrative  of  a  primitive level of spiritual development. In this respect, human life was adversely confined to  cosmic  (natural)  forces.  These  forces  were  rationalized  into  various  cultural  myths –   including mythological concepts such as imaginary creatures, gods that were  representative  of  countless  natural  forces  and  phenomena  (hurricanes,  storms, earthquakes, lunar eclipses), and even of demonaltry. These widespread paganistic  patterns  are  noted  by  Berdyaev  to  have  been  nearly  universal.  

The  paganistic  trend  however,  was  broken  with  the  historical  emergence  of  Jesus  Christ and the rise of Christianity. During the beginning stages of the height of the  Roman  Empire,  Christianity  ended  up  overturning  thousands  of  years  of  demonaltry.  Christ’s  message,  argues  Berdyaev,  led  to  the  emergence  of  a  new era marked by a dualism that had never before been articulated. In detail, Christ asserted a dualism between the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Caesar –a dualism that Berdyaev described as representing spirit and subjectivity (God) on  one  hand  and  objectivity  (Caesar)  on  the  other.  This  separation  was  immensely  significant  as  it  enabled  personality  to  develop  on  a  spiritual  plane  without necessary attachment to natural forces. This profound discursive rupture led human beings into a new period in which nature no longer determined their spiritual activity and existence. While human beings made immense spiritual strides as a result of a radical shift  in  thought,  they  did  not  manage  to  deal  with  an  impending  problem  of  authority.  

By  the  ending  point  of  the  first  historical  era,  the  role  of  authority  turned  out  to  be  highly  adverse  as  authority  prevented  Christ’s  message  from  diffusing properly. This was due to what Berdyaev described as authoritative and socially objectified forces. Such forces are endemic to the human condition. In the depths of consciousness, the human being is predisposed for both goodness and evil (Berdyaev 1926). Along these lines, Berdyaev argued that the origin of authority  is  connected  with  the  existence  of  evil  (Berdyaev  1952,  83).  Once  Christ’s message met authority, it led to his crucifixion and objectification. This is a reoccurring theme in Berdyaev’s thought, specifically in his depictions of the perpetual  adverse  impact  that  authority  has  had  on  humanity.  

Throughout history, when human beings attempted to utilize organized systems of authority to  deal  with  both  revolutionary  messages  or  manifestations  of  evil,  authority  would reproduce and extend evil (Berdyaev 1952, 83). While such statements do indeed appear to be anarchistic, it important to point out that Berdyaev was not an anarchist - he noted that, “it may be said that my view-point is too much under the influence of the anarchist myth, but this is not the case. The idea of a utopia, happy and stateless, is quite foreign to me” (Berdyaev 1952, 72). Furthermore, the dualism of objective and spiritual realms that emerged with Jesus   Christ   enabled   human   beings   to   become   free   from   group-based enslavement  to  cosmic  forces  and  mythical  constructions  that  were  previously  attributed to nature throughout heterogeneous paganistic societies. The notion of  Christ  being  a  savior  of  mankind  for  Berdyaev  was  highly  personalistic  and  spiritual  (Berdyaev  1938).  In  this  regard,  Christ  opened  up  the  realm  of  spirituality through attributing spirituality to a personal level on one hand, and through   disaggregating   it   from   nature   on   the   other.   Even   though   this   disaggregation  was  revolutionary,  it  was  objectified  and  resulted  in  Christ’s  message being used to promote authority in the realm of Caesar. This brings us to  another  key  assumption  held  by  Berdyaev  –  in  that  the  freedom  of  human  personality “cannot be given by society, and by its source and nature it cannot depend upon society – it belongs to man himself, as a spiritual being” (Berdyaev 1952,  59).  This  is  particularly  why  Berdyaev  rejected  communism,  capitalism,  democracy,   and   any   framework   associated   with   large-scale   centralized   governance  due  to  their  incompatibility  with  spirituality  – the  kernel  of  true  freedom. He also rejected organized religion such as the Catholic or Orthodox Churches due to their tendency to objectify religion in the realm of Caesar.  


===Period two===

'''The second period spans from the time the diffusion of objectified Christianity occurred (at the height of the Roman empire) to the end of the Middle Ages''' (15th and  16th  centuries).  

Early  on,  Christianity  was  turned  into  an  objectified  authoritative  structure  and  even  though  this  helped  foster  a  possibility  for  a  “supreme  spiritual  revolution”  (Berdyaev  1952,  60)  in  comparison  to  the  status  quo of paganism found in the first period, this revolution did not actually ever arise due to objectification and the realm of Caesar. Christianity provided human beings  with  a  theoretical  possibility  to  spiritually  free  themselves  from  natural  forces and the limitless power of society and the state. As such, Berdyaev’s second historical  period  begins  with  the  Roman-led  crucifixion  of  Christ,  and  the  subsequent  objectification  of  his  message.  Christ’s  message  did  not  succeed because it was objectified and merged into a complimentary configuration with the Roman state. Attention has to be given to this specific conceptualization of early Christian history  as  Berdyaev’s  noted  account  is  not  entirely  unique.  This  account  of Christianity  is  one  that  is  non-traditional,  and  is  similar  to  that  of  Leo  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky  – both  figures  that  rejected  the  traditional  Orthodox  Church.  Berdyaev  argued  that  conceptualizing  the  relation  human  beings  have  to  God  through obedience and causal effects actually led the human race to succumb to social processes of submission, servitude, and to herd mentality. Monism whether it  be  religious  or  anti-religious,  always  lends  itself  towards  tyranny  (Berdyaev  1952,   69).   

Berdyaev   argues   that   the   Apostle,   Paul,   contributed   to   the objectification  of  this  religion  greatly  by  seeking  to  place  Christianity  into  universal  history.  Paul  had  grave  fears  that  Christianity  could  turn  into  an  “anarchistic, revolutionary sect” (Berdyaev 1952, 70). Berdyaev explains that this ended  up  resulting  in  the  Church  not  only  failing  to  sanction  the  authority  of  Caesar, but it simultaneously equated it with authority derived from God. Thus, all  subsequent  “Christian”  states  and  empires  were  purely  symbolic  –  they actually  compromised  the  standing  and  original  message  behind  Christianity  (Berdyaev 1952, 71).  To summarize this interesting logic, Berdyaev posits that spirit is equivalent to true freedom, but ideas of spirit got objectified throughout the second period of  history  and  into  the  subsequent  periods  in  favor  and  confirmation  of  governmental   authority   (Berdyaev   1952,   71).   

Organized   religion,   argued   Berdyaev,  tends  to  objectify  itself  in  social  structures,  thus  rendering  it  into  an  anti-personalist standing (Berdyaev 1938). Structures of this sort have historically merged themselves into courtesy with empires, kingdoms, and most recently in states. Similarly, for Tolstoy, the Roman-led persecution and crucifixion of Christ symbolized the totalitarian character of the objective world. Tolstoy noted that, "Christ's whole teaching is a pointing out of the way of emancipation from the power of the world" (Tolstoy 1968, 268).  This brings us to a crucial tendency that Berdyaev observed throughout the second period and even beyond into the third and fourth periods. When seeking social change, human beings have an inclination to set up a continuation of the realm of Caesar (Berdyaev 1952, 65). 

This is why Berdyaev frequently noted that all  political  revolutions  are  tragic. '''In  the  second  period,  the  realm  of  Caesar  continued to strengthen.''' Berdyaev refers to this as “the law of Caesar’s realm” -a trend that manifests itself through every revolution that has occurred through chronological  history.  This  entails  that  the  French,  British,  American,  and  Russian   revolutions   brought   about   anti-personalist   and   spiritually   vitiated   outcomes. Berdyaev argues the basis of materialism can never be able to solve the problem of freedom (as true freedom is inherently subjective and spiritual). This is a tragic scenario for Berdyaev as revolution in social struggles and the aim for a new society gets determined not by spirituality, but by the means used and the  degree  of  violence  employed  (Berdyaev  1952,  64).  Berdyaev  brings  up  the  example of Gandhi and argues that, “Gandhi was of course more revolutionary than the communists, in the spiritual sense of the word, and just because of this spiritual revolution he was killed” (Berdyaev 1952, 64). 

The  second  period  was  not  only  marked  by  the  institutionalization  of  revolutionary   ideas   and   messages   put   forward   by   Christ,   but   gradually,   elementary  forms  of  economics  and  serfdom  also  arose.  These  trends  became  especially prevalent after the step-wise collapse of the Roman Empire. Serfdom grew to be salient by the Middle Ages, and was a great compliment to empire-led mercantilist profit seeking. The upkeep of empires, kingdoms and city states was  reliant  on  agricultural  productivity  carried  out  by  serfs  and  peasants  who  were subordinate to politically dominant religious authority that was dictated to them  through  monarchical  theology.  Socio-political  configurations  of  this  sort  were prevalent to varying extent across different areas of the world. Importantly, during  the  second  period,  social,  economic,  and  political  affairs  remained  marked by the absence of scientific inquiry. This was an age that preceded the enlightenment and the emergence of machines and industrialization. At this point in  time,  human  beings  did  not  yet  overcome  nature  whether  in  elemental  or  biological form, and they were still under the prism of objectified religion in the realm of Caesar.


===Period three===

As the subsequent section will demonstrate, this is a salient commonality that Berdyaev shared with Heidegger. For Berdyaev, it is precisely the “inner creative energy” of human beings that gets suppressed in the fourth period but then comes to light in the fifth (Berdyaev 1952, 105). This is precisely why Berdyaev noted in the  concluding  segments  of  his  last  work  that,  “if  the  revolutionary  is  the  new  man,  then  Gandhi  is  more  a  revolutionary  than  Lenin  and  Stalin”  -  as  the  appearance  of  a  new  human  being  is  not  simply  a  change  of  clothes,  but  it  presupposes spiritual change (Berdyaev 1952, 167). Similarly, Berdyaev went great lengths throughout his works to make his position on spirituality distinct from any form  of  statism.  He  believed  that  spiritual  realization  would  happen  through  a  “divine-human process” that would feature an awakening and would take place in “secret ways” (Berdyaev 1953, 142). This process will be made possible by God and the realm of spirit. f

The  beginning  of  the  third  period  was  brought  about  by  a  combination  of  occurrences. On one hand, the enlightenment gradually led to the dissolution of a long stemming era known as the “dark ages.” The British Glorious revolution and the French revolution resulted in a lessening of monarchical power and the abandonment of a sovereign’s divine right to rule. On the other hand, the creation of  the  steam  engine,  the  onset  of  mass  urbanization,  increases  in  steel-forging capabilities,  ship  building  improvements,  the  discovery  of  new  trading  and  shipping routes, and eventually the advent of electricity led to major changes in how human beings interacted with nature. Humans gained greater control over their  natural  surroundings  than  ever  before.  The  third  period  is  described  by  Berdyaev as one in which human beings carried out a process of mechanization over nature. The process of mechanization was reliant on two factors – those of scientific  and  technical  control.  Here,  understandings  of  causality  changed  greatly. No longer were causal forces in nature and daily life linked to theism, but rather,  the  rise  of  scientific  inquiry  enabled  widespread  cognition  to  emerge about the properties and materials that make up our world.  The  rapid  development  of  industry  resulted  in  stellar  cognitive  changes  in  how   human   beings   went   about   understanding   material   reality.   This   was   accompanied by a gradual decline in faith and the separating of the state from religious institutions. By the beginning of the 19th century, the myth of humanism was broken, argued Berdyaev. This led to an abyss opening beneath humanity. Berdyaev conceptualizes this abyss through linking it to the egress of capitalism and  the  marketization  of  economic  life.  A  profound  implication  arose  from  marketization –   for the first time in history, masses of people were necessitated to sell  their  labor  for  wages  under  specified  industrial  trades.  

Goncharov  (2016)  explains how Berdyaev assumed that under such a system people would fall away from   faith   and   God   and   simply   become   economic   toilers.   Increased   industrialization,   urbanization,   and   the   decline   of   feudalism   changed   the   structure of economics. The relationship that human beings had with society and politics also transformed. These processes entailed major changes for organized religion.  

The  authority  of  leading  churches,  such  as  the  Catholic  or  Orthodox  Church,  was  eventually  stripped  away  and  transferred  over  to  the  state  – this resulted in a newly found objective totality belonging to statehood.These dynamics, as one would expect, eventually led to even greater adverse outcomes,  specifically  in  the  rise  of  the  totalitarian  state  and  totalitarian ideologies –  both  of  which  featured  common  recognition  of  “the  complete  authority of the state and of society” (Berdyaev 1952, 57). 

This signified an adverse return  to  what  Berdyaev  referred  to  as  an  ancient,  heathen  state  of  human  consciousness.  The  revolutions  of  the  20th  century,  such  as  the  1917  Russian  revolution, were tragic for Berdyaev because those that waged such revolutions failed  to  recognize  the  distinction  between  the  realms  of  spirituality  (the  everlasting)  and  of  Caesar  (the  transient).  

This  recognitional  failure  led  to  the  solidification  of  both  monism  and  totalitarianism  (Berdyaev  1952,  73).  Such  outcomes can be observed in the philosophies of Hegel, Marx, Auguste Comte, and in social orders such as in communist and fascist regimes, as well as in liberal democracies (Berdyaev 1952, 78). The third period exemplifies how the realm of Caesar   always   wishes   to   subject   itself   to   the   whole   of   humanity   in   its   universalizing tendency. This pattern has turned out to be the main tragedy of history, of freedom, of necessity, and of the human being’s destiny (Berdyaev 1952, 79).  


===Period four===

'''The   fourth   period   emerged   in   the   twentieth   century   and   is   “the   final   metamorphosis of the realm of Caesar”''' (Berdyaev 1952, 48). Berdyaev begins his description  of  this  period  by  placing  emphasis  on  what  he  coined  as  the  “disruption  of  cosmic  order”  -  which  occurred  when  the  atom  was  split  and  nuclear  weaponry  was  developed.  While  many  international  relations  experts  have  since  placed  great  emphasis  on  both  coercive  capabilities  and  stabilizing  factors associated with nuclear weapons, Berdyaev saw the creation of the nuclear bomb as a tragedy that paved way for an entirely new relationship that human beings would have in relation to nature and the cosmos. The splitting of the atom solidified the full and total dissolution of organic forms of human organization. Berdyaev emphasized that for the first time in history, a grave new potential to wipe  out  lifeforms  on  earth  arose.  Nuclear  weaponry  and  power  could  disrupt the universal configuration of space and the makeup of the cosmos. Because of this   potential,   Berdyaev   saw   that   the   realm   of   Caesar   became   “terribly   augmented” with power that human beings had developed over nature.

Through  the  usage  of  machinery  and  technology,  human  beings  not  only  learned  to  control  nature,  but  they  continued  to  improve  their  systematic  manipulation of nature for profit-based motivations. In this sense, the rise of the fourth period did not simply lead to a departure from the third, but rather, it built upon     previously     established     marketization     that     emerged     alongside     industrialization.  Once  the  Cold  War  ended  and  the  Soviet  Union  collapsed,  nearly  all  countries  in  the  world  adopted  a  market-based  economic  system  in  which  profit  seeking  serves  as  the  principal  basis  of  economic  exchange  and  production. As we are still in the age of economic globalization, the aim of profit-seeking does not appear to be slowing down. This brings us to arguably the most salient  development  that  Berdyaev  accurately  predicted.  He  foresaw  that  this  terribly augmented power developed by human beings over nature would lead to enslavement to our own discoveries (Berdyaev 1952, 47). This is factually correct and can be observed in numerous spheres such as in the widespread necessity of economic growth and its equivalence to “progress,” or more even more significantly, in the creation of artificial intelligence (AI). The creation  of  intelligent  artificial  systems  has  been  made  possible  by  rapidly  advancing  technological  innovation.  This  has  even  resulted  in  the  arrival  of  artificial  superintelligence  which  is  a  form  of  intelligence  that  “significantly  exceeds the cognitive performance of humans in most domains” (Murphy 2018). The most common interactions that humans have with AI in today’s world is in their  daily  usage  of  the  internet  and  specifically  in  social  networking  sites  – platforms that are driven by machine learning optimization which is designed to hijack the human dopaminergic system (Murphy 2018). Importantly, the internet is not a random system of connections, but rather is it is closer to what tech-mogul Elon  Musk  has  described  as  being  a  pervasive,  conscious  and  interconnected  network of machines and humans that is alive.

Berdyaev   foresaw   the   rise   of   autonomous   machinery   and   spheres   of   organization   that   were   neither   part   of   nature   nor   exclusive   to   human   consciousness, he noted that, “machines are made from material elements taken from the old nature, but into them goes something quite new, no longer of nature, and not a part of the old cosmic order” (Berdyaev 1952, 51). 

'''In the fourth period, machines  and  their  underlying  technology  would  grow  to  have  a  “cosmogonic  significance”''' (Berdyaev 1952, 51). He noted that, “this is a new day of creation –or  a  new  night.  Probably  night,  for  the  light  of  the  sun  may  be  darkened”  (Berdyaev  1952,  51).  The  important  factor  to  consider  here  is  that  Berdyaev  specifically  classified  the  fourth  period  as  a  time  that  would  experience  the  creation of a new type of human organization –   one that was, “distinct from the organic,  technics  and  mechanization”  originally  found  in  the  industrial  era  (Berdyaev 1952, 47). 

'''The fourth period''' does not require sanctification which the realm of Caesar demanded in previous eras as this period contains the final phase of secularization.  What’s  more,  Berdyaev  foresaw  that  the  role  of  technology  and  machine-based  production  would  lead  to  great  personal  difficulties  for  human  beings  because we are insufficiently adapted to handle such augmentations. The great difficulty would come with the “terrible shortening of time, a speed with which man  cannot  keep  pace”  (Berdyaev  1952,  51).  He  foresaw  that  under  such  a  technical, machine-dominated order of life no single moment would be of value itself as each moment would become, “only a means for the next” (Berdyaev 1952, 51). The shortening of time is manifesting itself in every second of our present life. 

The  easiest  place  to  observe  this  is  across  social  media  and  online  forms  of  communication. Smart-phone equipped individuals carry out actions only for the purpose  of  obtaining  some  future  reaction  to  those  actions  via  posting  on  the  internet. This is a highly reciprocal process that leads to our total absorption into autonomously  controlled  digital  technology.  One  need  only  to  take  public  transport in any global metropolis whether it be New York City, San Francisco, London,  Shanghai,  Prague,  Moscow,  Buenos  Aires  or  Mexico  City  to  observe  that  out  of  every  given  10  people,  a  super  majority  of  them  are  on  their  smart  phones,  scrolling  through  sites  that  rely  on  artificial  intelligence  to  curtail  informational content to their users. These sites monitor their users’ actions, pick up, track and record their location, previous search histories, and then from an unfathomable amount of data, they dictate what piece of information a user will be exposed to next.The enslaving features of these platforms is not only tied to the fact that they are  controlled  by  algorithmic  profit-intensive  dynamics,  but  that  they  directly  influence neuro-chemical reward systems in our brains by sprucing up dopamine levels for some, and lowering them for others. Every new “like” a person receives for a photograph, video, or post triggers a dopamine reaction and when there a lack of “likes” one can fail to experience a positive internal reaction – leading to depressive  behavior.  This  is  an  adverse,  unnatural,  and  addictive  cycle  which  does not appear to be slowing down. Recent psychiatric research indicates that teenagers who spend three hours or more a day on social media (an amount of hours  which  is  very  common),  are  likelier  to  develop  mental  health  issues  including depression, aggression, anxiety, and antisocial behavior. The alarming issue  here  is  that  these  problems  are  likely  to  develop  even  if  statistical  models  feature controls for prior mental health issues as well as genetic predispositions (Riehm et al. 2019). Even though word limitations of this present essay disable me from being able to overview this literature in-depth, it is indeed difficult for one to not notice that something terribly inauspicious has arisen in recent decades in the relationship that human beings have to technology. Along these lines, some philosophers have attributed a grave danger to AI. For example, Bostrom (2014) argues that malignant failure modes of AI can lead to human extinction through AI  making  choices  that  are  completely  contradictory  to  the  intent  of  their  programmer(s). 

AI is configured by human cognition, but has the ability to compute its own processes  which  results  in  artificial  mechanistic  behavior  and  decision  making.  This is the particular autonomous sphere that Berdyaev spoke of and is also the sphere   that   is   already   seeking   totalitarian   recognition.   AI   utilizes   finite   components drawn from human intellect (through the code that programs a given intelligence  machine),  but  then  develops  infinite  numbers  of  models  that  can  influence  a  given  outcome  or  process  empirically.  In  this  sense,  AI  substitutes  human  cognition  with  computation.  For  the  first  time  in  history,  important  actions  are  occurring  in  the  empirical  world  which  are  outside  of  human cognition in totality. Perhaps the most salient example of this can be observed in the role that AI is beginning to play in the gravest of all dangers to humanity –nuclear weaponry. The Russian robotic mini-submarine called “Poseidon” was created in the last several years and there are plans for over 30 of these machines to  be  manufactured  for  the  Russian  Navy.  With  an  ability  to  travel  at  speeds  exceeding  100km  per  hour,  this  underwater  drone  is  not  only  the  fastest  underwater nuclear capable weapon ever created, but it also contains doomsday plans  that  it  can  develop  on  its  own  in  case  of  successful  nuclear  strikes  being  carried out on Russian soil. This  war  machine  is  capable  of  detonating  nuclear  blasts  under  water  or  sending nuclear missiles into the air if it cannot receive updating signals (during an  attack)  from  Moscow  and  other  areas  of  the  Russian  Federation  that  have  nuclear emergency warning systems. If adversaries of Russia successfully strike its territory to the extent in which there are no human beings left to operate nuclear launch  systems  and  centers  on  mainland,  Poseidon  can  create  an  artificial  radioactive tsunami that reportedly can range from 300-500 meters in height and can engulf an enemy country’s terrain for hundreds of kilometers (Fakhrutdinov 2018). Although just one example, that super powers are developing such systems based on AI has immense implications for the future. The actions and behavior of  AI  machines  will  lead  to  some  of  the  most  important  decisions  of  human  history getting made – such as the decision to launch a nuclear weapon during nuclear war. Weapons such as Poseidon exemplify Berdyaev’s categorization and prognosis of the fourth period of our development in relation to nature. Not only has  the  cosmic  rhythm  of  the  universe  been  disrupted  and  matter  itself  been  disaggregated, but there are now independent, non-human forces which have the power to destroy the world and wipe life forms and human beings off the face of the earth. 


===Period Five===

'''While  the  fourth  period  does  indeed  contain  a  large  number  of  disheartening  developments, Berdyaev conceptualized a fifth period in which he projected that spirituality  would  overcome  the  all-encompassing status of the realm of Caesar''' and technological enslavement that developed in the previous period. In the fifth period,  evil  and  suffering  will  be  alleviated  in  the  world,  but  this  outcome  can  only occur eschatologically. This will occur through spiritual transformation and the  abolition  of  concentrated  authority  throughout  social  orders.  As  noted  by  Berdyaev, “every authority, openly or in disguise, has poison within itself. True liberation  will  come  only  with  the  elimination  of  the  idea  of  sovereignty,  regardless of the subject to which this sovereignty applies” (Berdyaev 1952, 85). Berdyaev believed such a transformation will occur, but “the final victory of spirit over  Caesar  is  possible  only  in  the  eschatological  perspective.  Until  then,  men  will live under the hypnosis of authority, and this includes the life of the church, which, itself, may turn out to be one of the forms of Caesar’s realm” (Berdyaev 1952,  80).  

These  end-point  views  voiced  by  Berdyaev  are  characteristics  of  his  thought  that  have  led  some  (e.g.  Young  2012)  to  classify  him  into  the  Russian  Cosmist umbrella.

The interesting dynamic here is that Berdyaev does not argue that the state will  be  dealt  away  with,  but  rather,  our  understanding  of  the  state  will  fundamentally transform - “Under  the  conditions  of  this  world,  the  function  of  the  state  will  always  remain.  But  the  state  is  of  functional  and  subordinate  importance, only” (Berdyaev 1952, 72). We must refuse the sovereignty of the state because the state always tends to reach beyond its boundaries, argued Berdyaev. He believed that concentrated authority was inherent to not only communist and fascist states of the twentieth century, but also to the Christian period of history as  observed  in  totalitarian  and  monist  conceptions  of  church  and  empire.  Importantly however, this does not entail that a pluralistic democratic formation will emerge in the fifth period. Berdyaev pointed out that pluralism is “bourgeois and  capitalist  societies  are  bound  up  with  individualism  and  are  disguised  as  a  form  of  tyranny  by  means  of  capitalist  control”  (Berdyaev  1952,  58).  

Berdyaev strongly  asserted  that  when  economic  materialism  is  made  out  to  represent everything  “noble  in  life,”  this  results  in  the  degradation  of  human  beings.  Materialism recognizes only the realm of Caesar and the external, while at the same  time  it  denies  the  internal.  Similar  ideas  can  be  observed  in  Heidegger’s  framework and lectures on technology.Along these lines, Berdyaev articulated a strong case against materialism by positing that it will never being able to function as a framework or ideal that can enable  humanity  to  progress.  He  assumed  that  one  of  the  “worst  evils”  is  a  utilitarian  attitude  towards  truth  (Berdyeav  1952,  91).  

Basing  progress  upon  economic growth and development is erroneous because economic materialism considers economics as the base of reality, and through this it sets up an illusion of consciousness (Berdyaev 1952, 91). Berdyaev argues economic materialism is indeed a necessary factor of life, but it is not the end nor life’s highest value. It is not its determining cause. This indeed is an interesting factor because in the fifth period Berdyaev presupposes that labor will be dealt with through dignity - “the dignity of labour must be upheld: hence the necessity of ending the exploitation of the workers, hence of ending the exploitation of labour” (Berdyaev 1952, 170). Berdyaev believed that society will get transformed from within, and spirituality will  become  the  basis  of  social  organization.  He  projected  that  such  a  massive  change will come from within human beings - “Only a new birth, the birth of the spiritual man, who so long has slumbered and been held down, may be the real appearance of a new man” (Berdyaev 1952, 162). The  inner-spirituality  human  beings  possess  cannot  be  suppressed,  “no  matter how cruelly necessity presses upon him; man’s thirst for the spiritual will assert  itself ”  (Berdyaev  1952,  170).  

Human  beings  will  strive  to  create  a  new  brotherly   society,   personalist   and   communautaire.   This   is   premised   on   Berdyaev’s assumption that in the fifth period, society will not be an object that determines human beings from without (externally), but will be articulated from within. As such, Berdyaev reached for this eschatological transformation through his dynamic conception of freedom - “there is such a thing as the fate of freedom in the world, the existential dialectic of freedom in the world” (Berdyaev 1952, 104). Freedom is the definition of the human being, but it is internal and must be defined from within via spirit, not from without, not from external forces. True freedom, argued Berdyaev, lies outside of causal relationships and the objective world of phenomena. 

As the subsequent section will demonstrate, this is a salient commonality that Berdyaev shared with Heidegger. '''For Berdyaev, it is precisely the “inner creative energy” of human beings that gets suppressed in the fourth period but then comes to light in the fifth''' (Berdyaev 1952, 105). This is precisely why Berdyaev noted in the  concluding  segments  of  his  last  work  that,  “if  the  revolutionary  is  the  new  man,  then  Gandhi  is  more  a  revolutionary  than  Lenin  and  Stalin”  -  as  the  appearance  of  a  new  human  being  is  not  simply  a  change  of  clothes,  but  it  presupposes spiritual change (Berdyaev 1952, 167). Similarly, Berdyaev went great lengths throughout his works to make his position on spirituality distinct from any form  of  statism.  He  believed  that  spiritual  realization  would  happen  through  a  “divine-human process” that would feature an awakening and would take place in “secret ways” (Berdyaev 1953, 142). This process will be made possible by God and the realm of spirit."


==The Classes (or 'Estates')==

A contribution from Matthew McNatt:


===The First Estate===

"The first historical period—a time in which human life depended on the natural world—was a time when personality was not fully developed and humans did not fully conquer nature. It would have been this time in which the institutions of the First Estate emerged, delivering: 

* Pomp: Ceremony of rule ‒ The trappings of political dominance;

* Privileges: Clientelism ‒ Selling identities, promising special "rights," and buying votes; and

* Penance: Clergy (and their replacements in the psychiatric establishment) conditioning belonging to a community on their members' or clients' buy-in to the narratives and identities being "sold" about what is "wrong" when life is *hard* (original sin or a psychiatric "condition"), how what's wrong can be repaired (confession and liturgical participation or medication and participation in a support group or counseling), and how more people saved (spreading the gospel or evangelizing the benefits of psychiatry).

'''This First Estate operates on the principle: "We are right."'''


The First Estate can be thought of as *Masters of Ceremony*—or, uncharitably, as *Fakers*—as those who declare reality to be a particular way, then leverage others' belief to remake the world. The First Estate promises personal and social transformation. Its most successful members generally work within structures that provide services without a condition that direct payment occur prior to receiving the service. Today, thousands of years after its emergence, the First Estate includes governors, senators, congressmen, priests, pastors, psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, mediators, parliamentarians—anyone whose uniform, station, and/or ritual provides meaning structures for their patrons, on behalf of the people who give their institutions their clout.


===The Second Estate===

Berdyaev's second historical period—a time in which humanity became increasingly free of spirits and demons attributed to nature—was a time when economics and serfdom in their most elementary forms emerged. It would have been this time in which the institutions of the Second Estate emerged, of:

* Banks: War financing, futures trading, derivatives marketing, property loans, and other investment schemes

* Brass: Military leaders

* Bosses: Public administrators & crime lords


'''The second estate operates on the principle: Those whom we "other" are not persons.'''

The Second Estate coordinates (barely) legal threats and creates dependencies on its services. Today, hundreds of years after its emergence, Investment bankers fund both sides of a war, so the "winner" will be on the hook for repaying funds advanced. Futures traders and property speculators seek sufficient market dominance to be able to predictably buy low and sell high—while withholding capital from any entity that threatens regulation. The military brass sell a war to the public and work to ensure their side "wins" (and is, thus, in a position to repay the bankers). While many public administrators do not take directly from the public treasury, most are rewarded for advancing the causes—or, at least, not "rocking the boat" of systems being leveraged by—their patrons in the First, Third, or Fourth Estates.


===The Third Estate===


Berdyaev's third historical period—a time in which humans carried out mechanization over nature through scientific and technical control—marked the development of industry, capitalism, and a new necessity of selling one's labor for wages. This was when institutions of the Third Estate took shape, coordinating what had previously been done on a much more local level via:

* Logistics: Mercantilists and masters of industry

* Law(fare): Judges and lawyers

* Labor representation: Ostensible voices of the commoners, who must now sell some of their labor for wages.

'''The Third Estate operates on the principle: What's urgent is no longer subsistence, but systems.'''

The Third Estate ostensibly includes almost everyone who "adds value" through producing and distributing goods in the marketplace. Under industrial capitalism, however, the Third Estate really includes people who excel at achieving rapid growth in production and distribution (scaling up before marginal profits drop) and are willing to sell out (feigning deference to the First Estate while buying off key legislators, and producing and distributing extensively for the Second Estate).


===The Fourth Estate===

Berdyaev's fourth historical period—as an era marked by disruption of cosmic order, the dissolution of organic forms of human organization, and the development of various autonomous spheres—was the time during which the institutions of the Fourth Estate really came into their own. These include:

* Framers: News & entertainment executives

* inFormants: Owners of communication infrastructure & spy networks

* inFluencers: Advertisers, propagandists, & celebrities endorsers

'''The Fourth Estate operates on the principle: We determine what's relevant.'''

Berdyaev prophesied that one of these autonomous spheres would claim totalitarian recognition—much as the inFormants did during the COVID-19 crisis… and are doing again with DOGE.

The Fourth Estate uses techniques of narrative warfare to change people's preferences and purchasing habits, surface and leak incriminating evidence on rivals, game peer review and grantmaking to advance favored opinions, change electronic copies of historical records to hide unpleasant realities, and otherwise make or break personal and corporate reputations.


===The Fifth Estate===

Berdyaev's prophesied fifth historical period, which is just beginning, will be an age characterized by the dissolution of state power, labor emancipation, and spiritual transmutation. This is the epoch in which institutions of the Fifth Estate will emerge:

'''* Commoners:''' Those who excel spreading the practices that their families and future generations need for *subsistence living,* as well as recognizing and protecting the common-pool resources they'll likely need. The people who make up the bulk of the workforce, including gig workers, "grunts," and current and former soldiers, have a natural alignment with commoners.


'''* Cooperators:''' Those who work to implement or sustain:

- Shared governance responsibilities in their workplaces; 

- Creation of shared technological resources for worker-governed businesses; 

- Cooperative provisioning of local water, electricity, waste disposal, and communication infrastructure;

- Cooperative ownership of prime municipal storefronts, in order to keep rent affordable in perpetuity for locally owned and operated businesses;

- Bifurcated property taxes to create permanent affordability among owner-occupied homes, owner-occupied live/work spaces, and spaces for owner's businesses—including cooperatively owned residences, live-work, and business spaces—while making investment properties easier to buy and sell and incentivizing their development; 

- Within every county, the existence of credit unions that offer basic banking services, automotive loans; home loans, home-improvement loans; and business loans for worker-governed companies (with lower rates, ideally, for businesses that complete cooperative educational courses and comply with reporting standards that allow the credit union to pull in assistance from among its supporters, to help local worker-governed businesses, in some cases before the business itself realizes it needs help); 

- A tax code under which member-owners of worker-governed businesses can benefit from the same tax breaks on dividends enjoyed by members of the second estate; 

- State contracting (including contracting in traditionally "nonprofit" spaces) that is preferential to worker-governed businesses; 

- Transparency in municipal government—especially regarding the use of common-pool resources within the boundaries of a municipality—achieved with affordable and accessible technologies and standards; and

- Collaboration among municipalities around the world with similar geographic resources and development challenges, similar climates, and similar infrastructure constraints, so cities not in direct competition can learn from each other's policy experiments; 


'''* Crypto-Compadres:''' Designers and users of social and technological systems that push back against elite capture of common-pool resources. No capture by allied elites. No capture by antagonistic elites. Today, one of the leading fronts of this group is cryptography and cryptocurrencies, which frustrate the capacities of other Estates to extract unearned rent from their uses of common-pool resources."

The Fifth Estate will operate on the principle: We build readiness.

The Fifth Estate will repurpose technologies of the other Estates to deliver real ownership stakes and participation in governance to everyday people; make participating enterprises more anti-fragile; and structurally align incentives in parallel economies. The Fifth Estate will, also, leverage members' solidarity to reward other Estates' benign practices and to discipline other Estates, should they despoil a the commons.


===The Sixth Estate===

A Sixth Estate will likely provide appreciation of what has worked, an abiding gratitude for continued opportunities to experiment, and ample opportunities to rest. Currently, these aims are fulfilled *piecemeal* by other Estates—and how people might coalesce institutions around producing this is unlikely to become clear until there is a robust Fifth Estate. 

If the Clio-dynamic insights of Peter Turchin are correct, no Sixth Estate will arise until a Fifth Estate has secured its aims for at least a hundred years in a culture that allows cousin marriage, or for at least two hundred years in a culture that forbids cousin marriage — which likely means that we're looking at the emergence of the Sixth Estate in the early- to mid-2220s… if humanity makes it that long.


===The Zeroth Estate===

I also think it helps to recognize a "Zeroth Estate", consisting of:

* Loafers: Those who seek to do as little productive work possible, being bedazzled by the pageantry of the First Estate, providing cannon fodder for the Second Estate; taking advantage of labor protections (won by the Third Estate of willing workers) to avoid hard work; begging for more salacious and violent entertainment and mindless propaganda from the Fourth Estate; and being overall pacified by "bread and circuses."

* Looters: Those who riot and steal and who promote the "abolition of private property."

* Losers: Those who promote soft-on-criminal policies for their friends and not only second chance policies for addicts who abuse the public, but seventh-, eighth-, eighteenth-, or infinite chances to clean up… all at the tremendous expense of every other estate.


The Zeroth Estate has always existed… attempting to rest while others work, maximizing short-term personal gain instead of long-term personal or societal benefit. The Zeroth Estate remains a tool for any Estate to leverage against the others, whenever destruction becomes profitable for a particular Estate's ends. The Zeroth Estate are "takers"—parasites on the body politic."


[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Articles]]