This is the text of an email interview conducted in September 2008

Interviewer is Michel Bauwens.

For a more complete version see here at http://www.greekarchitects.gr/index.php?maincat=&newid=170&lang=en


=Text=

'''Q1: We've been covering some of your work on a new 'peer to peer' urbanism in our blog. Perhaps we can explore this connection further. First of all, do you agree with that assessment of your approach being in line with the peer to peer ethos. Tell us a little bit about yourself and how you came to your current thinking and practice. Finally, could you also what you think of my characterization of your work as neotraditional. What I mean is that premodern and what I would call 'trans'modern thinking are both concerned with the primacy of value and the immaterial, and that freed from the modernist rejection of all things traditional, we can now have an open mind and freely draw from thousands of years of human experience.'''

NS: At the basis of my approach (and my team of collaborators on
architectural and urban issues) is the empowerment of the individual.
That is certainly at the heart of the peer-to-peer ethos. It is also a
fundamental reversal of what has been the norm for close to a century;
namely the rule of a self-appointed elite to dictate the tastes of the
people as far as what living and built environments ought to be like.
Generations have been told that they had to live in a certain type of
house that was unpleasant to be in, to live in cities with an
unpleasant, often inhuman form, and we can go further. Generations
have been forced to go against their natural, instinctive responses to
an inhuman environment, and to accept it as "modern" and
"contemporary". This has been happening since the 1920s. The end
result is massive cognitive dissonance, which confuses a person's
instincts to the point that they are then very easy to manipulate.

Now there are two schools of thought as to how this happened. If you
are going to be kind, you can say that well-meaning, nice people with
good intentions wanted to build new types of buildings and cities so
as to better humanity and create a more just society. If you are going
to be harsh, you can claim that those very same people collaborated in
a dangerous mass experiment in social engineering, with the goal of
creating a submissive consumer class of people who are easily
brainwashed. The end result is the same: an inhuman built environment
founded upon energy wastage and a neurotic class of people who
everyday have to put up with urban and architectural stress. The
beneficiaries are the so-called experts who sold all the utopian
ideas, and who were well-rewarded for their role, and of course, that
section of society that created all this inhuman urban structure.

To get out of this disastrous mode of life -- and it is really a
philosophy and world view, not an architectural choice -- we need to
go back to traditional values. Sure, the social revolutions around the
First World War rejected tradition precisely at the time these new
"experts" were selling their utopian ideas, but that was the key to
the manipulation. People were ready to reject everything and adopt a
new way of life, and were not paying attention to the possible dangers
of being manipulated. If we look back to all the architecture and
urbanism of the past 3,000 years, we find human-scale solutions that
can be adapted for today's society. For the moment, the constant
attacks from those who accuse us of going back to the past have
prevented people in general from appreciating the wealth of solutions
available. I'm talking about small-scale, both low and high-technology
solutions that break out of the stranglehold of the consumerist
society. I'm also talking about satisfying basic human emotional
needs, such as a human-scale environment, a healing environment, that
we can create with very low cost once we jettison the fashionable or
dogmatic architectural "statements".

The modernists rejected all things traditional, as their basic cult
dogma. Thus, they threw out solutions developed over millennia, which
can never be substituted by any high-tech images. Some of my friends
think this was simply an industry trick to sell all that steel and
glass being produced in mass quantities from the new factories. In
that view, the Bauhaus was simply a publicity outlet for industrial
materials, which is ironic considering how Marxist most of the
Bauhausler were. But then, the Left embraced industrialization
wholeheartedly, just as fervently as did the consumerist society that
was supposedly on the political right. Communist countries erected
vast, inhuman buildings and cities, and the same typologies were
applied in the capitalist countries. A curious ideological agreement
between the two antagonists on the industrialization and
dehumanization of human beings!

Peer-to-peer solutions represent the opposite of this dehumanization.
I see an attempt to regain value for the individual, and hopefully to
enable solutions to evolve outside the controlled industrial system.
There is nothing wrong with industry, but I do not condone the massive
manipulation of entire populations, and the forced consumption of
inhuman building and urban typologies. People will buy industrial
products, and will build their houses and cities: what I want to see
is a vastly improved range of choices and the ability to make
individual decisions. I expect the latest cutting-edge industrial
techniques, such as just-in-time production, to play a major role in
this revolution. We are now promoting a curious and unexpected
combination of tradition with the latest technological possibilities
made available by the Internet. I don't believe that it was even
possible to think about implementation before, even a decade ago, but
now the whole process of information, coordination, distribution,
linkage, and expertise, can take place on the Internet. That's why I
support an open publishing environment so strongly. Information that
can change people's lives, that can change the lives of entire
population, must be freely available.

What we have not been able to break through, so far, is the
brainwashing. The vast majority of the world's population is suffering
from an inhuman built environment, from inhuman living spaces, from
inhuman building surfaces, from inhuman furnishings, and it is putting
up with it because of a basic terror. Psychological manipulation has
convinced them from birth that to go against the "modern" iconography
will mean economic collapse. Those images have become religious in
their hold on people's minds. Just try to suggest to someone that
steel and glass may not be the best materials in a desert or polar
climate (only to mention the heat losses). But they cannot envision a
world without those iconic "glass and steel" qualities, because that
image represents "progress" since the 1920s. Slum dwellers make do
with waste materials to build their homes, but when they can afford
to, they move out into an inhuman house built in "industrial" style,
often in an inhumanly designed high-rise, or worse, in a socially dead
suburb. That is their ultimate success: they have made it out of the
favela and into the inhuman utopian environment, and now they can
contribute as a pawn in the global economy.

'''Q2: Here's the next question, and I'd like to play advocate of the devil for a while. I hear your charge that modernists build inhuman cities and spaces, but I wonder if they were not just reacting to tradition, which was already gone in the 1920s and perhaps more against industrial dehumanization itself? I'm just assuming that there was a emancipatory charge to the work of many, but that the law of unintended consequences did not allow them to foresee all the results of their ideas and plans. Similarly concerning tradition, it is steeped not just in positive and communal ways of living, but also in authoritarian social structures. My question is therefore, if you look at tradition, by what method can you distinguish the wheat from chaff, what is the operating procedure or methodology you can use to do this kind of selection. Is it related to the patterning approach by Christopher Alexander? Tell us a little more about the latter, as not all of our readers may be familiar with that important work. In addition to him, who else has been of major inspiration to you and your colleages. An additional question: how do you react to the fact that the new moderns in East Asia, seem hell bent on repeating the mistakes that you describe, on perhaps an even grander scale?'''

NS: Every generation has reacted in some form (positive or negative)
to tradition, and different social classes react in different ways. It
is wrong to conclude that only the oppressed react negatively to
tradition, since we have seen ideas that destroyed a society emerge
from those who were well off -- they did it for the fun of it, as an
intellectual exercise, because those persons were psychopaths, or just
to "be different". While changes after World War I might be attributed
to a reaction against industrial dehumanization, they actually drove
the world into a more complete industrial dehumanization, so I don't
know if this is ironic or tragic. Here we move from design into the
minefield of politics.

There is a very simple criterion for how to judge the positive
qualities of tradition, or specific pieces of tradition: if it
empowers the individual to lead a healthier, more fulfilling life. Not
necessarily happier, or more just, since all the right conditions in
the world cannot guarantee that, but a full life without affecting
other human beings negatively. Rather than utopian promises that can
only be fulfilled by a state revolution -- and which invariably turn
around an oppressive system into another oppressive system -- I see
the value of peer-to-peer ideas of a personal validation of human
beings. By contrast, reaction to oppression channelled into a mass
movement is often commandeered by another elite to construct its own
power structure.

Clearly, one can write down a set of patterns that have been used
successfully to manipulate or oppress people, so we must include a
value system in evaluating patterns.  In computer science, it's
straightforward: patterns are those solutions that help a program run
better, while anti-patterns are those recurring pseudo-solutions that
keep making things worse. I have classified patterns that manipulate
the majority of people for the benefit of a small group, as
"anti-patterns". Most of what we see as architecture and urbanism
today, as taught in schools and shown in the media, consists of
anti-patterns. I do not ascribe "oppressive" intention to them,
however, since in many cases they were actually developed with the
best of intentions, and are often linked tightly to an attractive
ideology of political emanicipation. Their result is oppressive
despite all the good intentions. Both cynical and naive practitioners
just apply them for fun and profit, and like to re-use the original
claims of "liberation".

Christopher Alexander gave the Pattern Language to the world, and if
people had read it, it would have liberated every individual from the
tyrranical dictates of an architectural and urban machine (in the
sense of an oppressive system). The patterns in that book are a true
liberation, establishing people's own deep feelings about the built
environment as sound and valid. The reason this is so important is
that architecture schools, the media, and most architects have been
implementing the very opposite for close to a century. And they have
been justifying their inhuman product by a massive advertising
campaign, exactly like soft drinks and junk food replacing genuinely
nutritious food, because some people make a lot of money promoting
them, and those same persons would make a lot less money selling and
distributing wholesome foodstuff. We now have a significant percentage
of the world's economy driven by the soft drinks and junk food
industry, just as we have another major percentage of it driven by the
construction of glass and steel skyscrapers and dehumanizing concrete
buildings. The architectural/urban situation is "soft" oppression,
where a vast power system geared to promoting an unhealthy and
dehumanizing built environment is driven by subconscious suggestion.
In only a few instances is brute power used, as in monofunctional
zoning, and bulldozing owner-built houses so that someone can make a
profit by building concrete high-rise blocks.

The situation with the new Asian states awakening from their
competitive slumber is absolutely tragic. They are swallowing all the
deceptions that originally sold city-destroying, soul-destroying, and
culture-destroying architectural and urban typologies to the West. If
this were the 1950s, then OK, we might excuse this error as a lack of
experience. But we have several decades of mistakes, endlessly
documented, endlessly discussed and debated. Why are the new Asian
states copying the worst that the West did to their own people and to
their own cities? Probably, the reason is that the West itself is
still promoting the same destructive typologies -- only a minority of
us are condemning them, whereas the system is still stuck in a heroic
city-destroying mode. We have a bunch of western "experts" that have
advised the new Asian states to do precisely what they are doing now.
And those experts are making huge fortunes from the ensuing
devastation... many people are profiting financially from all this
construction, and it churns the country's economy. But the product is
toxic. Incidentally, many people don't see this in this way; all they
see is exciting new buildings and highways going up in the East. The
devastating realization will occur when the energy costs are added up,
and people realize that they have destroyed their own society.

Some additional explanation of the pattern concept:

Identifying any type of pattern follows the same criteria in
architecture as in hardware or software.

1. A repeating solution to the same or similar set of problems,
discovered by independent researchers and users at different times.

2. More or less universal solution across distinct topical
applications, rather than being heavily dependent upon local and
specific conditions.

3. That makes a pattern a simple general statement that addresses only
one of many aspects of a complex system. Part of the pattern
methodology is to isolate factors of complex situations so as to solve
each one in an independent manner if possible.

4. A pattern may be discovered or "mined" by "excavating" successful
practices developed by trial-and-error already in use, but which are
not consciously treated as a pattern by those who use it. A successful
pattern is already in use somewhere, perhaps not everywhere, but it
does not represent a utopian or untried situation. Nor does it
represent someone's opinion of what "should" occur.

5. A pattern must have a higher level of abstraction that makes it
useful on a more general level, otherwise we are overwhelmed with
solutions that are too specific, and thus useless for any other
situation. A pattern will have an essential area of vagueness that
guarantees its universality.

=More Information=
[[Nikos Salingaros]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Interviews]]