=Description=

Vlad Magdalin: 

"No-code is a kind of confusing term to be honest, we moved into this industry with a term that many people misunderstand. A lot of people think it just literally means no code is involved. But at the end of the day, it's a set of platforms, technologies and tools that help people build software. The things that engineers do in a code editor traditionally over the last 50, 60 years, this kind of software that you and I use every day from Facebook to Twitter, to Uber, to Lyft, to Google Docs, etc. Traditionally, all that software's built with code directly. No-code technologies help take that power and put it into a visual interface or declarative interface that is more like drag and drop or point and click to help everyone create that kind of software.

It's still not possible with no-code to create all software, but the industry is really catching up to how much you can do with no-code in a way that it's solving real business problems. It's helping entrepreneurs and creators create new products and services without having to get a computer science degree or do four years of training. And really what it's doing, it's democratizing the act of software creation the same way that YouTube democratized video creation where you don't have to be a movie studio anymore with millions of dollars of equipment in order to create entertainment for the web, build an audience, etc ."
(https://www.techrepublic.com/article/the-no-code-movement-is-in-the-early-stages-but-will-bring-exciting-new-possibilities-expert-says/)


=Status=

Vlad Magdalin:

"It's definitely the early stages, but it's the early stages of what the web felt like in the late '90s or the early 2000s of like, yeah, it's early, but there's so much promise already that you're seeing a commercial success, you're seeing a lot of things being built with it that it's kind of this rolling, how would I call that, ball of momentum where more and more people are seeing that it's becoming a big thing, maybe a little like crypto, but more real. Where I would say five years from now, it's going to become a de facto thing. It's just going to be a way that people build software. And I would probably guess that the majority of people who built software are going to be building it with no-code five years from now. We're just not there yet."
(https://www.techrepublic.com/article/the-no-code-movement-is-in-the-early-stages-but-will-bring-exciting-new-possibilities-expert-says/)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]