
=Characteristics=

[[Blockchain Technology and Polycentric Governance]]

"Because polycentricity exists on a spectrum, rather than labeling blockchain systems as endogenously and exogenously polycentric, it is better to test whether they meet a minimum criteria to label them non-monocentric. This exercise involves assessing attributes and indicators. Attributes represent broader conceptual understandings, while indicators provide empirical means to operationalize these attributes. 


As we briefed in the introduction, '''a system is considered non-monocentric if it fulfills the following criteria''':

* '''Multiple Decision-Making Centers''': The system must have more than one center where decisions are made independently.
Active Decision-Making: The decision-making centers must actively exercise or implement different opinions and preferences.
Autonomy from Outsiders: The decision-making centers need to be able to make operational decisions autonomously from the higher level or without direct influence from external entities, including those that might enforce rules.

* '''Unified Rule Set''': Despite the autonomy of various centers, there should be a coherent and overarching set of rules that applies across the entire system.

* '''Rule Set Utility and Transparency''': The rules of the overarching rule set need to be deemed useful by the agents subject to them, and the repercussions of non-compliance should be clear and understandable.

* '''Spontaneous Social Order''': The system should exhibit a social order that emerges spontaneously through coordination or competition among the various decision-making centers (Aligica & Tarko 2012, p. 255-256)."


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]