* Article: Non-bank digital currency systems: regulation and growth. By Mark Herpel, Editor of DGC Magazine. E-Finance & Payments Law & Policy, July 2010.

Source: http://www.e-comlaw.com

Reprinted in full with permission of the author.


=Text=

The beginning of the article sketches the historical evolution. The rest of the article analyses how digital
currencies backed by gold can no
longer go unregulated and undetected.

Second part of article yet to follow.


Mark Herpel:

"Digital currency is often described
as money or value that circulates
online but does not circulate
through a bank or recognized
financial institution.Many digital
currency companies emerged in
the mid to late 1990s with names
such as DigiCash, CyberCash,
eCash and e-gold. During the
1990s, these privately issued digital
tokens representing value were not
recognized as government issued
‘money’. Consequently, the creation
and transfer of the units was not
considered a regulated banking
operation. This was true for almost
a decade.

The ‘digital currency’ unit of the
1990s was an anonymous digital
token which could be transferred
from one account to another
within a closed system. These
systems could be described as large
accounting programs where one
account is debited and another
account receives the credit.What
makes these systems so special is
that from the early 1990s, digital
currency granted anyone, in any
country, instant and easy access to
the world of online commerce.
In its early days, this industry
operated in a brand new
unlicensed and unregulated
environment.While about a dozen
or so companies online today still
live in that bubble, the largest
companies and the industry leaders
have all gone through a period of
growing pains and evolved into
more modern systems.

However, several popular digital
currency companies were
intentionally domiciled or redomiciled
in under-regulated or
obscure jurisdictions lacking
sophisticated regulation and
internet oversight. These
companies presently transferring
funds around the globe each day
for thousands of anonymous
customers are quite simply flying
below the radar.While freedom
lovers call it ‘privacy’, international
law enforcement does not always
hold that view. No matter what
your perspective on the situation,
this is definitely not conventional
online banking.

To open and operate a digital
currency account in the late 1990s,
all you needed was a computer and
an internet connection. Almost all
of the early systems operated using
a similar type of model. Some
companies changed over the years
and grew out of that first structure,
many have not. Since the mid-
1990s, very few have retained all of
their original features. Unlike an
online bank account, ‘digital
currency’ is defined by these
features. 

During the past decade,
some of these features were
popular but have evolved while
other features are still widely used:

* Digital currency accounts can be
opened and used instantly.

* There were no distinctions
between a personal account or a
‘merchant account’. All digital
currency accounts were identical
whether personal or ‘merchant’.

* All transactions clear instantly,
there are never any delays.

* All digital currency transactions
are final, there are never any charge
backs or reversal of funds.

* To open and use a digital
currency account the currency
issuer/operator did not require
identification, credit check or
verification of identity.
(GoldMoney was an exception
with a CAP.Webmoney
accounts(passports) require ID for
anything more than a basic act.)

* There were no age limits - a tenyear
old could operate an account
with no questions.

* There were no jurisdictional
restrictions. Residents of Iran,
Cuba, India, South Africa or China
were all free to use digital currency.

* Unlike a bank account, there are
no minimum deposits required to
open and maintain that account.
Digital currency accounts can be
opened with no deposit and
remain open without issue or fee.

* There were no business
restrictions. Gambling, online
pharmacies, pornography,MLMs,
investments, pyramid/ponzi
schemes and many others were
permitted using digital currency
(exceptions: GoldMoney &
Webmoney have restrictions).

* Account holders were always
adding/withdrawing funds
(national currency) through third
party independent agents, not the
digital currency issuer/operator.

* Because funds could not be
reversed, there are never
withholdings or reserve funds. One
hundred percent of each
transaction clears and is
immediately available.

* Digital currency transaction fees
were and still are extremely low.
Compared to credit card
processing fees, digital currency
transaction fees are often less than
1/5 of the cost.


== Digital currency differences ==

For more than a decade, digital
currency units denominated in
dollars, euros and rubles, or backed
by precious metal were technically
not government issued money. As
units moved over the internet and
not through a bank, it was believed
digital currency circulated beyond
the reach of existing bank regulations.

Today, however, this loose
concept has evolved and several of
the larger countries like Australia,
Canada and the US have encircled
the issuers and exchange agents
with challenging new regulations
along with clarifications of the
existing bank laws.

In contrast to online bank
accounts, digital currency has more
anonymous cash like features. A
banker would say that the accounts
lack oversight. These digital
currency units are issued by a
private company and quietly move
around the globe with just a few
keystrokes. No strict bank
regulators or sophisticated AML
software is monitoring this account
activity. This was true in the 1990s
and is generally still true today.

In a recent interview for
DGCmagazine with the operator
of gBullion, a brand new digital
gold currency domiciled in the
United Arab Emirates, I asked, “If I
am transferring €1 million a week
through my gBullion account,
month after month, do you ever
ask the account holder for a source
of funds on where that money
came from and is that information
reported to any government
organization or tax authority?” The
answer was “If identification is
confirmed and we ‘know our
client’, they can buy or sell gold
daily up to amounts of €1 million,
€2 million or even €10 million
per day. This is their right.”
Here is a new online financial
business which would permit
deposits or withdrawals of €2
million to €10 million per day, but
never question where the funds
originated. Is this freedom and
privacy or simply ignorance?

Operators of these early 1990s
style digital systems did not have
bank accounts and never accepted
direct transactions with retail
consumers. All financial
transactions between retail public
customers were completed via
independent third party exchange
agents. Retail customers always
sent money to a third party and
not the operator of the system.
This structure provided absolute
protection for the assets backing
the digital units. Whether the value
behind the digital currency was
cash, precious metal or anything
else, that value remained protected
at all times from the everyday risks
of doing business. Today, many
existing companies still use an
identical structure.

This model creates a ‘round-the-clock’
third party liquid market for
the digital units and offers a
myriad of payment options in
various countries. The ability of a
customer to fund or withdraw
money from their digital currency
account using any number of a
dozen local methods is a
spectacular incentive for global
non-bank users (methods include
cash, IBAN, SWIFT, Western
Union, Ukash, cashU, Moneygram,
Anelik, Zoom, money order etc.) It
is doubtful if any type of
regulations could ever slow down
the growth for this type of third
party exchange business.

On the opposite side of the
payment spectrum, companies like
PayPal are integrated with banks,
process credit card transactions
and operate as licensed money
transmitters. The PayPals of the
world require all national currency
transactions to flow directly
through PayPal bank accounts. All
customer funds sent to PayPal or
withdrawn from those accounts
must flow directly through PayPal.

No third party exchange
transactions have ever been
permitted. Unlike digital currency
businesses, the big online payment
processing companies absorb
100% of the risks when dealing
with the public.

In 2002, while PayPal prepared
for a public offering, the
company's corporate lawyers were
quick to secure those important
financial licences required for
doing business in the United
States. However, during those
years, between 2002 and 2005,
most digital currency companies
were not following that same
regulatory path.

==Regulation and growth==

It has been said that government
regulation lags behind the
development of new technology by
three or more years.

In 2006, concerned with the
anonymity of digital currency
products, a number of US
government agencies began to take
a closer look at the industry along
with those independent exchange
agents which handled the customer
transactions. All of companies
located in continental US fell
under scrutiny. The following year,
a number of these businesses were
charged with operating as
unlicensed money-transmitting
businesses.

In April 2007, a US court-ordered
seizure forced the e-gold company
to liquidate a large number of
customer accounts and hand over
the funds. The amount of seized
money was in the millions. The
confiscated accounts mainly
belonged to independent exchange
agents operating within the United
States which had been declared
‘unlicensed & illegal’.


This 2007 action killed 99% of
the digital currency business in the
US, eventually lead to criminal
charges for e-gold and forced the
closure of payment systems such as
1MDC and Crowne Gold. What is
interesting to note regarding e-gold
is that during the 2005 to 2008
period, while they were engaged in
a very public legal battle, the
number of customer accounts
more than doubled as e-gold
picked up three million new
accounts. Since the company never
used paid advertising, this was the
first mainstream publicity it had
ever received.

Immediately after this action, a
few large agents and operators
permanently fled the US for more
casual business environments such
as Central America. Several of
them left the business and retired.

The industry had seen a similar
consolidation resulting from new
Financial Services Licensing
regulations enforced by the
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission during
2004. Forced out of business in
Australia, some had closed but
other larger agents changed
jurisdictions and simply moved
their business. The world is a very
big place.

While regulations and growing
pains have becoming the norm for
digital currency companies, this
has not slowed the industry's
growth. Global leaderWebmoney
Transfer has shown dramatic
growth each year for the past
decade. The number of users, dayto-
day transactions and funds on
deposit have surged asWebmoney
has expanded into new territories
and offered new products.

Webmoney Transfer now has more
than 11 million customer accounts,
and has never required any user to
have a credit card or bank account.
Digital currency flows through
more than 8,000 cities in 70
countries around the globe.
The 2009 e-money industry in
Russia had sales of more than 40
billion rubles ($1.3 billion).

Despite the Russian Government's
effort to pass new e-money
regulation this year - which could
possibly effect business expansion
through higher fees -Webmoney's
business is booming. GoldMoney
customer holdings have just passed
$1 billion in value and there are
even several other new digital
currency companies new to the
marketplace in just the past year.
Outside of the United States,
proper digital currency regulations
compatible with current market
models should not slow industry
growth. In fact, some additional
know your customer and antimoney
laundering regulations
should help bolster the growth of
digital currency across major
emerging markets.

New consumers entering the
digital currency marketplace do
not come from credit card
companies or banks. In fact, it is
very difficult to convince anyone to
put down their plastic. Digital
currency attracts those people in
cash markets wanting to do
business online. Digital currency
speaks to those customers in
markets not yet serviced by the
PayPal's of the world and new
users surface from an everexpanding
customer base of nonbank
consumers.

The business opportunities that
digital currency offers to someone
without a bank account or credit
card are enormous. In the years
ahead, we can expect to see more
non-bank internet users and,
despite additional government
regulations, the forecast is for a
continued boom in these products."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]