

=Discussion=

Kevin Carson:

"The difference between an institution and other organizations is that an
institution is unaccountable to those who make it up, and has a purpose independent of
those who serve it. It also has "a leadership that differentiates itself from those who make
up the organization," with the leaders viewing their own function "as being to manipulate,
threaten, induce, or coerce the group members into subordinating their personal interests
and promoting organizational purposes." 

On the other hand,

[i]n noninstitutional systems, the organization tends to be little more than a convenience, an
informal tool of cooperation that helps each one of us to further our interests through the
group. The organization has no independent purposes of its own, but represents only the
composite of our personal objectives. The organization does not control us, for there is no
division of purpose--and thus, no conflict--between personal and group purposes. The group
is but a reflection of the interests of those within it: it has no independent identity or other
organizational interests that could preempt our own. If the group has any leadership, it tends
to be temporary and informal....

Shaffer's typology of organizations resembles that of Paul Goodman. The more
differentiated the hierarchy and the more formalized its procedures, and the more
members feel the necessity of going through "proper channels" to exert nominal control
over the organization, the more likely that it has become an institution. Like Goodman,
he contrasts the early university system, which was a cooperative arrangement between
students or teachers to pursue their own purposes, to the bureaucratic universities of the
present day with their boards of directors representing institutional interests entirely
separate from students and faculty.

Shaffer distinguishes what he calls "member-oriented and member-controlled"
organizations from institutions, "whose objectives interfere with personal purposes and
generate conflict in society."

The natural order of things is for organizations to be formed by voluntary association
and cooperation, between individuals pursuing their own interests. Institutions
predominate only when the state erects entry barriers to such self-organization, diverts
resources to institutions, and otherwise crowds out self-organization, so that the range of
alternatives is restricted and people are artificially dependent on institutions. In short, the
large, hierarchical, managerial organization is the result of privilege."
(http://members.tripod.com/kevin_carson/sitebuildercontent/sitebuilderfiles/Chapter15.pdf)


=Sources=

Butler Shaffer, Calculated Chaos: Institutional Threats to Peace and Human Survival (San Francisco:
Alchemy Books, 1985), p. 10.


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]