

=Discussion=

Jeremy Brecher:

"Insurgencies are social movements, but movements of a special type:
They reject current rulers’ claims to legitimate authority.
Insurgencies often develop from movements that initially make no
direct challenge to established authority but eventually conclude that
one is necessary to realize their objectives. To effectively protect
the earth’s climate and our species’ future, the climate protection
movement may have to become such an insurgency.

The term “insurgency” is generally associated with an armed rebellion
against an established government. Its aim may be to overthrow the
existing government, but it may also aim to change it or simply to
protect people against it. Whatever its means and ends, the hallmark
of such an insurgency is to deny the legitimacy of established state
authority and to assert the legitimacy of its own actions.

A nonviolent insurgency pursues similar objectives by different means.
Like an armed insurgency, it does not accept the limits on its action
imposed by the powers-that-be. But unlike an armed insurgency, it
eschews violence and instead expresses power by mobilizing people for
various forms of nonviolent mass action.

After closely following the massive strikes, general strikes, street
battles, peasant revolts, and military mutinies of the Russian
Revolution of 1905 that forced the czar to grant a constitution,
Mohandas (not yet dubbed “Mahatma”) Gandhi concluded, “Even the most
powerful cannot rule without the cooperation of the ruled.” Shortly
thereafter he launched his first civil disobedience campaign,
proclaiming “We too can resort to the Russian remedy against tyranny.”

The powers responsible for climate change could not rule for a day
without the acquiescence of those whose lives and future they are
destroying. They are only able to continue their destructive course
because others enable or acquiesce in it. It is the ordinary activity
of people — going to work, paying taxes, buying products, obeying
government officials, staying off private property — that continually
re-creates the power of the powerful. A nonviolent climate insurgency
can be powerful if it withdraws that cooperation from the
powers-that-be.



==Why a [[Law-Enforcing Insurgency]]?==

Faced with the failure of conventional lobbying and political
“pressure group” activity, much of the climate protection movement is
now turning to mass civil disobedience, as witnessed by the campaigns
against the Keystone XL pipeline, mountaintop removal coal mining,
coal-fired power plants, and Arctic oil drilling. Such civil
disobedience, while generally recognizing the legitimacy of the law,
refuses to obey it in specific instances.

Civil disobedience represents moral protest, but it does not in itself
challenge the legal validity of the government or other institutions
against which it is directed. Rather, it claims that the obligation to
oppose their immoral actions — whether discriminating against a class
of people or conducting an immoral war or destroying the climate — is
more binding on individuals than the normal duty to obey the law.

A law-enforcing insurgency goes a step further. It declares a set of
laws and policies themselves illegal and sets out to establish law
through nonviolent self-help. Such insurgents view those who they are
disobeying as merely persons claiming to represent legitimate
authority — but who are themselves violating the law under what’s
known as “color of law,” or the false pretense of authority. So “civil
disobedience” is actually obedience to law and a form of law
enforcement.

Social movements that engage in civil disobedience often draw strength
from the claim that their actions are not only moral, but that they
represent an effort to enforce fundamental legal and constitutional
principles flouted by the authorities they are disobeying. And they
strengthen a movement’s appeal to the public by presenting its action
not as wanton law breaking but as an effort to rectify governments and
institutions that are themselves in violation of the law.

For the civil rights movement, the constitution’s guarantee of equal
rights meant that sit-inners and freedom riders were not criminals but
rather upholders of constitutional law. For the struggle against
apartheid, racism was a violation of internationally guaranteed human
rights. For war resisters from Vietnam to Iraq, the national and
international laws forbidding war crimes defined civil disobedience
not as interference with legal, democratic governments but rather as a
legal obligation of citizens. For the activists of Solidarity, the
nonviolent revolution that overthrew Communism in Poland was not
criminal sedition but an effort to implement the international human
and labor rights law ratified by their own government.

These examples seem paradoxical. On the one hand, the movement
participants appear to be resisting the constituted law and the
officials charged with implementing it. On the other, they are
claiming to act on the basis of law — in fact to be implementing the
law themselves against the opposition of lawless states.

Law professor and historian James Gray Pope has developed a concept of
“constitutional insurgency” to understand such cases. A constitutional
insurgency, or what might be called a “law-enforcing insurgency,” is a
social movement that rejects current constitutional doctrine but that
“rather than repudiating the Constitution altogether, draws on it for
inspiration and justification.” Pope detailed how the American labor
movement long insisted that the right to strike was protected by the
13th amendment to the constitution, which forbade any form of
“involuntary servitude.” Injunctions to limit strikes were therefore
unconstitutional. Although courts disregarded this claim, the radical
Industrial Workers of the World told its members to “disobey and treat
with contempt all judicial injunctions,” and the “normally staid”
American Federation of Labor maintained that a worker confronted with
an unconstitutional injunction had an imperative duty to “refuse
obedience and to take whatever consequences may ensue.”
(http://fpif.org/nonviolent-insurgency-climate-protection/)

=Source=

* This article is a joint publication of Foreign Policy In Focus and
TruthOut. For a longer presentation, see the Foreign Policy In Focus
report, “A Nonviolent Insurgency for Climate Protection?“ 

[[Category:Politics]]