
= software enabling people to collaboratively capture, explore, visualize, organize, filter and analyze knowledge

URL = http://nooron.org/ [http://www.noosphere.org/]

=Description=

'Nooron is Web software enabling people to collaboratively capture, explore, visualize, organize, filter and analyze knowledge. It is an open, computer-aided think-tank. It provides a framework within which participants present ideas, connect them to other ideas, devise criteria for idea evaluation, and then evaluate them. The resulting storehouse of assertions and opinions can then be navigated, filtered and visualized in new ways. Nooron supports the capture or importation of conventional facts and figures, and is 'knowledge based,' meaning that it uses Knowledge Representation technology to store richly complex and interrelated information.

Nooron is intended to be a suite of free (LGPLed) software clients and servers which together would form a system for magnifying collective human intelligence. It can help a small team work smarter, or a large population to collaboratively manage, analyze and improve combined knowledge. It is designed to integrate users and their knowledge into an evolving system, capable of improving ideas, and even improving the software used to manage those ideas. Unlike the majority of collaborative filtering systems, Nooron is based on user-extensible criteria to facilitate self-organization and evolutionary improvements."


=History=

Project History and Status

Nooron was developed from 2002 to 2006 using Python and PyOKBC, and was based on a number of experimental software projects developed from 1995 to 2001. Version 0.2.9 was completed and implemented as a knowledge publishing system, delivering knowledge in multiple formats, including HTML, GraphViz, Docbook, Postscript, PDF and JPG.

Work on Nooron, as described above, has been suspended. Many of its features and much of its software architecture, however, forms the foundation of new collaborative, criteria-based, software projects currently being developed.


=More Information=

Nooron is a project of Noosphere.org. If you are interested in learning more about the Nooron project, or other projects at Noosphere.org, 



[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Software]]