=Discussion=

Markus Lindholm:

"Human altruism means more than warm feelings for  our  kin  (Wilson,  2015).  Humans  live  and  take  potentially  part  in  any  other  existence   by   means   of   huge   cognitive   regimes   of   intensions,   reciprocal   understanding and shared meaning.The French paleontologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1959) considered this pan-human reservoir of shared meaning of such significance that it deserved its own   term.   In   addition   to   the   lithosphere,   hydrosphere,   atmosphere   and   biosphere,  he  identified  the  noosphere  (nous  =  reason,  meaning).  The  Ukrainian  geochemist  Vladimir  Vernadsky  (1945)  considered  the  noosphere,  despite  its  invisible nature, to have substantial impact on the other spheres, through houses, constructions, roads and railways, and through farmlands, roads, quarries, and other landscape deforming enterprises. It manifests physically as "the sphere of  the earth system or its subsystems where human activities constitute a significant source of  change through the use and subsequent transformation of  natural resources, as well as through the deposition of  waste and emissions" (Kuhn & Heckelei, 2010, p. 282). Two generations after de Chardin and Vernadsky, the footprints of the noosphere is recognizable to  everyone.  Even  if  all  of  humanity  disappeared,  future  paleontologists  would  easily  recognize  that,  during  a  geological  blink  of  an  eye,  one  species  caused  profound physically and biogeochemical alterations of the spheres on earth. For this  reason,  geologists  increasingly  consider  the  metabolic  impacts  of  the  noosphere as a new geological epoch, the Anthropocene.  '''The noosphere gained an evolutionary dimension through the work of John Maynard-Smith  and  Eörs  Szathmáry,  in  what  they  identified  as  the  major  evolutionary transitions''' (1995, 1999; Szathmáry, 2015). ''The history of the biosphere involves   a   series   of   transition   thresholds,   associated   with   new   levels   of   collaborative   'altruistic'   behavior.''   

An   early   transition   occurred   in   the   Precambrian,  as  one  bacteria  cell  managed  to  inhabit  another,  without  getting engulfed or digested. The two cells overcame their inherent tendency of selfish behavior,   and   instead   developed   a   collaborative,   symbiotic   bond.   This   collaborative  fusion  became  the  advent  of  large  and  complex  eukaryote  cells,  characterized  by  extensive  division  of  cellular  functions,  with  mitochondria  for  energy  metabolism  and  chloroplasts  for  effective  photosynthesis.  This  novelty  enabled the biosphere to extend into new space, and thereby to alter patterns and dynamics of biogeochemical cycles. During the early Cambrian period, a new level of collaboration emerged, as some  eukaryote  cells  formed  cellular  colonies.  Again,  instead  of  pursuing  genomic selfishness, cells established functional common equilibria, resulting in a  novel  biological  unit:  Tissue,  which  soon  assembled  into  larger  collaborative  complexes, such as leaves, stem, cones and cambium, or blood vessels, nerves and skin,  and  enabled  the  emergence  of  large  and  complex  organisms.  Again,  the  biosphere  went  through  a  transition  of  'physiological  altruism'  into  its  present  mode.  During  the  Cretaceous,  certain  insects  socialized  into  superorganisms,  where each member partly serves as independent organism, but nonetheless are functional  units  of  a  larger  communal  organism  – anthills,  beehives,  or  wasp  nests.  

'''The noosphere flags a new transition, where the mental isolation, which up to this  point  had  dominated  the  biosphere,  is  complemented  by  the  sharing  of  meaning,  conveyed  by  symbolic  signs'''.  We  are  the  last  major  evolutionary  transition  (Wilson,  2015).  The  human  community,  based  on  shared  meaning,  which already puzzled Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, inaugurates a web of cognitive interactions, which allow us to alter, reorganize, deteriorate, and even possibly destroy our environment. "Due to social care (including medicine) and  agriculture,  the  biology  of  humans  has  become  gradually  de-Darwinized"  (Szathmáry,  2015, p. 10110). For the same reason, Joseph Henrich considers Homo sapiens as a principally  novel  existence  on  the  planet:  "humans  are  at  the  beginning  of  a  major  biological  transition,  the  formation  of  a  new  kind  of  animal.  In  our  species,  the  extent  and  sophistication of our technical repertoire – and our ecological dominance – depends on the size and interconnectedness of our collective brains" (Henrich 2016, p. 318). We are witnessing a new major transition going on right in front of us, and each of us is part of it. Without understanding the concept of the noosphere and how it relates to the major evolutionary transitions, the environmental crisis will remain inexplicable. 

The major evolutionary transition that the reader is part of right now, through conceiving these thoughts of mine, depends on socialization of the minds. The minds,  which  so  far  were  limited  to  single  organisms,  extend  into  a  cognitive  community   of   shared   symbolic   signs   and   meaning,   independent   of   the   environment. The noosphere involves similar features as the previous transitions, where singular and isolated units managed to overcome their egocentric isolation without engulfing their fellow organisms. The 'we' invokes a capacity for common action so far unseen in the biosphere: A shared cognitive space independent of the  adaptive  demands  of  the  ecological  niche,  and  instead  adapting  to  the  noosphere, with all its new challenges, fears and possibilities (Gillings et al., 2016)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Noosphere]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons_Transition]]
[[Category:Transitions]]