
URL = https://batesoninstitute.org/nora-bateson/?

==Bio==

"Filmmaker, writer, educator. lecturer President of the International Bateson Institute, Sweden

Nora Bateson, is an award-winning filmmaker, research designer, writer and educator, as well as President of the International Bateson Institute (IBI) based in Sweden. 

Her work asks the question:

“How we can improve our perception of the complexity we live within, so we may
improve our interaction with the world?”.

An international lecturer, researcher and writer, Nora wrote, directed and produced the award-winning documentary, An Ecology of Mind, a portrait of her father, Gregory Bateson.
Her work brings the fields of biology, cognition, art, anthropology, psychology, and information technology together into a study of the patterns in ecology of living systems.
Her book, Small Arcs of Larger Circles released by Triarchy Press, UK, 2016, a revolutionary personal approach to the study of systems and complexity is the core text of the Harvard University LILA program 2017-18. Her new book, Warm Data, will be released in 2019 by Triarchy Press.

The IBI integrates the sciences, arts and professional knowledge to create a qualitative inquiry of the integration of life. As the president of the International Bateson Institute (IBI), Nora directs research
projects that require multiple contexts of research and interdependent processes, always asking:

“How we can create a context in which to study the contexts?”

An impressive team of international thinkers, scientists and artists have been brought together by the IBI to generate an innovative form of inquiry, which Nora coined “Transcontextual Research” and the corresponding new form of information she dubbed: “Warm Data”. A group process created by Nora ‘Warm Data Lab’ is the public outreach model of this research. Over 100 groups around the
world have participated in Warm Data Labs to assist in developing the ability to perceive complexity.

In addition, Bateson is also credited with the innovation of the neologism “[[symmathesy]]” and the corresponding theoretical essay bearing the same title. Bateson defines this neologism as:

"An entity composed by contextual mutual learning through interaction. This process of
interaction and mutual learning takes place in living entities at larger or smaller scales
of symmathesy."

As an educator she has developed curricula for schools in Northern California and produced and directed award winning multimedia projects on intercultural and ecological understanding.

Her work, which has been presented at the world’s top universities, is described as:
“offering audiences a lens through which to see the world that effects not only the way
we see, but also the way we think”.
Nora’s work in facilitating cross-disciplinary discussions is part of her research into what she calls “the ecology of the conversation”.

Her speaking engagements include keynote addresses and lectures at international conferences and universities on a wide range of topics that span the fields of anti-fascism, ecology, education, the arts,
family therapy, leadership and all aspects of advocacy for living systems –– she travels between conversations in different fields bringing multiple perspectives into view to reveal larger patterns."

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Complexity]]
[[Category:Sweden]]