
* Nord-Pas de Calais Third Industrial Revolution Master Plan – 2013. Prepared by the TIR Consulting Group LLC.

=Excerpt=

"This report was commissioned by the CCIR
on terms that limit the liability of the TIR
Consulting Group LLC for the Third Industrial
Revolution Master Plan. The analysis and
conclusions presented in the report result
from the exercise of our best professional
judgment, informed in large part by materials
and information available from a variety of
sources. Use of the report by a third party,
for whatever purpose, should not and does
not absolve such third party from using due
diligence in verifying the report’s contents
for its own specific purposes. Any use of the
document and any reliance on or decisions
based on it are the responsibility of those
individuals, organizations or businesses that
use it. The TIR Consulting Group LLC makes
no warranty or representation as to the
content or accuracy of the content of the
commissioned report and does not accept
any duty of care or liability of any kind
whatsoever to any prospective user, and is
not responsible for damages, if any, which
may be incurred by that user as a result of
decisions made or not made, or any actions
taken or not taken, based on the report."


=Executive Summary

"The overall goal of the Third Industrial
Revolution (TIR) in Nord-Pas de Calais is
to make the regional economy one of the
most resource-efficient, productive and
sustainable in the world.

The first step of this transformation is to
seek energy efficiency in any infrastructure
investment and to revisit behaviors and
decisions under the lens of efficiency:
Energy savings creates jobs by redirecting
the economy toward more labor-intensive
industries. This energy efficiency fundament
is the catalyzer for a circular economy and
for the 5 Pillar infrastructure to be built
simultaneously.

The first pillar is the shift toward renewable
energies: The total cost of renewable
energies is decreasing as an exponential
curve, and their marginal production cost is
close to zero. The Region should accelerate
the renewable production through sectorial
and fiscal approaches, and should facilitate
an industrial export strategy to also
capture the commercial opportunities from
Northern Europe investments. This pillar
should be coupled with Pillar 2 that aims
at transforming buildings into micro-power
plants, keeping the priority on the thermal
energy efficiency of buildings.

Pillar 2 will start first with a large-scale
retrofitting and refurbishment program
combined with a land conversion program
in brownfield and mines sites. These two
programs, driven by the Region, enable
buildings and land regeneration. Old mines
or industrial sites will be converted to
restore biodiversity, creating the first steps
toward the “Biosphere Valley”. The business
model of such programs is based on land
and real estate valorization. Furthermore, a
cooperative financing model, using energy
savings, can be established to support the
investment, while involving private investors
in the Third Industrial Revolution. As a
result of these investments, the region will
be equipped with near-zero marginal cost
renewable energy combined with longlasting
energy savings. In addition, such
programs will create employment in the short
term in the region. The region is to become
a whole Biosphere Valley that educates
students and promotes behavior changes
toward the biosphere, resource efficiency, a
reduced environmental footprint, and a high
industrial productivity. The Biosphere Valley
is actually the first regional industrial cluster
for a circular economy.

Pillar 3 – Energy storage will be provisioned
and planned, taking into account energy
exchanges to neighboring countries or
regions and the combined effect of Pillars
1 and 2. Driven by efficient buildings
and optimized energy consumption, the
regional need for energy will diminish. The
share of renewable energy will nonetheless
dramatically increase, beyond today’s 2 to
4 percent of the regional energy mix. The
national market for energy storage today
is not mature (no existing regulation, nor
subsidies) but recent negative prices on
gross electricity trading create the need for
storage. The first storage capacity will come
with electric vehicles. In addition, renewable
biomass methanization can create flexibility
in the energy system. Further, the Region
needs to take advantage of its hydrogen
grid (a unique asset in France) and the
experimentation in Dunkirk for power-to-gas
technologies. Methanation, compressed air
energy storage and hydraulic storage will be
developed too on an ad hoc basis.

Pillar 4 – The Energy Internet, directly
linked with Pillar 2—the Biosphere Valley
rehabilitation program—aims to roll out a
smart grid in the whole regional territory.
This will first consist in opening access to
detailed historical energy consumption
data: This is a prerequisite to building
refurbishment under Energy Performance
Contracting schemes. The refurbishment
program will lead to third-party investment,
energy consumption reduction and virtual
power plants, which need to be supported by
energy providers. Establishing cross-border
grid interconnection, especially with the
United Kingdom, Germany and Belgium, will
enable the region to export excess energy.
Real-time access to data will also enable
the region to create room for maneuvering
and optimizing energy production and
export on account of demand response
programs (“effacement”) in residential or
industrial buildings.

Pillar 5 – Plug-in and fuel cell transport
complements the four preceding pillars. To
support the construction works required to
realize the retrofitting and land conversion
programs (Pillar 2), an energy-efficient
transportation solution should be developed
in parallel. This will be the start of the
Logistics Internet, for the transit of goods:
The lighthouse Zen-e-Ville program under
Pillar 2 should respect the principles of a
collaborative logistics plan, where electric
trucks and warehouses are shared among
material and goods providers. And conversely,
these projects will provide the opportunity to
test and demonstrate plug-in and multimodal
solutions before a regional deployment
beyond goods-to-people mobility.

Synergies among the 5 Pillars all contribute
to greater levels of energy efficiency
and provide the foundation for the
Third Industrial Revolution to happen.

Thermodynamic efficiency improvements
enable productivity gains that can be
directed toward greater innovation, job
creation and cross-border attractiveness.

According to the DEEPER model, the Third
Industrial Revolution will require the
injection of 6 billion euros per year to reduce
the final energy use by 60 percent by 2050.
This effort will create more than 150,000 net
jobs from direct investment and indirectly
from an increased productivity. This effort is
less risky than not doing it: A business-asusual
scenario without increasing the energy
efficiency, but without increasing the energy
prices, will reduce employment by 100,000
jobs by 2050.

A key to success toward the Third Industrial
Revolution is a shared political consciousness
of the biosphere. Universities should play a
key role here: The academics will lead the
biosphere awareness effort by educating the
students and also monitoring the progress of
the Third Industrial Revolution using a key
set of sustainability, social and economic
indicators. Eventually, strong program
management will be needed from the Region,
as dynamic planning and rigorous execution
will be the key in delivering the TIR.
The Third Industrial Revolution Master Plan,
jointly conceived by Nord-Pas de Calais
and the TIR Consulting Group LLC, provides
a road map for steering the region into a
new economic era that will spawn the new
businesses and employment opportunities of
a sustainable 21st century."


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Policy]]