
Interesting speculative piece by Remi Sussan:


=Text=

"Recently I have been reading an extremely interesting study from Benjamin 
Sommer, "bodies of gods". His main thesis is that the gods of the "fertile 
crescent" (Phoenician, Babylonian, Canaanites) had the particularity to have 
several bodies, and even several "personalities" or "souls". The basic 
fluidity of these gods may manifest in two forms: fragmentation and overlap. 
Because of fragmentation a god appear to be in different locations, and even 
have different selves or personalities. 

The author shows as an example of this the following invocation by 
Assubanipal of the two Ihstar of Niniveh and Arbela: 

Exalt and glorify the Lady of Nineveh, 

magnify and praise the Lady of Arbela, 

who have no equal among the great gods! 

Their names are most precious among the goddesses! 

Their cult centres have no equal among all the shrines! 

A word from their lips is blazing fire! 

Their utterances are valid for ever! 

I am Assurbanipal, their favorite . . . 

I grew up in the lap of my goddesses . . . … 

Showing distinctly the existence of two goddesses of the same name. Benjamin 
Sommer insists to say that the plural is indeed used, and that the syntax 
shows that they cannot be seen as two different attributes of the same 
goddess. 

With Overlap, gods merge in each other, some are seen as aspects of some 
others: 

"Your head is Adad, who [makes] heaven and earth [resound] like a smithy, 

Your brow is Shala, beloved [sp]ouse who contents [Adad’s heart], 

Your neck is Marduk, judge of heaven [and netherworld . . . 

Your throat is Sarpanitum, creat[ress of peo]ple . ." 

According to Summer, the One god of early Judaism, as described in the old 
testament, shared with other south Mediterranean gods the same capacity to 
have several bodies. The God of the ancient testament wasn't at first a 
bodiless pure spirit, but a kind of liquid entity able to appear under 
several forms. 

Sommer only briefly mentions Egypt, as it is not his field of study, but I 
have simultaneously read Eric Hornung, "the one and the many", and it seems 
that the Egyptian gods also exhibited this kind of liquid nature. For 
instance, Hornung notices that the so-called Egyptian syncretism was not 
simply the absorption of one god by an other; for instance, in Amon-Re , Re 
is not abolished in Amon, or the reverse. Amon and Re both continue to have 
their cults, etc. But Egyptians created a third god, a "compound entity" 
from these two deities. Hornung explicitly compares this process to 
chemistry, where various compounds are associated in order to create new 
molecules. 

I have also the strong impression that India shared the same paradigm. I 
don't know for fragmentation, but I'm sure for overlap. Gods divide, and 
transform easily in each other; look for instance at these extracts from the 
Ganesha Upanishad: 

"You are speech. You are consciousness. You are Bliss. You are Brahma. You 
are Being-Consciousness-Bliss. You are the Non-Dual. You are plainly Brahma. 
You are knowledge. You are Intelligence. " 

"You are Brahma, You are Vishnu, You are Rudra, You are Agni, You are Vayu, 
You are the Sun, You are the Moon, You are Brahma, Bhur-Bhuvah-Svar. " 

So according to Sommer, one may classify religions not with a unique axis 
(monotheism/polytheism) but at least two, including the duality 
fluidity/fixity. Greek mythology is an example of a polytheism where gods 
and goddesses have just one self, one personality, and early judaism would 
be an example of a monotheism where a unique divinity may have several 
bodies and selves. 

What should we deduce of that? First an interesting epistemology and 
ontology. One of the main features of myths and religious though is that 
frequently they express in a narrative, intuitive embodied way some very 
abstract notions lying at the core of our way of knowledge. For instance, 
it's now quite well known that the Christian vision of history culminating 
in an "Apocalypse" paved the way to our common conception of linear time, a 
concept shared today by even the most atheist of our thinkers, in opposition 
to the older vision of cyclical time, shared by many traditional societies. 
Gregory Bateson mentions an other interesting example , showing how myths 
may express different versions of the notion of order and disorder. 

"Among the Iatmul of New Guinea, the central origin myth, like the Genesis 
story, deals with the question of how dry land was separated from water. 
They say that in the beginning the crocodile Kavwokmali paddled with his 
front legs and with his hind legs; and his paddling kept the mud suspended 
in the water. The great culture hero, Kevembuangga, came with his spear and 
killed Kavwokmali. After that the mud settled and dry land was formed. 
Kevembuangga then stamped with his foot on the dry land, i.e., he proudly 
demonstrated “that it was good. (…) the Iatmul have arrived at a theory of 
order which is almost a precise converse of that of the book of Genesis. In 
Iatmul thought, sorting will occur if randomization is prevented. In 
Genesis, an agent is invoked to do the sorting and dividing. " 

What a future religion may gain from this concept of "fluid gods"? By making 
the multiplicity the hallmark of perfection, such an ontology may provide 
narrative for a future psychology where the frontiers of the "body" and the 
self are increasingly blurred. This include of course, the idea of future 
uploaded superintelligences able to copy themselves in different supports 
etc.. But it may help people today to understand their current situations, 
their own existence as a network of online persona, avatars, agents, what 
Anders Sandberg calls the "exoself". It may give us a new vision of our 
mind, as a population of various personalities and entities. I don't speak 
here exactly about Minsky's society of mind, because, as I understand it, 
agents in a society of mind are not conscious: I speak more here about 
multiplication of conscious selves, a kind of "multiple personality 
disorder" but seen positively. Chaos magicians frequently point at this 
idea, and it is also used in some sci-fi novels such as Walter Jon Williams' 
Aristoi. But chaos magicians are frequently original in their ideas but 
superficial in their approach, and it may be interesting to build seriously 
some ontology and mythical narratives about this notion of fluidity."


[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Articles]]