Below are various materials related to the first academic conference on [[Peer Production]], held at Nottingham Trent University on November 15-16, 2007, co-organized by Andreas Wittel and Michel Bauwens.

See also the [http://www.ntu.ac.uk/p2pworkshop2007/ official page] for a general presentation of the program.

=Presentations=

#Stefan Merten ([http://www.oekonux.org/ Oekonux]): [http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/StefanMerten/MostMatureP2PEconomy Free Software]: The Most Mature P2P Economy. 1) [[Text version of key Oekonux concepts]].
#Adam Arvidsson: Review: [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/ethical-economy/2007/11/19  The Ethical Economy]
#[http://www.ylin.org Yuwei Lin]: Women's collective action in the free software world[http://www.slideshare.net/linyuwei/womens-collective-action-in-the-free-software-world/ Women's collective action in the free software world]
#[http://PaulBHartzog.org Paul Hartzog] and [[Richard C. Adler]], [http://www.oort-cloud.org/ Oort-Cloud]: [http://www.slideshare.net/paulbhartzog/social-publishing Social Publishing]
#[http://www.openlife.cc/ Henrik Ingo], [http://openlife.cc/DirectDemocracy Do we want Direct Democracy?]
#Dr Athina Karatzogianni, University of Hull, author of [[Cyberconflict]] and Dr George Michaelides Institute of Work Psychology, University of Sheffield: '''[[Cryptohierarchies]], Soft Control and Group Polarization in Networked Communities.''' Request copy of presentation from athina.k at gmail.com or george.michaelides@gmail.com
#Cosma Orsi. Roskilde University Centre. The [[Political Economy of Reciprocity and the Partner State]].
#[http://nuvatsia.terevaden.net Tere Vadén]. [http://nuvatsia.terevaden.net/podpress_trac/web/345/0/four-stages-of-freedom.pdf A Critique of Cybercommunism]
#Ned Rossiter. [[Economic Options for Organizing Networks in Beijing]]
#Dr Phoebe Moore [http://socialsynergyweb.com/cgi-bin/wiki2/Temp/download/free_software_free_time.ppt Free Software, Free Time PPT file]
#George Dafermos. TU Delf. Peer Governance in the Linux Community.
#Johan Söderberg. [[Hacking Capitalism]]. [http://www.amazon.com/Hacking-Capitalism-Routledge-Information-Technology/dp/0415955432/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1196374393&sr=8-1] (no presentation - Presented Summarized Lecture)
#[http://blog.socialsynergyweb.com/ Sam Rose] [http://socialsynergyweb.com/cgi-bin/wiki2/Temp/download/nottinghampresosam.pdf Open Businesss and P2P Ventures in theory and practice PDF]
#[http://cfeditions.com Hervé Le Crosnier]. [http://socialsynergyweb.com/cgi-bin/wiki2/Temp/download/nottinghameherve.pdf Vectorialism: how crowdsourcing help building new conglomerates of the digital age. PDF]

=Details=

'''Yuwei Lin:'''

"I was there, too. I gave a talk titled 'Women's collective action in the
free software world' at this workshop. I argued that voluntary work in free
software is not necessarily unpaid labour; people are motivated by a
variety of matters to get involved in free software. However, the majority
of the rewarded and visible labour is coding jobs largely done by men. In
this talk, I drew on the stories about women's practices in developing and
using free software, and tackled such overemphasis on the value of coding
and men's work. I called for attention to invisible values of mutual
helping, mutual learning, participating, and sharing experiences. I also
called for acknowledgement of women's participation (and hence diverse ways
of coding and hacking) in the free software world."


Tere Vaden introduced the concept of [[Triple-Free Software]]:

"triple-free peer production (whether in free software, media,
education...) includes the ownership of the means of production down to
the level of electricity, the physical infra etc. I'm thinking of Gandhi
in South-Africa: when he with his colleagues wanted to start a newspaper
highlighting the racial/economic/legal issues, they could not get it
printed (economy + censorship), so they bought a printing press and
moved with it to the country where they grew their own food & wrote &
published. I'm thinking that something like this might in the long run
be necessary if we want to escape the dependency & falling back of peer
production to waged labour."


=More Information=

Info page on the conference from Nottingham Trent University at
http://www.ntu.ac.uk/p2pworkshop2007/


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]