=Source=

This is from an unsigned Memorandum:

'''* Capture of U.S. Critical Infrastructure by Neoreactionaries. February 5, 2025''' 


=Discussion=

==The Rise of the NRx Movement ==
 
The ongoing restructuring of U.S. digital and administrative systems must be understood in the broader 
context of the neoreactionary (NRx) movement, a “Dark Enlightenment” ideology advocating for the dismantling of 
democracy in favor of centralized corporate or monarchic rule. Nick Land and Curtis Yarvin are the foremost 
proponents of this ideology. Touted as the “godfather of accelerationism,” Land has argued that democracy 
inherently leads to societal decline and proposed that societies should be run more like corporations, with 
competent elites at the top, akin to CEO-style governance rather than electoral politics. 


Similarly, Curtis Yarvin also 
known as “Mencius Moldbug,” has extensively written about his vision for replacing democracy with an “efficient” 
autocratic regime controlled by a CEO and technocratic elite: 

- "If Americans want to change their government, they need to get rid of dictator phobia….One way of 
dealing with that is.... hire two executives, make sure they work together and there is really no other 
solution…"

- “Assuming security and responsibility, how could we produce effective government in California? The 
answer: find the world’s best CEO, and give him undivided control over budget, policy and personnel.”

- “But—if you agree with me that democracy is the problem, not the solution—there’s also nothing 
wrong with a military coup in which the military expresses this same realization...Therefore, it is justified in 
seizing, and either dissolving or privatizing according to its best judgment, all subsidized or officially 
supported information organs of the old mediocracy, including universities, newspapers, TV and radio 
stations, schools, etc. Probably the first option is the safest….In a post-mediocratic state, education is a 
purely parental responsibility. Young people will learn whatever their parents choose to teach them, or have
them taught, or expose them to. Official involvement in this process, even in the form of subsidies, is 
unthinkable. Likewise, journalism is a purely private function.”


==Doxxing Controversy: NRx Gets Exposed==

Yarvin first came to prominence after being reported in a TechCrunch article, “Geeks for Monarchy,” in 
2013—after Peter Thiel had invested in Yarvin’s start-up company (Urbit), alongside Balaji Srinavasan, then an 
Andreessen Horowitz partner. 

The article alarmed his affiliates, including Thiel, Blake Masters, Patri Friedman, 
Michael Gibson, and Srinavasan, who suggested in correspondence retaliating against journalists:  

-“If things get hot, it may be interesting to sic the Dark Enlightenment audience on a single vulnerable 
hostile reporter to dox them and turn them inside out with hostile reporting sent to *their* 
advertisers/friends/contacts,” Srinivasan said in an email viewed by the New York Times.  


Mr. Thiel, a participant in the email thread, urged their colleagues to keep quiet. 


Yarvin replied to Srinavasan: 

-“Dude, control the frame….If you make a big thing of it, you prove their point…You and I have different 
vulnerabilities, you because you’re in the closet and I because I’m out of it...”  

Srinvasan contemplated an attack-back strategy, and acknowledged “It might mean moving to Singapore though as 
endgame.” (Since then, Srinvasan has renounced his citizenship and resides in Singapore). 


==NRx Entanglements: PayPal Mafia meets Network States==

Neoreactionary ideas, once fringe, have gained traction in Silicon Valley and among influential political 
operatives, including those now embedded in Musk’s network of power. Both Marc Andreessen (partner at 
venture-capital firm A16Z and author of the Techo-Optimist Manifesto) and former colleague Balaji Srinavasan 
(author of the Network State) cite Land and Yarvin, respectively. The “PayPal Mafia”—a network of early PayPal 
executives including Peter Thiel, now AI & Crypto Czar David Sacks, and Elon Musk—have also played a key role in 
mainstreaming neoreactionary ideas. In his 2009 essay “The Education of a Libertarian,” Thiel concluded democracy 
was incompatible with technological progress. Thiel also believes that monopolies are good, competition is bad, and 
the most successful companies create and sustain monopolies.


In an interview, Musk tacitly affirmed and expanded 
Peter’s claim to apply to government: 

- “I think its a false dichotomy to look at government and sort of industry as separate…government is…the 
ultimate corporation,” calling it a “monopoly that can’t go bankrupt, or usually cannot go bankrupt.”  
Both Elon Musk and Peter Thiel have more prominently participated in American politics, and notably built 
businesses that perform critical government functions. Thiel is a co-founder of Palantir, a firm that provides data 
analytics and surveillance tools for U.S. intelligence agencies, the military, and law enforcement, handling tasks that 
range from predictive policing and counterterrorism to managing battlefield intelligence. Similarly, Thiel-backed 
Anduril Industries is developing autonomous defense systems and border surveillance technology.  

Musk, the wealthiest man alive, operates Neuralink, Boring Company, SpaceX, Starlink, Tesla, X (formerly 
Twitter) and xAI. Musk’s SpaceX has replaced NASA in launching U.S. astronauts and provides the Pentagon with 
military satellite deployment, while Starlink’s internet services have been used in war zones, including Ukraine, 
raising questions about who controls critical infrastructure in geopolitical conflicts (Starlink has more satellites in 
orbit than the rest combined). Additionally, Tesla’s Superchargers have become the national standard for electric 
vehicle charging, with more than 49% of the US electric vehicle market. Tesla’s AI and energy infrastructure have
positioned Musk as a key player in electric grid management and autonomous military applications, with the 
Pentagon exploring Tesla’s AI-powered robotics for future defense use (despite past surveillance abuses). 

Meanwhile, Musk’s ownership of X (formerly Twitter) has turned Musk into an operator of one of the largest digital 
town squares that shapes discourse around the intersection of technology and politics worldwide. The scope and 
scale of his companies blur the line between public and private power, executing state-level functions but funded 
and backed by shareholders.  

“The government is now reliant on him, but struggles to respond to his risk-taking, brinkmanship, and 
caprice. Current and former officials from NASA, the Department of Defense, the Department of 
Transportation, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration told me that Musk’s influence had become inescapable in their work, and several of 
them said that they now treat him like a sort of unelected official. One Pentagon spokesman said that he 
was keeping Musk apprised of my inquiries about his role in Ukraine and would grant an interview with an 
official about the matter only with Musk’s permission. ‘We’ll talk to you if Elon wants us to,’ he told me.” In a 
podcast interview last year, Musk was asked whether he has more influence than the American government. 
He replied immediately, “In some ways.” 


Reid Hoffman told me that Musk’s attitude is “like Louis XIV: 

- ‘L’état, c’est moi.’ [translation: “I am the state”]” 


==NRx Politics==
 
The neoreactionary movement’s engagement in American politics has been limited and highly targeted, 
reflecting a strategic approach rather than a broad ideological movement. Peter Thiel, its most prominent financial 
backer, has intervened selectively, supporting candidates with personal and professional ties to him rather than 
building a mass political base. His first major political foray came in 2016, when he publicly endorsed and donated 
$1.25 million to Trump, an unusual move for a Silicon Valley billionaire. Yet, his political activity remained sparse until 
2022, when he invested heavily in two Senate candidates—J.D. Vance in Ohio ($15M) and Blake Masters in Arizona 
($10M). Both had worked closely with Thiel: Vance worked at Mithril Capital after law school before receiving early 
backing from Thiel’s network ($100M) to form a venture fund, Narya Capital, while Masters had been a long-time 
employee and protégé at Thiel Capital a co-author of the book, Zero to One. Thiel’s strategy of funding insiders 
rather than outsiders reflects the limited ambitions of the neoreactionary movement—a tactical elite project rather 
than a popular uprising. Thiel himself has retreated from direct political funding, declining to back any candidates in 
2024. Yet his political experiment has succeeded beyond expectation—with Vance not only securing a Senate seat 
but rising to the Vice Presidency despite past opposition to Trump, declaring him to be an “idiot” and 
“reprehensible.”   

Elon Musk, on the other hand, remained apolitical until late 2022, when he publicly broke with the 
Democratic Party and began amplifying messaging on X (formerly Twitter). His political influence surged in 2024, 
when he donated $75 million to a pro-Trump super PAC over three months and used X to push Trump’s candidacy. 
Musk’s strategy has been more aggressive than Thiel’s, including hosting Republican primary debates, and pledging 
to give $1 million a day to Trump supporters in swing states—a move that faced legal scrutiny over potential election 
law violations. 


==NRx Cynicism==

- “Caesar was an Olympian. Trump Should be on Ozempic.” 


Curtis Yarvin has a vision for an “American Caesar”—a strong leader who would dismantle existing 
democratic institutions and centralize power. Yarvin has emphasized the necessity for such a leader to act decisively 

- “When Caesar crosses the Rubicon, he doesn't sit around getting his feet wet, fishing. He marches straight across 
the Rubicon.”

Yet, Yarvin also writes, “Trump is no Caesar.”  


Yarvin dismisses the President’s capability to enact the 
kind of regime change Yarvin envisions. Instead, he cynically portrays the President as an aging showman who 
reflects the shallowness of his era rather than the grandeur of history. “Caesar was an Olympian. Trump should be 
on Ozempic.”  

Despite this open disdain for the President, Yarvin recognizes the President’s utility—not as a leader, but as 
a tool. His trials, legal battles, and media spectacle provoke the regime into overreach, accelerating its own decay. 
Yarvin describes the state as “the motor of revolution,” arguing that it is not insurgents like Trump who drive 
systemic collapse, but the regime itself, which reacts in ways that ultimately weaken its own legitimacy. The 
prosecution of the President, Yarvin suggests, creates a self-destructive cycle, where the government’s attempts to 
neutralize him only deepen public disillusionment with democracy. Yarvin even rejects the revolutionary impulse 
among the President’s supporters. He derides January 6 as “the last lame breath of mobocracy in America” and 
scoffs at the idea that Trump’s base—“used-car dealers, general contractors, small-town investment 
advisors”—could ever rise up and install a new “Trumpenreich.”  

Curtis Yarvin reveals a cynical instrumentalism—he does not admire the President as a leader, but rather 
sees him as a useful accelerant for the collapse of the current political order. Yarvin’s vision is 
post-revolutionary—he doesn’t want the President to fight the system from within, but to pave the way for a more 
competent, technocratic strongman to emerge. In Yarvin’s framing, the President is not a hero or a savior; he is a 
wrecking ball, a blunt instrument of destruction who can be discarded once the old order collapses. His movement 
may be politically useless, but as a spectacle, as a symbol of institutional failure, the President’s role is 
indispensable.  

- “In a world where voters elect Trump with a mandate to just take over the government—as completely as 
the Allies took over the government of Germany in 1945—he will probably screw it up, anyway. Yet he 
doesn’t have to screw it up. (The only way to not screw it up, for Donald Trump, is to be the chairman 
of the board, and delegate to a single executive ready to be the plenary CEO of America.)” 

Rather than a mass movement, neoreactionary politics operates as an elite-driven insurgency, leveraging 
intellectual narratives and populism (Yarvin), financial backing (Thiel), social, campaign and technical backing (Musk) 
and political frontmen (Vance) to shift power away from democratic institutions and into the hands of an elite. The 
hollowing out of government, the privatization of state functions, and the centralization of decision-making in 
unelected corporate-backed figures—once abstract concepts in Yarvin’s writings—who make a spectacle of the 
Presidency are now being tested at the highest levels of government."


==NRx Agenda==
 
Curtis Yarvin’s neoreactionary ideology advocates for a strategy called “RAGE” (Retire All Government 
Employees) — a framework designed to systematically hollow out bureaucratic institutions by forcing mass 
resignations, replacing career officials with loyalists, and centralizing control under a single technocratic leader. 
Yarvin’s belief is that the “deep state” must be dismantled from within, clearing the way for an autocratic governance 
model where decisions are made swiftly without bureaucratic constraints. 


Musk’s actions at OPM closely follow the RAGE blueprint: 

● Encouraging federal employees to leave through mass buyout offers and email campaigns. 

● Disrupting internal agency operations by removing career officials and replacing them with 
loyalists from private industry. 

● Weakening transparency and accountability by limiting access to internal systems and policy 
discussions. 


This blueprint was expressed by Vice President Vance, who in the past has expressed affinity to Vance’s ideology 
and willingness to escalate a constitutional crisis: 

- “So there’s this guy Curtis Yarvin, who has written about some of these things…I think that what Trump 
should do, if I was giving him one piece of advice: Fire every single mid-level bureaucrat, every civil 
servant in the administrative state, replace them with our people….And when the courts stop 
you…stand before the country, and say…the chief justice has made his ruling. Now let him 
enforce it.”

The capture of OPM is not just an administrative shake-up—it represents an existential threat to the integrity of 
federal civil service protections and independent government operations."

...


Recruitment of young, highly skilled individuals for ideological projects is a hallmark of the neoreactionary 
movement. Musk, Thiel, and their networks have long championed youth-led companies and experiments, where 
teenagers and early-twenties recruits are given disproportionate power in government, technology, and finance. 


This  is evident in projects like: 

● The Thiel Fellowship: Created by Peter Thiel in 2010, the fellowship encourages young talent to drop out 
of college and work on disruptive projects. Many recipients go on to work in surveillance, artificial 
intelligence, and cryptocurrency industries where Thiel has direct investments. 

● The Network School & Stake: Created by Balaji Srinivasan, a major figure in the crypto and secessionist 
movements, forfeited his US citizenship to move to Singapore, and advocates for founder-led, 
one-commandment societies that operate independently of traditional nation-states (The Network State: 
How to Start a New Country.) Balaji launched the “Network School,” a three-month long program for “dark” 
talent. Prospective students were assessed based on their alignment with specific values, including the 
belief that Bitcoin can replace the U.S. dollar, and a preference for AI over traditional human judicial 
systems. No journalists were permitted, consistent with his philosophy to “Go direct. Build your own 
media.”  

DOGE’s personnel structure mirrors the neoreactionary belief that governance should be placed in the 
hands of selected technological elites. These recruitment efforts follow a clear ideological objective: to remove 
experienced civil servants who uphold democratic norms and replace them with younger, unvetted ideologues who 
have been conditioned in neoreactionary circles. By deploying young, ideologically aligned individuals who lack 
experience in bureaucratic norms, legal constraints, or accountability structures, Musk and his allies are attempting 
to normalize rule by unelected elites. 


This serves multiple purposes: 

● It accelerates the collapse of traditional governance institutions by removing career expertise and replacing 
it with loyalty-based appointments. 

● It erodes the very concept of democratic oversight, conditioning the next generation of tech elites to accept 
a post-political and post-democratic world where private networks control public infrastructure. 


There is precedent for authoritarian regimes recruiting young, highly loyal cadres to execute radical 
ideological shifts. In Maoist China, the Cultural Revolution empowered young Red Guards to purge the bureaucracy 
and enforce party discipline. In Nazi Germany, Hitler Youth were fast-tracked into state security as a way to 
circumvent experienced officials who might resist authoritarian expansion. 


In contemporary autocratic regimes, such 
as in Russia and China, young technocrats are cultivated early and shielded from democratic institutions to ensure 
loyalty to centralized leadership. Congress must urgently investigate: 

● The extent to which private actors (such as Thiel, Srinivasan, and Musk) are coordinating youth 
recruitment pipelines into federal restructuring efforts. 

● Whether DOGE personnel are engaged in efforts to establish alternative governance structures, “network 
states,” or private autocratic enclaves while holding U.S. government positions, potentially violating 
insurrection, sedition, or national security laws.

The latter point on potentially violating insurrection, sedition, and national security laws cannot be 
underestimated, given network state experiments in territories currently considered under annexation by the 
administration. Two prominent projects are [[Praxis]] and [[Prospera]].


...

Elon Musk’s potential control over TikTok represents more than just a business acquisition—it embodies a 
key pillar of the neoreactionary (NRx) agenda: the consolidation of media and information power. Marc Andreessen, 
a prominent venture capitalist backing the neoreactionary movement, has publicly lamented the influence of 
traditional media. His firm, Andreessen Horowitz (a16z), has systematically bypassed traditional news institutions, 
funding alternative media networks.  Balaji Srinivasan has similarly advocated founders “Go Direct”—eschewing 
mainstream journalism entirely in favor of personal broadcasting through social media. Yarvin’s claims power resides 
in the “Cathedral” — a network of mainstream media, academia, managerial and bureaucracy that enforces elite 
consensus and suppresses dissent.  

This strategic shift away from legacy institutions extends beyond media into the financial sector, where the 
NRx movement has increasingly intertwined with cryptocurrency to fund and promote its political agenda. Crypto 
billionaires have used their wealth to influence the electoral landscape, targeting political figures who challenge their 
interests. Prominent figures such as Brian Armstrong, CEO of Coinbase, have leveraged crypto-derived wealth to 
influence elections, with Armstrong funding  “Fair Shake,” a super PAC known for opposing candidates skeptical of 
cryptocurrency. In the 2024 California Senate race, Fair Shake launched a major attack campaign against 
Democratic candidate Katie Porter, falsely branding her as “very anti-crypto” despite her non-engagement with 
crypto issues. The PAC aired misleading ads accusing Porter of taking money from pharmaceutical and oil 
companies, portraying her as a “bully” and a “liar.” This tactical deployment of crypto wealth to influence political 
outcomes mirrors the NRx approach to bypassing democratic accountability through alternative power 
structures—whether in media, finance, or governance itself. 

The NRx movement aligns also with red-pill and black-pill ideologies—reactionary movements that see 
societal progress as a decline from a golden age of hierarchy and order. Peter Thiel has explicitly stated that "the 
extension of the franchise to women renders the notion of 'capitalist democracy' an oxymoron." This philosophy 
extends to AI, where NRx leaders see artificial intelligence not as a tool for human empowerment, but as an 
instrument for enforcing top-down control. For instance, the concept of techno-monarchism within NRx circles 
envisions a ruler utilizing data systems, artificial intelligence, and advanced algorithms to manage the state, monitor 
citizens, and implement policies. Yarvin’s vision for society is chillingly explicit; he suggests that unproductive 
members of society should be dealt with through a “humane alternative to genocide”—one that removes 
“undesirable elements” from the public sphere without "any of the moral stigma" of mass murder. His proposed 
solution? A VR prison where individuals are "waxed like a bee larva into a cell." 

The potential consolidation of social media under a single influential actor—who already owns X (formerly 
Twitter), SpaceX, Neuralink, The Boring Company, and xAI, and holds a major stake in Tesla—with a radical 
anti-democratic ideology raises important considerations for policymakers and world leaders alike. Musk’s possible 
acquisition of TikTok extends beyond market competition and content moderation, touching on broader questions of 
information control, geopolitical influence, and the role of AI in shaping public discourse. His financial and strategic 
ties to global powers, including business interests in China through Tesla, coincide with the neoreactionary 
movement’s alignment with multipolarity—a shift away from Western liberal dominance toward competing power 
centers. If movements advocating for centralized control over financial and media infrastructure gain traction, the 
implications could change lives in ways that extend well beyond TikTok or Treasury. They will redefine the very 
nature of power in the digital age for many foreseeable generations.'


And from the conclusion of the document:

"Elon Musk’s unchecked consolidation of power over government infrastructure, financial systems, AI 
governance, and digital media does not serve the interests of the Trump administration or the broader conservative 
movement—it serves Musk himself and a network of ideological allies who seek to dismantle democratic 
accountability in favor of private rule. While some may view Musk as a useful instrument in dismantling the 
bureaucratic state, in reality, his actions demonstrate that he is not working for Trump or the Republican Party, but 
rather for his own power and the broader neo-reactionary agenda. The rapid restructuring of government functions 
under DOGE, Treasury infiltration, and efforts to control digital platforms show that President Trump and the 
American public may already be now hostage to Musk’s demands. 

The Founding Fathers fought a revolution to free America from the grip of an unaccountable monarch. 

Today, that struggle is being replayed—not against a king, but against the wealthiest man seeking to centralize 
power without oversight backed by radical extremists. The Constitution was designed to prevent any one individual 
from seizing control of government institutions for personal gain. Unless Congress acts decisively, Musk’s parallel 
power structure will continue to entrench itself, sidelining the executive branch, eroding institutional checks, and 
undermining national security. The choice is clear: rein in Musk’s overreach now, or risk allowing a private actor to 
reshape the United States in his own image, unchecked and unchallenged."

=References=

BILtalks, “BIL2012 - Mencius Moldbug: How to Reboot the US Government,” YouTube video, 18:30, posted October 20, 2012, 
https://youtube.com/ZluMysK2B1E (17:10–18:10) 

Mencius Moldbug, An Open Letter to Open-Minded Progressives, Chapter 6: "The Lost Theory of Government," May 22, 2008, 
https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2008/05/ol6-lost-theory-of-government/

Mencius Moldbug, “Mediocracy: Definition, Etiology and Treatment,” Unqualified Reservations, September 9, 2007, 
https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2007/09/mediocracy-definition-etiology-and/ 

Kevin Roose, “Slate Star Codex’s Rationalists,” The New York Times, February 13, 2021, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/13/technology/slate-star-codex-rationalists.html 

Peter Thiel and Blake Masters, Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future (New York: Crown Business, 2014)

Ronan Farrow, “Elon Musk’s Shadow Rule,” The New Yorker, August 28, 2023, 
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/08/28/elon-musks-shadow-rule 

Linker, Damon. “The Intellectual Right Contemplates an ‘American Caesar’.” The Week, July 28, 2021. 
https://theweek.com/politics/1003035/the-far-right-contemplates-an-american-caesar 

Curtis Yarvin, "The Trials of Trump," Gray Mirror, June 6, 2024.

James Pogue, “Inside the New Right, Where Peter Thiel Is Placing His Biggest Bets,” Vanity Fair, April 20, 2022, 
https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2022/04/inside-the-new-right-where-peter-thiel-is-placing-his-biggest-bets

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Politics]]