

'''Book: Nudge. By Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein.'''

= explores the policy implications of behavioral economics


=Review=

Coco Krumme:

"But Nudge has an interesting prospect beneath its slick white cover. Authored by two Univeristy of Chicago heavy-hitters, Economist Richard Thaler and Law Professor Cass Sunstein, the book explores the policy implications of behavioral economics, a field describing the irrationalities of human behavior. Taking findings from psychology (e.g. people procrastinate; they’re averse to losing money), Thaler and Sunstein propose policies to help us make the best decisions, in light of our irrational tendencies. In a classic example, they suggest we design 401k plans to require “opting-out” rather than “opting-in,” thus encouraging people to save by default.

The core idea of behavioral economics—that humans don’t behave like rational economic agents-- is several decades old, and the authors lean heavily on the work of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky (and to some extent, Herbert Simon). But Nudge goes beyond psychological research to suggest concrete ways to improve public policy in light of experimental findings.

Humans are bad at long-term planning: but what if cars came with stickers tallying the monthly cost of gas over the next five years: sticker shock might lead buyers to a more efficient car? Or what if we “nudged” people to conserve energy by showing how their energy use stacks up with that of neighbors? Thaler and Sunstein cite an experiment in which residents of a Southern California town reduced their peak usage by 40% once they were incited to compete with households next door."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/008141.html)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Policy]]