
URL = http://nutrientdenseproject.com/


=Description=

Bryan Hugill:

"This voluntary network of farmers, gardeners, orchardists, ranchers, agronomists, writers and researchers is working hard to re-write the rules for the way in which we understand food, the production thereof, and its consumption, all based on sound scientifically credible data that they gather and pay for themselves. The idea is being able to conclusively demonstrate (read: numbers) that soil health = plant health = nutrition."


From the organizers:

"~ Is it true that our food is nutrient deficient because our soils are mineral depleted? If this is so, what can be done about it?

~ Many are saying that modern hybrid crops have less nutrition than the traditional open pollinated varieties. Is this true or not?

~ If grown on the same soil, which varieties of the common fruit and vegetable crops contain the highest levels of nutrients?

~ Is it true that high-Brix crops are more nutrient-dense than crops with a lower Brix reading?

We would like to find the answers to those questions. Who are we? We are a small, volunteer group of farmers, gardeners, orchardists, ranchers, agronomists, writers and researchers from the USA and around the world who banded together in early 2010 with the goal of finding the answers to the questions above. We all love growing, we all love science, we all love good food and healthy soils, crops, people, and animals. We especially love real answers to questions like these.

We are growing food using Organic, Biodynamic, Permaculture, Biological, and “conventional” methods in all sorts of combinations with one overarching goal: To learn how to grow the healthiest, best tasting and most nutritious food that has ever been grown, and to do it in harmony with Nature and the Earth." 
(http://nutrientdenseproject.com/)

=Discussion=

There are lots of similar movements around singular methods of soil augmentation, wonder how they connect. (TerraPreta, EffectiveMicroorganisms etc) [[User:FranzN|FranzN]] 07:22, 15 September 2011 (UTC)

The specifics of this project are also being discussed here: http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/soilandhealth/ --[[User:Bryanhugill|BryanHugill]] 08:43, 28 September 2011 (UTC)

----

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Movements]]