= NZGOAL 1.0 =

New Zealand Government Open Access Licensing (NZGOAL) is a guidance framework developed by lawyers associated with CreativeCommons Aotearoa/NZ, and approved in 2010 by Cabinet (the Executive body of the NZ Government). It recommends that all non-private and non-sensitive data generated through the spending of public money be made available under CC licenses, and gives advice on license selection. Version 1.0 of NZGOAL was based on version 3.0 of the CC license suite.

"NZGOAL is guidance for agencies to follow when releasing copyright works and non-copyright material for re-use by others. It aims to standardise the licensing of government copyright works for re-use using Creative Commons licences and recommends statements for non-copyright material."

https://www.ict.govt.nz/guidance-and-resources/open-government/new-zealand-government-open-access-and-licensing-nzgoal-framework/

= NZGOAL 2.0 =

When version 4.0 of the CC suite was released, ending the practice of jurisdiction-specific licenses, a version 2.0 of NZGOAL was released, noting this change, and recommending the use of CC 4.0 licenses.

= NZGOAL-SE =

In 2016, NZGOAL-SE (Software Edition) was proposed, to give similar libre licensing advice on the use of software in government departments and other public organisations. NZ GOAL-SE was developed through a public consultation and collaborative drafting exercise using [Loomio](https://www.loomio.org/g/NohQxyr9/nzgoal-software-extension), [GITHub](https://github.com/opendatanz/nzgoal-se), and Google Docs. --[[User:Strypey|Strypey]] ([[User talk:Strypey|talk]]) 03:14, 2 June 2017 (UTC)

A case study on the development of NZGOAL-SE is available on the [https://www.ict.govt.nz/guidance-and-resources/open-government/new-zealand-government-open-access-and-licensing-nzgoal-framework/nzgoal-se/case-study-open-source-software-licensing/ ICT.govt.nz] website.