
'''= " a not-for-profit organization serving the purpose of enabling regenerative land stewardship and the development of thriving living systems in specific conservation areas around the world".''' [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ocv9rtRkDxsJmeRxrL6mV07EyWcHc2YqfN8mHoylO2E/edit#]

This project is linked to the Traditional Dream Factory in Abela, Portugal.

See: The [[OASA Charter on Regenerative Principles]]


=The Principles=

==Area I - Soil==

Introduction

Soil is the foundation of our thriving living systems. When caring for the soil, we ask: Are there any other options besides those that create disturbances of the soil? How might we create and support more life and vitality in the soil?

Principles

===Soil Principle I - Soil Protection===

Plant cover protects the soil from erosion and serves as a barrier between the sun and the raw soil, preventing escalated soil temperatures that can decrease soil microbial life. This principle speaks to keeping living roots in the soil, in order to feed soil microbes and vice versa. Do not leave bare soil, plant a diversity of plants or mulch to protect and nourish soil.


===Soil Principle II - Limit Soil Disturbance===

Mechanical soil disturbance, such as tillage, alters the structure of the soil and limits biological activity. Tillage should be limited and only used in specific circumstances. Generally, tillage of any specific acre even once each year is too much. No regular tiling of the Lands is allowed, unless proven to be beneficial to the soil quality by an unbiased agro engineer. Using rippers to uncompress the soil but without disturbing the topsoil has been proven to be useful in improving soil.


===Soil Principle III - Fertilizers and Pesticides===

Synthetic chemical fertilizer and pesticide applications are not allowed. External fertilizers in general are not recommended to be used. There shall be no use of synthetic chemical fungicide on the Lands. Organic, natural or plant-based fertilizers and pesticides shall be used in a planned manner that does not disrupt the soil but support rebuilding ecosystem processes. Carcinogenic agents should also be avoided.


===Soil Principle IV - Compost===

Thermophilic compost can be used to support the growth of veggies or trees and vermicompost can be used as fertilizer. Use compost in appropriate quantities and within conditions which do not hinder the plant's natural capabilities and resilience.


===Soil Principle V - Soil Creation===

Chop and drop is encouraged to provide nutrients that will decompose into humus and create soil. When trees are trimmed or cut, at least 30% of the organic material shall be left to decompose on the surrounding lands.


==Area II - Water==

Introduction

Water is the foundation of life, and the source and sustenance of healthy life on earth. When rain falls on our Land, we are responsible for its fate from that point forward. Will it infiltrate and be retained? Will it cause erosion and harmful runoff to others? Are we taking responsibility for the water that comes on our Lands? Do we take proper care of the wastewater that we produce in our bathrooms, toilets, washing machines or similar?

Principles

===Water Principle I - Water Harvesting and Storage===

It is encouraged to work towards recreating or enhancing the natural water cycles, and when necessary we can develop water catchment systems such as swales, sponge areas, ponds, etc., in order to store excess rainwater.


===Water Principle II - Deep Water Reserves===

Tapping into deep water reserves should be avoided except as a last resort solution. Favor rainwater collection, and reuse of domestic waters.


===Water Principle III - Greywater and Blackwater Systems===

Wastewater can be classified into two categories: blackwater and greywater. Although they are both wastewaters, they have different levels of contamination, which is why they must be treated differently. Both varieties should be recycled through biological treatment systems and re-used for irrigation, flushing toilet water or other suitable purposes.


===Water Principle IV - Water Protection and Restoration===

The uncompromising protection and restoration of all natural water sources shall be enforced, as well as the rewilding of ecosystems, necessary for the water resources restoration, which includes planting of species and efforts to reduce evaporation.
It is explicitly forbidden to pollute any kind of water source. Use of chlorine for pools and ponds is not allowed. If local regulations enforce this, the Guardian Organization may seek an exception from Oasa after having attempted alternative methods such as salt, oxygenation, or similar.


==Area III - Air==

Introduction

Air pollution, due to the presence of substances in the atmosphere, is harmful to the health of humans and other living beings. The contamination of air causes damage to the natural balance of ecosystems. Limiting or eliminating air pollution is critical to the creation and protection of thriving living ecosystems.

Principles

===Air Principle I - No Pollution===

Air pollution from burning toxic chemicals or materials is forbidden. Open burning in the agriculture and forestry sectors is forbidden and should be done only at the designated places if at all.


===Air Principle II - Carbon Sequestration===

Carbon sequestration is the process of capturing and storing atmospheric carbon dioxide. It is one method of reducing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere with the goal of reducing global climate change. Reforestation and improvement of agricultural practice are two natural strategies that help with carbon sequestering from the atmosphere of our planet. These strategies are encouraged.

Concerted efforts to plant trees in new places (afforest), replant deforested acreage (reforest), as well as using carbon-rich wood for construction, for example, extending trees’ storage capacity beyond forests’ borders, are all easy to implement strategies.

Most farming is intended to produce something that is harvested from the land. Carbon farming is the opposite. It uses plants to trap carbon dioxide and strategically uses practices such as reducing tilling, planting longer-rooted crops and incorporating organic materials into the soil to encourage the trapped carbon to move into and stay in the soil.


===Air Principle III - Biochar===

Another way to enhance plants’ ability to store carbon is to partly burn biomass to make biochar, which can then be buried or spread on the Land. Biochar carbon remains in the ground for centuries, slowing the growth in atmospheric greenhouse gas levels. Simultaneously, its presence in the earth can improve water quality and increase soil fertility.


==Area IV - Waste==

Introductio
Is it important to deal with waste to minimize pollution, both human and environmental health could be negatively impacted otherwise. When dealing with waste, we should ask:  Can we use the output of one system (waste) as an input for another (resource)? Do we reduce consumption of needless items? Do we promote the use of degradable products? Do we utilize products to their maximum life?

Principles


===Waste Principle I - Reducing Waste===

Reduce includes all the activities which reduce the generating of solid waste into the environment. Reduce waste in all possible areas. Avoid any kind of single-use plastics. This includes cutlery for a restaurant business, agricultural plastic covers that aren’t reused, covering laundry items in plastic, plastic shopping bags, etc.


===Waste Principle II - Recycling Waste===

Recycling means re-covering a previously used object and giving it a second life. Provide easy access to recycling to all users of the facilities (i.e. containers for recycling).


===Waste Principle III - Upcycling Waste===

Upcycling, also known as creative reuse, is the process of transforming by-products, waste materials, useless, or unwanted products into new materials or products perceived to be of greater quality, such as artistic value or environmental value. Upcycling is encouraged.


===Waste Principle IV - Recovering Waste===


Most of the materials thrown in the garbage can be recovered, used and processed in ways other than being destroyed. Safely recover waste where possible to be re-used on site.


===Waste Principle V - No Waste Pollution===

Avoid disposing of any type of waste on the Land. Littering waste into places that are not designated as disposal facilities is forbidden. No hazardous materials are allowed on the Lands.


==Area V - Rewilding and Biodiversity==

Introduction

Rewilding aims to restore healthy ecosystems by creating wild, biodiverse spaces. Focus on the recovery of ecological processes and interactions, rebuilding ecosystems that have previously been modified by human disturbance, using the plant and animal life that would have been present had the disturbance never occurred. Biodiversity underpins the supply of nearly every major ecosystem service on Earth and as such is fundamental to the livelihood and well-being of our planet and biosphere.

Principles

===Biodiversity Principle I - General Protection of the Wild Lands===

At least 50% of the Lands should be kept wild, or be rewilded planting autochthonous/ native species. Access should be kept clear for any wild species to be able to come and go, unless it causes danger to health or safety of users of the Land, its fauna or flora or facilities. These areas should also be free of human introduced animals and must be accessible by wild animals, for example, with fenceless entries and flows throughout the property. Rewilding plans should identify core rewilded areas, ways to connect them, and ensure outcomes are to the mutual benefit of people and nature.


===Biodiversity Principle II - Regenerative Agriculture and Permaculture===


We strive to apply permaculture and regenerative agriculture principles and avoid single crop cultures to the best of our abilities. In general, a minimum of 5 crops per 10 m2, and 20 species per hectare is expected. Fields should be at least partially planted with trees, either as windbreaks or full cover.


===Biodiversity Principle III - Conservation===

Forested areas shall remain forested. Cutting ancient trees, older than two hundred years or one meter in diameter, is prohibited; unless proven to be required for ecological purposes. Any construction nearby trees should take into account the health effect on the tree before commencing. Keep cover crops or mulch on areas that are farmed in off seasons.


===Biodiversity IV - Invasive Species===

Invasive species are any species that are non-native and harm the local ecosystem. When these non-native plants and animals establish themselves in our local ecosystems, they outcompete and dislodge species that have evolved specifically to live there. These plants affect us by degrading our soil, leading to erosion that can lower the quality of our water. They should be removed and avoided.


===Biodiversity Principle V -  Livestock===

Livestock are healthy for soils and ecosystems. Soil and plant health is improved by proper adaptive grazing of one or more animal species, which recycles nutrients, reduces plant selectivity and increases plant diversity. Introduction of livestock to the Lands is encouraged.


==Area VI - Resources==

Introduction

Sustainable energy is energy that is inexhaustible. Several forms of energy can be considered sustainable, wind, solar, and water - also bioenergy and geothermal energy.

Sustainable construction means using natural, renewable and recyclable materials when building new structures, as well as reducing energy consumption and waste. The primary goal of sustainable construction is to reduce the impact on the environment and increase general health and well-being.
Sustainable foods are types of foods that are grown or reared in a manner that limits their negative impact on the environment and the communities that produce them. Sustainable foods are environmentally friendly foods that minimize greenhouse gas emissions and use resources as sustainably as possible.

Principles

===Resources Principle I - Conserving Resources===

Sustainable and renewable energy sources should be favored whenever possible. Aim to maximize efficiency and strive to reduce the consumption of non-renewable (and renewable) resources. This highlights long-term optimization versus short-term maximization of production.


===Resources Principle II - Construction Areas===
 
Maximum of 5% of the Land surface can be developed into buildings, unless such construction is pre-existing or unless it is clearly not viable for the Land in question.


===Resources Principle III - Materials===

Construction teams should always favor local, natural materials. If possible they should use materials that can return directly to the ground, such as clay or wood. When that is not possible, a comparison study should be established between the different materials (natural versus synthetic) in order to compare the pros and cons of both options.


===Resources Principle IV - Buildings===

Buildings that promote biodiversity, such as a building with elements that allow vegetation to climb or grow as part of the construction are encouraged.


===Resources Principle V - Food===

Cooking with in season ingredients for your location, as this avoids unnecessary transportation of produce overseas, mostly in regards to fruit and vegetables.
In line with the above, try to buy local ingredients, such as produce, meat, dairy and grains. This of course, also refers to limiting overseas transportation, but also tries to cut down on road transportation of goods.
Make an effort to buy and cook with more plant based ingredients, and less meat and dairy products. Meat farming causes 60% of food-related greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. 
Try to avoid food waste as much as possible.


==Area VII - Community==

Introduction

Community and communication building efforts lay the groundwork for a collective intelligence which fosters resilient groups. It means that we ensure that we will take care of each other; that we know how to relate and how to communicate with one another both in a nurturing and a productive way; and that we strive for a community designed from the start to have a high degree of social cohesion and teamwork.
Questions to ask ourselves: Do we give enough support to ourselves and people around us, so we can build and create together with joy and care? What is the best way to organize ourselves to achieve our joint goal to protect and preserve Lands and commons?

Principles

===Community Principle I - Equivalence and Personal Accountability===

We relate to one another in the way that no one is ignored and everyone is heard with the same amount of importance. 
Everyone’s priority is to take care of themselves first, in order to be able to help the community. Everyone is personally responsible for their behavior and the way they act with others.
Leadership is based on service to others, not on an exercise of power towards others.
Everyone may express themselves freely as long as the boundaries of other people are retained.


===Community Principle II - Decision-making===

We base our decisions on planning, observing and evaluating results. We strive for effective and sustainable solutions and we learn from our mistakes.
Community decisions should be based on consent, transparency and trust. Consent means the absence of objections. Consent urges the group to accept a “good enough” solution for everyone. After a formal decision making process, a decision is ratified when there are no meaningful or “paramount” objections by anyone. Transparency is key in a decision-making process as it directly influences our willingness to trust the results. 


===Community Principle III - Rules===

We ensure that those affected by the rules of the community can participate in modifying them. We develop a system, carried out by community members, for monitoring members’ behavior. We use graduated sanctions for rule violators and effective means for dispute resolution.


===Community Principle IV - Open-Source and Knowledge Sharing===

All community efforts that result in the creation or development of a product, a best practice  or a system that could benefit the larger community should be made available by sharing knowledge and using open-source approaches.


===Community Principle V - Relationships with Local Communities===

We will always develop kind relationships towards all local and neighboring communities and strive for creating functioning cooperative mechanisms in the areas of food production, arts, culture, public safety and environmental and natural resource protection.


===Community Principle VI - Resiliency===

We strive to create a strong and independent community via mutual help and personal resiliency. The more sustainable, self-dependent and resilient our community will be, the less it will depend on external financial or other resources, thus creating a place of free expression and personal authenticity.


===Community Principle VII - Disputes and Conflict Resolution===

Successful co-living and co-existing is based on respecting each other’s boundaries and energetical, emotional and physical capacities. Take full responsibility for yourself and your behavior towards others.

Any disputes and conflicts arising in the community, that are not dealt with on the community level, while following the guidance in this document, shall be settled by the Council of Regeneration."

(https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ocv9rtRkDxsJmeRxrL6mV07EyWcHc2YqfN8mHoylO2E/edit#heading=h.lf1xqvnjl8f5)

[[Category:Social Charters]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Regenerative Approaches]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]