

=Description=

Aaron Rosa:

"As Augmented Reality (AR) tentatively moves from obscurity to ubiquity, we find 
ourselves constantly enticed by the purported capabilities and glossy demonstration videos 
of this technology. While major corporate players seek to establish unique identities in this 
emerging information space, their design fictions focus on a product’s ability to improve 
everyday activities. By using images of comfort, convenience, and efficiency, the companies 
seeking to monetize Augmented Reality tend to gloss over AR’s potential to create 
distraction, disinformation, and delusion. As we begin to recognize the capacity for AR 
technology to obscure or eliminate elements of the real and the digital, we open up a new 
space for examination Occlusive Reality.

Occlusion, as used in the Augmented Reality paradigm, is the intentional blocking of 
information from the visual spectrum. Augmented Reality technologies have been lauded for 
their capacity to allow users to visualize geospatially contextualized information about their 
surroundings in real-time creating an experience that marries the digital and the real into 
an immediate, personalized, and seamless space. Alongside other perceptual engineering, 
occlusion is employed to create the illusion of embededness for digital artifacts; analyzing 
the user’s visual scope and selectively eliminating both fragments of the real and digital 
worlds. In so doing, AR simulates via a rendering algorithm, a visual phenomenon we are 
accustomed to—inability to see through solid objects—thus creating the illusion of realistic 
placement for the digital artifact.

While this rendering illusion is critical to creating believable coexistence of digital 
and real information, I believe that the capacity for occlusion merits investigation and a 
discourse for political power inherent to AR technology."
(http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/17-3/S10.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Protocollary Power]]


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]