
'''= a collection of adults and children's messages that challenge public school to become something more than it is'''  [http://occupyedu.tumblr.com/about]


URL = http://occupyedu.tumblr.com/


=Description=

"Occupy Education was create in connection with Cooperative Catalyst.

Join #occupyedu to share the countless, unique ways you challenge the status quo in public education.

Children, parents, educators, community members – all are invited. We cannot re-imagine or recapture schools without the stakeholders they serve.

Every child deserves a personally meaningful education and a community of learning that includes, involves, and inspires her.

#occupyedu isn’t about standardizing our schools. It’s about creating a new public education system that recognizes and values a broader definition of learning than that accounted for by tests. It’s about recognizing and valuing a broader community of children than those who benefit from the tests. It’s about fostering sustainable communities of learners and problem-solvers that include all children in personally meaningful work of lasting worth and joy to themselves and our society.

While local solutions best fit local needs in our schools, the broad goal of #occupyedu is to influence federal and state educational policy so that meaningful work of lasting value stands in place of high test scores in assessing, promoting, and graduating our students."
(http://occupyedu.tumblr.com/about)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]