
'''= "a separate political party is needed to translate the energy and ideas of the Occupy Wall Street movement and the 99% into concrete, actionable solutions to fix our nation’s problems".''' [http://theoccupationparty.org/about-2]

URL = http://theoccupationparty.org/ 


=Discussion=

"The first months of OWS were able to work without any set of leaders or agreed-upon demands because the main objective was one of riotous visibility, a sort of “we’re mad as hell, and we’re not gonna take it anymore,” kind of thing. But that was months ago, and while a sizable chunk of Americans support OWS, with winter coming on strong, protest fatigue and just plain fatigue are threatening to thin the ranks considerably. 

So perhaps it’s unsurprising that the very decentralization that has kept OWS from coming forth with either demands or a latter-day Debs, has encouraged at least one Occupy group to go it alone and form a political party, complete with candidates and Congressional aspirations.

Enter Occupy Cincinnati and the not-so-subtly-named Occupation Party, which party spokesman Tyrone Givens says is planning to run six candidates for local seats in three states. The party has a ten-point platform on their site, which includes everything from jailing those responsible for the recession to repealing the Citizens United Supreme Court case. 

Electoral politics, after all, are exactly how the late nineteenth-century Populists turned their ideas into enacted Progressive Era platforms, and more recently, how the rank & file hijinks of the Tea Party elected folks like Michele Bachmann to the US House of Representatives. While the Progressive era produced a president or two, the Tea Party has, mercifully, not gotten as far. But the point remains. America realizes there’s a 99 percent, but if OWS truly wants to enact change, shouldn’t it be petitioning Washington and Wall Street, the two entities who have ironically evaded it from the beginning?"
(http://occupyhistory.tumblr.com/post/12482201521)

[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]