URL = http://www.occupythesec.org/


=Description=

by Alexander Eichler:

"A handful of protesters at Occupy Wall Street are doing what
the authors of a complex piece of financial legislation may have hoped
no one would do. They are reading it.

The legislation is a draft of the so-called Volcker rule, a 298-page
regulatory document that came out of last year's Dodd-Frank financial
reform act. As originally proposed by Paul Volcker, then chairman of the
President's Economic Recovery Advisory Board, the rule was aimed in part
at preventing federally backed banks from making risky trades that could
ultimately cost taxpayers. But in its current form, the Volcker rule is
long, dense and -- critics fear -- full of language that affords banks a
lot of wiggle room.

"It's a daunting document to look at," said Alexis Goldstein, a former
financial sector employee who joined the Occupy protests a few weeks ago.

Yet Goldstein, 30, and a small party of fellow Occupiers are doing just
that. The group, known as Occupy the SEC, has been reading through the
Volcker rule line by line, flagging passages that seem to enable banks
to skirt around regulatory intentions.

The Occupy Wall Street movement, now in its third month, has drawn fire
from people who say its members are too vague in their criticism of the
financial system. Occupy the SEC, which consists of between four and
eight New York protesters, would seem immune to such charges. Its
members are compiling a list of highly specific points, and their
ultimate goal is to submit a letter to regulators detailing their
concerns before the Jan. 13 deadline.

Anyone can send in comments on the draft of the Volcker rule -- and
regulators will review those submissions before producing a final
version of the measure -- but, as in most cases where draft rules are
made available for public scrutiny, not everyone has the time or
inclination to parse hundreds of pages of regulatory jargon. Goldstein
noted that most of the comments on financial rules end up coming from
the banks themselves, arguing for greater leniency.

Yet regulators "have to read and acknowledge" every letter that comes
in, Goldstein said, and she hopes that Occupy the SEC can offer a bit of
pushback.

"We just want to be a voice that's saying something different from what
the banks are saying," Goldstein told HuffPost.

Occupy the SEC is just one of several dozen task forces within New
York's greater Occupy movement, and Goldstein emphasized that she and
the others going over the Volcker rule do not speak for or represent the
wishes of Occupy Wall Street as a whole. But Occupy the SEC is in good
company when it comes to casting a skeptical eye on the Volcker draft.

Paul Volcker himself has expressed displeasure with the current
proposal, which is 30 times as long as the version originally included
in Dodd-Frank. And this past Wednesday, a group of 17 House Democrats
issued a letter to Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke asking that the
latest incarnation of the Volcker rule be thrown out and replaced with
something more streamlined, calling the current version "unnecessarily
complex."

Other critics have charged that the Volcker rule gives banks too much
responsibility for self-regulation and that its rules come bundled with
exemptions in language so vague they undermine the whole effort.

"There are exceptions in there you could drive buses through," said
Lawrence Baxter, a professor at Duke University School of Law.

That's what Occupy the SEC is on the lookout for."
(http://www.economics.arawakcity.org/node/968)


[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Policy]]