
'''= Gunther Teubner and Anna Beckers organised an international conference on [[Transnational Societal Constitutionalism]] in 17 - 19 May 2012.''' 

URL = http://www.iuctorino.it/content/transnational-societal-constitutionalism

The conference was hosted by HiiL, the International University College of Turin (IUC) and the Collegio Carlo Alberto. 




=Program=

All video links also available [http://www.iuctorino.it/content/transnational-societal-constitutionalism here]

* Introduction: New constitutional conflicts. Gunther Teubner, Turin & Anna Beckers, Maastricht
 

'''I. Beyond nation state constitutions: The move to the ‘societal’ and to the ‘transnational’'''

* A sociology of constituent power: The political code of transnational societal constitutions. Christopher Thornhill, Glasgow; Video: [[Christopher Thornhill on the Political Code of Transnational Societal Constitutions]] [http://youtu.be/pLXu2GYup1E]

* The elusive social dimension of ‘societal constitutionalism’. Emilios Christodoulidis, Glasgow
 

'''II. New constitutional subjects: Transnational regimes, the cosmopolitan state,
global assemblages?'''

* We and cyberlaw: Constitutionalism and the inclusion/exclusion difference. Hans Lindahl, Tilburg

* Enabling constitutions: The new constitutional framework in the age of access. Riccardo Prandini, Bologna

* Emergent globally bordered spaces: Anti-terrorism, global finance, and so much more
Saskia Sassen, New York
 
 
'''III. Constitutional arenas'''

* Occupy the system! Societal constitutionalism and the global economy. Moritz Renner, Berlin; Video: [[Moritz Renner on Societal Constitutionalism and the Global Economy]] [http://youtu.be/Jt6e49EC7s4]

* Private governance of knowledge: Societally crafted IP regimes. Dan Wielsch, Cologne; 

* Constitution making and constitutive power of the commons. Ugo Mattei, Turin; Video: [[Ugo Mattei on the Constitutive Power of the Commons]] [http://youtu.be/vW8MhJkTwpk]

* Constitutionalisation of non-governmental certification programmes. Jaye Ellis, Montreal
 

'''IV. Collisions of transnational constitutions'''

* Procedural principles for managing global legal pluralism. Paul Schiff Berman, Washington D.C.

* Conflicts-law constitutionalism, societal constitutionalism and the power of technicity. Christian Joerges, Bremen
 
* The constitutionalism of trans-normative Law – Towards a general theory. Poul Kjaer, Copenhagen
 

'''V. Human rights and private power''' 

* Fundamental rights, private law and societal constitution: On the logic of the so-called horizontal effect. Florian Rödl, Frankfurt

* Hierarchical power arrangements and horizontal effects in human rights regimes. Larry Catá Backer, Carlisle, Pennsylvania




=More Information=

* Conference review via our entry on: [[Transnational Societal Constitutionalism]]

* The conference contributions will appear in Indiana Journal of Global Law and under the title „[[Transnational Societal Constitutionalism]]“  in Indiana University Press.

* Book: [[What Can Social, Intergenerational and Distributive Justice Approaches Learn from the Commons]]?


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]