
* Report: PARTICIPATIVE WEB: USER-CREATED CONTENT. By the DIRECTORATE FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY COMMITTEE FOR INFORMATION, COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS POLICY. Working Party on the Information Economy, 2006

URL = http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf

The report was prepared by Sacha Wunsch-Vincent and Graham Vickery of the OECD’s Directorate
for Science, Technology and Industry as part of the WPIE work on Digital Content
(www.oecd.org/sti/digitalcontent). It is published on the responsibility of the Secretary-General of the
OECD.


=Summary=

"The concept of the participative web is based on an Internet increasingly influenced by intelligent
web services that empower the user to contribute to developing, rating, collaborating on and distributing
Internet content and customising Internet applications. As the Internet is more embedded in people's lives
users draw on new Internet applications to express themselves through user-created content (UCC).

This study describes the rapid growth of UCC, its increasing role in worldwide communication and
draws out implications for policy. Questions addressed include: What is user-created content? What are its
key drivers, its scope and different forms? What are new value chains and business models? What are the
extent and form of social, cultural and economic opportunities and impacts? What are associated
challenges? Is there a government role and what form could it take?

...

The analysis is structured in six main parts. The first part defines UCC. The second and third parts
identify the key drivers of UCC and provide a broad overview of various UCC types and related
distribution platforms. The fourth part analyses associated value chains and new business models while
the fifth part examines social and economic impacts of UCC. The final part analyses opportunities and
challenges for users, businesses and government."
(http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf)

=More Information=

* [[User-Generated Content]]



[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]