URL = http://www.ofbyandfor.org/

Self-Governance initiative by Mitch Kapor:

"'''the whole concept of open and equal access to information could do wonders for our politics. Placing information in the open, allowing people to debate both general and very specific aspects of software, and then creating a process for decision-making about implementation could be very important lessons.... There are many other interesting aspects to the open source community that may very well help define new participatory processes that can help us revitalize our democracy."''' 

- Mitch Kapor [http://www.alternet.org/election04/20076/]


=Description=

"Of, By and For is a web site that was designed to do several things. One is to be a forum for a forward-looking political discussion. By forward-looking I mean, both beyond the 2004 election, but also trying to ask a different set of questions — not about whether Democrats or Republicans should be elected. Important and as critical as that kind of discussion is, I feel that there are some much more fundamental questions. For instance, what ought to be the nature of self-government in the 21st century? Based on the feeling that we have wandered pretty far from what the Founders of the country had in mind when they set this country up. There is a serious need for a discussion about political reform and the future of the Republic.

So the website was designed to be a place for those discussions to take place. One of the things we’ve done, is try to use different ways of engendering the discussion."
(http://www.alternet.org/election04/20076/)


=More Information=

[[Open Source Governance]]


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]