
'''= " a two-hour guided process where community members meet (virtually or in person) to identify and exchange their passions, knowledge, skills, resources, opportunities, and needs".''' [https://offersandneeds.com/]

URL = https://offersandneeds.com/

=Description=

"The Offers and Needs Market (OANM) was developed by Donnie Maclurcan in 2011 in response to the isolation he was seeing emerge in his Australian community. Following early iterations, he brought the OANM to his work at the Post Growth Institute (PGI).

In 2017, Crystal Arnold began working with the PGI, and experienced her first OANM at the Social Artistry Odyssey in Ashland, Oregon. She felt people come alive, bubbling with generosity and curiosity during the event, and knew that this could benefit many people. She was hired to facilitate the market at several women's leadership conferences and events throughout Oregon. More people reached out wanting to run these events, virtually and in-person. In 2018 Crystal began teaching this process to individuals and organizations.

In 2020, we launched the virtual OANM Basic and Advanced Facilitator Trainings, and since then, we have brought 160 people from 16 countries through these programs. The community of practice that has developed continues to deepen, with regular opportunities to receive advice, find a co-facilitator, and share resources. 

Hundreds of our event surveys were loud and clear: this was making people's lives better, across all demographics. 

Over the past decade, in-person OANM events have been run in more than 30 countries worldwide, engaging over 4000 people, and virtual events continue to happen across online communities everywhere. This method has connected individuals and organizations in neighborhoods and across oceans, including people in Australia, Zimbabwe, Egypt, Italy, Germany, the U.K., and the U.S.

Having extensively refined the process and proven the impact of the OANM, we are now sharing it with community leaders around the world."

(https://offersandneeds.com/about/#impact)

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]