
'''Offline TV'''


URL = https://channelguide.participatoryculture.org/?q=viewchannel/974


=Description=


"Oxford activists Hamish Campbell and Richard Hering from Undercurrents have kick-started a radical TV station called OfflineTV. It uses the revolutionary new peer-to-peer open source project Democracy Player.

OfflineTV is innovative because it brings together a number of tried and tested technologies (P2P, RSS, broadband) to make a really user-friendly internet TV interface. It has the capacity to scale from hundreds to thousands and hundreds of thousands viewers in full-screen quality. The other crucial thing is the content: the best of politically radical underground video on direct action, social justice, and the environment. This version is now beta-testing.

Two channels are already up and running :

OfflineTV – a quality-controlled screening of the best of what’s out there in radical cyberspace.

News from the Balkans - the first regional network of what will hopefully be many similar networks around the world. NfB gives a radical voice to this region which is so mis-reported by the corporate media. This project is being launched out of the video workshops in the EYFA Art and Activism caravan, but we hope to create a permanent network of radical film makers posting regular reports."
(http://www.indymedia.org.uk/en/2006/07/344593.html)


=How To=

"To watch these channels, download Democracy Player

Then search for Undercurrents inside Democracy Player and subscribe to each channel."
(http://www.indymedia.org.uk/en/2006/07/344593.html)


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Audiovisual]]