=Description=

Emil Ejner Friis:

"Omni-consideration derives directly from this axiom of emotional valence: We should attempt to maximise pleasure and minimise suffering (over the long run). The concept of Human Rights is a subset of this way of thinking, but Omni-consideration goes much further: it implies care not only for all humans but all conscious beings (and the environment as a result). 

'''Omni-consideration implies the practice of considering the impacts of one’s actions and decisions on all stakeholders, including but not limited to oneself, other people, other species, future generations, and the environment.''' It also prohibits externalising harm somewhere else for the benefit of a narrowly defined group or outcome. To truly live this, decision-making would need to take into account the interconnectedness of living systems and n-th-order consequences. As elaborated by complexity science with its understanding of non-linear dynamics, we need profound humility when judging what effects any action may have. In terms of moral reasoning, this humility implies a parallax between utilitarianism, virtue ethics, and deontology."

(https://metamoderna.org/cosmo-local-coordination/)


'''2.'''

"At the core of a global, shared moral framework would need to be something like Omni-consideration, a term used by Daniel Schmachtenberger. 

It builds directly from the most fundamental lived reality of conscious experience - valence: Suffering is bad, pleasure is good. This seems like an experiential axiom, whether we have a formalized theory of consciousness or not (Mike Johnson suspects valence might be the “Rosetta Stone” of consciousness). If this can’t be our shared basis for coordination, nothing can. 

Omni-consideration derives directly from this axiom of emotional valence: We should attempt to maximize (long-term) pleasure and minimize suffering. The concept of Human Rights is a subset of this, but omni-consideration goes much further: it implies care not only for all humans but all conscious beings (and the environment as a result).

Omni-consideration implies the practice of considering the impacts of one's actions and decisions on all stakeholders, including but not limited to oneself, other people, other species, future generations, and the environment. It also prohibits externalizing harm somewhere else for the benefit of a narrowly defined group or outcome. To truly live this, decision-making would need to take into account the interconnectedness of living systems and n-th-order consequences. As elaborated by complexity science with its understanding of self-organizing, non-linear dynamics across interconnected diverse actors, we need profound humility when judging what effects any action may have. In terms of moral reasoning, this humility implies a parallax between utilitarianism, virtue ethics, and deontology."

(https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/cosmo-local-coordination)


=More information=

* [[Integrative Pluralism]]

* [[Transjectivity]]

* [[Cosmopolitan Shamanism]]


[[Category:P2P Ethics]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]