'''Article: On the Open Design of Tangible Goods. By Christina Raasch, Cornelius Herstatt and Kerstin Balka'''. R&D Management. Volume 39 Issue 4, Pages 382 - 393

URL = http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/122535407/abstract

Preprint in fulltext via http://open-innovation-projects.org/assets/Uploads/Raasch-Herstatt-Balka-On-the-open-design-of-tangible-goods-Preprint.pdf

(raasch@tu-harburg.de; c.herstatt@tu-harburg.de; kerstin.balka@open-innovation-projects.org)


=Description=

"Open source software development has received considerable scholarly attention, much of which is based on the presumption that the 'open source model' holds some lessons of broader applicability. Nonetheless, our knowledge of its deployment outside the software industry is very limited. This paper focuses on the open source development of tangible objects, the so-called open design. We propose a generalised definition of open source development. Drawing on 27 exploratory interviews and six comparative case studies selected from a pool of more than 75 projects, we analyse the workings of open design. The analysis reveals that open design is already being implemented in a substantial variety of projects with different organisational and institutional structures."


=Excerpts=

(from the preprint version)

==Definition==

"Yet, “what does it mean to apply the term ‘open source’ in fields outside software
development, which do not use ‘source code’ as a term of art? […] It seems the time has
come to devise a new, broader term” (Economist 2004). To generalise the ‘OS model’ to a
non-industry-specific level, we propose the following model, which we call Open Source
Innovation (OSI): OSI is characterised by free revealing of information on a new design with
the intention of collaborative development of a single design or a limited number of related
designs for market or non-market exploitation.


This definition contains four critical aspects: 

(1) OSI is characterised by a non-market, noncontractual
transfer of knowledge among the actors involved in invention and between those
actors and those involved in exploitation. Actors share some ideas, designs, and other relevant
information with a non-definite set of other actors without any immediate recompense or
expectation thereof. An open licence may establish rules of knowledge sharing and re-usage.
The actors engaging in such activity are often called volunteers, in the sense that the activity
is voluntary at the level of the individual and of the contributing corporation, but not
necessarily at the level of each member of such a company. 

(2) Actors share their ideas with
the clear purpose of contributing to the joint development of 

(3) a single, integrated design or
a small number of interrelated designs. Put reversely, OSI does not refer to design information
being revealed by actors without the understanding that this design is a part of a larger design
task carried out in collaborative fashion by a group of actors. 

(4) The design thus developed is
exploited in the sense that it is produced and sold on a market, integrated into other products
that are marketed, or deployed during the development of such products. Exploitation can be
either for-profit or not-for-profit or both.

Our model builds on and intersects with several of the models of collaborative development
proposed in the literature (cf. Raasch/Herstatt et al. 2008). The theoretical foundation
supporting OSI is laid by the private-collective model (von Hippel/von Krogh 2003; von
Hippel/von Krogh 2006), whereby actors invest private resources towards the production of a
public good. Within this model, OSI focuses on a collaborative development process
involving several contributing actors and therefore requiring organisational mechanisms to
co-ordinate the efforts expended by different actors.

OSI also needs to be related to user innovation networks or communities (von Hippel 2005;
von Hippel 2007; Füller/Jawecki et al. 2007). OSI can be generated by commercial or private
contributors or a mixture of both. If commercial companies participate in OSI, they may profit
from using the product being developed, but may also have different objectives, e.g. an
increase in sales of complementary products (Henkel 2006). The user-innovation model, by
contrast, is based on “open, voluntary, and collaborative efforts of users” (Shah 2005, p. 1),
meaning private or commercial, but still users. Additionally, OSI refers to collaborative
development efforts on an integrated design (or a number of closely related designs or design
variants), a condition that does not necessarily hold for user communities (Lüthje/Herstatt et
al. 2005)."


==Cases==

'''(1) [[OScar]]:''' In 1999, the OScar project was initiated by Markus Merz, CEO of a small
consulting firm designing e-business strategies for the automotive industry. He planned to
complete a car design by virtual collaboration and then offer it to OEMs and suppliers for
production. Merz set out by writing a ‘manifesto’ and building a website to rally supporters to
the project. Free access, public ownership of designs, and democratic decision processes with
himself simply as an orchestrator were the principal tenets of his plan. The initial goal to
complete a design within 36 months soon appeared too optimistic; two factors slowing the
project down were the absence of cheap or free CAD programs meeting the project’s
requirements and a lack of focus and direction that accompanied the entirely decentralised
approach.

After a relaunch of the project in 2005 and a redesign of the website, OScar began to attract
thousands of readers and co-developers. Merz provided some development guidelines for
OScar 0.2, but otherwise the design evolves from discussions in the community forums. The
car is meant to be simple and cheap to produce (a ‘world car’) as well as economical in terms
of fuel consumption. To date, the project is still in early design phase; completion is assumed
to take another five to ten years.


'''(2) [[RepRap]]:''' The RepRap project was initiated by Dr. Adrian Bowyer, a senior lecturer at the
University of Bath, in 2004. In an article on the Internet and a press release he announced his
goal to create a self-replicating machine, i.e. a 3D-printer that is able to produce most of the
parts needed to assemble another such machine. A commercial 3D-printer currently costs
approx. US $20,000, whereas the price target of RapRap lies below US$400.

The project relies on decentralised development and production accomplished by
geographically dispersed project members. Initially new members simply volunteered and
were welcomed to the team. As the community grew, a core team was formed to drive and
coordinate development, while maintaining a decentralised, mostly non-hierarchical structure.
The first fully functional, self-replicated RepRap v1.0 (called "Darwin") was completed in
June 2008 and celebrated as a great success. Next steps are the reduction of included thirdparty
components, the advancement of the printing technology, and the recruiting of new
community members.

(3) [[Free Beer]]: Free Beer, previously known as Vores Øl, is commonly regarded as the first
open source beer. It was originally created by students in a class on copyright law at the IT University
of Copenhagen together with Superflex, a Copenhagen-based artist group. They
set out to illustrate how concepts of the free software movement could be applied outside the
digital world. In 2005, they brewed about 100 bottles of Vores Øl 1.0 in the school cafeteria.

The subsequent amount of media attention and feedback they received came as a surprise.
From these discussions of the recipe and the experiment itself, the project emerged.
Superflex then took the idea further and has since released several new, revised versions
based on feedback from testers. By now Free Beer has been brewed on a large number of
different occasions ranging from student parties and conferences in Germany to exhibitions in
Brazil. In addition, Project21, a Swiss student organization for sustainable development,
created a spin-off under the Free Beer trademark in 2007. They developed a new recipe and
first brewed 1,000 liters in a local brewery. Again they received unexpectedly strong feedback
and hence decided to continue and find a sponsor. Within one year, they sold approx. 5,000
liters of Free Beer. Today, Free Beer is produced and marketed by two breweries in
Copenhagen and Zurich.


(4) OSGV: The OSGV ([[Open Source Green Vehicle]]) project was initiated by David W. Lee,
who is still project manager; it is run by the SSM (Society for Sustainable Mobility), a nonprofit
automotive engineering group set up in late 2005. The project goal is to employ open
design to contribute to solving environmental issues, particularly to promote sustainable
mobility (cf. Lee 2008).

Following market analysis and lengthy discussions on the project forums, Lee decided that the
design should be a seven-passenger SUV. The design should allow easy swapping of the
power generating unit and thus fuel type (gasoline, biodiesel, hydrogen fuel cell, ethanol,
natural gas). A core developer team then defined open specifications on the system, subsystem
and interface level. Based on this set of tightly controlled specifications, a community
of about 250 members completed a preliminary design in early 2008. Further development
and the building of a prototype are to be accomplished by 2009. To achieve this goal, SSM
has licensed the design to a venture-capital backed start-up company which will finish
development and take on production.


(5) [[Open Moko]]: In early 2006, Sean Moss-Pultz assembled a group of four core developers to
run an open source software project for a Windows-Smartphone on behalf of FIC (First
International Computer, Taiwan), a producer of hardware. In answer to strong media and
industry interest in the project, FIC put their Windows plans on hold and increased resources
for developing a Linux-based Smartphone. In late 2006, they announced the development of
an open mobile telephone, in which openness would include software and hardware. Today,
two years later, thousands of community members participate in the development of both
hardware and software, shaping the result to a large extent.

Openmoko, Inc., founded as a subsidiary of FIC in early 2008, employs approx. 70
geographically dispersed developers to improve the current design into a mobile phone
suitable for the mass market. The first 5.000 prototypes were put on the market in July 2007
and sold out within one month; in July 2008, the second generation was launched with similar
success.

(6) [[Neuros OSD]]: Neuros Technology, a Chicago-based spin-off of Digital Innovations (DI)
with approx. 35 employees, sells audio and video devices, among them the Neuros OSD
(Open Source Device). The Neuros OSD is an open source, Linux-based, embedded media
center, i.e. a device to record digital content from various sources and to store and output this
content in a standardised format used by most digital devices, from MP3 players to mobile
telephones and televisions.

Faced with three problems, the need to innovate, the need to obtain very detailed customer
feedback on application features, and the need for speed in the fast-moving video space,
Neuros CEO Joe Born successively laid open its design specifications and development
process to a growing community for feedback, bug tracking, documentation, and co-development. Some parts of the design, e.g. components delivered by third party vendors, as
well as corporate decision processes, remain closed to the public."


==Characteristics==

===Who drives open design projects?===

Mirroring findings from OSS, we identify community-driven (OScar, Free Beer) and
company-driven (Neuros OSD, OpenMoko, OSGV) open design projects as well as projects
led by members of research institutions (RepRap). In the Neuros OSD case, one company
directs the development process and delivers most of the work, laying open its designs for a
community to co-develop. OScar, by contrast, is entirely community-driven, similar to the
RepRap project in which a community is guided by a university researcher combining project
and academic work. In between lie OpenMoko, rather closer to, but not as extreme as the
Neuros OSD case, Free Beer, which unites a community of users with commercial
contributors and producers, and OSGV, which set out with a community of individual
contributors and researchers led by a non-profit organisation, but has been largely taken over
by a start-up company.

Some scholars of collaborative development have suggested that developers active in open
design must possess strong and specialized skills, and that this necessity poses a substantial
impediment to open design (Lerner/Tirole 2004). Our case studies mostly corroborate this
proposition. In all cases we studied, apart from Free Beer, developers with special skills are
required, e.g. engineering, informatics, or electronics. In addition to depth of expertise, open
design projects also tend to require developers from a considerable diversity of backgrounds.
RepRap developers believe their group to be more multi-disciplinary than observed in most
software projects. Similarly, the completion of a functional car design necessitates mechanical
engineers and automotive engineers as well specialist disciplines such as high-power
electronics, fuel efficiency, etc.

Prior experience with OSS development is not typically deemed an important prerequisite for
participation in open design, and indeed many developers do not possess any. Still, an OSS
background instills a knowledge of a “totally different development culture and an
appreciation of openness, of the fact that open or free standards are preferable to some
proprietary solution for the design process” (OpenMoko). Developers with prior experience in
OSS projects may thus be particularly likely to subscribe to the goals pursued in open design."


===Modularity===

"In all our cases except one (Free Beer), the artefact being developed is modular. Perhaps even
more importantly, these open design projects make a particular effort to develop the artefact
in a modular way. Thus, the open design even of very complex objects is considered feasible,
as long as they can be modularised. These findings are in accordance with studies on
modularity in the field of OSS (MacCormack/Rusnak et al. 2006; Baldwin/Clark 2006).

In the Free Beer project, in which an integral product is developed, the low level of
complexity of the object enables collaborative and dislocated task completion despite the lack
of task granularity. This suggests that the feasibility of open design depends jointly on the
degree of modularity and the degree of complexity of the artefact. High complexity
necessitates a modular architecture, while simple objects may be amenable to open design
despite modularity being low.

Our cases reveal that development tasks of considerable complexity are tackled within open
design settings. One important strategy to manage this complexity is outsourcing. Allowing
for outsourcing to third-party suppliers, the fact that a mobile phone, for instance, includes a
large number of sophisticated technical components, which would probably be beyond the
OpenMoko community to develop afresh, does not preclude success within an open design
set-up. 


This is illustrated by the following quotation:

“At a certain point in time someone has to make the boards […] and things of that nature. But the thing that
we're working on, the open source, is the design. […] nobody has time to assemble the boards.” (RepRap)
However, this strategy shifts complexity to a different level, i.e. specifications, interfaces, and
documentation.

Summarising first findings on the characteristics of the artefacts developed in open design we
find that, first, modular objects and simple objects seem particularly well suited to open
design, second, feasibility seems to depend jointly on modularity and complexity, and third,
more complex, but modular designs can be completed with the help of third-party suppliers."



===Loci of Production===

"In our case studies, '''we identify three different loci of production: with external
manufacturers, with the community, or with the focal organisation coordinating the project'''.


OSGV and OScar plan to take the first route, once they get to this stage; RepRap takes the
second approach, and Neuros OSD and OpenMoko the third. Free Beer is brewed both by the
community and by large commercial breweries.

Production by companies external to the project is typically chosen in open design projects,
which do not have an OEM as their coordinator, such as OScar or OSGV. Besides the cost of
testing and building physical objects and the potential of exploiting economies of scale in
manufacturing, product safety and liability issues are important considerations.
The RepRap 3-D printing machine is assembled by each developer from standard parts
commonly available for sale and parts printed by another RepRap according to the project
design files. Assembly allows for some choices, depending on the developers’ personal
requirements and willingness to pay. Development tasks are performed by the community on
their own machines, which are in various stages of completion. If an improvement is voted to
be integrated into the official project design, they must either update their machines or stay
with the older version.

“If changes are made to the hardware, then everybody that's got hardware already built has to start again or
modify it. There's some cost associated to this, which would not occur with software. They can just download it
and they got it." (RepRap)

“Because every [component] is necessarily seen and assembled by someone that builds a RepRap, there's a very
complete peer review going on.” (RepRap)

As these quotations illustrate, there is no clear-cut separation between design, prototyping,
and production in the community production regime employed be RepRap, at least not at this
stage. Once the design is finalised, the option of involving an external manufacturer for massproduction
may be considered – although this does not seem a likely avenue at present.

An amalgamation of development and production stages can also be identified in our two
cases which feature production by the company coordinating the project. Both OpenMoko
and Neuros OSD rely on “release procedures [which] are deliberately very soft” (Neuros
OSD), whereby different test versions are produced and released to the community, either for
free or at a cost, for testing and improvement. The target group for this co-development and
co-testing process is successively expanded; advanced test versions are offered for general
sale. Thus one version is sold in the market, while the follow-on improved version is being
developed based on community feedback. What seems noteworthy in this context is a
considerable fault tolerance among the community: Their eagerness to buy ‘bug-ridden’ beta
versions or ‘developer samples’ for co-development took supplying companies by surprise."


==Degrees of Openness==

"To think of open design as entirely open, however, would be over-simplistic. In order to paint
a more fine-grained picture, we draw on a distinction proposed by West (2003) between
“open parts” and “partly open”. According to the ‘open parts’ strategy, the project coordinator
“grant[s] all rights to a subset [of the design]”, whereas “partly open” refers to the release of a
design “under restrictive terms” (West 2003, p. 1277).

Counter to the common understanding of ‘open’ design, five of our six case studies actually
reveal some limitations to openness, according to either one or both elements of West’s
conceptual dyad. They rely on trade secrecy, trademarks, and in some cases even patents (for
OSS cf. Dahlander and Magnusson 2005). Limitations to the scope (‘open parts’) or the
degree (‘partly open’) of openness are sought either by the suppliers of components or by the
focal company or core team of the project. In several cases (e.g. OSGV, Openmoko) we
identified limitations to openness in both degree and scope, the regime varying among the
components. 

'''In other words, these designs included entirely open parts, partly open parts, and
closed parts.''' 

The common denominator behind all these examples appears to be the endeavor to balance
the interests of the designer community and commercial companies involved, e.g., as
suppliers or manufacturers. In several of our cases, there is an awareness that, by deciding to
“leave enough room to encourage private investment” (OSGV), the community can improve
its probability of success.

The major exception among our cases is the OScar project core team who consciously reject
this avenue: According to founder Markus Merz, adherence to OS principles, particularly
openness, takes precedence over bringing the car to market. OScar is primarily intended to
prove the feasibility of open car design, which is why actual production is deemed secondary.
In all other cases decision makers try to promote project success by carefully weighing
community and commercial requirements. Some findings, particularly from the OpenMoko
and OSGV projects, suggest that this trade-off is actually accepted by community members,
as long as the balance is perceived to be fair."

=More Information=

* http://open-innovation-projects.org/my-research


==Bibliography==

* Agerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B. (2008) Opensourcing to an unknown workforce: Exploring
opensourcing as a global sourcing strategy. MIS Quarterly, 32(2), 385-410.
* Baldwin, C. Y., Clark, K. B. (2006) The architecture of participation: Does code architecture
mitigate free riding in the open source development model?. Management Science, 52(7),
1116-1127.
* Chesbrough, H., Appleyard, M. M. (2007) Open innovation and strategy. California
Management Review, 50(1), 57-76.
* Dahlander, L., Magnusson, M. G. (2005) Relationships between open source software
companies and communities: Observations from Nordic firms. Research Policy 34(4), 481-
493.
* Gläser, J. (2007) The social order of open source software production. In: St.Amant, Kirk and
Still, Brian (eds.), Handbook of research on open source software: Technological, economic,
and social perspectives. Hershey, New York: Information Science Reference.
Hellström, T. (2003) Governing the virtual academic commons. Research Policy, 32(2), 391-
401.
* Henkel, J. (2006) Selective revealing in open innovation processes: The case of embedded
Linux. Research Policy, 35(7), 953-969.
* Müller-Seitz, G., Reger, G. (2008) Open beyond the software code? - An explorative
examination of the development of an open source car. Proceedings of the EIASM IPDM
Conference 2008, Hamburg.
* Raasch, C., Herstatt, C., Blecker, T., Abdelkafi, N. (2008) Open Source Innovation - Out of
software? Proceedings of the EIASM IPDM Conference 2008, Hamburg.
* Shah, S. K. (2005) Open beyond software. In: Cooper, Danese, DiBona, Chris and Stone,
Mark (eds.), Open Sources 2. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media.
* Shirky, C. (2005) Epilogue: Open Source outside the domain of software. In: Feller, Joseph,
Fitzgerald, Brian, Hissam, Scott A. and Lakhani, Karim R. (eds.), Perspectives on Free and
Open Source Software. Cambridge, MA et al.: MIT Press.
* Shirky, C. (2007) Generalizing peer production into the physical world.
http://finance.groups.yahoo.com/group/decentralization/message/6967.
* Thompson, C. (2008) Build it. Share it. Profit. Can Open Source hardware work? Wired
Magazine, 16.11.
* Vallance, R., Kiani, S., Nayfeh, S. (2001) Open design of manufacturing equipment.
Proceedings of the CHIRP 1st International Conference on Agile, Reconfigurable
Manufacturing. http://www.opendesign.org/CHIRP_Open_Design_Mfg_Equipment.pdf.

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]