
'''* Article: Escaping the Polanyi matrix: the impact of fictitious commodities: money, land, and labor on consumer welfare. By Gary Flomenhoft. real-world economics review, issue no. 74, 2016'''

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue74/Flomenhoft74.pdf [https://rwer.wordpress.com/comments-on-rwer-issue-no-74/ comments]

=Abstract=

"Karl Polanyi’s concept of land, money, and labor as “fictitious commodities” are found
in his book The Great Transformation. He pointed out that the attempt to commodify
these factors, which he said was necessary for a market economy, would demolish
people, business, and nature if some mitigating steps were not taken. The impact of
these fictitious commodities will be analysed in the modern market economic context
to show their detrimental impact on consumer surplus and welfare. The author
introduces the term “Polanyi matrix” to describe the system of unseen rules whereby
land, money, and human labor are commodified, are never questioned, and are at the
root of many economic problems. The author contends that commodification of land,
money, and labor are not necessary for a functioning market economy, and in fact are
detrimental to it. For example, land can be placed in trusts, money can be
administered as a public utility, and people can reclaim sovereignty over their own
labor. The concepts of socially responsible business, green economics, sustainable
economics, the creative economy, natural capital, steady-state economics, caring
economy, solidarity economy, cooperative economy, or any other suggested
solutions, have no chance of succeeding in creating widespread prosperity or
sustainability, unless the operating system of the economy can be reformed in these
three crucial systemic ways. We can use Polanyi’s insights to address the
fundamental roots of the problem in commodity land, money, and human labor."

=Excerpts=

"In order to demonstrate the impact of the
three false commodities in the financial crisis we can look at asset prices for land and money,
and unemployment for labor during the financial crisis.


==Land as a false commodity==

When looking at real estate prices it is important to remember that rising house prices reflect
rising land values, not buildings. Buildings depreciate as they wear out. Their replacement
price may increase due to the normal inflation rate, and their value may be maintained by
investments in repair and maintenance, but buildings do not increase in value on their own.
By contrast, land values are what are subject to rising real prices.

There are three important problems with land as a market commodity. First, periodic booms
and busts of land prices due to speculation are extremely disruptive of the economy and
cause recessions and massive unemployment. The crash of 1929 was due to an asset bubble
including real estate, and it is widely understood that the “sub-prime mortgage crisis”, i.e.; a
land bubble, was behind the global financial crisis in 2008, as real estate prices rose to
unheard of levels historically, and then crashed.

Second, land prices rise faster than incomes driving average wages to subsistence due to
mortgages and rents crowding out other expenditures by average wage earners. Housing
costs rise to unaffordable levels, and households respond by putting both partners to work,
increasing working hours, or working multiple jobs so they become trapped by debt peonage.
Third, rising land values, or the economic rent of land, are generated by society and not by
the individual land owner. Therefore society has the right to recapture it. Allowing some
members of society to benefit from social progress and leaving others behind is inequitable.
So there is a moral component as well, since landowners accumulate capital gains from land
while doing nothing to earn them. “Did you ever consider the full meaning of the significant
fact that as progress goes on, as population increases and civilisation develops, the one thing
that ever increases in value is land?” (George, 1887)

Furthermore, it is a zero-sum game. For every person who makes unearned gains from land
someone else must pay. Rising prices and rent benefit land owners, while renters must pay
ever increasing rents. These factors sum up the essential problems with the privatization of
land rent, and commodification of land.

==Solutions to commodity land==

Treating land as a market commodity destroys consumer welfare, and creates boom-bust
economic cycles. For a sustainable economy, land must be removed as a commodity leading
to asset bubbles. There are several ways this could be done. Municipalisation, taxation on
economic rent of land, and community land trusts. In Singapore, Hong Kong, and formerly in
Canberra, Australia all land is owned by the city and leased out on long term contracts such
as 99 year leases. Covenants restricting profit on resale would be necessary to avoid turning
land into a commodity.

Arnott and Stieglitz sum up another solution to the land problem as follows: “…since a
confiscatory tax on land rents is not only efficient, it is also the ‘single tax’ necessary to
finance the pure public good” (Arnott and Stieglitz, 1979, p. 471-471). If holding costs are less
than the annual capital gains, then financiers will continue to speculate on land and housing.
If land tax or capital gains taxes removed the unearned income from real estate, then land
would no longer be subject to speculation or bubbles.

Another viable method of removing land from the market is to place land in community land
trusts, where land is owned by a non-profit organization, and is leased to homeowners who
own the buildings. Limited or shared-return contracts on homes prevent homeowners from
capitalizing land prices into their house prices when sold. They are most often used for
affordable housing, but can also be used for commercial, industrial, or agricultural uses.
These three methods essentially remove land from speculative markets, and remove the
distortionary impact of land from markets of all goods and services containing a land
component. 


==Money as a false commodity==

The administration of purchasing power, in other words creation of the money supply, is
currently regulated by quasi-private central banks such as the US Federal Reserve Bank, but
is mainly controlled by private banks. According to a recent publication by the Bank of
England, private banks create 97% of the money supply through the issuance of loans to
borrowers10. “This confirms that banks create money when they grant a loan: they invent a
fictitious customer deposit, which the central bank and all users of our monetary system,
consider to be ‘money’, indistinguishable from ‘real’ deposits not newly invented by the banks.
Thus banks do not just grant credit, they create credit, and simultaneously they create money”
(Warner, 2014, p.74). “Central banks increase money supply by purchasing government
bonds with money created for that purpose” (Farley et al, 2013), so-called monetizing the
debt. This central bank money is often called “vertical money”, while money created by the
banking system is called “horizontal money”. So the entire money supply is essentially
administered by the market as Polanyi stated as a requirement of a market society. The
money supply is very flexible as determined by demand for credit, but every dollar creates
interest payments to banks, which increases the cost of items purchased such as homes, and
decreases consumer welfare.

Market administration of the money supply and other financial products also violates the
theory of consumer welfare, the invisible hand, and the magic of the market. Greater demand
for currencies, credit, and financial products, rather than leading to market entry and lower
prices, leads to rising asset prices until the bubble bursts. Hyman Minsky called the end stage
of financial capital the “Ponzi stage”, where there are no more productive investments
available to be made in the economy, so finance goes mainly into speculative activities,
driving up asset prices (Minsky, 1992, p. 9). While asset prices are rising, banks are willing to
extend rising amounts of credit, increasing the money supply, but when asset prices are
falling banks call in loans and reduce lending, thereby shrinking the money supply. This is
referred to as pro-cyclical monetary policy, which exacerbates recessions and unemployment
due to shrinking demand in times of falling asset values. What is needed is counter-cyclical
monetary policy. Some control is exerted by central banks through adjustment of reserve
rates, interest rates and open market operations, but they don’t directly control the money
supply.

Since monetary policy is out of the hands of governments, in order to address monetary
contraction they often respond with Keynesian expansionary fiscal policies to address
monetary contraction. That is the only tool they have at their disposal. By additional spending
or reduction of taxes, governments are able to inject more money into the economy, and
counteract some of the pro-cyclical trends of bank money. This goes directly against the
principle of market administration of purchasing power, and is an example of one of the
mitigating responses to pure neo-liberal, laissez-faire policies that Polanyi devotes his entire
book to explaining. “Grave evils would be produced in this fashion unless the tendencies 
inherent in market institutions were checked by conscious social direction made effective
through legislation” (Polanyi, 1944, p. 129).

There is also a biophysical limitation to the infinite emission of credit by private banks. All
bank credit is issued with interest compounded continuously or annually as a condition of
loans. Therefore, the money supply must continually expand and the economy must grow in
order to obtain the funds to pay back interest on the entire money supply. This creates a
perpetual growth imperative, which has resulted in the 2014 ecological footprint measured at
50% overshoot of the planet’s biocapacity11. “Robbed of the protective covering of social
institutions…Nature would be reduced to its elements, neighborhoods and landscapes
defiled, rivers polluted, military safety jeopardized, the power to produce food and raw
materials destroyed (Polanyi 1944, p. 73). And thus it is today as planetary overshoot has
already exceeded boundaries for biodiversity and the nitrogen cycle (Rockström 2009, p.
472), and the climate destabilizes from excess greenhouse gasses.

Marion King (M.K.) Hubbert identified the basic problem with our current debt and interest
based monetary system in his essay entitled, “Exponential Growth as a Transient
Phenomenon in Human History”


Over time, due to our debt-interest based money system, the value of money declines,
making products more expensive. This perpetual decline in the value of money has resulted
in one dollar in 2014 being worth the equivalent of four cents in 1913 (bls.gov), a total
depreciation in 100 years of 25 times its value, or -3.16% per year compounded annually. The
most stable currency in the world at the time, the Deutch Mark was worth 20 cents (pfennigs)
in 2001, based on a 1950 starting point of one Deutch Mark13. This constant reduction in the
value of money due to the debt-interest money system, results in perpetual price inflation,
which is accounted for in economic models as an annual rate of 2-3% inflation. For consumer
welfare prices should be going down, not up. Constantly depreciating currency results in
prices always rising and labor needing to constantly sell itself for higher wages on labor
markets.

Since land is usually appreciating faster than wages, this creates a treadmill for the average
worker trying to keep up with constant consumer price and land price inflation. If the value of
money was constant, then competition in real commodities would decrease prices benefitting
consumers. In reality economists look at deflation with horror as it decreases demand and
results in recession, and makes loans harder to repay due to increasing value of money
compared to income. Since nearly the entire money supply is issued through commercial
loans, it would create default and monetary crisis if there was constant price deflation. By
using the concept of “real” prices adjusted for monetary inflation, we can disaggregate the
portion of prices due to increased product costs, and the portion due to currency depreciation.
Since nominal prices of microelectronics have declined without adjusting for “real” prices, this
is an even more impressive achievement. It means that the prices of microchips have
declined faster than prices have increased due to currency deflation. So if prices are inflating
at 3.16% per year due to currency depreciation, that means that the price of microchips are
declining in real terms faster than 3.16% per year.


==Solutions to commodity money==

The fact that 97% of the money supply is created by interest bearing loans is the crux of the
problem. It adds the cost of interest to everything, and causes a growth imperative due to the
need for economic expansion to provide the money for interest payments. Many economists
and writers over the years have recommended 100% reserve requirements, most recently in
an IMF working paper by Jaromir Benes and Michael Kumhof, called “The Chicago Plan
revisited”. This refers to the plan by U of Chicago economists led by Frank Knight in the
1930’s and also supported by Irving Fisher and Henry Simons, to require 100% reserve
requirements on all bank loans, which would transfer to government the function of creating
the money supply through 100% vertical money, ideally interest free, by spending it on public
goods. Lincoln’s Greenbacks were a successful example of interest-free government money.
Greenbacks were created interest-free to pay Civil War soldier’s wages. With 100% reserves
banks would just become intermediaries between savers and borrowers.

Several intermediate steps have been proposed. The JAK bank in Sweden issues loans
interest free which would decrease the perpetual growth imperative, and perpetual inflation.
However, the JAK Bank lends out only money it has on hand and does not add to the money
supply. Coincidentally, JAK stands for Jord, Arbete, Kapital in Swedish – or Land, Labour,
Capital in English. Public Banks such as the Bank of North Dakota have been proposed as a
way to transfer some seigniorage to the public sector. Banks are able to create credit while
states are prohibited by the US Constitution. The Bank of North Dakota receives all deposits
of state revenues, and uses them to leverage many loan programs for agriculture, industry,
commerce, and student loans. Even more decentralized would be a system of municipal
public banks creating credit for their infrastructure needs, at minimal interest, and paid back
by tax money, with revenue going to the municipality instead of to banks. A voluntary
decentralized approach is also possible. Around 70-80% of all bank loans in the US are for
mortgages. If non-profit financial institutions were formed to take on the financing of nonmarket
land in community land trusts, then we could begin to escape the Polanyi matrix.
These banks could establish credit on the basis of the JAK bank which takes equity in
properties instead of interest, and can begin to remove the use of money as an extractive
commodity.

For the problem of monetary speculation, a financial speculation tax or Tobin Tax has been
proposed worldwide as a means to reduce the level of speculation in financial assets, but
would not change the creation of money. To eliminate the commodity nature of money, the
creation of the money supply would have to be transferred to government, and maintained at
a stable price level.


==Labor as a false commodity in the financial crisis==

The third of Polanyi’s false commodities, labor, is a special case. As factors of production,
people are no longer human beings, but are commodities bought and sold in labor markets,
so called wage slaves, or “human capital”. Without unionization or government intervention,
labor is generally at a disadvantage to the owners of business, except in the case of highly
skilled labor, as labor is normally overabundant, and easily reproducible by a very enjoyable
process. In Polanyi’s words, “Robbed of the protective covering of cultural institutions, human
beings would perish from the effects of social exposure; they would die as the victims of acute
social dislocation through vice, perversion, crime, and starvation (Polanyi, p. 73). As a factor
of production, it is in the interest of business to minimize wages to labor. As consumers,
laborers benefit from low prices resulting from reduced labor costs, which act directly against
their interests as employees seeking higher wages.

There are several specific results of labor as a market commodity. During bust cycles, labor is
hit with unemployment, leading to many of the social consequences pointed out by Polanyi.
Due to globalization, labor has not been compensated for its increased productivity
contribution since 1975 in the US. Also, as a result of treating labor as a market commodity,
Polanyi predicted starvation and crime would result, without social intervention. We can
evaluate these results in light of the 2008 financial crisis.

...

Since 1975 workers have received almost none of the gains of increased productivity, which
has increased by 143% since around 1975 (figure 14). In other words, productivity has more
than doubled, while workers received none of the gains. This can be explained by the
deindustrialization of the US economy, as heavy industries followed by manufacturing in
general were exported to Asia. Due to this trend there was a huge decrease in unionization
which went from 39% in 1940 to around 10% in 2014. During the same period there was a
trend toward part-time work and contract labor, mergers and acquisitions, with downsizing
and layoffs. The Reagan revolution and Republican “Contract with America” both served to
remove power from the working class and transfer it to corporations. One of Reagan’s first
acts as President was to break the Pilots and Air Traffic Controllers strike (PATCO), replacing
them all with military personnel. That was the final nail in the union coffin. The Democratic
Party in 1992 through the Democratic Leadership Conference chose to seek the same
corporate and Wall St. money as the Republicans, and from that point on effectively stopped
serving the working class. All these factors led to the reduction of bargaining power and
political power on the part of labor, and can help explain the stagnating real wages during this
period of time.


==Solutions to commodity labor==

One of the responses to critiques such as Polanyi’s of labor as a market commodity was
Marx’s prescription of a “dictatorship of the proletariat”, and state ownership of the “means of
production”. It turns out that one dictatorship is no better than another. Also owning the
means of production does not necessarily eliminate land or money as commodities, although
presumably putting labor in charge of managing industrial production would give them more 
sovereignty over their work lives. In reality during Soviet communism, laborers remained
commodities ruled by party elites. More recently the Mondragon cooperatives have
demonstrated a more cooperative form of labor management, still within the market system,
but with good results. In the US Louis Kelso originated the idea of Employee Stock Ownership
Plans (ESOPs), which would ideally turn all employees into capitalists by giving them a share
of stock in the company. This has had limited success. Many ideas for returning power to
workers have been proposed in recent years. Community land trusts often employ
development and construction companies for housing construction and renovation. Therefore,
combining community land trusts with worker-owned construction companies is feasible. Gar
Alperovitz has promoted many structural reforms including, “the traditional radical principle
that the ownership of capital should be subject to democratic control” (Alperovitz, 2013). This
refers to worker ownership or participation in their own workplaces, a very different
proposition than state communism or state capitalism. Democratizing the workplace is a great
unfinished business of society.

What few reformers have advocated directly is to remove labor as a factor of production sold
in labor markets. It is probably a lack of imagination that prevents us from imagining an
economy where labor consists of human beings doing meaningful work in alignment with their
skills and interests. Aboriginal and tribal people managed to do it, through non-simultaneous
reciprocity. Even in feudal times according to Polanyi, labor was tied to feudal estates and
was remunerated according to social relationships, not according to labor markets. Surely we
can find an approach embodying something like Sen’s capabilities approach that respects the
humanity of labor, while still remunerating them for their work. We need to find a way for
laborers to gain control of their lives and work according to their capabilities, instead of simply
selling their labor in markets.


==Conclusion==

Commodity land, money, and labor remain a largely unseen matrix as they have been part of
the market economy since “The Great Transformation” from a feudal to market society.
Market competition raises the price of land and money through increased demand for fixed
assets, rather than lowering it through increasing supply as in the case of microchips or other
competitive product. Commodity labor in flexible labor markets normally results in wages
being driven down due to the oversupply of labor. Labor is also subject to periodic
unemployment and loss of income during recessions resulting from booms and busts in
commodity land and financial products. Therefore commodifying land, money, and labor
reduces consumer surplus, and lowers economic welfare. It is entirely unnecessary, as all
three can be managed outside of markets. None of the major proposals for economic reform
address the three false commodities identified by Polanyi, except for Daly. Combining
solutions developed in this article and Daly, by implementing 100% reserve requirements and
public banks, community land trusts, and housing companies set up with worker ownership
and management, all three fictitious commodities could be addressed. Since 70-80% of
commercial loans are for real estate, this would comprise a huge portion of commodity
money, land, and labor. Only by addressing the Polanyi matrix can the fundamental problems
of inequality, poverty, environmental destruction, boom-bust monetary cycles, exorbitant
housing prices, and many other problems be solved."

[[Category:Land Commons]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Money]]