'''* Article: Reactivating the Social Body in Insurrectionary Times: A Dialogue with Franco 'Bifo' Berardi. By Hugill, David and Thorburn, Elise. Berkeley Planning Journal, 25(1), 2012'''

URL = http://escholarship.org/uc/item/7z74819g

"interview with Franco "Bifo" Berardi that
covers a broad swathe of topics, including issues of education, debt,
crisis, and mediation in the contemporary historical conjuncture."


=Abstract=

"The Italian theorist Franco “Bifo” Berardi has spent a lifetime
participating in revolutionary movements and thinking through their
complexities. He is best known in the English-speaking world for his
association with the Italian autonomist movement Operaismo (“workerism”)
and its prominent attempts to transform communist politics by resituating
the “needs, desires, and organizational autonomies” of workers at the
foundation of political praxis (Genosko and Thoburn 2011: 3). This text
assembles excerpts from three interviews we conducted with Berardi over the
course of the insurrectionary year 2011. Each of our conversations
coincided with notable developments in last year’s mobilizations and our
interviewee’s enthusiasm about those events is evident at certain points in
the transcript. Yet while Berardi is generally optimistic about the revolts
and the “reactivation of the social body” that they seem to imply, he
reminds us that protest alone will not be enough to win the genuine kinds
of autonomy that he suggests are necessary. He argues that dogmas of
growth, competition and rent have so colonized every sphere of “human
knowledge” that they have begun to threaten the very survival of what he
calls “social civilization.” The hegemonic grip of this “epistemological
dictatorship” has altered our capacity to feel empathy towards one another,
severing fundamental bonds of inter-personal connection. Yet in spite of
this dark diagnosis, Berardi is not a doomsayer and he always leaves open
the possibility of transformation and escape. He counsels that our best
shot at deliverance lies in the development of new strategies of
withdrawal, refusal, sabotage, and the negotiation of new “lines of flight”
from the late-capitalist forms of domination."

=Excerpts=

excerpt, page 3 ( 212 ) ...

"Bifo points to the limits of too enthusiastic an embrace of space-based urban struggle.
His point is not to deny the importance of marches and occupations but 
to suggest that a more formidable foe resides in the deterritorialized orbit
of software and algorithms, financial flows and behavioral automatisms.
Indeed, he argues that the hegemonic grip of this “epistemological 
dictatorship” has altered our capacity to feel empathy towards one
another, severing fundamental bonds of inter-personal connection."
(http://escholarship.org/uc/item/7z74819g)


=Introduction=

David Hugill and Elise Thorburn:

"The Italian theorist Franco “Bifo” Berardi has spent a lifetime
participating in revolutionary movements and thinking through their
complexities. He is perhaps best known in the English-speaking world for his association
with the Italian Operaista (“workerist”) movement – known colloquially as
“Autonomism” or “Autonomist Marxism” - and its prominent attempts to
transform communist politics by re-centering the “needs, desires, and
organizational autonomies” of workers as the foundation of political praxis
(Genosko and Thoburn 2011). The Autonomist tradition is primarily concerned
with the autonomy of human subjects: it is a Marxism that insists on the
primacy of laborers as active agents. Thus where Western Marxisms have
tended to focus on the dominant logic of capital itself, Autonomists have
sought to affirm the power of workers first, understanding transformations
in the capitalist mode of production primarily as responses to class
struggle (Dyer-Witheford 2004); the political history of capital, in other
words, can be read as a “history of successive attempts of the capitalist
class to emancipate itself from the working class” (Tronti 1979 quoted in
Trott 2007). This inversion of the dialectical relationship between labor
and capital (sometimes called the “Copernican Turn”) is thus often
considered the hallmark of Autonomist theory (Moulier 1989).

What follows are excerpts of three interviews that we conducted with Bifo
over the course of the insurrectionary year 2011. Each of our conversations
coincided with notable developments in last year’s mobilizations and our
interviewee’s enthusiasm about those events is evident at certain points in
the transcript. Our first encounter was at an Edufactory meeting in Paris
at which a range of groups had come together to build a common front
against the neoliberalization of universities in Europe and around the
world. The conference was held just weeks after the ouster of Tunisian
President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and the proceedings were routinely
interrupted by live updates from the ongoing revolution in Egypt. Indeed,
news of the emergent ‘Arab Spring’ coupled with the energy of attendees
from ongoing student mobilizations in Britain, Italy, Chile and elsewhere,
animated the conference with a palpable sense that a new cycle of struggle
was once again upon us. Our follow-up conversations with Bifo - both held
remotely - were animated by a similar backdrop of upheaval as that
revolutionary spring bled into an equally oppositional summer and then gave
to an occupied fall. Yet while our interviewee remains generally optimistic
about the events of 2011 and the “reactivation of the social body” that
they seem to imply, he is also quick to remind us that protest alone will
not be enough to win the genuine kinds of autonomy that he suggests are
vitally necessary. As we shall see, Bifo’s primary concern is with the ways
in which particular dogmas of growth, competition and rent have colonized
the spheres of “human knowledge.” He argues that the persistence of these
“mental cages” threatens the very survival of “social civilization” and
remains critical about the capacity of protest to interrupt their
pervasiveness. There are tactical implications to these observations and
Bifo - both in the text below and elsewhere - asks tough questions about
whether marches and occupations are effective strategies for targeting
contemporary arrangements of domination. Unlike the geographer Eric
Swyngedouw (2011), who insists that the seizure of urban space continues to
be at the heart of “emancipatory geo-political trajectories,” Bifo points
to the limits of too enthusiastic an embrace of space-based urban struggle.
His point is not to deny the importance of marches and occupations but to
suggest that a more formidable foe resides in the deterritorialized orbit of
software and algorithms, financial flows and behavioral automatisms. Indeed,
he argues that the hegemonic grip of this “epistemological dictatorship”
has altered our capacity to feel empathy towards one another, severing
fundamental bonds of inter-personal connection. As he puts it elsewhere:

We have lost the pleasure of being together. Thirty years of precariousness
and competition have destroyed social solidarity. Media virtualization
has destroyed empathy among bodies, the pleasure of touching each other, and the pleasure
of living in urban spaces. We have lost the pleasure of love, because too
much time is devoted to work and virtual exchange (Berardi and Lovnik 2011).


Yet Bifo is not a doomsayer, in spite of this dark diagnosis, and he always
leaves open the possibility of transformation and escape. He counsels that
our best shot at deliverance lies in the development of new strategies
of withdrawal, refusal, sabotage, and the negotiation of new “lines of flight” from
late-capitalist forms of domination. There are good reasons to be optimistic
as we reflect on the flourishing of this new “spring” of resistance but as
Mike Davis (2011: 5) warns us “spring is the shortest of seasons.” Bifo’s
observations are critical reminders that the hardest work will come as we
try to sustain, transform and hone the insurrectionary energies of 2011. We
hope this dialogue contributes to that process in some modest way."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Politics]]