
'''* Report: On-Chain Impact Networks: How Crypto Is Being Used To Regenerate The World. A GreenPill Network Writer’s Guild.'''

URL = https://greenpill.network/pdf/onchain-impact-networks.pdf


=Context=

"An impact DAO or impact network is a group of individuals coordinating to create
systems change in alignment with pluralistic values and vision. - Ron Rivers

Using web3 tech and specifically distributed consensus mechanisms to empower
social infrastructure and positive impact in communities and societies as a whole - Gareth Farry."

(https://greenpill.network/pdf/onchain-impact-networks.pdf)


=Description=

'''1. Kevin Owocki:'''

"David Ehrlichman's book, "Impact Networks," explores how networks can drive social change through collaboration and systemic impact. It provides practical insights on building and sustaining networks based on trust, shared purpose, and collective leadership. Impact Networks serves as a guide for leveraging network power to address complex challenges and create lasting change.


Onchain Impact Networks is about the projects that are putting these insights to work in web3 as of 2024. While the books may have similar titles, they differ greatly in scope. We recommend readers check out David Ehrlichman's book, "Impact Networks," if they are building an Impact Network of their own."


'''2. GreenPill Network Writer’s Guild:'''

"In an era where technology continues to reshape every facet of our lives at an
increasing speed, the concept of an Impact Network stands out as an example of how
we can use it for good.  At its core, an Impact Network leverages the decentralized and
accessible nature of blockchain technology to create systems that facilitate positive,
tangible change in the world. This book is a small step in exploring the numerous
ways blockchain has the potential to address some of the most pressing challenges of
our time, ranging from scientific innovations to financial resource distribution to
climate change and beyond. Our goal is to showcase tangible ways crypto is being used to create positive sum
outcomes and the amazing networks of communities behind them. We explored some of the fastest-growing impact domains so that even if you’re new to any of these categories, it’s clear there’s something for everyone to dig into. What’s
important here is that no matter how much time you can dedicate to a hobby,
network, or research outlet, impact is possible and can also be fun."


=Contents=

"The categories you’ll find in this book are:

* [[Decentralized Science]] ([[DeSci]]) democratizes science by using blockchain to provide
open access to research data and decentralized funding, fostering a more inclusive,
human-forward scientific community.

* [[Community Funding Protocols]] empower communities to collectively fund initiatives
that align with their values, from Universal Basic Income (UBI) schemes to public
goods, art, open-source software, and more.

* [[Regenerative Finance]] ([[ReFi]]) prioritizes sustainability and positive environmental
impact. ReFi utilizes blockchain to create financial models that regenerate natural
ecosystems and promote long-term sustainability.

The themes of Climate and Environmental REGENeration explore how blockchain is
used to combat climate change and restore ecological balance. These include carbon
credit trading platforms and decentralized conservation efforts, among many more.

Blockchain’s potential for Culture and Education includes protecting cultural
heritage, promoting artistic expression, and providing access to quality education for
underserved communities.

Infrastructure development benefits from blockchain-based solutions to build
resilient and inclusive systems, such as decentralized energy grids or smart cities.

Finally, Impact Measurement is essential for understanding the true impact of
blockchain initiatives. While measuring impact is often a moving target, these tools
and teams are on the right track to building more intuitive solutions."


[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]