'''* Book: Onchain Capital Allocation Handbook - by Kevin Owocki. Allo, 2024'''

URL = https://allobook.gitcoin.co/?

''"an accessible exploration of the rapidly evolving landscape of resource distribution in both traditional and blockchain-based systems."''

=Description=

"Capital allocation, from paying bills to complex organizational funding, often suffers from inefficiencies and lack of transparency. Crypto, with programmable smart contracts, has the potential to revolutionize this by enabling more efficient, effective, and transparent capital distribution. By addressing coordination failures and introducing new onchain strategies, crypto could transform how society allocates resources, similar to how the internet revolutionized information sharing. This book explores these possibilities within the web3 space, offering a comprehensive guide to the emerging innovations in capital allocation."


=Contents=

==Funding mechanisms==

A diverse array of funding mechanisms, from AutoPGF to Harberger Taxes.

"This section presents a range of methods for distributing resources and capital, both within and outside
blockchain environments. From novel blockchain-native approaches like AutoPGF and LottoPGF to adaptations of traditional models such as Social Impact Bonds and Participatory Budgeting, these mechanisms offer diverse strategies for capital allocation.

By exploring these varied approaches, readers can
gain a broad understanding of funding possibilities in
the evolving landscape of onchain and decentralized
systems, informing potential applications in their
own projects or research.


==Governance structures==

Governance structures underpinning effective resource management in decentralized systems.


==Cooperative models==

Cooperative models breathe new life into collaborative economic
approaches.


==Real-world applications==

Real-world applications showcasing these concepts in action


=Excerpt=

Kevin Owocki:

"Onchain Capital Allocation: Explorer Edition invites you on an exhilarating journey
through the frontier of resource allocation. This is your roadmap to the future of finance,
where traditional wisdom meets blockchain innovation in a dazzling dance of possibilities.
Imagine a world where capital flows as freely as ideas, where transparency isn’t just a
buzzword but a foundational principle, and where communities shape their financial destinies. That world is no longer a distant dream—it’s unfolding right before our eyes, and
you’re about to become a part of it.


Inside, you’ll discover:

• A treasure trove of funding mechanisms, from Participatory Budgeting to AutoPGF,
that transform how we raise and allocate resources.
• Decentralized governance models that make democracy more accessible, alongside contribution metrics that recognize value in new ways.
• Cooperative approaches like digital-age ROSCAs and innovative revshare models,
breathing life into community-driven economics.
• Real-world examples from pioneers like Artizen, Hypercerts, and Optimism, turning
theory into practice in onchain allocation.


This book is more than information—it’s an invitation to join a vibrant community shaping
the future of finance."

(https://allobook.gitcoin.co/src/pdf/onchain-capital-allocation-v2.pdf)

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Books]]