OPPT-IN (OPPT's Community Site and Courtesy Notice) - http://oppt-in.com

=Description=
[http://p2pfoundation.net/Raffael_K%C3%A9m%C3%A9nczy Raffael Kéménczy] summarizes:

The One People's Public Trust (OPPT)  was used to establish the legal foundation for re-gaining individual legal sovereignty within the current framework. In-depth investigation by the OPPT (and others before) have led to the conclusion that all corporations (including governments as corporations) are based on commercial law. By definition, commercial law is only applicable to commercial entities or so-called strawmen of natural persons. Along this line of reasoning, most laws natural persons (you and me) currently feel objected to are only valid because we assume the fictious commercial entity created for us by the state at birth (usually including form of address and the last name written in capital letters, e.g. Mr Steve STRAWMAN). General ignorance of the legal system and intimidation tactics by corporate entities have perpetuated this situation.

Through a series of filings with the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), the overarching legal register, the OPPT has effectively foreclosed on any and all corporations (including governments), publicly announced on December 25th, 2012. The filings can be accessed on the OPPT's website or through the UCC DC Registrar and are currently unrebutted. It took intricate knowledge of this high-level legal structure and help from various individuals to create them. The filings stand as valid since they claim/register the BE'ing of each individual to belong solely to itself and its creator (as a spiritual concept), eliminating any fictituous legal concepts such as corporations which had previously been put in-between. If anyone would try to to rebut these filings, they would need to lay out a higher claim as to why they own any individual, which would basically require them to declare other people as slaves. 

The OPPT advises the use of a specially crafted Courtesy Notice to inform others that all corporations have been foreclosed and the corporate safety net of limited/shifted responsibility is no longer in place. This Courtesy Notice is to be used if an illegal claim of a now foreclosed legal entity (such a a mortgage repayment) is brought up. The only way to establish a legal relationship is to form a contract between natural persons, a draft of which is included in the Courtesy Notice. It's main goal however is to inform others of the new legal situations and that they are now fully and personally responsible for all of their actions.

The OPPT's trustees are Caleb Paul Skinner, Heather Ann Tucci-Jarraf and Hollis Randall Hillner. As of March 2013, weekly radio shows about OPPT are broadcasted on Freedom Reigns and The Collective Imagination Radio Show.

(This description was written assuming the legal logic and proceedings presented by OPPT to be sound.)

=Analysis=
[http://p2pfoundation.net/Raffael_K%C3%A9m%C3%A9nczy Raffael Kéménczy]'s analysis:

It appears as if the legal foundation for these proceedings is sound as it stands unrebutted and the filings are detailed and make sense. The ethical and/or spiritual realisation of absolute self-responsibility and free will has thus been established within(!) the current legal framework using its own mechanisms through the UCC.

Unofficial reports by legal professionals with sufficient knowledge of the UCC procedures (which is rare in itself) speak of its legal validity. Public figures such as Judge Naplitano have simply dismissed these news, however without specifically rebutting any of the points raised.

I personally believe the trustees to be of integrity and the legal foundation to be sound, but this is actually completely irrelevant. The only question is whether we (you!) consciously assume self-responsibility and deny anyone else to have a claim on your BE'ing and creations. The OPPT's UCC filings are very carefully worded, both legally and spiritually. The message put forward by Heather Ann Tucci-Jarraf in interviews is to simply focus on BE'ing and DO'ing - which I translate into being yourself, loving and creating, simply doing what you are really supposed to do instead of remaining fearful and stuck in what is essentially a "slave mentality".

The work done by the OPPT may provide a legal footing within the "old" legal system and as such provides tools like the Courtesy Notice to raise awareness and challenge unlawful (and, above all, unethical!) claims. It should be noted that laws are man-made and only those which become adopted (and/or feared) by people are actually having any effect on their behaviour. Only those who consciously realize themselves to be self-governed won't be governed by others. No outward circumstance can guarantee Freedom, for it is is an inner attitude and can only be brought into one's own life and society as such (see my website for my personal, detailed analysis of these issues). 

“A man who says, 'I want to change, tell me how to', seems very earnest, very serious, but he is not. He wants an authority whom he hopes will bring about order in himself. But can authority ever bring about inward order? Order imposed from without must always breed disorder.”
― Jiddu Krishnamurti

=Links=

The One People's Public Trust (Official Site/Document Archive) - http://peoplestrust1776.org/

OPPT-IN (OPPT's Community Site and Courtesy Notice) - http://oppt-in.com

Washington, D.C. Property Information (for UCC filings) - https://gov.propertyinfo.com/DC-Washington/


[[Category:Research]]