
'''= building of a duplicable open source village model for self-sufficient and sustainable living. Everything we do and create is open source, free-shared'''

URL = http://www.onecommunityglobal.org/ [http://www.sustainabilitynonprofit.org/]

See also: http://www.onecommunityglobal.org/open-source/


=Definition=

Lilian Ricaud:

"One Community is open source project blueprinting and free-sharing everything needed to simultaneously address all the challenges currently facing humanity. This includes 7 complete and different sustainable village prototypes, all related living infrastructure, and a Highest Good society model for global transformation."
(http://www.lilianricaud.com/web-strategy/open-research/open-social-innovation-open-sourcing-social-innovation-to-promote-sharing-sustainable-social-practices/)


=Description=

"One Community is a non-profit organization and think tank leading a global free-sharing and open source collaboration for the creation and building of a duplicable open source village model for self-sufficient and sustainable living. Everything we do and create is open source, free-shared, and aggressively marketed to make available and spread the information and ideas as quickly as possible.

Our goal in creating this open source village model is to provide everything necessary to establish a global collaborative of successive teacher/demonstration communities, villages, and cities to exponentially expand and share sustainability. One Community is creating this because we believe it has the potential to facilitate a new Golden Age of sustainable living, cooperation, collaboration, and people thinking and creating for The Highest Good of All."
(http://www.sustainabilitynonprofit.org/global-free-sharing-and-open-source-collaboration/)


=Discussion=

'Darwin said, “In the long history of humankind (and animal kind, too) those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed.” We agree and are organizing our think-tank team, and leveraging the power of the internet and remote collaboration tools, to forward open source creation and sharing by creating an open source and sustainable village model built for indefinite innovative evolution and duplication, international sustainable development, and ultimately unifying the human species. We believe that we can create a model that self-replicates by sustainably addressing the foundations of survival (food, energy, and housing) in a way that provides a superior living experience and incorporates and promotes living for The Highest Good of All. \
The number of people that want some version of this, and are becoming aware that it is possible, is growing every day. "
(http://www.sustainabilitynonprofit.org/global-free-sharing-and-open-source-collaboration/)


[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]