
= a proposal by [[Tiberius Brastaviceanu]]

URL = https://sites.google.com/site/multitude2008/Home/politics/towards-leaderless-social-mass-movements/rethinking-social-movements#TOC-Here-s-one-solution

=Discussion=

""Build a *smart widget* to play the role of *banner* for the social
movement. Nowadays, every individual or small organization that
associates with a movement has a presence on the Internet. In the past,
members and organizations part of a movement wore a banner to identify
themselves and to communicate to others that they belong to that particular
movement. In our case this banner becomes a *smart banner*, a widget,
which marks individuals and organizations in the virtual space, which is
"wore" on people's blogs, webpages, Facebook accounts, etc.


* "An open data acquisition, analysis, and display system 

All *widgets are connected to a central system*. Every time they are
viewed online they send data to the central system. Every widget/banner has
it's own serial number, is unique. The central system is in fact an open
system. It gathers data from all banners/widgets in circulation,
processes it, and publicly displays information about the entire social
movement in real time. The way the information is analyzed and displayed is
open, and can be modified/improved by an open community.


* "Spreading mechanism

Anyone can grab a banner/widget from any other widget out there, just by
clicking on a link which brings you to a place where the code is provided.
It is not necessary to associate information about the owner of a widget,
but the location of the widget (the site or blog where it is installed)
will be known. Thus, the spread of banner/widgets becomes viral (spreads
from member to member), and adepts of the movement become ambassadors of
the movement with full rights. BUT, if someone in the community finds out
that some owner of a widget is acting against the movement his *widget/banner
can be terminated from the central system through an open
and democratic decision making process. Reputation parameters can also be
added.


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Politics]]