==Description==

From [[wikipedia:Online deliberation]]

"'''Online deliberation is''' a term associated with '''an emerging body of practice, research, and software dedicated to fostering serious, purposive discussion over the Internet'''. It overlaps with, but is not identical to, e-democracy.

Online deliberation is very interdisciplinary, and includes practices such as online consultation, online deliberative polling, online facilitation, interactive e-learning, civic dialogue in Internet forums and online chat, and group decision making that utilizes collaborative software and other forms of computer-mediated communication. Work in all these endeavors is tied together by the challenge of using electronic media in a way that deepens thinking and improves mutual understanding."

==Book==

'''*  Online Deliberation: Design, Research, and Practice. Todd Davies and Seeta Pena Gangadharan editors. Stanford: CSLI Publications, November 2009'''

Info via University of Chicago Press [http://www.press.uchicago.edu/presssite/metadata.epl?mode=synopsis&bookkey=5667101]; free pdf download at http://odbook.stanford.edu (Creative Commons licensed).

"Information and communication technologies must move toward becoming the platform for deliberative online dialogue that extends and augments offline public interactions. This volume examines this subject in a rich and comprehensive way." -- Fiorella de Cindio, Universita degli Studi di Milano. 

===ToC===

* Introduction: The Blossoming Field of Online Deliberation (Todd Davies, pp. 1-19)
* Part I - Prospects for Online Civic Engagement
: Chapter 1: Virtual Public Consultation: Prospects for Internet Deliberative Democracy (James S. Fishkin, pp. 23-35)
: Chapter 2: Citizens Deliberating Online: Theory and Some Evidence (Vincent Price, pp. 37-58)
: Chapter 3: Can Online Deliberation Improve Politics? Scientific Foundations for Success (Arthur Lupia, pp.  59-69)
: Chapter 4: Deliberative Democracy, Online Discussion, and Project PICOLA (Public Informed Citizen Online Assembly) (Robert Cavalier with Miso Kim and Zachary Sam Zaiss, pp. 71-79)
* Part II - Online Dialogue in the Wild
: Chapter 5: Friends, Foes, and Fringe: Norms and Structure in Political Discussion Networks (John Kelly, Danyel Fisher, and Marc Smith, pp. 83-93)
: Chapter 6: Searching the Net for Differences of Opinion (Warren Sack, John Kelly, and Michael Dale, pp. 95-104)
: Chapter 7: Happy Accidents: Deliberation and Online Exposure to Opposing Views (Azi Lev-On and Bernard Manin, pp. 105-122)
: Chapter 8: Rethinking Local Conversations on the Web (Sameer Ahuja, Manuel Pérez-Quiñones, and Andrea Kavanaugh, pp. 123-129)
* Part III - Online Public Consultation
: Chapter 9: Deliberation in E-Rulemaking? The Problem of Mass Participation (David Schlosberg, Steve Zavestoski, and Stuart Shulman, pp. 133-148)
: Chapter 10: Turning GOLD into EPG: Lessons from Low-Tech Democratic Experimentalism for Electronic Rulemaking and Other Ventures in Cyberdemocracy (Peter M. Shane, pp. 149-162)
: Chapter 11: Baudrillard and the Virtual Cow: Simulation Games and Citizen Participation (Hélène Michel and Dominique Kreziak, pp. 163-166)
: Chapter 12: Using Web-Based Group Support Systems to Enhance Procedural Fairness in Administrative Decision Making in South Africa  (Hossana Twinomurinzi and Jackie Phahlamohlaka, pp. 167-169)
: Chapter 13: Citizen Participation Is Critical: An Example from Sweden (Tomas Ohlin, pp. 171-173)
* Part IV - Online Deliberation in Organizations
: Chapter 14: Online Deliberation in the Government of Canada: Organizing the Back Office (Elisabeth Richard, pp. 177-191)
: Chapter 15: Political Action and Organization Building: An Internet-Based Engagement Model (Mark Cooper, pp. 193-202)
: Chapter 16: Wiki Collaboration Within Political Parties: Benefits and Challenges (Kate Raynes-Goldie and David Fono, pp. 203-205)
: Chapter 17: Debian’s Democracy (Gunnar Ristroph, pp. 207-211)
: Chapter 18: Software Support for Face-to-Face Parliamentary Procedure (Dana Dahlstrom and Bayle Shanks, pp. 213-220)
* Part V - Online Facilitation
: Chapter 19: Deliberation on the Net: Lessons from a Field Experiment (June Woong Rhee and Eun-mee Kim, pp. 223-232)
: Chapter 20: The Role of the Moderator: Problems and Possibilities for Government-Run Online Discussion Forums (Scott Wright, pp. 233-242)
: Chapter 21: Silencing the Clatter: Removing Anonymity from a Corporate Online Community (Gilly Leshed, pp. 243-251)
: Chapter 22: Facilitation and Inclusive Deliberation (Matthias Trénel, pp. 253-257)
: Chapter 23: Rethinking the ‘Informed’ Participant: Precautions and Recommendations for the Design of Online Deliberation (Kevin S. Ramsey and Matthew W. Wilson, pp. 259-267)
: Chapter 24: PerlNomic: Rule Making and Enforcement in Digital Shared Spaces (Mark E. Phair and Adam Bliss, pp. 269-271)
* Part VI - Design of Deliberation Tools
: Chapter 25: An Online Environment for Democratic Deliberation: Motivations, Principles, and Design (Todd Davies, Brendan O’Connor, Alex Cochran, Jonathan J. Effrat, Andrew Parker, Benjamin Newman, and Aaron Tam, pp. 275-292)
: Chapter 26: Online Civic Deliberation with E-Liberate (Douglas Schuler, pp. 293-302)
: Chapter 27: Parliament: A Module for Parliamentary Procedure Software (Bayle Shanks and Dana Dahlstrom, pp. 303-307)
: Chapter 28: Decision Structure: A New Approach to Three Problems in Deliberation (Raymond J. Pingree, pp. 309-316)
: Chapter 29: Design Requirements of Argument Mapping Software for Teaching Deliberation (Matthew W. Easterday, Jordan S. Kanarek, and Maralee Harrell, pp. 317-323)
: Chapter 30: Email-Embedded Voting with eVote/Clerk (Marilyn Davis, pp. 325-327)
* Epilogue: Understanding Diversity in the Field of Online Deliberation (Seeta Peña Gangadharan, pp. 329-358)
* Name Index and Subject Index  (pp. 359-374)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Facilitation]]
[[Category:Books]]