=Description=

Lloyd Nimetz:

"What paradigm shifting changes has the Internet brought to the slowest sector of them all, the philanthropic sector?  The answer might be online giving markets. 

These organizations can be loosely defined as web-based, informational and transactional platforms that help donors and volunteers more easily identify and then contribute to or volunteer at high performing nonprofits, social projects or needy individuals.  They empower pre-vetted organizations to access a wide and diverse base of primarily individual contributors and volunteers.

These online giving markets are also part of an emergent phenomenon throughout the world where home-grown but similarly modeled organizations like GiveIndia, Brazil Social Stock Exchange, Greater Good South Africa, HelpArgentina and many more have quickly become important actors in their respective philanthropic ecosystems.  Just like Kiva and DonorsChoose, these organizations are harnessing new technologies and adapting business concepts to change the face of philanthropy and increase levels of civic participation throughout the developing world.  Each country brings a different history, political system, operating context, tax code, legal system, and most importantly a unique philanthropic culture.  Whether or not these online giving markets become as important in the 21st century as community foundations were in the 20th century remains uncertain, but their impact is growing and must be better understood."
(http://www.ssireview.org/opinion/entry/the_future_of_philanthropy_giving_20/)



=Examples=

"DonorsChoose.org has been referred to in the New York Times as “the Wikipedia of hope.” GlobalGiving has been called “The Charity Long Tail.” Fortune Magazine went so boldly as to title its feature article on Kiva.org, “The only nonprofit that matters.” 

Modestneeds.org hosts an online community where needy individuals can make their case to individual donors directly to help pay for overdue bills and mortgage payments. Greennote.com offers a platform where students can solicit family and friends for college loans.

Examples of Online Giving Markets (OGM) include:

    * BetterPlace.org
    * Brazil Social Stock Exchange
    * Conexión Colombia
    * DonorsChoose.org
    * eBay Giving Works
    * GiveIndia
    * Give Meaning
    * GlobalGiving
    * Greater Good South Africa
    * HelpArgentina
    * Kiva.org
    * MissionFish
    * Modest Needs

(links at http://www.ssireview.org/opinion/entry/the_future_of_philanthropy_giving_20/)

=More Information=

#[http://www.keystoneaccountability.org/files/Keystone_Online%20Philanthropy%20Markets.pdf Online Philanthropy Markets: from ‘Feel-Good’ Giving to Effective Social Investing?]
#More on [[Online Giving]]


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Relational]]