=More Information=

See the page on [http://distributedresearch.net/wiki/index.php/Wiki_facilitation Wiki Facilitation] at DAR.

The onlinefacilitation listserv is for discussion about the skills, techniques and issues around online facilitation in a variety of Internet online environments and virtual communities.


URL = http://groups.yahoo.com/group/onlinefacilitation/


==Links==

Compiled by DAR at
http://distributedresearch.net/wiki/index.php/Online_Facilitation_Links

* '''The Art of focussed Conversation'''
http://ica-associates.ca/Resources/Articles/AFC.cfm
Part of the Canadian Institute of Cultural Affairs website which contains many resources about participatory decision making and a toolkit called "Technology of Participation" or ToP.

ToP is a collection of robust and easily learned facilitation tools.
You can read about more of them in a book by Laura Spencer, Winning
through participation (Dubuque: Kendall/Hunt).A  

* The '''email listowners' FAQ'''
http://listownersfaq.emaillist-managers.com/

*An online resource on online facilitation in general (not education only)
is '''Nancy White's site'''. She has an amazing wealth of experience and runs
great courses in online facilitation and all her articles are online under
a creative commons license.

http://www.fullcirc.com/
http://www.fullcirc.com/resources.htm

*There's also '''Gilly Salmon's work''' and she has a website (and
online course) too.
http://www.atimod.com/
http://www.atimod.com/research/publications.shtml
http://www.atimod.com/e-moderating/intro.shtml
http://www.atimod.com/e-tivities/intro.shtml

*'''Concord''' the work of '''Sarah Haavind''' and colleagues
at the Concord group.
http://www.concord.org/
http://www.concord.org/resources/browse/
http://www.concord.org/courses/metacourses.html

*'''emoderators''' The work of Zane Berge and Mauri Collins
http://www.emoderators.com/

*'''TextWeaver''' is an open source discussion forum package designed for online education. The [http://www.textweaver.org/ textWeaver]  website includes a discussion of [http://www.textweaver.org/facilitation.htm facilitation] plus further reading.

*'''IAF Methods Database'''
http://www.iaf-methods.org/

*'''Bang the Table''' is a facilitated space for public policy discussion
http://www.bangthetable.com/


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]