
'''* Article: Click for work: Rethinking work through online work distribution platforms. By Ilana Gershon and Melissa Cefkin. Ephemera, volume 20(4), 2020 . Special issue: Work, reconfigured'''

URL = http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/click-work-rethinking-work-through-online-work-distribution-platforms

also called: '''Open call work distribution platforms'''


=abstract=

"Online work distribution platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk or Uber alter how work tasks are chosen or assigned. Put succinctly, instead of the employer choosing the employee, the worker chooses the task. Responses to these new technological possibilities for distributing tasks are all deeply influenced by the contemporary historical moment, which privileges approaches to workers that take them to be neoliberal market actors. In this article, we examine how these platforms interact with current ideas about work and contemporary configurations of work by altering the ways work is accomplished both within and outside of an organization through open calls. In particular, we focus on the challenges these platforms bring to the problems of coordination ever-present in any project of designing the work, disseminating the work, and controlling the work process."


=Excerpts=

From the introduction:

By Ilana Gershon and Melissa Cefkin

"Work distribution platforms such as Uber or Amazon Mechanical Turk change how work is distributed, and thus encourage people to examine anew how work is defined and allocated. These platforms allow work to be distributed by ‘open-calls’ rather than by assignment or pre-defined job role requirements and commonly involve crowdwork and open source principles. They provide structures that significantly alter how work is organized, significantly enough to require that users re-examine what forms of social organization can and should accompany work. Many view these platforms as harnessing new imaginaries of collaborative engagement. They allow participants to operate as if they do not have to subject themselves to a job position whose commitments and activities they may not wish to perform. That is, they offer a neoliberal take on an age-old question at the heart of work and organization studies: why would workers agree to subordinate themselves to others (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007; Burawoy, 1979; Weeks, 2011)? These platforms offer workers the chance to imagine themselves as autonomous entrepreneurial selves and thus reply to Boltanski and Chiapello’s question: ‘I don’t have to’.

Inspired by observations of several work platforms, we offer this thought piece to suggest how online work platforms operate in contexts where neoliberal logics prevail. What happens to work that is performed through these mechanisms? While there is great diversity in platform structures, in this article we provide a conceptual framework for seeing the broad commonalities underlying how these platforms transform what work can and should be. These platforms do not merely extend existing work processes through piece work, but rather indicate changes at the level of how tasks are classified, made distinct, and performed. 

In what follows, we first problematize work distribution platforms as exposing a contradiction at the heart of neoliberalism – that between the entrepreneurial self and the structure of the firm. We then provide a framework for seeing the commonalities that underlie these platforms. This framework is motivated by crowdwork and open-work experiments and efforts that took place wholly inside the confines of a large corporation, belaying the expectations that these platforms are exclusively geared towards externalizing labor. Drawing on observations of these experiments, we explore three ways in which the work may be being reshaped through use of these mechanisms: (1) the design of work, (2) the dissemination of and access to work, and (3) the control, management and authority over work. While online work distribution platforms in general change the organization of work, these work practices are informed, as we discuss in conclusion, by participants’ own neoliberal perspective on work which projects a tension between autonomy and firm efficiencies.


By enabling participants to imagine themselves as entrepreneurial selves, work distribution platforms create a peculiarly neoliberal contradiction between the entrepreneurial self, as described by Michel Foucault (2004), and the benefits of the firm, as imagined by an early ordinal economist, Ronald Coase (1937), who influenced many neoliberal scholars.[1] Accepting the general neoliberal assumption that markets are the ideal form of social order, Coase (1937) asked: why have firms in the first place, since corporations do not operate internally according to market principles? He concluded that firms can lower transaction costs through the managerial organization of production, making firms more of an economically preferred route than the market for certain purposes (see also Benkler, 2002). In short, there is a tension between the strong appeal in not having a boss and the efficiencies of the firm. Our argument is that this tension, which accompanies online work distribution platforms, becomes visible when analyzing how these platforms re-organize work – the way work is designed, the ways in which it is distributed, and the ways in which it is controlled. 

While open call work distribution is not a new phenomenon (for historical examples, see Nelson, 1990; Scholliers and Schwarz, 2003), these online platforms further validate Yochai Benkler’s prescient insight that the digital has the potential to transform the firm/market distinctions Coase defined (Benkler, 2002; Coase, 1937). How is it that work distribution platforms accomplish this transformation? The appeal of work distribution platforms is grounded in currently dominant neoliberal sensibilities that encourage workers to view themselves as businesses in their own right, and thus makes subordination less desirable (Foucault 2004; Rose 1998). While these platforms align themselves well with contemporary ideological shifts in concepts of work, they also undercut many of the solutions that firms historically provided to the practical dilemmas of working with others. As we show, these platforms encapsulate a contradiction that is internal to neoliberalism, counterpoising the ideal of autonomy with Coase’s re-affirmation of the firms’ purpose. Thus these systems force people to revisit questions of coordination, cooperation, and collaboration present whenever working with others. 

Since the turn of the century, online work platforms have proliferated, enabling people to tender tasks of tremendously varied scope. Work distribution platforms allow both work requesters and work seekers to opt in to soliciting and selecting work assignments. Work assignments are made available broadly, rather than being assigned due to an organizational position. They use a range of market mechanisms as contractual forms, from fixed price bids to auctions to contests, and may include traditional hourly or salaried pay or outcome-based work (pay for results). This definition encompasses a broad range of open-call systems – we focus on those which rely on internet-based mechanisms to function. Depending on the platform, participants respond by claiming tasks, applying to be selected to perform work, or submitting results to a simple request or a contest. Some systems – such as Mechanical Turk or Topcoder – only support digital work. But not all the work performed is digital work. For instance, through Task Rabbitpeople can find others nearby to perform chores – helping cook for a party, or assembling furniture. Participatory systems common to citizen science efforts enable volunteers to use telescopes or other instruments to gather data on the skies, waters, or soil. In some systems the work is performed as a crowd, involving degrees of coordinated action. In others, any given effort can be performed singularly. Nonetheless, even when offline work occurs, the work distribution, contracting, and communication about tasks takes place online. They promise workers the freedom to work when, where, and on what they like.

These platforms vary widely in the nature of the task being distributed (Doan et al., 2011). Online marketplaces such as Upwork or Freelancer.com act as intermediaries to match work projects requiring certain skills with specific producers, such as getting legal work performed or software code written. Mechanical Turk is known for its decomponentization of work into tiny bits, or microtasks such as translating ten words. Microtasks can be disseminated, claimed, and performed by people worldwide within minutes. At the other end of the spectrum, InnoCentive and Kaggle provide platforms through which other enterprises seek to solve large, complex challenges by soliciting submissions to contests. Even crowdfunding plays into these dynamics. People can identify work they would like to see undertaken, such as producing an artwork, and at the same time solicit investment in the form of others’ time and money to get it done.

Work distribution platforms change how the workplace functions as a forum for facilitating connective action. Platform driven work acts to transcend and even displace forms of workplace sociality – forms that affect workers’ experiences both positively and negatively – engendered by organizations. Participation in intra-organizational crowd and open work initiatives has prompted participants to reflect on their identity at work (Cefkin et al., 2014). It also puts into relief for workers the relative degree of commonality or distance from their fellow workers.

These platforms do not inherently undermine firms’ boundaries, and can be used internally among full time employees. Open call work distribution is not synonymous with freelancing per se.[2] The cases that are used to illustrate our points here (and are described further below) are drawn from efforts inside of IBM. Yet while firm boundaries are in place, these platforms potentially undermine some of the benefits of firms by introducing market mechanisms for distributing the work."


==Firm control, platform control and the nature of work tasks==

By Ilana Gershon and Melissa Cefkin:

"Underlying these changes are questions of subordination and equity. Open call platforms presumably remove certain hierarchical relationships – the supervisor no longer assigns jobs, instead workers select for themselves the tasks they want to do. They may even make requests of others to do work for them. Champions of these platforms view this as providing more autonomy to workers (for a critique see e.g. Kingsley et al 2015; Rosenblat and Stark, 2016) and allowing workers to enter into more equitable relationships with each other. In this perspective, a temporally bound contract stands in for equity (Kittur et al., 2013; Malone, 2004). That workers are continuously choosing the work they do, and may even in turn ‘outsource’ tasks to others, is seen as evidence that they are working as equals among individuals who also can select tasks and structure their time on their own terms. 

Neither the temporary contract, however short, nor the technological infrastructure supporting open calls, in themselves are harbingers of autonomy or equity. Instead, freedom or equity arises from the beliefs and often routinized practices shaping the use of technologies and the implementation of contracts. A platform’s structure is too underdetermined to produce freedom or equity on its own, and thus this prevalent interpretation of why some ways of distributing tasks are improvements is linked to widespread neoliberal views that corporations must change how they have functioned previously (Gillespie, 2010). 

When people use open call platforms, they often do so while surrounded by neoliberal approaches to work. Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello argue that a ‘market type of control’ emerges as firms increasingly attempt to create market conditions both within the context of the firm, and through various techniques for outsourcing work (2006: 82). Rather than using hierarchical relationships to discipline workers, companies turn to market competition as an effective motivating external force. They write: ‘Creating competition has replaced control of work by the directors of these units, who in return can rely on customer demand to exercise control that seems to issue no longer from them, but from the market’ (ibid.: 82). Open call platforms are prone to use markets to replace workplace hierarchies – relocating hierarchical processes into the technology (Irani, 2015). In some platforms, such as 99Designs and Topcoder, competition determines who will get paid for the tasks that they do, and, in general, disciplines workers into performing in prescribed ways.

Open call platforms both resonate with strands of neoliberal beliefs about autonomy and work, and strengthen the intrusion of market-based interactions into firm transactions (see also Sundararajan, 2016). A long-standing distinction between firm and markets among economists was most notably addressed by Ronald Coase in the early years of the neoliberal thought collective (Mirowski and Plehwe, 2009). Coase explores what value firms offer over and above market transactions, asking what functions firms serve. He famously argued that firms exist because they lower transaction costs, in part by supplying workers with opportunities to build long-term relationships within a workplace, and experience solving sporadically occurring problems. Firms contain routines, infrastructure, and historical knowledge that make them desirable, especially if the alternative is economic activity organized solely through market transactions. Open call work distribution has the potential to undercut benefits firms traditionally offer by re-configuring how knowledge and resources circulate within firms. It often introduces more fleeting market transactions into what were previously relatively stable forms of production organized through managerial structures.


Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss (1999) prefigured many of the shifts that these platforms potentially engender when discussing how work evolves under capitalism:

''- At the extreme, if corporate management chooses to break work down into component tasks and remove it from the biography, job, or career of any particular individual, then it must be fully describable and in some sense rationalized. …The kinds of work especially affected include tacit and contextual knowledge, the expertise acquired by old hands, and long-term teamwork. (1999: 11)''


They argued that these transformations risked re-inscribing social inequalities into work practices, largely by valuing some tasks and rendering others categorically invisible or putatively inconsequential.

Each work platform has a structure that might coincide with dominant approaches to determining what work is valuable, although not all platforms reinforce the same ideologies. 


For example, Irani has argued that since the microtasks of Amazon Mechanical Turk are so often designed to be as simple as possible, the platform becomes an infrastructure that produces:

''- the difference between ‘innovators’ and ‘menial’ symbolic workers. Programmers who manage thousands remain flexible tinkerers with few accountabilities. (Irani, 2015: 232)''


Amazon Mechanical Turk functions to support emergent views of appropriate divisions of work in the knowledge economy in which innovation is linked to charisma and persuasion, and routine tasks are depreciated. Yet other platforms might structure how the tasks are organized so that the worker is chosen precisely because of their ability to perform complex and innovative work."



==Reorganizing control, management, and authority==

By Ilana Gershon and Melissa Cefkin:

"Open call work platforms potentially enable a wider range of participants to engage in tasks than traditional forms of hierarchical control allow. These platforms also engage a diverse range of contractual terms. In doing so, they change how work is controlled and managed.

In many ways, work requesters maintain strong control over what the work is and how it is performed. This is supported by a number of mechanisms designed into the systems. The platforms may enable specifying a given set of highly detailed procedures that workers must, in turn, ensure were followed. The smaller the task, in many cases, the more specified and constrained the means of performing the task. They may even include built-in tracking systems for monitoring time-on-tasks, as UpWork does. Indeed, comments in the discussion forums that commonly accompany any of these platforms have historically referred to its big-brotherly presence. Another means of retaining control is by determining the terms by which final results are accepted. One risk to workers in contest and micro-task work sites is that people will perform work, but their work is rejected. There may be little or no explanation as to why nor a means of disputing these decisions (Irani and Silberman, 2013). Other systems, such as the technical crowd-work platform Cefkin and her colleagues (2014) studied, are designed to encourage clear acceptance and rejection policies and provide processes for appeal. While potentially increasing fairness, these elements also significantly increased the effort required of work requesters to manage work through the system. They demand that requesters specify all potential aspects of the work that could affect acceptance (‘whoops, I failed to indicate that the egg needed to be removed from the carton before scrambling…’) and the criteria for evaluation, exceeding the taken-for-granted understanding workers develop in person. 

These risks are not absent in work outside these systems. It is not uncommon offline to have a breach of contract, to have to chase clients for payment, or to face never getting a sufficient explanation as to why work was rejected. Indeed the often short duration and/or limited scope of work common to many work distribution platforms may be felt by participants as a means to mitigate the risks of agreeing to any one job by spreading out opportunities. This ability to select and assemble a range of opportunities is considered one of the upsides to these systems. Workers claim a sense of control over how their work is evaluated by avoiding excessive lock into any specific client.

Workers regain authority, further, to select their own work. This may be of particular significance within organizations, with threats to managerial regimes of authority being one of the potentially more profound consequences of intra-organizational work platforms. Management is largely a system for commanding resources, including employees’ time and efforts. Having systems that invite employees to choose freely what work they want to spend time on risks up ending that regime. Questions of authority and control emerge even in the seemingly simple question of whether and how a work distribution platform should involve managers in the work of their staff in the system. In what way should a manager participate in their staff members’ time and selections? This was a question Cefkin and her colleagues (2014) faced in helping design the work marketplace for change management professionals. Should a manager be asked to give explicit approval per work task, and if so, should the system be designed not to move a bid forward without manager approval? Should a manager be notified of their employee’s participation, but lack a means to voice support or disapproval of the employee’s effort within the system? Or should a manager not be notified at all?[11]

Reputation mechanisms are one of the most direct forms of control built into these platforms. Reputation mechanisms are used to identify participants, and to measure their activity. A large number of reputation mechanisms are used across the platforms, from subjective evaluations of approval, such as the styles of ratings or ‘liking’ on sites such as Yelp, to measured participation rates. For workers, these ratings can signal the number of tasks applied to, selected for, completed, on-time work, and so on. Echoing what Cefkin found to be true in the crowd-work system for technical work, Martin et al. argue that reputation mechanisms often create hidden work for those completing tasks on Amazon Mechanical Turk:

Reputation management tactics are often defensive and the Turker shoulders the potential cost of the practice. These practices include ensuring they can do the work before accepting it, specialising in known tasks for specific requesters, getting training on tasks from coworkers, ensuring the completion code would load and so on. (2014: 10)

Currently, in Mechanical Turk workers bear the brunt of negotiating that reputation mechanisms work smoothly. This is not, however, a necessary feature of these platforms. On a number of platforms, it is possible for work requesters also to be rated based on their responsiveness, effectiveness in specifying work, and so on.[12]

Reputation mechanisms are the most blatant of several ways in which work distribution platforms use market demand and competition to discipline workers (Rosenblat and Stark, 2016). As other scholars have pointed out, workers are still being controlled and disciplined, but because this occurs through technological platforms that re-allocate and often obfuscate where the source of control might be located, workers have trouble determining who is responsible for what, and thus need to develop strategies when they want to change the working conditions or payment system enabled by these platforms (Crawford, 2016; Irani 2015; Irani and Silberman 2013). The autonomy these platforms seem to promise becomes elusive in the process. These shifts in how work is controlled and how it is harnessed through the shape and design of the work distribution systems raise concern for fairness, and can re-center debate on the relationship of workers to their work."



==In conclusion==

By Ilana Gershon and Melissa Cefkin:

"Open call work distribution platforms have entered the scene at a moment in which neoliberal logics dominate how many people understand ideal work relationships. The developers thus often promise that these platforms will encourage work relationships based on the imagined autonomy and equity that one supposedly has when the employment contract is viewed as a business-to-business contract. Some platforms such as Uber or Lyft notably make this central to their legal defense when workers sue them for misclassification. They have argued that they are not a firm providing transportation services, but rather a technology company enabling small business-owners, their drivers, to connect to customers (Tomasetti, 2016). These neoliberal takes on autonomy and equity are not inherent to the platforms, rather, these platforms are underdetermined enough that many different practices around distributing work exist. Yet these possibilities are all too often limited by organizational infrastructures already in place, and widespread neoliberal understandings of how collaboration and work distribution should occur. This results in a tension between the promise of workers’ autonomy and the efficiencies that a firm promises. This tension then shapes how these platforms are integrated into established work processes, influenced by users and companies’ beliefs, organizational routines, and material infrastructures surrounding appropriate work relationships.

This neoliberal framing can obfuscate the multiple ways in which these platforms re-organize work both within and outside of firms. In particular, these new platforms lead users to return to age-old questions about authority, control, and the nature of tasks. As these platforms re-shape the social organization of work, they bring the market into the firm in ways that undercut what neoliberal theorists themselves understand to be the benefits of managerial controlled production. This creates social dilemmas for participants that must be resolved – dilemmas such as: how should one best segment or re-combine a set of tasks, or how does one evaluate the work or the worker? Many of the solutions that have emerged to address these dilemmas end up re-inscribing older problems that people have had with work, although in slightly newer packages (Suchman and Bishop, 2000). We specifically explored how discipline, surveillance, and competition still shape how workers are controlled in these systems, albeit now enabled through marketplace interactions that frame competition as a means to discipline and define workers, rather than through internal firm dynamics such as organizational hierarchies.

As new ways of distributing work become possible, people have to develop new skills for coordinating with strangers, and new techniques for circulating information and arranging tasks to accommodate a greater fluidity in who participates in work projects. This often involves erasing the benefits that Coase (1937) argued firms offered. As getting work done shifts away from a work contract that revolves around command and obedience, people will still have to address the problems of coordination ever-present in any project of planning the work, disseminating the work, and controlling the work process. Since this is a fundamentally social task, when the principle conceptual resources people have for thinking about these processes are variants of a neoliberal logic, the solutions developed often encourage a belief that all engaged in this work process should be treated as businesses in their own right."

[[Category:Labor]]