
=Discussion=

Zack Walsh:

"A growing number of scholars such as William
Connolly, Sergei Prozorov, Bruno Latour, Marisol de la Cadena, and Mario
Blaser see ontological conflicts as the deeper source of many political conflicts.
Alexandros Kioupkiolis, a political scientist from Aristotle University, noted
that attempts at political reform within the current paradigm are largely
meaningless, because the paradigm itself is what drives today’s social and
ecological crises. It is really important therefore to discuss ontological issues
to get at the root of contemporary political problems. In such discussions,
however, it is difficult to determine which ontology (if any) offers a more
accurate description of the world. Conversation can become challenging as
you try to reconcile different ontologies, so it is important to consider how we
speak about ontology. In Sustaining Affirmation (2000), Stephen White explores
how a “weak” ontology can affirm political commitments without recourse
to traditional or dogmatic foundations of thought. Process-relational thinkers
defend such a style characterized by openness, self-restraint, and humility, but
Alexandros admits, it is not universal—it emerges out of a particular Western,
liberal context— so it does not fully resolve the paradox of how to reconcile
mutually exclusive ontologies.

A core question is how to facilitate the highest level of collective intelligence
with groups whose members have different core beliefs, languages, and cultural
values. Ferananda Ibarra, co-director of the Commons Engine, shared how
using “prime language” helps us remain open to a variety of conflicting,
ontological standpoints. To practice prime language, you eliminate the verb “to
be.” This allows you to speak from your experience without invalidating other
possible experiences. We need to be mindful not to discuss theories of existence
as if they represent the only truth. Lieselotte Viaene, an anthropologist at
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, said the verb “to be” in fact does not exist
among the indigenous peoples she’s been working with.

Another requirement of healthy dialogue is to address personality features
that can strongly affect the quality of collective interaction. In the course of
the conversation it became clear that enabling dialogue across ontological
differences may pose particular demands to the process design and facilitation.
For example it may be extremely difficult to facilitate conversation among
strangers who feel vulnerable sharing deeply held beliefs. Also, there are people
who are more or less assertive, emotionally sensitive or expressive, introverted or
extroverted. Community agreements and rules of good conduct are needed to
facilitate democratic and mutually respectful interaction. During the workshop,
as inter-personal conflicts emerged, Brooke Lavelle, president of the Courage
of Care Coalition, and Lucien Demaris, co-director of Relational Uprising,
expertly facilitated a session to heal inter-personal conflicts, using several of the
contemplative and somatic based practices they have developed."
(https://cdn6.commonsstrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Zack-Walsh_Ontology-as-a-Hidden-Driver-of-Politics_def2.pdf?)

[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]