
'''= "a free, easy to use service, where you can receive and store your Open Badges safely and share them with whomever you like and wherever you like".'''

URL = https://openbadgepassport.com/


=Description=

"In the 21st Century, we learn and achieve new things not only at school but also at work, through hobbies, volunteering and many other activities across our lives. How can we recognize and acknowledge this valuable informal learning and carry it forward?

With the help of Open Badges!

Open Badges are based on a digital standard created by the Mozilla Foundation to recognize learning, know-how, achievements, skills and attitudes. Although this phenomenon is still new, millions of badges have already been issued around the world. Soon you’ll start seeing more and more opportunities to earn badges through education, volunteering and in the workplace.

Open Badges are highly valuable for learners but also for organizations. They can use them to set goals, build learning paths or to engage students or employees.

“Team Worker”, “Social Media Expert”, “Fair Coach”, “Diligent Summer Worker”, “Student Tutor”, “Association Chair”…there are countless uses for Open Badges! You might not be able to use them right away, but you can create a free account and save your Open Badges into an Open Badge Passport. Then in the future, you’ll be able to use them when you apply for jobs or formal education programs.

With Open Badge Passport you can easily receive, save and organize your Open Badges.and share them on social media such as LinkedIn, Twitter and Facebook. You can even create a CV around them. Take pride in your achievements and build a versatile and interesting gallery of your skills and know-how with Open Badge Passport!"
(https://openbadgepassport.com/en/about)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]