=More information=

* '''Article: [[Can Communities Produce Complex Technology]]? Looking Into Space for Insight. By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 41(2-3) . DOI: 10.1177/02704676211041900'''

URL = https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900


“This article examines a community producing complex space technology. We attempt to highlight which aspects of the  community’s activities can help democratize high-tech development while providing a context for similar cases involved  in developing and manufacturing nonhigh-technological artefacts. We discuss how this has been made possible by using a  technology-determined organizational approach based on the CubeSat open platform infrastructure, blending formal and  hands-on education, open communication, specific recruitment and working practices, and a genuine passion for technology.  We identify as critical enablers for community-based collaborative development of space technology the open-source  architecture standard called CubeSat Design Specifications, the modularization of work in subsystems and between different  organizations, and the open and participatory approach work tasks distribution and decision making. Moreover, we argue that  the digital/informational aspect of this technology allows the community to implement organizational practices that resemble  how open-source movements over the internet produce complex digital artefacts like Wikipedia or Linux. ESTCube can  shed light on community-driven complex technology development, providing lessons on what a democratized version of  high technology would resemble and how open and digitalized technology can help develop the capacities of a community.”


=Excerpt=

==[[CubeSat]]==

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

“A CubeSat is a one unit (1U) 10-centimetre side cube-shaped  satellite. By combining the volume of two or more 1U  CubeSats, the size of the CubeSat can be arithmetically  increased (2U, 3U, nU). CubeSats are based on an open 
source architecture standard known as '''the CubeSat Design  Specification''' (CDS; Mehrparvar et al., 2014; Swartwout,  2013; Toorian et al., 2008). CubeSats carry payloads—tech nological artefacts intended to be tested/demonstrated with  the mission, like a camera or a propulsion system.

A CubeSat is like “a box” with two distinctive features.  First, it ticks all the formal requirements to be loaded in a  rocket launcher and safely deployed into orbit. Second, it is  designed to operate in the extreme conditions of outer space,  protecting its content. Besides the protective shield of the  “space box” container, and its contained artefacts (payloads),  a CubeSat needs to perform other functions to be operative.  These operative functions (e.g., navigation, communication)  are organized in different subsystems (e.g., attitude determination and control system, communications system) based  on specific hardware (e.g., gyroscopic sensors, microstrip  antenna; Ehrpais et al., 2016; Slavinskis et al., 2016). 

As a means to safely launch the payloads that constitute  the CubeSat mission objective (test/demonstrate technology  artefacts), CDS provides a frugal platform for prototyping  space technology. Its construction, development, and launching costs are relatively low, with shorter technology development periods (Selva & Krejci, 2012; Woellert et al., 2011).  CDS is open to everyone, and it has been very beneficial to  startups, universities, developing states, and communities  (Woellert et al., 2011). In the next section, we are going to  examine what makes technology complex, and how technology complexity can be conceptualized.” 

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)


==[[ESTCube Program]]==

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

“The Estonian Student Satellite Program (ESTCube Program) is a  locally adapted version of the CubeSat Program. Through this  program, a workforce of volunteers is recruited to work on  ESTCube CubeSats (Noorma et al., 2013; Slavinskis, Reinkubjas,  et al., 2015). Tartu Observatory (TO) and the University of Tartu  (UT) have been the main hosts of the program. Since 2018, the  former is an institute within the latter. They provide working  space, labs, and testing facilities (Iakubivskyi et al., 2020).  Several ESTCube members have become department leaders,  researchers, and engineers in these host institutions. 

Typically, college-level students join the ESTCube  Program, but the recruitment process starts earlier. To inform  about space science and their work, ESTCube members  organize and take part in several activities: workshops, presentations, and science outreach events. During summers,  there are special activities to train high-school students. The  Summer Academy brings together high school and university students to TO (Janson, 2018). There, students can participate in ESTCube activities through the Science Camp  
(Teaduslaager) and the Science Task Force (Teadusmalev). The ESTCube Program provides hands-on education for  students, complementing their formal education. Students  work on goal-oriented tasks related to some aspect of the  CubeSat. Responsibilities, the difficulty level of the work  tasks, and other features are decided on aptitudes, capacities,  experience, and disponibility of the students. Team leaders  supervise and coordinate students, but students are expected  to work independently on their work tasks. Recruitees often  write their theses (BSc, MSc, or PhD) on some aspect of the  CubeSat. The first satellite produced by ESTCube, called  ESTCube-1, has resulted in over 30 BSc, 20 MSc, and 2 PhD  defended theses (Slavinskis, Reinkubjas, et al., 2015). ESTCube members are also involved in other peripheral  activities, often as amateurs. Passion for science and technology is their core intrinsic motivation, along with meeting  like-minded people. Their areas of interest include radio  communication, robotics, science Olympiads, hackathons,  programming, game development, or desktop fabrication.  For example, an ESTCube member has created an online  database on nanosatellites (nanosats.eu). This database was  originally supported by an EU grant, but since 2014 it is regularly updated every 2 or 3 months. 

During the development of their ESTCube-1 (2008- 2013), the ESTCube community did not formalize the initiative into any legal form. ESTCube members were tied by  shared values, having a common goal: to produce and launch  a CubeSat, making Estonia a space nation (Noorma et al.,  2013). They envision space exploration as an activity that  should benefit humanity as a whole. Membership is open for  everyone who shares their vision and their values and is will ing to contribute to the project with inclusive community  development prioritized over efficiency. 

Community building on shared values is crucial for  ESTCube community persistence through the long CubeSat  development periods. The principal stress factor came from  working with an accelerated schedule after accepting an earlier-than-expected launch opportunity from Arianespace  (Slavinskis, Pajusalu, et al., 2015). The iterative prototyping  of satellites is only possible through successive prototypes  and models of the flight-ready satellite. Once a CubeSat is in  orbit, there is no possibility to bring it down to Earth for  hardware improvements or reparations. Simulations (digital  models) and physical tests in testing facilities (e.g., testing  functions, systems integration tests, and environmental tests)  are performed to test the technology. ESTCube members  report strong life-long bonds with other team members,  developed through years of close collaboration—especially  during the latest stages of development of ESTCube-1.

In the case of ESTCube, researchers, engineers, and space  enthusiasts were the instigators. ESTCube is “a combination  of various initiatives—education, science, technology, as  well as student and volunteer organizations” (Kalnina et al.,  2018, p. 2). The ESTCube community does not own fixed  assets or property: the host organizations provide working  space and lab access. 

To this day, ESTCube does not have one principal source  of funding. Several outlets are used to finance the costs of  manufacturing technology for the CubeSats, the launching  costs, and to financially support its members. The European  Commission, The European Space Agency (ESA), and  Estonian grants and scholarships (Lätt et al., 2014), a crowd 
funding campaign (Kalnina et al., 2018), donors, or sponsor ships, are some of the funding sources that ESTCube has  been tapping through the years. 
The complexity of ESTCube’s organizational model  gradually expanded. Having an international network of  partners, over 200 students divided into a larger number of  working tasks, involvement in international regulatory bod ies, partnering with ESA, among other areas of activity,  become an administrative burden. The organization could  not operate much longer without a formal legal structure. At the beginning of 2017, 32 new and old members of ESTCube  founded the Estonian Student Satellite Foundation. The initial objective of ESTCube was to build one  CubeSat and launch it into orbit. The mission was accomplished in 2013, when ESTCube-1 was launched into Earth's  orbit. The initiative was refounded after launching  ESTCube-1. The transition period from ESTCube senior  leaders to the new generation leading ESTCube-2 satellite  took approximately 2 years. Currently, the second CubeSat  (ESTCube-2) is in an advanced development phase under the  guidance of the Estonian Student Satellite Foundation. ESTCube-1 provided Estonia with the space technology  proficiency needed to attain permanent membership status in  the ESA. The status of Estonia as a member in ESA brought  new opportunities for ESTCube and its host organizations to  expand their involvement in new activities, both locally and  internationally. The same year that Estonia joined ESA,  ESTCube-1 micro-camera was selected to be a payload of  the European Student Earth Orbiter satellite (the third mission within ESA's Education Satellite Program; Noorma,  2016). Also, in 2019 Estonia was invited to participate in  ESA's “Comet Interceptor” mission. ESTCube also influences some decisions of its hosting institutions. Acquisition  of lab testing machinery, rearrangement of departments and  academic curricula, selection of grants and project proposals  take into consideration the ESTCube needs and outcomes. Producing knowledge and technology in-house is one of  the priorities of ESTCube and its hosting organizations.  However, procuring the machinery to manufacture space  technology was never an option. Instead, a network of exter nal partners is used to produce components designed and  developed by ESTCube members."

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)


=Discussion=

==[[Technology-Determined Organizational  Structure]] ==

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

CubeSat technology greatly determines the organization of  work. ESTCube-1 consisted of seven subsystems and two  ground support systems (Table 1). The communication and  
interrelations between subsystems must be well-defined and  effectively executed. Each subsystem has a team leader who  coordinates the work tasks inside the subsystem team. Also,  team leaders coordinate tasks among themselves. All subsys tem teams engage in discussing the main choices from the  early stages of design. All issues are open for discussion, and  all members are involved in making crucial decisions, like  choosing a launch provider (Slavinskis, Pajusalu, et al.,  2015). Team leaders use transversal groups created on the  spot to deal with newfound coordination needs. In areas of  limited impact or requiring specific expertise, the discussion  and decision making are entrusted to task-force groups.  Students are usually involved in developing more than one  subsystem to gain practical multidisciplinary collaborative  working skills. 

ESTCube outreach efforts resulted in more than 15 aca demic journal articles (and several conference papers and  posters) documenting the technology, the design, the results,  and the know-how of the project. Payloads and subsystems  and thoroughly described from functions to hardware, and  from technical specifications to the justification of design  choices. These academic publications appeared mostly dur ing condensed periods—especially right after the development of ESTCube-1, and we could split them into two areas.  First, publications connected with the CubeSat technology  (design and flight results), including areas like the main pay loads (Iakubivskyi et al., 2020; Lätt et al., 2014); the electri cal power system (Pajusalu et al., 2014); or the command  and data handling subsystem (CDHS) and its firmware  (Laizans et al., 2014; Sünter et al., 2016). Second, publica tions dealing with the project and the community (know how), including a compilation of lessons learnt (Slavinskis,  Pajusalu, et al., 2015); the working processes and the funding (Kalnina et al., 2018); and the management of the com munity (Noorma et al., 2013; Slavinskis, Reinkubjas, et al.,  2015). We can say that, in the case of ESTCube, technology  determines their organizational model, and their academic  outcomes reflect the impact of technology determinations  over how they organize themselves. These academic  
publications follow the same modular structures (payloads,  subsystems) of the CubeSat. 

ESTCube uses a network of partners to develop and man ufacture CubeSat’s technology. Often, companies agree to  provide services or discounts to support ESTCube. During  the development of ESTCube-1, the preference was to use  customized components off-the-shelf (Slavinskis, Pajusalu,  et al., 2015). However, not all components are available in  Estonia, and in some cases, they were shipped from the  United Kingdom, Germany, or the United States. Hardware  components are provided with different—primarily closed— 
licenses. Students usually utilize proprietary software pro vided by the universities to students and academic staff. This  tendency is shifting as the advantages of working with open source software become more evident to ESTCube  members. 

The ESTCube-1 CubeSat incorporated open-source soft ware. The mission control system of ESTCube-1 used open source software “Hummingbird” codeveloped with an  Estonian company (ESTCube, 2020). The open-source  “FreeRTOS” operating system was used on the satellite’s  main onboard computer (CDHS) and the camera, while the  also open-source TinyOS operating system was used on the  communication module. As part of the results and lessons  learnt from ESTCube-1 experience, the use of an operating  system that “provides most of the needed functionality, for  example, a form of embedded Linux” (Slavinskis, Pajusalu,  et al., 2015, p. 18) is recommended. 

It is, however, during the development of ESTCube-2 that  open-source software becomes widely used. The open source “tech stack” (a set of technologies used to build a  
single application) of ESTCube-2 developers consists of  nearly 20 digital technologies including languages (Python,  Go, Apache Groovy), databases (PostgreSQL, SQLite) and  satellite specific software like Skyfield (see Table 2). Besides,  the development setup (Microsoft Visual Studio Code), and  the repositories (Git) used are open source. To provide quality assurance, open-source coding standards (Python 3,  Docker, React JS) are used, data exchange standards are fol lowed when possible (XTCETM, C2MS), and compliance  with international standards is followed (European Space  Components Coordination, European Cooperation for Space  Standardization, Consultative Committee for Space Data  Systems, and others). 

During the final stages of ESTCube-1, a difficult period  marked the core design decisions for ESTCube-2. The  launcher provider offered an earlier launching date. The  ESTCube team decided to speed up the development time to  make it into the new launching date —the CDS version of  ESTCube-1 was selected to fit into Arianespace’s Vega  rocket. In the end, everything went well except for one thing:  the tether of the main payload failed to deploy on orbit, and  the principal experiment did not take place. 

As a consequence of the shortcomings detected in the  ESTCube-1 subsystems organization and the critical failure  on the principal payload, ESTCube-2 follows a unified organizational structure. It aims to maximize the use of common  components, allowing reusability and “facilitat[ing] mobility  of team members between subsystems” (Slavinskis, Pajusalu,  et al., 2015). This integrated-system approach reduces the  number of subsystems and improves the resilience and stout ness of the hardware. Building all subsystems as independent  components connected only by cables resulted in an overall  weak system structure in ESTCube-1. The ESTCube-2 orga nization of work is the same as ESTCube-1: the satellite plat form is developed in Tartu, while the payloads (one in  ESTCube-1) are developed in specific places. The main difference is that ESTCube-2 is a 3U (three-unit) CubeSat and  can carry more payloads. ESTCube-2 teams are based on dif ferent academic institutions (TO, UT Institute of Physics,  Aalto University, Dresden University of Technology,  Ventspils University of Applied Sciences and the Finnish  Meteorological Institute). Each team focuses on a single pay load. Each payload is related to the expertise of the academic  institution in which each team is based. 

This technology-determined organization of work resulted  in one more important defining trait of ESTCube: open and  efficient personal communication skills. Different subsys tems demand expertise from different scientific and technical fields. Most ESTCube members tended to use jargon and  technical terminology when communicating their work and  findings, which complicated both the coordination between  subsystem teams and the communication with external par ties. To solve this issue, ESTCube members take communication skills training and are generally encouraged to publicly  talk and write about their work (Olesk, 2019). For internal  communication, like task coordination or decision making,  ESTCube first adopted an Estonian communication platform  called Fleep (Liibert, 2017) and later moved into the open source oriented Discord platform. Using channel lists to  organize working tasks and topics, every member can find  the relevant information and documentation and take part in  the conversations at any time in the same domain. "

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)

==Conclusion==

By Lucas Lemos and Chris Giotitsas:

“A community aiming to produce  highly complex technology needs to find access to expensive  materials and costly machinery. The ESTCube strategy to  produce space technology is twofold. First, in-sourcing the  key production capacities like knowledge, know-how, and  design. Second, outsourcing manufacturing capacities  through a network of partners. Building key capacities in house is necessary to secure the community’s long-term  sustainability. 

ESTCube’s approach to producing complex technology  resembles the approach employed by open-source move ments producing complex digital artefacts, like Wikipedia or  Linux. In the latter, wide-spread access to the Internet and  the use of privately owned tools for producing digital information (computers) allow distributed networks of collaborators to coordinate their efforts. Hence, such initiatives are  producing highly complex digital systems and technology  without appropriating the material infrastructure that makes  their endeavors possible. 

Following Benkler (2006), the production of information  depends on three main inputs: already existing information;  the mechanical means to sense, process, and communicate  information; and human communicative capacity. Regarding  digital information, Benkler posits that human communicative capacity “becomes the primary scarce resource in the  networked information economy” (Benkler, 2006, p. 52),  thus the most valuable asset in information production. In the  case of ESTCube, the 6-year-long period of development of  the ESTCube-1 CubeSat is mainly a digital information process. The manufacturing of ESTCube-1 technology was the  material output of a collaborative intellectual process. It  entailed over 100 people coordinating their work tasks  through the Internet, using software programs installed on  their personal computers to produce a 10-centimetre cube 
shaped artefact. 


Using an analogy between the production of digital information and the production of technology, we can adapt  Benkler’s categories to suit the ESTCube case: 

• The CubeSat open platform (CDS) and current space  scientific knowledge would correspond to Benkler’s  first input (existing information). 
• The manufacturing capacities, like specialized  machinery, and the CubeSat’s components would  belong to the second category (mechanical means). 
• The ESTCube members' communicative capacities  and the ESTCube Program (know-how) would correspond to the third category (human communicative  capacity). 


Moreover, there are certain similarities on how open-source  movements through the Internet are democratizing knowledge, and how a grassroots initiative like ESTCube is 
approaching the production of highly digitized complex  technology. In the former, a collective consciousness was  developed to pursue the democratization of information digitally. In the latter, a similar awareness process may be taking  place through groups of space enthusiasts having access to  outer space through the CDS open technology platform. The  core concept allowing such initiatives to democratize and  reappropriate information technology is the digital/modular.  Two aspects align it to what open-sour
ce movements have  been doing to democratize information. A digital-oriented  organization of work, and the decreasing costs of technology  manufacturing in its mature phase. 
First, a CubeSat is “mostly digital.” The largest part of its  production is related to manipulating digital information.  Open-source movements produce specific practices and  organizational models well suited for peer-to-peer networks.  Likewise, a community of space enthusiasts can use similar  organizational patterns producing a CubeSat. Second, the  closer the CubeSat industry gets to its maturity phase, the  simplest and more cost-efficient the manufacturing of its  components should become. In the case of open-source  movements, the ubiquity of personal computers and afford able wide-spread access to the Internet was necessary to  reach a critical mass of participants. Outsourcing manufacturing capacities also frees ESTCube from the limitations  and financial burdens of risky fixed capital investment in the  non-standardized- yet CubeSat industry. 

It appears that, in the case of ESTCube, the appropriation  of complex technology seems to be a highly digitized pro cess that entails certain organization forms adapted from the  open-source movements to the technological demands of  CubeSats. The organizational structure of the community is  flexible and adapted around the needs of the technological  development processes. These processes are complex and  interdependent, thus they are compartmentalized in nonrigid  structures that follow the evolving needs around the project. 
Furthermore, the community uses what we identify as a  three-fold strategy to produce complex technology that helps  overcome the disadvantages of using closed tools and closed  manufacturing capacities. First, by using an open-source  platform (CDS) as the base to produce the artefact, along  with a community organizational model (CubeSat Program).  Second, by using open-source software to develop the technology. This is highly relevant as most of the software is pro \duced and transmitted to the CubeSat after it is in orbit.  Third, by producing open knowledge academic publications  documenting (a) the design of the CubeSat, payloads, and  subsystems; (b) the results of the space mission, including  the technology’s performance; (c) the know-how (lessons  
learnt, the ESTCube Program, the experience). Open communication, both internally and externally, is one  of the configuring aspects of ESTCube’s open-source  approach. It allows them to partially overcome some of the  limitations imposed by restrictive hardware and software  licenses they use. The closed-licensed hardware manufactured  
by their partners can be, up to a point, “opened” by document ing the technology design, results, and know-how. Expanding the communication skills of the members to  “open” the initiative was fundamental to connect the project  with the general public, making space science more accessi \ble. The role of technology-related hobbies and enthusiastic  amateur involvement of ESTCube members in other activi ties provided a shared sense of belonging for the community  and opportunities for recruitment, funding, promotion, and  establishing partnerships. The long term viability of the ini tiative depends on transmitting and nurturing the shared values of the community, generating tight bonds between its  members, building the resilience needed for the initiative to  not disband after long years of hard work and unpaid contributions. Wide and early recruitment events are utilized to  attract interest. Indeed, as opposed to more accessible types  of technology development, special effort is required when it  comes to sophisticated technologies for younger people and  those with specialized skill sets to be involved. In turn, wider  participation provides unique opportunities for volunteers to  develop knowledge and know-how and seek employment in  a sector that would otherwise be largely inaccessible. It becomes evident that such a model of increased participation in the development of high technology is possible. Yet  for it to be sustained and adopted more widely, significant  institutional support would be required as well as wide structural change. This illustrates how the current discussion on  how to reap the benefits of publicly funded research is not  enough to provide radical options which may build on the  insight provided by cases like ESTCube. It can point the way  toward genuine democratic participation in the development  and appropriation of such technology in society.” 

(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/02704676211041900)

[[Category:Design]]
[[Category:Estonia]]
[[Category:Articles]]