

= a project by the World Summit Movement

URL = https://openaccesseconomy.org/


=Description==

"Open access economy = Trust over trade                                            
                                                                                                              
"In its most basic form, all citizens who engage in an open access economy understand the following two fundamentals:

* That they are fully supported by their community

* That they participate in supporting their community


Clearly, one cannot happen without the other, but central to the philosophy is the movement away from explicit trade towards implicit trade, where reciprocity (or trade) is not expected uniformly, but rather within a much larger circle of mutual support.

So for example, if someone cuts your lawn, there is no expectation that you must reciprocate some equivalent task or resource with that person. Instead, the other person understands that you will reciprocate in some other way, with some other person at some other time. This works for the other person as they too enjoy the benefit of others' reciprocal behaviour at other times.

It could be even further summarised as replacing trade with trust.


The reason we use trade is to enable us to exchange goods and services with strangers. We know this because we don't tend to request exchange within close-knit groups or families. These 'micro-cooperatives' work on trust.

If, hypothetically, this level of trust existed in the greater community, it could operate on the same principle. And there are ways we can do this through re-education and awareness campaigns, social incentives, or even tracking reciprocal acts in the community."     
(https://openaccesseconomy.org/doku.php?id=open_access_economy)

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Economics]]