
URL = http://www.openwebdevice.com/

=Description=

'HTML5 is the ubiquitous platform for the web. Web developers can use the same set of technologies they know and love to build rich web applications that will also work across mobile devices. And now, it is also possible to access all native device capabilities directly in HTML5, enabling a kind of WebApps not possible so far: Native WebApps."
(http://www.openwebdevice.com/)

"The heart of the system is Mozilla’s Boot2Gecko, which has always been open and opensource. The Open Web Device is also using a Linux Kernel (the same one used by Android devices) which is also open. This is a 100% open project where, for instance, operators and OEMs can actively and openly contribute to the code, instead of Mozilla developing internally and making code drops available."
(http://www.openwebdevice.com/#myModal)


=Discussion=

==The Role of Telefonica and QualComm==

"Telefónica had the clear vision of the concept and how to move it forward in 2010. Telefonica’s R&D department prototyped the full concept and when Mozilla announced the Boot2Gecko project, both development teams started working together as one team. Currently, Mozilla is providing the web technology, and Telefónica is collaborating in integrating this technology with the underlying kernel, as well as providing the User Experience and services.

Qualcomm currently delivers the chipset for a large volume of Android based smartphones, which is the DNA of the device. By tightly integrating the Open Web Device with the chipset we will guarantee that any OEM will be able to manufacture a device with very little effort: it will be almost a plug & play procedure."
(http://www.openwebdevice.com/#myModal)



[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Standards]]