
=Discussion=

'''Ralph Horat and Jan Baeriswyl:'''

"What started with the open-source software movement has since
expanded into various areas such as open access for knowledge
& education (e.g. MOOCs), open science, open government
data, as well as open-source design which is gaining increasing
importance with the rapid developments in the space of additive
manufacturing. All these movements form around “digital information goods”, which unlike physical goods can be used by
thousands of people at the same time without subtracting any of
their value. What all these movements have in common is the
shared belief that breaking out information from today’s silos will
have a profound impact on the collective intelligence and the
creative and innovative capabilities of society as a whole.

For this to become viable on a large scale, a shift has to happen
within our economic and legal systems that support this transition: There need to be economic incentives to openly share valuable information within the digital commons. Additionally, all
data has to be secured on robust and distributed open-source
infrastructure and protected by cryptography. The technological
possibilities are present today, especially in the blockchain industry where open source platforms (e.g. Ethereum, IPFS), incentives
for data collaboration (e.g. Ocean protocol, Numerai) and privacy technologies (e.g. Zero-knowledge proofs, Homomorphic
encryption, Multi-party-computation) are being developed simultaneously. Furthermore, information needs to be organized to
be useful and actionable. An open-source version of Google’s
page rank algorithm could certainly be a starting point, but the
even greater promise lies in leveraging collective intelligence for
curating information. Given a system for managing economic
rights directly connected with information production and consumption, information curation seems like the missing piece for
a complete infrastructure, where individuals highlight relevant information for others out of the vast amounts of available data."

(https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/62dbb0618642e951d91a0032/640080c27d68f806147d703a_Whitepaper_Cosmo-localism.pdf)

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Movements]]