= The Open Web Foundation is '''an independent non-profit dedicated to the development and protection of open, non-proprietary specifications for web technologies.'''


URL = http://openwebfoundation.org [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Web_Foundation]


=Description=

"The Open Web Foundation is an attempt to create a home for community-driven specifications. Following the open source model similar to the Apache Software Foundation, the foundation is aimed at building a lightweight framework to help communities deal with the legal requirements necessary to create successful and widely adopted specification.

The foundation is trying to break the trend of creating separate foundations for each specification, coming out of the realization that we could come together and generalize our efforts. The details regarding membership, governance, sponsorship, and intellectual property rights will be posted for public review and feedback in the following weeks.

As we work out the fine details of the foundation, we invite and encourage individuals to come and join the discussion. To ask questions please visit our Q&A page. You are also invited to join the community and discuss ideas and specifications you would like to see developed within the foundation."


=Status=

July 2008:

"Facebook announced their support for the new foundation, and we have learnt that Google, MySpace, Six Apart, Plaxo and many others will also be supporting the new initiative. Google and Facebook now have an appropriate venue where they can resolve their differences and work on a standard way to have their users interact with each other between the Facebook Connect and OpenSocial platforms. The web foundation also provides the technical details, as well as policy details, on how such a relationship between companies and products could work.

Currently there is not much more at the Open Web Foundation outside of a lot of strong backing, a lot of strongly willed organizers and a lot of initiative. The foundation hopes that within the next few months after the announcement today they will be able to release their first set of work on data standards and formats."
(http://www.techcrunch.com/2008/07/24/open-web-foundation-officially-launches/)


=More Information=

#http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Web_Foundation


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Open]]