Overview page on the [[Peer Governance]] of [[Open Source Software]] projects:

#Generalities: [[Peer Governance]]; [[FLOSS - Governance]]


==Topics==

#[[Peer Governance - Semi-protection]] 
#[[Peer Governance - Benevolent Dictatorships]]
#[[Role of Nonprofit Foundations in Open Source Governance]]

Related Topics:

#[[Internet Governance]]
#[[Multistakeholder Governance]] 
#[[Open Source Governance]]: use in other sectors that are inspired by the OSS model

==Examples==

Cases:

#[[Apache - Governance]]
#[[Debian - Governance]] ; [[Study on Debian Governance and Social Organization]]
#[[GNU Compiler Collection - Governance]] 
#[[Linux - Governance]]
#[[Fetchmail - Governance]]


Non- Open Source cases

#[[Burning Man - Governance]] 
#[[ThinkCycle - Governance]] 
#[[Jimmy Wales on Wikipedia's Governance]]


=More Information=

Research:

#[[Introduction To Open Source Software Development]]



==Bibliography==

Markus, M. Lynne, 2007. “The Governance of
Free/Open Source Software Projects:
Monolithic, Multidimensional, or
Configurational?” Journal of Management
and Governance, Journal of Management
and Governance, 11 (2), 151-163.

O’Mahony, Siobhán, 2007. “The governance of open
source initiatives: What does it mean to be
community managed?” Journal of
Management and Governance, 11 (2), 139-
150.

O’Mahony, Siobhán and Ferraro, Fabrizio. 2007.
“The emergence of governance in an open
source community”, Academy of
Management Journal 50 (5), 1079-1106.

Shah, Sonali, 2006. “Motivation, Governance, and
the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open
Source Software Development,”
Management Science, 52 (7), 1000-1014.





[[Category:Governance]]