
=Characteristics=

* many technical details and requirements in this google doc: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RDihfZIOEYs60kPEIVDe7gmsxdYgUosF9sr45mgFxY8/edit#]

=Event=

==Ultimate Medical Hackaton for [[Open Source Ventilator]]==

"What we need is a Nasal cannula-based NIV. This system humidifies air, mixes it with oxygen and then pushes a constant stream of it into people’s lungs. If we can design a simple and working system we can give those plans to factories around the globe and get these things made. If the factories fail us, let’s also have a version people can make at home.

If you aren’t sure if a ventilator is something you can work on there are other problems. Can you make algorithms to determine if a person needs a ventilator. Can we recycle n95 masks? Can we make n95 masks at home? Workers also require a negative pressure tent for housing patients. This will be especially useful if we need to build treatment facilities in gyms or office spaces. Lastly if you’re a medical professional, can you train people how to help?

Let’s beat this thing. The ultimate medical hackathon begins."
(https://hackaday.com/2020/03/12/ultimate-medical-hackathon-how-fast-can-we-design-and-deploy-an-open-source-ventilator/?)

=More information=

Compiled by Appropedia, 19/3/2020:

==Informations / Call / Coordination...==

#guidelines for ventilators : https://www.appropedia.org/Open_source_ventilator
#UK /Goverment looking for organisations who can support in the supply of ventilators and ventilator components across the United Kingdom : https://ventilator.herokuapp.com/
#Ireland : OpenSource collaborative ventilatore initiative :
> https://opensourceventilator.ie/register/ > https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfxvOfZptgG_mCKE8jGuXK4cb59I5WHPzt5gSh3cHh1tFgy7Q/viewform

==Documentation==

#Specification for simple OS mechanical ventilator : https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FNPwrQjB1qW1330s5-S_-VB0vDHajMWKieJRjINCNeE/preview?
#low-cost portable ventilator, 2010, MIT News office : http://news.mit.edu/2010/itw-ventilator-0715?fbclid=IwAR3nIcBeG0A8vf3tcJaUnUnoixaoYSvbaL_dJJrqR-gB7nUuNQjW9n5ivTg
#Italian : 3D Valves : https://help3d.it/valvole-stampate-in-3d-a-brescia-facciamo-chiarezza/

* DIY Emergency ventilator :

#https://www.facebook.com/jeff.ebin/videos/pcb.675336579943404/10157962700143971/?type=3&theater&ifg=1 (FROM FB)
#https://www.facebook.com/stephen.sheehan.73/videos/10221015618356875/ ( FROM FB)
#https://www.facebook.com/stony.didgeridoo/videos/pcb.2982372671826445/2982353668495012/?type=3&theater&ifg=1 ( ROM FB) => They are 3D printing the parts
> see full publication on their profile : https://www.facebook.com/stony.didgeridoo?__tn__=%2CdC-R-R&eid=ARBlOriyOYbYnL6s_9UZ2O5nF4hqRSMLnU9MVaktZ90sS3U2_Q434tgI7zVte74npaPE2gjuTgkki68x&hc_ref=ARQf8sN-7EFcQ5iLanpqwj-IUZ-ceDlB3uGClYGKORkOjcqQxEf0tQZ79HuAR7oIo1w&fref=nf

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:P2P Hardware]]
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]