'''= an International Non-Governmental Organization whose mission is to educate people of Earth about Open Source and Resource Based practices''' (founded by Mathew Marlin Mallory Phillips and is based in Rüsselsheim, Germany.)


URL = http://OpenSourceEarth.ning.com


=Description=

"Open Source Earth is an International Non-Governmental Organization whose mission is to educate people of Earth about Open Source and [[Resource Based]] practices, and to get people to use those principles to create what is needed to sustain Human life.  

Resource based comes from the concepts of Jacques Fresco and the Venus Project. An example of  a Resource Based practice as opposed to current economic practices is for example if a school is falling down, people in charge of keeping that building from falling down might say that there is no money to fix it, even though there is endless concrete, endless steel and other materials to fix it.  Since many of the resources are owned, it is possible to grow the resources that are needed, specifically for these projects.

Open Source Earth could also be an answer to what seems to be happening in the global economy today.  If we backup our computer data, why not have a backup for how we live.  Open Source Earth was formed as a Trans-National Social Movement Organization and has 3,500+ people in it's network around the world.  It was formed to use the power of numbers, and increased probability to solve the problems that face humanity today.  Sharing knowledge for alternative ways to live and inspiring people to use these technologies where they are in the world to better conditions.

With Open Source Earth, Technologies are Open Sourced, giving the concepts and designs away rather than patenting them for sale or licencing, empowering people with the tools to create what is needed to live and flourish. Technologies such as BioGas Digesters, the effluent of which can be used to grow food, textile, medicine, plants that can be used as building materials, oil producing plants, fuel, plastic or other crops in an organic hydroponics system.  

Open Source Earth has partnered with Omega Garden of Canada and Dewpointe of the USA to buy their systems wholesale to send to Haiti to create long term solutions to the disasters that have occurred there.  

Open Source Earth is holding it's first meeting at the Frankfurt am Main Main Train Station on March 28th, 2010 at 12:00 noon using the Open Space Meeting format, where everyone will have a voice."
(http://www.prlog.org/10559189-open-source-earth-meeting-to-discuss-open-source-and-resource-based-sustainability.html)


=More Information=

The website is at http://OpenSourceEarth.ning.com and the email is at OpenSourceEarth@gmail.com. Open Source Earth has a Facebook group and fan page. The contact telephone number is 0173 1606 349.


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Biofuel]]