

=Examples=

Sourced from http://snowman828.blog.hexun.com/32791181_d.html

Below is just a selection, there are more packages described on the site above.

==Dokeos==

URL = http://www.dokeos.com

Dokeos is a learning suite that allows you create, organise, follow and coach learning activities. Here is a quick preview. For a demo, register as a course creator in Dokeos Free Campus.

1 Open Source professional learning suite: Build e-courses using templates, import SCORM courses. Assess learners through tests and surveys. Coach them through interaction tools. Convert Word and Powerpoint documents into courses.


==DotNetSCORM==

URL = http://www.dotnetscorm.com

The purpose of the DotNetSCORM project is to create an Open Source Learning Management System using .Net technologies. There are currently several SCORM compliant Learning Management System?s written in Java and PHP. These are mostly based upon the ADL Sample RTE. However due to the technologies used they can not be tightly integrated into the Windows Server environment. Therefore this projects goal is create a SCORM Compliant LMS to serve as a model for further development and use of the SCORM standard on the Windows Platform.


==Fle3==

URL = http://fle3.uiah.fi

Fle3 is a web-based learning environment. To be more specific Fle3 is server software for computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL). Fle3 is Open Source and Free Software released under the GNU General Public Licence (GPL). The licence is protecting your freedom to use, modify and distribute Fle3.

Fle3 is designed to support learner and group centered work that concentrates on creating and developing expressions of knowledge (i.e. knowledge artefacts) and design. Fle3 contains three learning tools and several administration tools.

Fle3 is easy to localize to different languages (all you need to do is to translate one file). Currently users may choose their user interfaces language to be Finnish, English, Spanish, French, Portuguese, Brazilian Portuguese, Norwegian, Dutch, Italian, Lithuanian, Estonian, German, Polish, Danish or Chinese. New translations are welcome.

==Mahara==

URL = https://mahara.org/

Quotes from the project website:

History: "First established in mid 2006, the Mahara project started as collaborative venture funded by New Zealand's Tertiary Education Commission's e-learning Collaborative Development Fund"

Philosophy: "A first guiding principle with the development of the Mahara ePortfolio system is that it is learner centred – a form of Personal Learning Environment. This is in contrast to the more institution-centric Learning Management System (LMS)."
 
Structure: "Mahara is a stand-alone system that can be integrated into a wider virtual learning framework. We believe the Learning Management System remains a highly useful application for delivering learning. We also believe the overall environment can be enhanced and complemented by a learner-centred personal learning environment such as Mahara. Pan-institutional learner communities can also be encouraged using Mahara."
 
Relationship with Moodle: "Mahara’s architecture is inspired by the modular, extensible architecture of Moodle. The Mahara team has also been heavily involved in the Moodle community, with recent work mostly focused on Moodle Networks. Similarly, Mahara systems can be networked together as well having single sign-on from Moodle 1.9 upwards. In a sense, we see Mahara as a ‘sister’ application although the two systems are not required to go together."

==Moodle==

URL = http://moodle.org

Moodle is a course management system (CMS) - a free, Open Source software package designed using sound pedagogical principles, to help educators create effective online learning communities. You can download and use it on any computer you have handy (including webhosts), yet it can scale from a single-teacher site to a University with 200,000 students.


==OpenLMS==

URL = http://openlms.sourceforge.net

OpenLMS is a Learning Management System (LMS) made at the Dept. of Geography, NTNU. The system is a fully functional LMS with support for group collaboration, file sharing, distribution of lectures, etc.. As such it is a good tool for distributing lecture notes to groups of students, and also facilitates collaboration for groups of students and teachers.

The system has successfully been used at the Dept. of Geography at NTNU in Trondheim Norway, for three years. It is continuously further developed and was released as OpenSource software last year.

OpenLMS now supports English (core language) and Norwegian. Steps has been taken to translate for further languages.

Scorm, Dublin Core, AICC etc. could be important factors in systems like OpenLMS and similar LMS/LCMS. Support for exporting objects for these standards will probably be incorporated into OpenLMS. HOWEVER - the focus of standards for the exchange of learning objects often overshadows the lack of a culture for sharing within the organizations in question. This very resource-demanding part of a LMS/LCMS is therefore not focused at the present stage in the development.

OpenLMS is GNU GPL ? this means that the code is free for use. You will, however, have to cover all other costs like servers, consultants to install it, user support etc...

Main contributing developers are: Ragnvald Larsen, Geir Vatne and Christian Myksvoll. Contact Ragnvald in case of questions regarding OpenLMS.


=More Information=

Full listing at http://snowman828.blog.hexun.com/32791181_d.html


[[Category:Education]]