
'''= "the Open Making Society will incorporate a set of design principles which draw on Doughnut Economics and the Circular Economy to create socially and environmentally sustainable products which are genuinely essential to our lives".'''

URL = http://www.participatorycity.org/open-making-society

=Description=

"The Open Making Society is a collective of designers building the future that we want to see, and is enabling communities across the globe with the open source tools to create it. 

Open Making Society will assemble designs that can be manufactured anywhere, with a collection of essential products and designs to bring concepts out of the classroom and into neighbourhoods. We invite you to submit your design, product or process. 

Selected designs will be prototyped, manufactured and scaled as part of the Essential Works programme in the Every One Every Day Warehouse.

The goal of Essential Works is to create inclusive growth, co-creating businesses with the local community that embody solutions to the multiple crises that we face. Working with 20 to 30 young people, the programme will develop and test trade a range of products and create new co-operative businesses fit for the future.

Essential Works will build a replicable model for incubating neighbourhood scale worker co-operatives, with designs that ensure that everything made is circular and builds thriving, resilient communities with space for participation for people from all walks of life. 


Rather than building a post Covid-19 economic recovery based on reverting to production methods which hurt the environment, the Open Making Society will incorporate a set of design principles which draw on Doughnut Economics and the Circular Economy to create socially and environmentally sustainable products which are genuinely essential to our lives. In partnership with Essential Works, these will become a blueprint for creating regenerative economies that value the equilibrium of people and the planet."

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Open]]
[[Category:Design]]