
=Discussion=

Maarten Vanheuverswyn:

"A standard is a way for something to work. MP3 is a standard. DVD is a standard. PDF is a standard. HTML (the language of the World Wide Web) is a standard. In the non-computer world, the Phillips head screw is a standard. Standards allow you to buy a wheel that fits a car, and a nut that fits a bolt. Most of the time people can simply look at a standard - such as the Phillips head screw - and say "Okay, now I can make a Phillips head screw head screwdriver, because I can see how this thing works." Unfortunately, in the world of computers it is possible to have things called "Closed Standards", where it is impossible to "see" how things work. If the person who designed the system does not explicitly tell you how something works then you will not be able to imitate it. For example, if you wanted to create a programme that could save Microsoft Word documents then, as we pointed out above, the only way to do this is to guess how the Microsoft Word format works. This is especially troubling since many government institutions use this format as their de facto standard, so in effect tons of crucial information are stored in a format that nobody really knows how to open or save, except one company called Microsoft.

This use of closed standards results in what is known in the industry as "Vendor Lock-In", where as a customer you become so dependent on a vendor for products or services that moving to another vendor would be too expensive or too much of a hassle. This is a well known strategy of large software houses. It is one of the reasons why Bill Gates managed to become a billionaire, not because he was such a genius but because with his predatory tactics he was able to tie millions of computer users to his company (more about this in our article Bill Gates, saviour of the world?). You must keep buying products from the same company if you want to keep up to date software, and it is too bad if they decide to no longer support a feature you really need. Some banks are still using ancient versions of the OS/2 operating system because the company that once made their proprietary banking software, which only runs on this old operating system, ceased to exist so these banks are now stuck with it.

So, how can we actually have complete control over the files we save? Well, as we said before, some companies publish full specifications of their file formats - such as Adobe with their PDF files, and the Fraunhofer institute, with MP3's - allowing us to create tools to, say, play our MP3's, or convert a bunch of MP3's into an audio CD. Even though companies still retain the intellectual property rights to these formats, we have (as a gesture of goodwill) been given complete blueprints on how to use them. So, should we all just use well-documented formats? That would be a step in the right direction but it is not enough to become truly independent of third parties keen to make a profit. As we found out earlier with the example of the MP3 files, if you use someone else's method for storing information (be it music, photos or essays) they still retain the right to decide who may use their method and to charge royalties. Companies in a capitalist world are in the business to make money in the first place after all.

Who then can I actually buy software from, and be able to do with it what I like? Actually, some people are giving it away. There is the example of PDF files, which is a truly open standard. Every software programmer can find out how the PDF format works because Adobe, the company that created the standard, has given complete instructions on how to use, create, save and print so-called PostScript documents - all without having to pay any royalties. This will remain the case forever, so even if Adobe goes bankrupt, we would still be able to read and write PDF documents. This is not the case if you have bought a song from, for example, an online store like iTunes, which usually comes in a restricted format from Apple that you can only play on an iPod and not on any other MP3 player.

The second type of software licence we mentioned at the very beginning was "open" software. Most open licences, with some minor differences, allow you to add, remove or modify anything you like. They give the software away. You may initially have to pay for a copy, but when you click "I Agree" on a copy of Red Hat Linux you are, from then on, permitted to do whatever you like with the software. If there is a feature you want, then you (or that friend of yours down the road who is pretty good with that sort of thing) may add it. If you want to add lots of features and sell it to someone else, that is allowed too. Or you could just keep on using OpenOffice, an open source word processing programme, happy in the knowledge that you will always, no matter what, be able to get to your documents. The spirit of "Open" is that no single person should be dependent on any third party to use their own property.

Just as with closed standards, there are things called "Open Standards." An open standard defines how something works, but it isn't owned by anybody. Sure, there may be some non-profit organisation in charge of maintaining a reference, but no one needs to pay money to write a HTML web page, since it is an open standard.

Now imagine combining the power of open software and open standards. Anyone could communicate perfectly with anyone else, without being dependent on any third party. This is happening today. It is called Open Source, or to use a better term, "free software"."
(http://www.marxist.com/computer-industry-capitalism-free-software240907.htm)


[[Category:Standards]]