URL = http://openmoney.org/

=Description=

"[[Open Money]] is a means of exchange freely available to all. Any community, any association - indeed, any body - can have their own money. Open money is synonymous with [[LETS]] - an invitation to come inside and play, as in open door and open house; collaboration as in open hand and open for all; attitude as in open mind.

The purpose of the open money project is to bring together and organize the people and resources necessary for the development and propagation of open money everywhere.

The open money project is a work in progress - a continuation of almost 25 years of LETSystem and community currencies development all over the world, two community way projects in Canada using smart cards, the Japan open money project, and, most recently, a community currencies services provider - ccsp.

The intent is to develop an open money kernel - a core set of text files, administration tools and software systems that are sufficiently coherent and clear that further elaboration of the set derives from the core concepts themselves, rather than from the particular agendas of the originating writers and contributors. The open money kernel is to have a life of its own.

Material submitted for inclusion in the kernel or in the supporting documentation will presently be reviewed and edited through a moderated process between the main contributors."
(http://openmoney.org/top/introduction.html)


=More Information=

#The Open Money principles are applied in the [[Community Way]] project.


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Open]]