
=Description=

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Today’s lowest cost 3D printers have their roots in university research projects. The two
leading consumer-level 3D printer platforms originated from university research labs at Bath
University in England, and Cornell University in the United States. The University of Bath’s 3D
printer is called [[RepRap]] and Cornell’s is called [[Fab@Home]].

'''Perhaps because of their university origins, the machine blueprints for both RepRap and Fab@Home are freely available to anyone who wants to build their own machine, or to improve upon the existing designs.''' 

Not only do Cornell and the University of Bath openly
publish their machine design blueprints, they permit commercial companies to develop and sell
their own versions based off of the designs of the original university machines.

In contrast, commercial-scale 3D printers are developed commercially and their product designs are proprietary and not shared publicly."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=Directory=

#[[RepRap]]
#[[Fab@Home]]

==[[RepRap]]==

"(short for Replicating Rapid-prototyper); from: Bath University in England

Dr. Adrian Bowyer and his graduate student, Ed Sells,
created RepRap in 2004 with the goal of making a low
cost 3D printer, but also one that could print its own parts.
Darwin, an open-source 3D printer, was made available
in 2007. 

Today a number of commercial kit makers sell versions of the RepRap, 
'''including [[Ponoko]] in New Zealand, [[Bits From Bytes]] (UK), [[MakerBot]] (U.S.) and [[Shapercube]] (Germany).''' 

MakerBot sells their entry level
Cupcake machine for about $9506.

In 2009, Bowyer and team introduced '''the second generation RepRap machine, [[Mendel]]".'''
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


==[[Fab@Home]]==

Via Cornell University in Ithaca, NY, USA.

"Fab@Home is an open source 3D printing platform that was developed at Cornell University.
In 2006, graduate student Evan Malone and Professor
Hod Lipson created the Fab@Home personal 3D
printer. Fab@Home was designed to be versatile and
works with almost any material that can be extruded
through a plastic syringe and nozzle.

Though more expensive than other entry level 3D
printers, Fab@Home can produce objects from a wide
range of materials such as silicon, wiring, even food
and has a variety of digital manufacturing tools for
extruding, cutting, milling and assembling various
materials7. The parts for Fab@Home, as well as
complete machines are sold online by a variety of
vendors and hobbyists. The cost of an unassembled
machine kit is about $1,600."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

=More Information=

# [[Personal Manufacturing]]
# [[Desktop 3D Printers]]



[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Free Software]]