'''= " an open education membership organization ... :  we support a growing community of more than 1,400 higher education institutions and consortia engaged in open educational initiatives".''' [https://www.linkedin.com/company/open-education-network/about/]

URL = http://open.umn.edu/oen


=Description=

"The Open Education Network (OEN) is an open education membership organization of both vision and practice, and the leadership, actions, and results of our community are transforming higher education. Based at the University of Minnesota, we’re working together with our members to make higher education more open.

The seed for the OEN was planted when, in 2012, the Open Textbook Library (OTL) was founded. Two years later the Open Textbook Network was started. Today, as the Open Education Network and with a small staff, we support a growing community of more than 1,400 higher education institutions and consortia engaged in open educational initiatives. Together we advance open educational practices, engage faculty, remove barriers, and enhance student success."

(https://www.linkedin.com/company/open-education-network/about/)


=Characteristics=

Aim: more access to education, and savings for participating institutions

* "Our community supports the Open Textbook Library, a comprehensive resource for openly licensed academic textbooks. All textbooks are free, and the majority are peer reviewed. 

* When you join the Open Education Network, you become part of a supportive community that works together to make higher education more open.

* We work together to benefit everyone in higher education. We help each other, learn from each other, and create resources for each other and the common good."

(https://open.umn.edu/oen)


=Status=

Linked-In: "2-10 employees" [https://www.linkedin.com/company/open-education-network/about/]

" The Open Education Network is based in the Center for Open Education in the University of Minnesota’s College of Education and Human Development." [https://open.umn.edu/oen]

* List of members: https://open.umn.edu/oen/members


=Characteristics=

==Criteria for Open Textbooks==

'''1. Open Textbook Criteria'''

"Textbooks in the Open Textbook Library are considered open because they are free to use and distribute, and are licensed to be freely adapted or changed with proper attribution.

The criteria for including new textbooks in the Open Textbook Library are:

* All content must be openly licensed. We accept textbooks licensed with GNU and Creative Commons (CC) licenses, with the exception of the CC ND (No Derivatives) component. CC BY is recommended. Go to Creative Commons for more information about selecting a license for your work.

* Must be a complete textbook available as a complete portable file (e.g. PDF, EPUB).

* Must be in use at multiple higher education institutions, or affiliated with a higher education institution, scholarly society, or professional organization.

* Must be an original textbook (not a derivative of another textbook). Possible exceptions to this criteria are modifications that reflect the needs or context of an entirely new audience. For example, the textbook has been changed in such a significant way that it is now relevant to a new country, profession, or has been translated into a new language. Authors or publishers will be asked to demonstrate significant changes to the original text."

(https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/books)

* Introduction to the Open Textbook Library: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3DhQLX7Lnk


'''2. Open Licenses'''

"Open Licenses: Many in the open education community, including the Open Education Network, believe that the most appropriate license for open textbooks is the Creative Commons Attribution International (CC BY) license. The CC BY license means anyone can retain, reuse, revise, remix and redistribute open textbooks. This is commonly referred to as the 5Rs.

As part of our commitment to the 5Rs, a textbook with a No Derivatives component to the license (CC BY SA ND or CC BY ND) is not considered an open textbook. This is because ND licenses do not allow for revising and remixing. Although you may find some textbooks in our library with ND licenses, as of November, 2016 we are no longer accepting textbooks with that license."

(https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/books)



==Access to Publishing and Course Design Tool==

"Institutional and allied OEN members can create one free open textbook project in our PressbooksEDU Sandbox. OEN consortial members can create up to five projects."

(https://oen.pressbooks.pub/)



==Education and Training Efforts==


===Training for Librarians: Certification===

"The Certificate in OER Librarianship is a comprehensive professional development program that offers formal training, a community of peers, and expert mentors in order to build sustainable, collaborative, and effective open education initiatives on higher education campuses."

(https://open.umn.edu/oen/oercert)


===Dissemination Workshops, Peer Review===

See: https://open.umn.edu/oen/workshops

===Textbook reviews by faculty, for faculty===

"The OEN’s signature faculty workshop focuses on understanding students’ financial predicament and its impact on academic success. We introduce faculty to open textbooks and the benefits they can bring to student learning, faculty pedagogical practice, and social justice on campus. Faculty are invited to engage with open textbooks by writing a brief review of a book in the Open Textbook Library. These workshops have resulted in a 45% adoption rate by participating faculty.

Open Textbook Library: Makes faculty aware that there are open textbook options for them to consider.
Workshop: Helps faculty understand what open textbooks are and addresses misconceptions and  concerns.
Review: Gets faculty to take the time to engage with a textbook so they can see if it could work for them. 
We take academic freedom seriously. Writing reviews empowers faculty to decide what book is right for their students and their course."


===Local workshops, expert facilitators===

"The OEN offers members two types of local workshops, both facilitated by a select group of faculty and staff from OEN schools that share their expertise and experience in open education on their campus.

VIRTUAL CAMPUS VISITS: This fully synchronous virtual campus visit includes two, 1.5 hour-long workshops – one workshop for faculty and another for campus partners who will interface with faculty as they make their adoptions. Additional meetings with campus constituents during the day are welcome. Cost: $2200

TRAIN THE TRAINER: Prepares attendees from systems and consortia to use the OEN workshop strategy at their own campuses to educate, engage, and empower faculty to choose open education. This training includes an asynchronous course shell and a 3-hour synchronous session. Cost: $3150."


=Directory=

of interesting site pages:

* Index of textbooks, ready or under development: https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks ; https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/textbooks/in_development


=More information=

* Primary Location: University of Minnesota, College of Education and Human Development; 330 Wulling Hall, 86 Pleasant Street S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, US

* Youtube video channel via https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_lf4_Wss_uW0KGny_A3erg/videos

# Community Data: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-KQB3kpyXo
# Open Pedagogy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiY4An_YmXY
# How to share: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KElSECUkJOo
# Faculty Incentives: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls4Uu_gz0-U
# How to print and sell: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fC94VSnkTg


* Example of diffusion through members: VIVA Open Education Network Membership, https://vivalib.org/va/open/otn [https://www.mcls.org/engagement/open-education-network-oen/ example #2]

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Open]]