See the review at http://www.b-eye-network.com/view/9516


=Examples=

 
"R is an open-source implementation of the S statistical programming language, which was developed at Bell Laboratories starting in the mid-‘70s. R is available under the GNU General Public License, which allows commercial use. Look in particular for tm, the R Text Mining Package, and for other useful modules and software interfaces listed under the natural-language processing task view. The paper “Text Mining Infrastructure in R” will help you along.

RapidMiner is commercial open source, available in a free, community edition under the GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL) (which is similar to the LGPL used by Gate, with adaptations for networked software use) and also a closed-source (commercial) license for those who wish to embed the software into proprietary, commercial products. RapidMiner was developed at the University of Dortmund, Germany, and was formerly known as YALE (Yet Another Learning Environment). The university spun off Rapid-I in 2007 to develop and support the software.

The software supports a wide variety of clustering, classification and other data mining functions. Text-related modules include the Word Vector Tool (WVT), Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Data Stream plug-ins. According to Rapid-I cofounder and managing director Ralf Klinkenberg, RapidMiner responds to a very wide set of text-processing needs including news filtering, email routing, sentiment analysis and opinion mining, and general information extraction. According to Klinkenberg, RapidMiner allows users to combine unstructured data (text documents) and structured data (database tables, time series data, audio data, etc.)."
(http://www.b-eye-network.com/view/9516)

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]