
= OS3E

URL = http://www.internet2.edu/network/ose/

=Discussion=

Bill St. Arnaud:

"At the this weeks spring Internet 2 meeting there was a major
announcement on Internet 2’s new Open Science, Scholarship and
Services Exchange (OS3E) initiative. This could be a real game
changer. OS3E embodies the concept of “software defined networks”
where users (or network operators) can configure their own network
topology and architectures using OpenFlow as the underlying enabling
technology. For those who are familiar with the technology will
recognize many of the same features and capabilities in CANARIE’s
UCLP (http://www.uclp.ca/). “UCLP is a software system that allows
end-users, either people or sophisticated applications, to treat
network resources as software objects and provision and reconfigure
lightpaths within a single domain or across multiple, independently
managed, domains. Users can also join or divide lightpaths and hand
off control and management of these larger or smaller private
sub-networks to other users. “
 
What is exciting to me about OS3E, and one of the original drivers of
UCLP, is the fact that it may fundamentally change the future of R&E
networking globally. With the development of open lightpath exchanges
around the world network users and researchers will now have greater
flexibility in terms of defining network topologies and services that
fit their specific needs and applications. Today R&E networks are very
hierarchical whether they are based on IP and/or lightpaths. Open
exchanges allow significant greater flexibility in defining network
topologies and solutions. With software defined networking like OS3E
or UCLP and open lightpath exchanges researchers can now directly peer
with each other, with other institutions or with other networks. There
is no need for traditional network hierarchy and those researchers
and/or intuitions who can afford their own fiber or lightpaths can now
interconnect and peer with each other at those open exchange points.
More importantly users do not have to be locked into a given network
protocol. Different OS3E instantiations, (Articulated Private Networks
in UCLP speak or network slice in OpenFlow speak) can enable different
applications and services such as shared Ethernet, switched optical
lighpaths or simple static optical circuits. The choice of network
service is determined by the user and not dictated by the network
operator.
 
Many researchers and funding agencies believe that network
infrastructure, especially for big science, should be treated as
resource similar to computing and storage that is paid for, and
controlled by the researcher themselves. Tools like OS3E and UCLP
enable this type of funding models. For the increasing number of big
science applications such as high energy physics, astronomy, genomics,
climate modeling and many others who now need large dedicated pipes
the advent of OS3E and open lightpath exchanges is a true game
changer."
(NextNet mailing list, 4/2011)


=More Information=
 
#Internet 2 announcement of OS3E, http://www.internet2.edu/network/ose/
#White paper on software defined networks and background on OS3E, http://www.internet2.edu/network/ose/docs/Open%20Science%20Exchange%20Whitepaper.pdf
#The importance of open exchange points, http://www.slideshare.net/bstarn/on-vector-looking-forward


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]