


'''= OS Nano is an experiment in making nanotechnology research accessible, simple and transferable and to make it address environmental, health and social justice issues around the world.'''

URL = http://opensourcenano.net/


=Description=

"Open Source Nanotechnology starts from the belief that most of the new ideas, tools and materials that are discovered and engineered in nanotechnology could take an infinite number of paths. They need not lead to better weapons, bouncier tennis balls, or tiny self-replicating robots; they can lead to better drinking water, better soil or cheap, non-harmful, non-invasive diagnostics. The problem today is that the former are more profitable than the latter, and so few scientists or engineers spend time thinking about them, while people around the planet continue to demand them. What if these roles were collapsed? What if everyone were encouraged not only to use nanotechnology, but to innovate as well? OS Nano provides a way to do that by contributing to a commons in knowledge and technique that is legally free and open to everyone.

OS Nano provides direct access to the most “upstream” components of nanotechnology as possible. It is a new way of meeting the demand for citizen inclusion, public dialogue and public assessment of technology. But unlike most schemes for including “the people” in “the science,” open source nanotechnology does not make a distinction between scientists and the people. Everyone, in our opinion, can be a scientist, and everyone has a duty to be “the people.” By the same token, we don’t believe that everyone is a scientist or part of the public in the same way. Some people are experts in chemistry, but do not work at a university; some people are experts in areas not usually recognized as relevant to nanotechnology. Some people care deeply about particular social problems that directly affect them, some people care at a distance about the plights of others. The current system of innovation, especially in the US, does not capture all that special expertise, much less channel that deep concern into the projects that need it. OS Nano makes a wager that there is a better way."
(http://opensourcenano.net/about/)


[[Category:Science]]