* '''[http://www.wethinkthebook.net Source: We-think: The power of mass creativity - Charles Leadbeater]'''

Common platforms and peer to peer working allows innovation to emerge from a
community. Communities of innovation are all the rage on the web but once
again, they are very old. Community and conversation is the root of creativity.
Ideas live in within communities as much as they do in the heads of individuals as
shown for example in the 18th century Cornish tin mining industry just before the
industrial revolution.

Cornwall was the Silicon Valley of its day, home to the most impressive
innovations in industrial technology. Cornish tin and copper mines posed the
trickiest problems for engineers and so demanded the greatest ingenuity. The
deeper the mines went the more prone to flooding they became. In 1769 the
inventor James Watt came up with a engine design which incorporated a separate
condenser that cut the amount of coal needed by two thirds. This transformed the
economics of mining. The Watt engine, marketed with his business partner
Mathew Boulton, quickly spread through Cornish mines but [Nuvoulari
papers...] the mine owners became disenchanted. Boulton and Watt charged mine
owners a royalty fee equivalent to a third of the amount of money that a mine
saved each year after installing their engine, the design of which was protected by
a very broad patent enforced ferociously. Mine owners soon started to complain.

The patent meant they could not improve on the design through their own efforts.
Boulton and Watt had no incentive to make further improvements because they
were making so such money. In 1790 Cornish mine owners revolted. Today they
would be denounced as software pirates: they started to install unauthorised
versions of the engine. Boulton and Watt took them to court and got their patent’s
life-span extended to 1800. Innovation ground to a halt. Boulton and Watt never
made another sale in Cornwall. In 1811, a group of mine captains – lead by Joel
Lean a respected local engineer – started a journal to share new ideas in the spirit
of collaboration and open competition that often marks creative communities.

Lean’s Engine Reporter was published each month for almost a century, reporting
on all aspects of engine design. A year after the Reporter started, Richard
Trevithick and Arthur Woolf introduced a new design that fast became the
industry’s standard operating system. Woolf and Trevithick did not patent their
design and freely allowed other mines to copy from the original erected at the
Wheal Prosper mine. They made their money installing, adapting and improving
engines. The tightly knit community of Cornish engineers were soon swapping
ideas through the Lean Reporter for how to improve on the basic idea.

During Boulton and Watt’s ascendancy, following an initial leap, innovation
stalled. The open and collaborative period that followed produced near continuous
innovation for more than thirty years, as a host of practitioner-engineers improved
upon Woolf and Trevithick’s design. None of this invention was patented. By
1845, engines in Cornish mines were more than three times more efficient than
the Boulton and Watt engine of 1800. They became known as “Cornish” engines
in recognition of the cumulative, collaborative and collective nature of the
innovation. During this period Cornwall had the fastest rate of steam engine
innovation in the world and the lowest rate of patenting in Great Britain.

The Cornish engine story prefigures today’s contest between Microsoft and open
source software: sharing can be a highly effective basis for commercial
endeavour. In Cornwall rival firms released to one another ideas that brought
significant cost reductions to all. They did so because the mine owners had a
strong shared interest and independent mine engineers were keen to make known
what they had achieved. The Cornish tin mines ran on open source software
centuries before the computer. The web is reviving this communal approach to
innovation, using the web as its tool rather than Lean’s Engine Reporter.


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:P2P History]]