
'''= "a web portal developed specifically to address the urgent need to publish not only the final plans, but the entire design process for open source hardware projects".'''

URL = https://opendesignengine.net/

"developed specifically to address the urgent need to publish not only the final plans but the entire design process for open source hardware projects. We like to think of it as the Source Forge for hardware"


=Description=

"Open Design Engine is a web portal developed specifically to address the urgent need to publish not only the final plans but the entire design process for open source hardware projects. We like to think of it as the Source Forge for hardware. And while sites like Source Forge and LaunchPad are focusing on features to support software projects (such as demo web and database servers for web site projects), Open Design Engine is focused on the needs of hardware projects. The private alpha version is built on Redmine (licensed under the GNU General Public License v2), and has support for common features such as source code repositories, wikis, forums, and issue tracking. Open Design Engine also has full sub-projects so teams can breakout their work along functional lines (such as software, electronics, and mechanical engineering) all under the heading of the main project. And Open Design Engine has a desktop like file management system for storing non-source files in a way that is more familiar to developers who come from disciplines beyond software development. Check out the full list of features and the roadmap to see where Open Design Engine is headed. ODE is being distributed similar to Wordpress."


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]