

=Directory=

Compiled by Open IT Agency:

(updated list of links via [http://openitagency.eu/open-source-hardware-actors-list-berlin-europe/]:

* Christian Siefkes & Stefan Mertens and Keimform.Org –  Keimform is a blog about Commons and is interested in Open Source Hardware 

* Open Knowledge Foundation Berlin – works for Open Data and Open Knowledge. They have no open source hardware project – yet. 

* Open Energie Halle [http://open-energy.tumblr.com/] -  Felix Seltmann and Christoph Unbescheidt are Industrial-Design-Students and Open Source Hardware enthusiasts. They developed and documented Open Energy Solutions. 

* Bauraum für Low-Tech Ideen – Develope several low-tech solutions and publish manuals and building plans. 

* Ingenieur*innen-Kollektiv –= They create workshops for ecological and social self-supply and upload building plans und CC-licenses. 

* Exceptionally Hard and Soft Meeting [http://ehsm.eu/]–  Conference with strong interesst in OSHW 

* Knowable.org [http://Knowable.org] – Platform on the search for open collaboration tools for hardware.

* Kobakant  –  Wearable Electronics and more 

* FabLab Berlin [http://www.fablab-berlin.org/] – One of Berlins very active fablabs 

* Plusea – Soft, flexible, washable textile sensors that you can build yourself!

* letsmake [http://signup.letsmake.com/] – Eine Shareconomy Plattform für P2P Werkstattvermietung / / * e n Make money with your workshop! Rent it out to makers, hobbyists and other likeminded people. 

* open IT Berlin [http://www.open-it-berlin.de/] – The city of berlin aims to connect different players in the field of open source, open hardware, open standards with this brand. 


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Germany]]