
'''* Database: Open Syllabus Analytics.'''

URL = https://analytics.opensyllabus.org/


=Description=

"Analytics is a tool for exploring millions of anonymized syllabi and other curricular materials drawn from thousands of colleges and universities around the world. Analytics helps instructors design classes, students explore fields, publishers develop books, and educators at all levels better understand the curriculum of higher education.  It is a window onto higher education as a global project built from millions of decisions about what and how to teach."

(https://analytics.opensyllabus.org/about)


=Research=

'''* Research Report (Working Paper): Closed Classrooms? An Analysis of College Syllabi on Contentious Issues. By Jon A. Shields, Yuval Avnur and Stephanie Muravchik.'''

URL = [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L6aUnf3HZPqOTJrP8ee-m2Szh-uyFKZA/view?pli=1 pdf]

Jon Shields:

""We just completed a study that draws on a database of millions of college syllabi to explore how professors teach three of the nation’s most contentious topics—racial bias in the criminal justice system, the Israel-Palestine conflict, and the ethics of abortion. Since all these issues sharply divide scholars, we wanted to know whether students were expected to read a wide or narrow range of perspectives on them. We wondered how well professors are introducing students to the moral and political controversies that divide intellectuals and roil our democracy.

Not well, as it turns out. Across each issue we found that the academic norm is to shield students from some of our most important disagreements."

(https://www.persuasion.community/p/we-analyzed-university-syllabi-theres)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Research]]