
'''= "This second RGCS white paper, Walking the Commons, is focused on a new research practice and method codesigned by members of our network: Open Walked Event-Based Experimentations (OWEE)".''' 

URL = https://collaborativespacesstudy.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/rgcs-white-paper-owee-final-version.pdf

=Description=

"The OWEE protocol consists in a free, several day long learning expedition in a city, which brings together different stakeholders (academics, entrepreneurs, activists, makers, journalists, artists, students, etc.) and relies on a partly improvised process (both the people met and places visited are part of the improvisation that emerges in the flow of discussions). Walk and embodiment are central, as both indoor and outdoor times are expected to involve participants and remote followers differently."


=Source=

* White Paper: WALKING THE COMMONS: DRIFTING TOGETHER IN THE CITY. Coordinated by AMÉLIE BOHAS & FRANÇOIS-XAVIER DE VAUJANY. 2nd RGCS WHITE PAPER, October 2018

URL = https://collaborativespacesstudy.files.wordpress.com/2018/10/rgcs-white-paper-owee-final-version.pdf

"This second RGCS white paper is focused on a new research practice and method codesigned
by members of our network: Open Walked Event-Based Experimentations (OWEE).
The protocol consists in a free, several day long learning expedition in a city, which brings together different stakeholders (academics, entrepreneurs, activists, makers, journalists, artists, students, etc.) and relies on a partly improvised process (both the people met and places visited are part of the improvisation that emerges in the flow of discussions). Walk and embodiment are central, as both indoor and outdoor times are expected to involve participants and remote followers differently. Although close to the French “Dérive”, OWEE also diverges from it on several key points. This white paper returns to the OWEE philosophy, the importance of improvisation and public spaces, and the search for commons in the way collaboration and knowledge are built and shared. It then discusses the issue of preparing and managing the event. Finally, we offer several case studies and ethnographies related to past events. These feedback and empirical analyses are opportunities to explore key questions for the city as well as the ways we live and work together. We conclude by stressing the importance of embodiment and ‘felt solidarity’ in the approach of commons and communalization in today’s collaborative world."

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]