

URL = http://www.openwallet.org/

=Description=

OpenWallet.org is a payment platform that allows vendors of products or services to submit interactive payment apps to a network of automatic vending machines. The apps are written in HTML, CSS, and Javascript using Angular.JS or Meteor.JS.


==Technologies used==

* HTML5 / CSS / JS
* Node.JS
* Angular.JS
* Debian Linux
* MongoDB
* ZMQ
* OpenTransactions
* OpenCV, Zbar
* Olimex (Open Source Embedded Hardware!)


==What's "Open" in OpenWallet==

The first aspect: Total reliance on Open Source technologies, which we feel should be used in any serious product. We feel the age of proprietary infrastructure are numbered.

The second aspect: Any vendor of products or services, or exchange of any virtual currency, or popular wallet, or any other legitimate business can build and host an application on the vending network, facilitating collection of cash, and distribution of prepaid products or virtual value / currencies.


==P2P Features in OpenWallet==

At least one Bitcoin exchange is already integrated into the OpenWallet payment network (Bitinstant), allowing real-time purchase of Bitcoin for cash. Once the customer has Bitcoin, he can P2P the value he owns. The machine facilitates the sale and purchase of Bitcoin from a Smartphone or by scanning paper vouchers with QR codes on them. It can also print such vouchers (for example to issue change, or a refund, which can later be used to fund a new transaction).



[[Category:Money]]