
= project


=Description=

"There are many systems that allow groups to collaborate. A mobilization platform can be distinguished from a collaboration platform in the following ways:

* Self Organizing: Built into the platform are the tools to source the necessary resources for ones projects.

* Open Projects: The system will be designed to accommodate projects that open in the sense that, in principle, the more people working on the project the better.

* Catalytic Capacity: In virtue of the way that we will connect people to projects to organizations in real time, with substantial information flow (industry news, project news, people news etc.), we expect that projects will be generated off the platform. Like-minded people will be able to find each other.

* Large Scale Collaboration: The platform will designed with the view that, in time, it will be able to support large numbers of people working on open projects.


In short, a mobilization platform is designed, specifically to make massive social change a possibility!"
(http://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=dc4gbgsj_25hqc96xt3&hl=en)



=Motivation=

"'''What is Massive Social Change?'''

Simply put, massive social change is revolutionary! - something that happens on a grand scale! It is the sort of change that is meaningful. It is the sort of change that we would experience should we collectively decide on a particular path to address the issue of climate change, end poverty and so on. In short it is massive!


'''Massive Social Change Requires Massive Mobilization'''

Let us for a moment assume that it is possible to make the sorts of changes that will result in global change on a large scale. Let us assume that, for example, enough people in the world can come together to force certain climate change related strategies to be adopted globally. What is necessary is that large numbers of people be mobilized around specific ideas or plans.


'''Massive Mobilization Requires Large Scale Consensus Formation'''

In order for large numbers of people to be mobilized around specific ideas, it is necessary that mechanisms be developed that make large-scale consensus formation a possibility; mechanisms that make it possible for hundreds of thousands if not millions of people to agree on certain goals and a specific course of action to achieve these goals!


'''Large Scale Consensus Formation is a Product of Group Process'''

When groups of people agree on a plan, it is the result of meetings and dialogue. It requires assessment of ideas, compromise, negotiation and so on. Hence, it is the product of the interaction of those that are part of the collaborative process. This sort of collaborative process is, by definition, a group process."
(http://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=dc4gbgsj_25hqc96xt3&hl=en)


=Source=

Article: ON THE POSSIBILITY OF AN OPEN SYSTEM MOBILIZATION PLATFORM. How the Principles of Real Time Interaction, Visibility, Openness and Self-Organization Can Serve as the Foundation for a Technology Platform that can be Utilized to Solve Large Scale Global Problems

URL = http://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=dc4gbgsj_25hqc96xt3&hl=en


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Technology]]