
* '''Article: A. J. Buitenhuis, I. Zelenika and J. M. Pearce, A. J. Buitenhuis, I. Zelenika and J. M. Pearce, Open Design-Based Strategies to Enhance Appropriate Technology Development''', ''Proceedings of the 14th Annual National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance Conference : Open'', March 25-27th 2010, pp. 1-12. Open Design-Based Strategies to Enhance Appropriate Technology Development]”, ''Proceedings of the 14th Annual National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance Conference : Open'', March 25-27th 2010, pp. 1-12.

URL = http://nciia.org/sites/default/files/pearce.pdf 


=Abstract=

"The appropriate technology (AT) movement is being driven by inventors and innovators who are interested in designing technologies that are culturally, environmentally,
and economically appropriate, and feasible to construct and use for people anywhere in the world. This paper examines how open sharing of designs, specifications, and technical information can enhance effectiveness, widespread use, and innovation of AT. This commons-based open design method has been highly successful for software development (i.e., open source), and has also begun to be used in other fields through unique partnerships and new information-sharing tools on the internet. This paper critically demonstrates key examples of open design successes that can be applied to development of AT. It also identifies potential barriers to open-sourcing AT designs, analyzes business models for open design in the context of AT, and outlines practical solutions with examples currently underway."

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Sustainability]]