

'''= proposed by the GroundOS project'''

URL = http://groundos.org/


=Description=

From the GroundOS site:


" Cloud computing is such an overused buzzword at this point, however the reality is that this technology has yet to fully peak. Cloud computing is here to stay, but in it's current state there are some fundamental issues that need to be addressed before it matures. Currently cloud computing is little more than a marketing buzzword, used to dress up the cold ugly business model of renting software, with the additional cost of losing your rights and abilities to fully protect and control your data, all in exchange for the convenience of a web based application. In reality, the entire cloud computing business model revolves around vendor lock-in, through proprietary and closed source software that is either ad supported, subscription based, and/or profits from the sale of your personal information. With a truly free and open source cloud solution, the possibilities are endless. We can make cloud computing beneficial for the masses by restoring the freedom and control over the cloud back to the individual. 

On that note, here is our rebuttal to the current state of cloud computing:

* Cloud computing has taken away our ability to fully control the applications that we use.
    
* Cloud computing has made it impossible to encrypt or protect our data, and exposes our data to privacy risks.
    
* Cloud computing often requires subjection to targeted ads, regular subscription fees, and/or data mining.
    
* Cloud computing has taken away our ability to fully control our own data, subjecting us to data loss through service termination.
    
* Cloud computing has taken away our ability to host our cloud where ever we want or need.


Instead of complaining about these problems, we've simply done our best to correct them. 


Here's how:

* GroundOS gives you the ability to fully control all the applications that you use, with full source code for everything.
    
* GroundOS gives you the ability to encrypt and protect your data, through multiple security settings and SSL support.
    
* GroundOS is completely open source, free of charge, and free of ads.
    
* GroundOS gives you the ability to set up your own cloud, so there's no services to terminate.
    
* GroundOS gives you the ability to set up your own cloud where ever you want, whether at home, the office, a hosting company, or even a data center."
(http://groundos.org/)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]