

=Example: Fluid Forms=

URL = http://www.fluid-forms.com/

"Fluid Forms, in turn, uses geodata as a
starting point for very individual jewelry.

This too contributes to an aesthetics
which is strongly inspired by nature. In
addition to this, the layer structure of
3D printing is actively used as a design
element. The source code for this will
also be publicly available sooner or later,
enabling other designers to pick up
the basic logic and use it for their own
work."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


=Discussion=

"More and more frequently, program
code is becoming the logical material
for the definition of three-dimensional
shapes. If the code serves its purpose
well and is made available to other
creative coders, there is a good chance
that the latter combine it with additional
functions. So a virtual toolbox, so
to speak, for various design purposes
is created. First prototypes of chairs
whose structure has been automatically
created by program code on the
basis of its future user’s weight and the
desired weight distribution, and which
have subsequently been 3D printed, already
exist.

Over time such software functions
will take on more and more complex
tasks. Thus some kind of intelligent
aesthetics will take shape which gives
form to the desired function at the
touch of a button. In this respect the
designer’s job will be increasingly to
work out the right definitions of task
and the appropriate framework conditions."
(http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


[[Category:Design]]