URL = http://openmaterials.org/


=Description=

"OpenMaterials is a collaborative research project dedicated to open investigation and experimentation with DIY production methods and uses of materials.

In the spirit of the open source software and hardware movements, we hope to promote materials to be researched and developed in a public, collaborative manner. We see materials as an open resource, and wish to establish an open process for exploring and sharing knowledge, techniques and applications related to materials science.

Inspired by Eric Raymond’s comment in ‘The Cathedral and the Bazaar’, regarding the bazaar style which he described as “a great babbling bazaar of differing agendas and approaches”, we hope to encourage discourse and experimentation with the broadest range of materials and processes possible.

This website is intended as a platform to share knowledge, resources and discoveries, as well as document experiments and processes."

(http://openmaterials.org/about/)


=Discussion=

Simone Cicero:

"There is a clear and obvious relationship between smart materials and our ability to innovate in the field of interaction design. In fact, these materials have led to a breakthrough in creating technology that, in the words of Amber Case, “disappears from our view and becomes simply an enabler.”

Catarina’s experiments with conductive ink, paper circuits, muscle wires or even thermochromic paint are only the beginnings of the large innovative potential the sharing of knowledge in this field has.

While the role of DIY for the generation of innovative materials is still unclear, there have already been some encouraging results. Maybe you have heard of Graphene, a new material that is likely to be used for a myriad of innovative applications in the future. It turns out that graphene supercapacitors have already been produced in a DIY way by using DVD burners (see how this was done in this video).

As questions from the audience showed (for example when the panel was prompted to give their opinion about sourcing recycled materials), the biggest challenges in this area are environmental goals. The new approaches to materials that were discussed will without doubt play a crucial role in creating self-sufficient production systems that operate on a local scale and no longer depend on external resources.

Speaking of being sensitive to resource use, we also had a chat with Tomas Diez before the panel, who introduced us to the Green FabLab project. Green FabLab is an IAAC initiative that aims to create production systems that are inspired by natural processes from a sustainability as well as bio-mimicry perspective (you may recognize this approach from Gaudi’s thinking!).
Since Green Fablab will produce the food and energy it needs locally, the project embodies a vision of a system that is truly Data In – Data Out: it imports and and exports common shared knowledge.

New ways of relating to production and consumption

Not long ago, a fascinating article appeared on PloS Biology (I also mentioned it in my recent presentation about innovation in Glocal Communities) called “The Macroecology of Sustainability.” It emphasized that it will be impossible to derogate from the principles that govern physical systems. An honest look at current production systems (such as our cities) shows how highly unbalanced they are in terms of resource consumption.

We can only hope that manufacturing processes will be transformed and become more decentralized. We need a new model in which goods are produced Just in Time (in contrast to mass production) in a distributed manner. To enable this we have to change our approaches to design to make them more collaborative and, more importantly, more tolerant and adaptable to the materials and workers that are locally available.

While sharing knowledge will help us find the skills we lack, we need to find new ways of accessing the supply of raw materials we need. The design of everyday objects will become more “invariant” to available materials, while at the same time we will be able to produce these same materials locally. Materials will be defined by their properties, not by the raw materials they consist of.

While projects like Open Materials, Open Structures or Open Source Ecology are making great progress in designing a (physical) commons, other approaches for creating everyday objects are emerging as well.

Ambitious projects such as CustomMade, or the great Italian Slowd.it (soon to launch its international version on Slowd.eu, aiming to create a network of designers and places for handicraft production) hold the promise that a different way of relating to production and consumption is possible, and, from a certain point of view, inevitable."
(http://magazine.ouishare.net/2012/11/third-industrial-revolution-resources/)


=Interview=


==[[Catarina Mota on the Open Materials Movement]]==

Interview conducted by Simone Cicero:

"[Simone Cicero] '''What will be the implications of bringing the study of new materials out of the research centers: how much is the DIY world ready to create new materials and generate innovation? What kind of material do you foresee people will be inventing, hacking, modifying? and following what necessities, gaps? How opening materials will make them smarter?'''

[Catarina Mota] I believe that the implications of bringing materials out of research centers are very similar to what has already happened with hardware: we’ll see materials-hacking, new applications and possibly even new materials come out of it. It’s all about critical mass. Material scientists have the know-how and the tools, and they’re creating amazing new materials, but once you put that knowledge and those tools in the hands of a large number of people they will come up with things a smaller group probably wouldn’t have thought of.

We’re still taking the first steps towards open source materials and we don’t yet have critical mass. But our tools are getting more sophisticated and there’s increasingly more knowledge and experimentation out there. So while we’re not yet ready to create new materials and devise major innovations, we’re paving the way for that to happen.

I think we’ll start with two kinds of materials – in fact we already have:

Simpler smart materials such as conductive ink, which don’t require extensive chemistry knowledge nor expensive equipment. Earlier this year, Jordan Bunker from Pumping Station read a research paper from two materials scientists from UIUC and was able to reproduce their method for making conductive ink at his hackerspace. A couple months after that, Nick Vermeer from NYC Resistor, also based on a research paper by materials scientists, published his first successful experiment in creating a DIY conductive ink.

Materials for 3D printing: as 3D printers become more popular, more and more attention is being paid to the materials they use. We haven’t yet seen any major breakthroughs, but there are already a few projects focused on creating filament makers and recyclers, such as the Filabot. I expect that, in addition to experiments with ABS and PLA, we’ll also see some action in the development of UV-curable resins (which are expensive) as well as in materials for laser-cutting and milling.

The necessities and gaps these materials fill are access to better and cheaper materials for things we are already doing: creating circuits and fabricating objects.

As Eric von Hippel suggests, users know exactly what they want so they’re particularly well positioned to design and prototype it. What this means is that we’ll likely hack or create materials to do things only we know we need. So materials will become smarter in the sense that they’ll be better adapted to fit specific needs.



'''[Simone Cicero] Does it exist for open materials a real business opportunity to create companies and productive activities around a shared and collaborative research framework such as has happened for open source or open hardware so far?'''

[Catarina Mota] I believe so. As the open source hardware and maker movements expand, so does our need for materials with which to make things. And right now, most materials producers aren’t paying attention to this, they’re completely focused on supplying large manufacturing businesses and few make their products available in small enough quantities to be acquired by makers. So there are definitely untapped business opportunities here, specially in what concerns materials for digital fabrication.



'''[Simone Cicero] In evaluating the implications of decentralization, materials are central. In creating a new decentralized structure of production, what are the cross-implications between design and materials? On the one hand, design must seek new ways to create products and learn how to be materials invariant in some way – otherwise will be hard to collaborate globally on a real global library of “productibles” – on the other hand we have to invent materials that are open, hackable, versatile (to avoid harming the design and creation process too much).'''

[Catarina Mota] I don’t see this as problem as long as there is good documentation. The same way we now identify parts in BOMs, specifying the part number and linking to spec sheets, we can do something similar for materials. For example, there are several types of thermochromic paints now available which are activated at different temperatures, but as long as we have this information we can select the one we need. The same thing applies to other materials: if we publish recipes for a material and also include a clear explanation of the resulting properties, people will know which recipe to choose for their application. It’s really not that different from the way open source hardware works, it’s all about good documentation!



'''[Simone Cicero] In addition to the design world – that is always in advance on such innovations – which productive field you think it should develop an interest in open materials – even though it did not so far? Iin general, which are the application areas where we have the most need to create new materials? Also what are the more important and interesting axes of innovation (eg sustainability, recycling, longevity, versatility) for materials?'''

[Catarina Mota] I think the area in which we currently have the most need for P2P materials research is digital fabrication. We now have access to the hardware itself so our need for cheaper and more sustainable materials is also increasing. This is urgent since we’re making more things than ever before and we need to start thinking of ways to recycle/reuse failed prints and leftovers.

Another area that has had some attention, but not enough, are biomaterials, some of which have existed for a long time. I’m thinking for example of cardboard, cork and bioplastic. I believe that a lot of the innovation waiting to happen will not be about creating new materials, but about finding new uses for traditional materials. I live in NYC and every week we put out tons of cardboard to be recycled. Recycling still requires a non-trivial consumption of energy. So every time I see these mounds of cardboard on the street I wonder if we can repurpose it locally to build furniture, bricks, planters, etc. Cork is also an amazing material: it’s renewable, sound/temperature insulating, and long lasting. Why don’t we use it more?

Another interesting aspect of this has to do with the longevity of materials. Some of the materials I stock tend to go bad after a while, specially during the summer when it gets very hot. My stock of magnetic paint, for example, was constantly drying up. Now that I created my own formula, I can just make whatever quantity I need when I need it. I also started stocking thermochromic pigments. That way I only mix them with the binder when I’m about to use it. And I can also make different types of paint from a single batch of pigments: acrylic, oil, screen printing, fabric, etc. So there is a lot less waste and much more flexibility.



'''[Simone Cicero] Often we appeal to the social implications of the Open & p2p revolution. Since this paradigm has gained visibility in time – because it regards production of hardware, tangible objects – and the Maker (and hackers) culture is actually getting everyday more traction; we finally started to question the digital, decentralized, p2p manufacturing as a future alternative to large-scale industrial production.
What are in your opinion the implications of these changes in term of equity, new opportunities, transformation of labor relations or even for the overall sustainability of production and consumption of goods?'''

[Catarina Mota] My personal take on this is that we’re not uprooting a system and replacing it with an entirely new one. That would have devastating economic and social consequences as history has shown. We’re simply proposing and exploring an alternative. And we’re doing this the way makers/hackers do everything: by executing it and thus showing a proof of concept that can be expanded. It used to be really hard to argue that open source businesses are viable, but now we have so many examples of successful companies that we don’t need to argue anymore. All we have to do is point at these real-life examples.

You speak of an alternative to mass production and in my opinion alternative is the keyword. We’re not abolishing the old system, we’re making it better. We’ll still need mass production for many things, such as nuts and bolts, that are standard and required in large quantities. What I hope we’ll see is an emerging ecosystem in which both large and small producers will be highly networked, with information flowing across many nodes.



There will be more opportunities for small producers to arise and subsist. Though, as Limor Fried once pointed out, it’s important to realize that the skills involved in designing and making good hardware are not the same skills required to successfully run a manufacturing business. Meaning: being able to design and make a good prototype is not a guarantee of commercial success. We’ve seen this over and over again in kickstarter campaigns, for example, in which the creators had a brilliant idea for a product, made a working prototype, raised the money to produce it, but then run into all sorts of problems when trying to manufacture and distribute it. Economies of scale are still in place, 3D printing hasn’t replaced injection molding and may never do so. Also, as businesses become more successful, demand also increases so no matter how enthusiastic a group of people may be, they will not be able to make each and every item themselves. Therefore, lowering the barriers to entry will allow more small businesses to emerge, but we shouldn’t expect all of them to succeed. The key here is to know your market and what you can do so you can determine in which area of the ecosystem you can participate. The up side is that the cost of failure is also decreasing, so if your business fails you can probably start afresh.

As for environmental sustainability, I think we’re at a crossroads here. The ease with which we can now make things could either be a disaster or the best thing ever. On the one hand, this can lead us to think of objects as disposable (we can just make a new one if we don’t like what we currently have). On the other hand, as Morton, Mochon and Ariely describe in the IKEA Effect, we may develop special relationships with the things we make/assemble ourselves which will make us more likely to want to repair them when they break. If this happens, the life cycle of products will be extended. And, of course, it goes without saying, that making or assembling things locally will also play an important part in terms of environmental sustainability, specially if it uses as many locally available materials as possible."
(http://meedabyte.com/2012/07/26/why-we-need-open-hackable-materials-now-an-interview-with-catarina-mota/)



=Status=


==2012==

Catarina Mota:

"The effort to open source materials is still in its infancy but there has been some significant progress since I first became involved with it over 3 years ago.

First of all, we now have more suppliers of smart/special materials for DIYers. Online stores like Adafruit, Sparkfun and Inventables now carry things that used to be extremely hard to source. And some manufacturers have also began selling directly to the public.

The accessibility and price of smart textiles, for example, has led to an increasing number of projects and explorations by artists and makers. Many of these applications are DIY garments with both aesthetic and useful properties. Some examples I like to cite are Leah Buckley's Turn Signal Biking Jacket, Kobakant's wearable toy piano, and Diana Eng's Fairytale Fashion collection. But there are many more.

We are still in the early stages of making smart materials ourselves, but even here we've seen some progress. Kobakant runs the wonderful How to Get What You Want website which has a wealth of information on how to mix smart materials with crafting techniques to create really amazing sensors and actuators. Hannah Perner-Wilson also created the incredible Kit of No Parts that describes a series of really interesting techniques to mix high and low tech materials. And Lynne Bruning has good tutorials on how to make your own conductive fabric.

Recently we've also seen some progress in the chemistry front. A few months ago, Jordan Bunker from Pumping Station: One was able to create a DIY conductive ink based on an academic paper. And only a few weeks ago, Nick Vermeer from NYC Resistor came up with another formula for making conductive ink, based also on an academic paper, that uses off-the-shelf materials and doesn't require special equipment. These formulas aren't perfect, but neither are the ones made by professional manufacturers :)


As I see it, there are 4 phases on the roadmap to open sourcing materials:

1) Access: ability to acquire smart/special materials in quantities and prices affordable to makers

2) Documentation: information on how to use and hack the materials

3) Recipes: data on how to reproduce and modify the materials

4) Production Equipment: open source machinery and lab equipment to manufacture and hack materials


It seems we're doing pretty well in terms of stages 1 and 2, and we're starting to see some activity on stage 3. Hopefully, as we put out more information and projects, the open source hardware community will also take an interest in stage 4 - though we already have some interesting things here, such Cathal Garvey's DIY vortex device which, incidentally, Jordan used to make his conductive ink.

As for openMaterials.org, we continue to do what we've always done: sourcing new and interesting materials or DIY methods, experimenting with them, collecting information on what other people are doing, and publishing all this so others can take it to the next level."
(May 31, 2012)


=More Information=

#[[Hard Hack]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]