'''= project of R.U. Sirius in the U.S.'''

URL = http://www.10zenmonkeys.com/2007/11/26/the-open-source-party-proposal/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Open Source Party is an attempt to apply some of the principles of the Open Source movement, which started out as a software movement and has evolved into a cultural sensibility, to the current and future political situation. Why are our political institutions decades or centuries (Washington B.C.) behind our technology? It's also an attempt to define a sort of alternative political agenda that seems nascent in our culture right now--this novel mix of liberalism, libertarianism, pragmatism and vision that many of us see buzzing around us."
(http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-krassner/how-serious-is-ru-siriu_b_75402.html)


'''2.'''


"The Open Source party, as it stands, is an exploratory group. We have varying ideas as to how we should approach it. Personally, I believe that we should use Raymond's "The Cathedral and the Bazaar" as the starting point for our platform.

Originally the "Open Source Party" was formed around R.U.'s essay: The Open Source Party Proposal. The original idea went into remission until I read R.U.'s essay and emailed him about reviving it. Give the original essay a read."
(http://opensource.com/government/11/12/open-source-political-party)


=Interview=

Interview of co-founder Trevor Tomesh:

"What is it and what are you looking to accomplish?

We are an exploratory net-roots campaign to re-envision the world political system and government as an open source exercise in democracy rather than what it has become -- to a large extent, an oligarchy of the super-rich, and a playground for mega-corporations aimed at optimizing goals other than human good. See R.U. Sirius's article in H+ Magazine for more information.


'''Is the Open Source Party movement related in any way to Occupy Wall Street?'''

Officially, we have no involvement with the Occupy Wall Street movement. However, I would be bold enough to guess that the vast majority of our members do support the movement.


'''What role do you think open source plays in government?'''

The American government, currently? None. The American government, as with many western governments, is run under an opaque, closed-source, almost corporate model. Of course, there is the illusion of democracy, but the ability for the people to choose our leaders is no more democratic than the Pepsi corporation allowing Mountain Dew fans choose the new flavor. Think about it.

Now, what role should open source play in government? Well, that's what our entire party is about...coming up with an answer to this question. Of course, there are various answers from various members as to how to utilize open source principles. I am personally of the view that the old system should be completely replaced with a new model based on Raymond's essay.


'''How do you see the Open Source Party interacting with the Open Government Partnership?'''

Well, our goals are the same: Transparency and accountability. We approach "Open Governance" at a more literal angle. However, as with all good open source projects the Open Source Party thrives on cooperation.


'''How does someone get involved with the Open Source Party?'''

Simple. Join the Facebook group and ask what you can do!"

(http://opensource.com/government/11/12/open-source-political-party)


=More Information=

#[[Question Authority]]
#[https://sites.google.com/site/opensourceparty/home International Open Source Party Wiki]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Open]]