
=Description=

Marcin Jacubowsky:

"To me, open source permaculture (OSPC) is:

1. LIVING MATERIAL CHOICE. Data on what explicit varieties work where - with a visual, global map - if we make this a worldwide project. This point - combined with basic theory, such as Mollison's work - leads to permacultural designs that anyone can implement where they are. The shortcomings of all global-reaching work on the topic is the lack of site-specific information - requiring the invitation of outside experts (permacultural designers). Theory abounds - but practice boils down to knowing particular varieties of living materials and where to get them. One could live on the theory only and end up with suboptimal systems - but optimization can happen from site-specific performance data.

2. PROPAGATION/SOURCING - how you would get the living materials accessibly - on the cheap. This includes both industry standard techniques for propagation, and bioregional facilities where this plant material can be obtained. Global sourcing should also be avaialable. Material should be obtained along OS lines - DIY option where you could, for example, do sweat equity at a propagation facility to get low cost or free materials. Or, it could be that you buy the materials outright. The requirement is that the bioregional facilities have EVERYTHING - diversity, quantities, and prices that allow easy access to producing an integrated permaculture implementation.

3. OPEN SOURCE EQUIPMENT - open source equipment for processing; energy production; field equipment. Other supporting equipment for complete permaculture startup and maintenance, from neosubsistence to economically significant market production capacity.

4. ECONOMIC ANALYSES of productive operations. Both on the subsistence and market levels - such that analyses promote replicability and open business models."
(http://openfarmtech.org/index.php?title=Information_For_Food_Swadeshi)


=More Information=

*  http://permacultureinstitute.pbwiki.com/Andy
    
* http://permaculturewiki.com
    
* http://www.permaculture.org.au/topics/ 


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Open]]