
URL = http://gekgasifier.com/

=Description=

"Our project started in 2008 with the open source Gasifier Experimenter’s Kit (GEK), supporting research, education and DIY hacking in biomass thermal conversion.  Four years later it has evolved into the Power Pallet— a fully automated solution for personal scale biomass power generation. Today you can find over 300 of our systems in 40 countries, supporting research in over 50 universities.

We invite you to join us for the ongoing collaborative process of refining GEK systems, and proving gasification to be a uniquely powerful solution for individual scale energy independence.


...

The Gasifier Experimenters Kit (GEK) makes it easy for beginners and experts alike to run high performance solutions in small scale gasification and pyrolysis. Whether you’re a DIY enthusiast, commercial user, or university researcher; the GEK will get you over the starting hurdles and onto the more rewarding work of making clean gas for power generation, or biochar for soil amendment.

The GEK is designed in a modular fashion for easy switch out between common reactor types and operating situations. You can use the GEK to run an expertly configured downdraft gasifier for fueling engines and generating electricity and heat. Or you can use the same system to create a multi-mode pyrolysis reactor (the BEK) for biochar making and soil studies.

The result is a uniquely powerful “LEGO system” of biomass thermal conversion. The GEK lets you deploy all the commonly discussed, but rarely implemented, “expert solutions”– and does so at the smaller-scale and lesser price needed for personal scale energy projects.

The GEK project is an experiment in collaborative science and open source engineering. GEK participants are working together to advance the science of gasification, and the engineering solutions to implement it meaningfully for today’s users.We’re convinced that a bottom up participatory ecology in energy is just as possible as it has been in computing and communications. We’re using the same methods of open designs, DIY hacking and online collaboration to move it along as quickly as possible.

We encourage you to join us for the adventure via the GEK forum or GEK wiki. Here you will find GEK enthusiasts gathered daily to help on each other’s projects, and generally grow the public knowledge base of gasification solutions.

You might also consider attending one of our hands-on weekend workshops in gasification and biochar. The workshops are held quarterly at ALL Power Labs in Berkeley Califiornia, and elsewhere around the world as sites and interest develop."
(http://gekgasifier.com/)


[[Category:Energy]]