
=Description=

From the Wikipedia [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access_publishing]:

"Open access publishing is the publication of material in such a way that it is available to all potential users without financial or other barriers. An open access publisher is a publisher producing such material. Many types of material can be published in this manner: scholarly journals, known specifically as open access journals, magazines and newsletters, e-text or other e-books (whether scholarly, literary, or recreational), music, fine arts, or any product of intellectual activity. In this context, non-open access distribution is called "toll access" or "subscription access".

Open access can be provided by traditionally-organized publishers, or under other arrangements. With respect to scholarly material, some distribution is carried out by locally organized and subsidized publishers; an example is the production of Annals of Mathematics, produced and supported by the Princeton University Department of Mathematics and the Institute for Advanced Study.

More normally it is a specialized publisher. Some open access publishers publish only open access material, such as PLoS; some publish open access journals as well as subscription-based material, such as BioMed Central (BMC).

The term has also been used in a wider sense to include publishers of Hybrid open access journals, which provide open access only for some article, those for which payment is made on behalf of the author.

It can similarly be used for publishers of Delayed open access journals, in which the articles are open access only after a period of embargo.

Even more loosely, the term is also used to describe publishers that permit or encourage self-archiving by authors and institutions."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access_publishing)


=More Information=

[[Self-Archiving]]


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:IP]]