

=Discussion=

Alberto Corsín Jiménez:

"The open source movement has drawn considerable attention of late. ‘Openness’ has become 
a favoured slogan for describing the epistemic pressures and transformations undergone by 
the political economy of knowledge and technoscience in the age of informational capitalism. 
Thus, whilst some authors have argued that the structure of digital information—in particular 
the negligible costs of reproduction—instantiates a de facto regime of superabundant 
or ‘open knowledge’ (Foray, 2006, pages 172–179), others have drawn attention to the 
enclosure of such informational commons by existing proprietary regimes (Boyle, 2008). 

However, as Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom have pointed out, it is worth remembering that 
access to information depends to this day on the maintenance and management of complex 
infrastructural facilities. Their suggestion is to think of information not as a superabundant 
commons but as a common‑pool resource (Hess and Ostrom, 2003): a resource that requires 
storage and preservation, and over which one must define rights and rules of access, extraction, 
exclusion, and alienation (Hess and Ostrom, 2006, page 7).

Whilst the economic and political underpinnings of open knowledge are on the whole 
well understood, there are fewer studies of the cultural practices and social organisation 
characteristic of such initiatives. In this regard, the aspects of the new economy of open 
knowledge that has received most commentary to date is its grounding in novel organisational 
forms, in particular so‑called peer‑to‑peer networks of collaboration (Benkler, 2006). The 
common view here is that peer‑to‑peer decentralised networks are blurring traditional 
distinctions between production, distribution, and consumption of informational forms. In 
this economy, users themselves become producers of content (so‑called ‘prosumers’), and 
cooperation becomes the economy’s main, if not only dynamo (Benkler, 2011).

Although the organisational qualities of F/OS software projects have been much 
commented on (Ghosh, 2005), in‑depth or ethnographic studies of F/OS cultures are 
much harder to come by. Chris Kelty’s (2008) historical and ethnographic account of the 
development of free software has already become a classic in the field. Kelty has suggested 
that communities of free software developers may be conceptualised as ‘recursive publics’: 
a form of public sphere where the architectural framework for debate and exchange is self‑
grounded in the very activity of writing, editing, patching, or recompiling the infrastructure 
(code) that programmers work with. In a recursive public, technology is deployed “as a kind 
of argument, for a specific kind of order: [free software developers] argue about technology, 
but they also argue through it. They express ideas, but they also express infrastructures 
through which ideas can be expressed (and circulated) in new ways” (Kelty, 2008, page 29, 
emphases in the original). The notion of a ‘recursive public’ offers, then, a very useful 
analytical framework with which to rethink the nature of politics when the infrastructures of 
participation are themselves open to (self‑)modulation.

Gabriella Coleman’s recently published ethnography of the ethics and aesthetics of hacking 
similarly draws on long‑term anthropological engagement with free software programmers 
(2012). Whilst Kelty draws attention to the structural innovation that ‘recursivity’ brings to 
public sphere theories, Coleman focuses instead on the cultures of liberalism that hacking 
enacts. According to Coleman, the toils and pleasures of hacking reveal a contradictory 
and tense relationship with (American) traditions of political liberalism. Hacker attitudes and 
work routines simultaneously challenge and take residence within liberal conceptions 
of freedom, labour, and intellectual property. Thus, whilst some hackers work towards 
protecting individual autonomy from intrusive corporate behaviour, others promote an 
experience of autonomy and freedom that rejoices in the virtues of sharing and learning. And 
yet other programmers take pleasure in the culture of transgression that characterises certain 
underground hacker practices (see also Coleman and Golub, 2008).

These innovative ethnographies of F/OS projects have shown how interventions in the 
domains of technology and property may also be conceptualised as interventions in the domains 
of collaboration and social and political invention; indeed, how these in fact subtend all politics 
as infrastructural politics. There is a historical lesson worth briefly rehearsing here, about the 
proprietorial and sociological frameworks and traditions that such infrastructural politics has 
contributed to exposing. According to Fred Turner (2006), digital utopianism, hacker ethics, 
and the political economy of peer‑to‑peer collaboration are long‑term developments from 
Norbert Wiener’s interdisciplinary postwar experiments in cybernetic philosophy (1989), and in 
particular from the do‑it‑yourself, environmental, and ‘homebrew’ computing countercultural 
movements inspired by cybernetics. In this reading, the philosophy of cybernetics is deemed 
responsible for laying the conceptual ground for talking of ‘informational exchanges’, virtual 
communities, or digital economies of cooperation more broadly. It has contributed to the 
understanding of open source information as a political technology.

It is hardly coincidental, therefore, that the original impetus and advocacy for free 
software as a nonproprietary technology took root in the context of such countercultural 
movements. For indeed what first sparked the creation of free software licences—and 
has remained the most important cultural and political innovation in free and open source 
(F/OS) projects over the past thirty years—was the status of ‘openness’ as a proprietary 
object. The creation of the GNU General Public Licence (GPL) by Richard Stallman in the 
1980s, which is the original and archetypical licence on which F/OS software programmes 
run, marked the first time that copyright law was hacked by the invention of a ‘copyleft’ 
licence (Kelty, 2011). But the controversy surrounding its original development is echoed 
today in almost all debates concerning the legal status of digital objects (Gillespie, 2007). 

These include discussions about the intangibility, materiality, and legal agency of software 
and digital objects; the distinction and/or breakdown of the idea–expression dichotomy; and 
the ensuing problem of adjudicating between creativity, collaboration, and shared practice 
in software development. What is a copyrightable object (code, firmware, binaries)? Who 
are the (collective, individual, relational) subjects of rights? And how do these various 
distinctions map onto political, social, and ethical categories (the public domain, freedom, 
the commons)? These are all controversial debates that have been sparked anew by the digital 
revolution (Biagioli et al, 2011).

The study of open source urban hardware projects is part of these debates, posing a 
formidable challenge to—and spurring considerable innovations in—property forms and 
law. For in most countries the licensing of designs in open hardware projects falls under the 
jurisdiction of patent law, not copyright law.

Unlike F/OS programmes, open source hardware projects produce tangible outputs—
artefacts, devices, machines. According to the Open Source Hardware Definition and 
Statement of Principles, what makes a piece of hardware ‘open’ is its design process (OSHW 
Draft, “Definition of free cultural works”, http://freedomdefined.org/OSHW). It is the design, 
not the object qua object that remains open. This makes open source hardware fundamentally 
different from F/OS software, in that design and output do not coincide in the same object. 

In software the code is the design and the infrastructure; in hardware, the tangible output is 
assembled from the design. In other words, the source of openness in open source hardware 
is the design.
The design of an open source hardware project encompasses therefore both the design of its 
hardware and software and the documentary record of its design process. That is, one needs to 
make explicit how (in what formats, files, stages, languages) the process of design is described, 
documented, and published. Step by step such documentary registry spells a methodology of 
design. Hardware design documentation includes, for example, mechanical drawings, circuit‑
board layouts, photographs, and descriptive texts. There are many layers to a design, and open 
source hardware projects require that every native component of a design be rendered ‘open’, 
or that if a portion of the design is not released under a F/OS licence it be made clear.

An important consequence of the role played by the methodology of design in the 
standardisation of an open hardware project is its legal affordances. Open source hardware 
licences are generally limited to controlling the circulation of design documents and have no 
purchase over manufactured objects. In open source hardware, then, the method of design 
is turned into a social form with proprietary effects: that is, the organisation of the network 
of collaborators; the material qualities of components, formats, and layers (photographs, 
sketches, code); and the methods of description and documentation are all entangled in the 
social process of making or hacking property. Property is not the outcome or output of a design 
process, but the very design process itself. The question of what is open—and how the process 
of opening it up is carried out—when the underlying object is hardware rather than software, 
remains, therefore, a hotly contested issue, and one about which little is known to date."
(http://www.envplan.com/abstract.cgi?id=d13077p)

Source: [[Prototype for Open Source Urbanism‎]]



[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]