'''= " A movement advocating for transparent, modifiable, and democratically governed artificial intelligence systems, rooted in the ethos of digital commons."'''


=Definition=

OSI:

"What is Open Source AI

When we refer to a “system,” we are speaking both broadly about a fully functional structure and its discrete structural elements. To be considered Open Source, the requirements are the same, whether applied to a system, a model, weights and parameters, or other structural elements.


An Open Source AI is an AI system made available under terms and in a way that grant the freedoms1 to:

# Use the system for any purpose and without having to ask for permission.
# Study how the system works and inspect its components.
# Modify the system for any purpose, including to change its output.
# Share the system for others to use with or without modifications, for any purpose.

These freedoms apply both to a fully functional system and to discrete elements of a system. A precondition to exercising these freedoms is to have access to the preferred form to make modifications to the system."

(https://opensource.org/ai/open-source-ai-definition)


=Characteristics=


==Model Openness==

Releases include weights (open-weight), training data, and code (e.g., Mistral AI, LLaMA 2). See: [[Open Weights]]

Contrasts with "open API" models (e.g., OpenAI) that hide core infrastructure.

==Governance==

Hybrid licenses (e.g., CreativeML Open RAIL-M) impose ethical use clauses.

Community-driven oversight (e.g., EleutherAI, LAION).


==Ecosystem==

Tools for federated training (Flower), ethical datasets (The Stack), and local deployment (Ollama).


=Timeline=

Timeline of Open Source AI, via DeepSeek:

==2000–2010: Pre-Open AI Foundations

2001: GNU Free Documentation License – Early model for open knowledge sharing, later influencing AI licenses.

2007: Launch of Apache Mahout – Open-source machine learning library, emphasizing collaborative development.


==2011–2019: Open AI Emerges==

2015: TensorFlow released by Google (open-source, but with corporate control).

2019: EleutherAI forms – Grassroots collective building open LLMs (e.g., GPT-Neo).


==2020–2022: Community-Led Models==

2020: BigScience (France) – Hosts BLOOM, the first multilingual open LLM 

2021: LAION releases OpenCLIP – Open dataset for image-text models, critical for Stable Diffusion.

2022: CreativeML Open RAIL-M License – Ethical use clauses for open models (used by Stable Diffusion).


==2023: Corporate Co-optation & Backlash==

March: Meta releases LLaMA 1 ("open" but with restrictions).

June: French Mistral AI founded – Advocates for open-weight models in EU policy

July: LLaMA 2 released – Sparks debate over "open-washing" 


==2024: Policy Battles & Commons Alternatives==


January: EU AI Act amendments target open-source exemptions (French NGOs lobby for commons protections).

April: Mistral 7B – French model outperforms proprietary alternatives, fueling sovereignty debates.

June: Open Source AI Summit (Paris) – Co-organized by La Quadrature du Net 


=Examples=

# [[Mistral AI]]	French startup lobbying for EU-wide open-weight AI standards.	https://mistral.ai
# Pythia	Transparent LLM by EleutherAI, with documented training data.	https://eleuther.ai
# OpenRAIL Licenses	Ethical use licenses for AI, co-designed by civil society.	https://www.licenses.ai


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Free_Software]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Open]]