

'''* Paper: Open Works, Open Cultures, and Open Learning Systems. Michael A. Peters. Chapter 4 of Putting Knowledge to Work and Letting Information Play: The Center for Digital Discourse and Culture. Edited by Timothy W. Luke and Jeremy Hunsinger. [http://www.cddc.vt.edu Center for Digital Discourse and Culture], December 2009.'''

URL = http://www.cddc.vt.edu/10th-book/putting_knowledge_to_work.pdf (pp. 76+)


=Excerpts=

==Concepts and Metaphors of Openness==

"The idea of openness as a political, social, and psychological metaphor has been part of
a set of enduring narratives in the West since the time before the flourishing of modern
democracy, scientific communication, and the rise of the knowledge economy.

Principally these narratives have been about the nature of freedom, the primacy of
rights to self-expression, the constitution of the public sphere or the commons, and the
intimate link between openness and creativity. The core philosophical idea concerns
openness to experience and interpretation such that a work, language, and culture
consider as a semiotic system permit multiple meanings and interpretations with an
accent on the response, imagination, and activity of the reader, learner, or user. The
classic work that philosophically develops this central idea is the Philosophical
Investigations by Ludwig Wittgenstein (1953) who draws a close relationship between
language as a set of open overlapping speech activities or discourses he calls “language
games” and a “form of life” (or culture).

...

In Wittgenstein’s account of rule-following we see a view of openness to
language and to the text that permits multiple interpretations and the active
construction of meanings. This emphasis on the openness of language, of the text and,
indeed, of ‘openness to the other’ as aspect of subjectivity, which rests on the values of
multiplicity and pluralism, is in part a reaction by Wittgenstein against the logical
empiricist understandings of logico-linguistic rules that allegedly allow for only pure and
single meanings unambiguously correlated with words that depict the world.

...

In 1962 Umberto Eco, the Italian novelist and semio-cian, published his Opera aperta
(The Open Work) which while belonging to his pre-­‐semio-c wri-ngs nevertheless
utilizes the underlying notion of a linguistic system to discuss the development and
values of open works where openness stands for multiplicity of meaning, freedom of
reader, and the plurality of interpretation.

...

Eco distinguishes between three forms of openness in the work of art in terms of
interpretation, semantic content, and the works in movement. While all works of art are
capable of bearing a number of interpretations, the open work is one in which there are
no established codes for their interpretation.


==Open Cultures==

As many scholars and commentators have suggested since the “change merchants” of
the 1970s —Marshall McLuhan, Peter Drucker and Alvin Toffler-­‐-­‐first raised the issue we
are in the middle of a long term cultural evolutionary shift based on the digitization and
the logic of open systems that has the capacity to profoundly changed all aspects of our
daily lives — work, home, school — and existing systems of culture and economy. A wide
range of scholars from different disciplines and new media organizations have
speculated on the nature of the shift."
(http://www.cddc.vt.edu/10th-book/putting_knowledge_to_work.pdf)


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Articles]]