'''= courses that allow external access and participation by non-registered students'''


=Description=

"What is the next step in this progression of openness? If the content is free and the papers, or journal articles are free, then what comes next? I think the next dramatic step…wait, better…LEAP forward will come when a university steps up and offers what I’m tentatively calling OpenTeach. 

OpenTeach empowers professors to teach others for FREE. It enables them to step outside of the boundaries of their university and teach other students, hopefully less privileged, for free. I think this step is coming and I look very forward to that day arriving. Imagine if people could take courses from some of the most brilliant people on the planet. Imagine if these professors were supported by their institutions (given actual faculty loading) to teach students that are not a part of their institution. Imagine the amount of goodwill that this would provide for the bold institution that embraced this concept."
(http://nixty.com/blog/2008/05/18/opencourseware-openaccessopenteach/)

=Example=

"a professor at the University of Texas at Dallas hopes to try to offer even more of his course to a wider audience this fall by allowing outsiders to participate in course discussions online.

“Serious, you can just take this class for free,” wrote the professor, David Parry, an assistant professor of emerging media and communications at the university, on a post on his blog AcademHack. The course is a graduate seminar on “Networked Knowledge,” and Mr. Parry had already planned to make recordings of class sessions available online. But he’s now offering to hold a weekly online discussion group by video chat for those tuning in remotely as well. “Think of it as a more formalized reading group,” he said. 
Those auditing the course who aren’t enrolled won’t get any credit, though. “The knowledge is free, the degree will cost you money,” he wrote."
(http://chronicle.com/wiredcampus/article/3233/professor-proposes-taking-open-education-beyond-posting-course-materials?)


=More Information=

#3 more examples at http://chronicle.com/wiredcampus/article/3349/more-open-teaching-courses-and-what-they-could-mean-for-colleges



[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]