
'''* Article / Conference Paper: ''Thwarting an Uber Future for Complementary Currencies: Open Protocols for a Credit Commons''. By Jem Bendell and Matthew Slater. Paper prepared for the IV International Conference on Social and Complementary Currencies: Money, Consciousness and Values for Social Change, 10th to 14th May, 2017, Universita Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, 2017'''

URL = http://matslats.net/sites/matslats.net/files/Bendell%20and%20Slater%202017.pdf


=Abstract=

The paper explores the rationale and potential for practitoners in both complementary currencies
and platform cooperatives, and their associated researchers, to consider the role of open protocols
to grow the digital commons and avoid a digital dystopia of platform monopolies. The authors
contend that there have been two parallel worlds of practice that have hitherto had little interaction.
One the one hand, the largely capitalist-backed fields of cryptographic currency innovation and
blockchain development, and on the hand the more community-oriented initiatives with older, less
technological complementary currencies. Through a literature review, the same rift is shown to
extend to academic literature. The authors suggest this division reflects a more philosophical divide
between capitalist interests and those seeking to generate and maintain shared wealth. Based on
that analysis the relevance of the concept of “the commons” is discussed, as well as the “digital
commons” as a way of framing different approaches.

The importance of developing open protocols in order to create conditions for new entrants to
thrive, including “protocol cooperatives” is explained. The argument that a free market in privatelyissued
currencies would naturally avoid monopoly, without conscious effort to do so from
innovators and regulators is rejected. Instead, the concept of the commons is applied to currencies
and credit, with implications for the development of open protocols for complementary currencies.
The vision, strategy and roadmap of the new Credit Commons Collective is presented. The
methodology for the research is an adaptation of “reflective practice” through a structured use of
“thinking partnership” over the years of engagement with the subject matter, complemented with
periods of academic literature review, including for this paper."


=Excerpt=

Jem Bendell and Matthew Slater, from the introduction:

"This paper outlines a rationale for growing a “digital commons” of open protocols and related tools
for both platform cooperatives and complementary currencies. It documents findings from 7 years
of joint reflective practice and related interdisciplinary study by the two authors, one a professor in
management studies and the other a complementary currency engineer.

The paper contends that there have been two parallel worlds of practice that have hitherto had little
interaction. One the one hand, the largely capitalist-backed fields of cryptographic currency
innovation and blockchain development, and on the hand the more community-oriented initiatives
with older, less technological complementary currencies. We find the same rift extending to
academic literature, and conclude that the division reflects a more philosophical divide between
capitalist interests and those seeking to generate and maintain shared wealth. We note that the
field of commercial barter, or reciprocal trade, has received even less attention from researchers,
though this may be about to change.

We explore the use of the concept of “the commons” and in particular the digital commons as a
way of framing these different approaches. We chronicle the rising concern about multinational
corporate domination of the new sector where people rent access to their assets, such as ride
sharing or home sharing. We warn that the response to this concern by creating “platform
cooperatives” could be flawed, and explain the importance of developing open protocols in order to
create conditions for new entrants to thrive, including “protocol cooperatives”. However, we warn
that unless more emphasis is placed on developing open protocols within the field of
complementary currencies, then this field can be overtaken by multinational enterprises in ways
that will make monopolistic practices in the "sharing economy" look insignificant. In doing so, we
reject the argument that a free market in privately-issued currencies would naturally avoid
monopoly, without conscious effort to do so from innovators and regulators. As innovators, not
regulators, we outline how the concept of the commons can be applied to currencies and credit,
and introduce the vision and strategy of the new [[Credit Commons Collective]]. A roadmap of the
next steps for this Collective is presented. "
(http://matslats.net/sites/matslats.net/files/Bendell%20and%20Slater%202017.pdf)


==Open Protocols are needed for [[Platform Cooperatives]] to Thrive==

Jem Bendell and Matthew Slater:

"The proper function of an institution is not to crunch
algorithms or own infrastructure that could be common, but to manage trust and social relations. In
this context drivers might aggregate into cooperatives to present a trusted brand appealing to
those who wanted, say, flash cars, women only drivers, criminal record checks, insurance, etc.
Moving beyond ridesharing this protocol approach has many domains. Airbnb could be replaced in
the same way. Real Estate agency could also change. Why should you have to commit to a single
Estate Agent to sell your house and troop around many estate agents to find a house? There could
just be a protocol for advertising and searching for residential property. Why is it still necessary in
2017 to advertise a second-hand bicycle on a centralised, censored, platform like craigslist,
freecycle or the local supermarket or newspaper? Why isn't there simply common space for that?
Open protocols would help pave the way.

The history of open protocols shows they enable efficiencies and economies of scale (e.g. the USB
and x86) which reduces prices and waste. Open protocols also wrest control from individual firms
with the relevant intellectual property and thus enable competition from new entrants. However,
they do not prevent new monopolies from emerging over time. With the internet, capitalist interests,
as manifested by venture capital and then investment banks, backed those enterprises that worked
out how to build services, private territories and gateways on top of the internet’s open protocols
and to build the notion of private property and the means of production into the internet. Only then
could companies like Facebook and Google/Alphabet start monetising value for investors, even
while the lower layers remain free as designed. The importance of network effects to the value of
any platform, whereby they are as useful to the extent they are ubiquitous, it is hard to imagine any
platform like minds.com competing head-to-head with Facebook succeeding to become similarly
large and influential.

One recent protocol that threatened to democratise everything was Bitcoin. As described earlier,
Bitcoin is a protocol for different 'wallet' programmes on different computers to share a common
ledger and thus agree how much is in each wallet. It enables a global payment system without the
need for a central institution to keep the definitive ledger, and so it allows a money system without
states or banks. Bitcoin has turned out to be flawed in that its mass adoption led to an unintended
form of centralisation, where computing power is decisive. Better algorithms have long existed,
although so far Bitcoin retains its first mover advantage. (Torpey, 2014)

To summarise, we see that platform cooperatives have limited potential unless new open protocols
are introduced to enable multiple entrants into a single ecosystem. In absence of benevolent
monopolies, utility will be sub optimal unless open protocols enable interoperability. Open software
protocols mean that it is more difficult to maintain a monopoly position so, forcing entrepreneurs
and investors to focus on competition rather than attempting to monopolise a whole market. . As
many new entrants will fail, if there are open protocols, what they have created while failing can
add to the ecosystem, rather than adding to the mountain of junk code or leaving users stranded."
(http://matslats.net/sites/matslats.net/files/Bendell%20and%20Slater%202017.pdf)

==An Open Protocol for the interoperability of complementary currencies==

Jem Bendell and Matthew Slater:

"The concept of the commons can be applied to our means of exchange – money and credit.
Therefore, with the term “credit commons” we mean our ability, as free individuals and
organisations, to issue and honour credit to whomever we choose, in a form and volume that we
decide, without having to pay state-sanctioned private intermediaries (Bendell and Greco, 2013).
“The key insight from a study of the history of money is that we have allowed the credit commons
to be privatized so that it can be accessed only by appealing to some bank to grant a “loan”.
Today's monopoly on credit creation by private banks now drives a range of economic, social and
environmental problems” (ibid).

As “thinking partners” focused on how to scale collaborative credit systems, we have concluded
that open protocols to enable interoperability between complementary currencies is an important
next step. In arriving at that view, we have found the concepts of the commons to be helpful and
therefore have adopted the name Credit Commons Collective for the group now working towards
those aims. In the final sections of this paper, we summarise known attempts at interoperability, 
the barriers that currently exist, and design principles for a currency exchange system between
complementary currencies.


...


The commercial barter sector and social currency movement have long been at a point of maturity
when standards might be expected to emerge (even the same protocol for both), yet the above
initiatives are technologically crude and not widely used. The oft-heard lament from users that
there is a lack of variety in the marketplace offered on individual exchanges could be quelled by
greater interoperability.

Analysing this situation, we have identified some of the obstacles to greater interoperability. First,
are technological challenges. We observe how much software today is directed at mobile phones
apps, and both the commercial barter sector and social movements are still focused on the users
of web browsers. Just as young software engineers are starting their own high risk projects rather
than supporting functioning projects, the complementary currency platforms rely on older engineers
who know nothing of the technologies of the current decade.

Second is the risk aversion and priorities of incumbents. In conversation with some business barter
software providers we found they did not think that interoperability would increase their turnover.
We suspect there is a fear also of their captive markets being freed. It is also easier for them to
design and run projects internally to organisations, so resources tend to be allocated towards to
adding features and competing with other platforms.

Third are the shallow connections in the social movement and profession in complementary
currencies. There has been no shortage of online conversations, conferences and proposals for
various forms of cooperation, but so far, insufficient money and energy have been committed to
enabling the movement and profession, by creating useful umbrella organisations or consulting
software experts to draw up open protocols.

Finally, and no less significantly, are challenges in the realm of discourse and philosophy. On the
one hand, the well documented investment and enthusiasm about blockchain innovation has
barely touched existing economic networks, while the collaborative credit concepts been elbowed
aside by the Austrian economics implicit in Bitcoin's design. On the other hand, many users and
activists of local currencies conflate local circulation with local issuance. They feel that if a currency
goes out of bounds, it begins to resemble the system of global capital they hoped to shelter from.
We believe that even the limited adoption of a better protocol (or set of protocols) could change the
systemic drivers which now separate value-creators into separate marketplaces. It would make
small exchanges much more viable, thus allowing for greater monetary experimentation. It would 
allow greater convergence around software, thus reducing overall development costs, which
should translate into reduced membership costs. And by linking together the major networks into a
whole, that whole would become a focal point for collaborative credit initiatives the world over."


=Examples=

Jem Bendell and Matthew Slater:

"We would like to highlight the three most useful interoperability projects we know of. 

First, '''the Universal Currency (UC) was created by the International Reciprocal Trade Association for its
members'''. Not a clearing house between different currencies, the UC is a separate exchange with
its own currency which members of all participating exchanges can also join. The exchange is
governed by IRTA and since 2015, provided by Bartercard, the largest B2B exchange in the world.

Second, '''a standard was created for exchanges to publish an RSS feed of offers and wants on their
individual exchanges''', and to read that feed from other exchanges. This can be used in conjunction
with the UC, but technically it has not been sufficient to enable cross-platform searches and sales.

Third, '''when the Australian LETS moved to a clone of CES in 2012, Tim Jenkin built a system
called Clearing Central to allow trade to continue between the two servers. Since then Spain built
its own CES platform, called Integral CES, which also connects to Clearing Central, and
Community Forge exchange software is connected as well'''. There is not yet a way to view
catalogues on other servers."

=More information=

* [[Collaborative Credit Systems]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Credit Commons]]