'''= "A platform of platforms and an open system for global climate accounting and planetary accountability".'''

URL = https://www.openclimate.earth

=Description=

Martin Wainstein:

"The [[Open Climate Project]] is an open source initiative exploring the application of distributed ledger technology (DLT) and other emerging technologies, such as IoT (Internet of Things), big data and machine learning, to the challenge of helping the world keep a transparent climate accounting system towards the climate targets set in the 2015 Paris Agreement — i.e. maintaining anthropogenic warming below 1.5oC. Global climate accounting, the process of recording climate actors and their actions in respect to the shared account of the planet’s climate state, occurs in diverse set of registry platforms that are individually centralized and collectively dispersed and unlinked."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

=Characteristics=

Martin Wainstein:

==The Planet’s accounting track==

"This track must consider Earth as the physical planet devoid
of human created political divisions, and purely based in
physical science. In other words, this can be seen as
decentralized Earth ledger that encompasses the main aspects
covered by working group 1 of the intergovernmental panel
on climate change (IPCC). 


The proposed two fundamental
components to develop and track are: 

1) A consensus mechanism to determine the remaining carbon budget and
its unavoidable uncertainty range (see box 1 for more info
outlining the importance of tracking the carbon budget).
Whilst this number may need to be constantly updated, it can
be a fixed value determined by a median range or
democratically agreed by, for example, an international
scientific committee. 

2) The process to track the aggregate
rate in which this budget is consumed, in real-time or another
practical time period. Whilst the aggregate number is the key
variable value to monitor, efforts should be placed to track
emissions provenance (i.e. their root sources and path).


==The World’s accounting track==

This accounting track is the one traditionally associated with
climate accounting, and described above in section 1, since it
must consider the self-defined boundaries in the human
civilization: countries, provinces, cities, organizations,
individuals, etc. As such, it involves a more intricate political
and subjective process.


The two core accounting components distributed ledger
should cover are: 

1) Open climate pledges taken by all the
relevant actors. This includes nationally determined
contributions (NDCs) in the case of countries, and general
climate pledges stated by any NSA, presented as fixed
numbers that states an intended positive climate action (eg.
emission reduction) in the future relative to a base year. 

2) The process to affordably track and certify what indeed was
and was not emitted by the respective actor. This, in
combination with the other components, is also a strong basis
to roll-out global mechanisms to incentivize behavior change
(eg. through rewards and penalties)."


=Discussion=

Martin Wainstein:

"Planet Earth’s atmosphere can hold a limited amount of
carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) emissions before average
global temperatures unleash the most costly and damaging
impacts of climate change. The Paris Agreement set a
global goal of holding global warming well below 2oC and
aiming for a 1.5oC limit of warming, relative to preindustrial levels.

The limited quantity of emissions relative to this 1.5/2oC
threshold has been termed our global ‘carbon budget’.
Scientifically, the carbon budget is not a fixed number and
never will be — it has an uncertainty range and the data
and knowledge used to calculate it is updated every year
(Rogelj et al., 2019). However, scientists estimate around
600 GtCO2e remains in the budget, while global annual
emissions are around 40 GtCO2e. Thus, the key take-away
when looking at the carbon budget science is that if present
emission pathways are left unchecked, the budget could be
consumed in as little as 15 years. After this, we’ve crossed
an irreversible threshold in planetary resilience."


==[[Consolidating a Climate Accounting System]]==

Martin Wainstein:

"Consolidating a climate accounting system that can combine
state and NSA climate actions is essential to the success of the
Paris Agreement and the prevention of dangerous global
warming. In fact, NSAs and their progress should inform
national target-setting, tracking and policy-making that in
turn should encourage even more non-state action
commitments. Quantitatively assessing and tracking climate
pledges and certifying the efforts to achieve them, however,
are still fraught with difficulties. Existing measurement,
reporting and verification (MRV) systems to track climate
action —both from state and NSAs— are labor-intensive and
costly, frequently requiring third-party consultants, which
discourages resource-constrained actors from participating
and recording actions in transnational climate action
networks or measuring their climate change impacts at all.

If we were to consolidate and maintain a single recordkeeping ledger with global consensus (i.e. where all parties agree) the task would be far from a simple under a trustless
and competitive world. Decades of slow climate negotiations
among countries attest to the intricacy of this challenge. The
rise and maturity of blockchain and its cryptographic science,
paired with emerging digital technologies such as internetconnected sensors, big data and artificial intelligence can provide robust opportunities for existing and new climate
platforms to streamline and incentivize data collection,
climate action certification (i.e. MRV), accounting and trade.
These tools could fill a critical gap in the understanding of how
bottom-up non-state climate actions are implemented, what
they achieve, and how to build a sustainable system that
lowers measurement and reporting burdens to be more
inclusive globally.

Whilst the initial application of blockchain focused on digital
currencies (e.g. Bitcoin), other non-financial applications
quickly followed. In fact, its core promise of decentralized
consensus eventually caught the attention of the climate
world. Eventually, the UNFCCC declared its support for
research on blockchain and distributed ledger technologies
(UNFCCC, 2018). Following this announcement, initiatives like
the Climate Chain Coalition have successfully created a
growing network of entrepreneurial actors that are actively
exploring the blockchain and climate intersection, each with
their own set of technological value propositions.

To date, however, there hasn’t been a compelling direct
application of the technology, at least not in terms of a global
internationally recognized framework for carbon and climate
accounting that propose to leverage the power of trustless
decentralization and automation to integrate legacy
accounting practices with emerging technological ones. There
has also been little discussion about how to address questions
around the governance of these tools, data sharing between
existing climate platforms, development of globally accepted
accounting protocols for NSAs, and the dichotomy of
maintaining actor data privacy alongside climate
transparency."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])



=More information=

* The Open Climate platform, portal and integration protocols are in an alpha prototype phase. Platform can be accessed at www.openclimate.earth and source code can be found at www.github.com/YaleOpenLab/openclimate.

* [[Towards a Blockchain for Global Climate Accounting]]

[[Category:Open]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]