
'''= a group blog for news related to open education'''

URL = http://openeducationnews.org/

=Description=

"The young field of open education is gaining momentum and energy. As additional projects, foundations, universities, and other participants join the movement, the need increases for a single source to gather, sort, analyze, synthesize, and disseminate news related to open education. As a field, open education is now where the field of open access was a few years ago. Peter Suber’s wonderful Open Access News provides an invaluable service to the OA community, and we intend to replicate this service with Open Education News.


'''How does Open Education News work?'''

Open Education News is essentially a group blog. A number of individuals from the US, South Africa, and eventually other locations daily monitor the internet for news related to open education. We then aggregate these items and publish them individually with minor commentary. Occasionally we’ll publish bigger pieces of our own authorship; analyses and such. If you know of some open education news we should write about, contact David Wiley at david.wiley@gmail.com.


'''Where do you host Open Education News?'''

OEN runs on the popular WordPress open source blogging platform. The site is hosted at WordPress.com, which provides great stability and speed for a very low cost and zero administration overhead (e.g., no worry about backups, security, etc.). We’d highly recommend WordPress if you’re looking for a blogging platform.
Who writes for Open Education News?

The OEN team is currently comprised of Woldekidan Amde, SaraJoy Pond, Jennifer Maddrell, Philipp Schmidt, and David Wiley. If you’d like to join the team of folks writing for OEN, contact David Wiley at david.wiley@gmail.com.
Who supports Open Education News?

Open Education News is graciously supported by the Open Society Institute and the Shuttleworth Foundation."

[[Category:Education]]