

=Description=

By Jeremy de Beer, Jeremiah Baarbé, and Sarah Thuswaldner:

"Agricultural data is a vital resource in the effort to address food insecurity. This data is used across the food-production chain. For example, farmers rely on agricultural data to decide when to plant crops, scientists use data to conduct research on pests and design disease resistant plants, and governments make policy based on land use data. As the value of agricultural data is understood, there is a growing call for governments and firms to open their agricultural data.

Open data is data that anyone can access, use, or share. Open agricultural data has the potential to address food insecurity by making it easier for farmers and other stakeholders to access and use the data they need. Open data also builds trust and fosters collaboration among stakeholders that can lead to new discoveries to address the problems of feeding a growing population."
(http://www.openair.org.za/open-datas-effect-on-food-security/)

=More Information=

* see [[Open AIR]]: The Open African Innovation Research  network is researching open agricultural data for Africa

==Publications==

By Jeremy de Beer, Jeremiah Baarbé, and Sarah Thuswaldner:


"Open AIR researchers has already published two works on open agricultural data. 

1) Published in partnership with GODAN, “[http://www.godan.info/documents/ownership-open-data-governance-options-agriculture-and-nutrition-0 Ownership of Open Data]” describes how intellectual property law defines ownership rights in data. Firms that collect data own the rights to data, which is a major factor in the power dynamics of open data. 

2) In July, Jeremiah Baarbé and Jeremy de Beer will be presenting “[http://www.openair.org.za/publications/a-data-commons-for-food-security/ A Data Commons for Food Security]” at the 2017 International Association for the Study of the Commons conference in Utrecht, The Netherlands. The paper proposes a licensing model that allows farmers to benefit from the datasets to which they contribute. The license supports SME data collectors, who need sophisticated legal tools; contributors, who need engagement, privacy, control, and benefit sharing; and consumers who need open access."
(http://www.openair.org.za/open-datas-effect-on-food-security/)


[[Category:Open Data]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Open]]