
'''= [[Crowdsourced Design]] initiative'''

URL = http://openideo.com/

=Description=

"OpenIDEO is a place where people design better, together for social good. It's an online platform for creative thinkers: the veteran designer and the new guy who just signed on, the critic and the MBA, the active participant and the curious lurker. Together, this makes up the creative guts of OpenIDEO.

To become a place where good ideas gain momentum, OpenIDEO depends on participation — your inspirations, his comments, her concepts, our design process. It's these efforts, these big and small moments of sharing and collaboration, that make this platform a dynamic resource for tackling significant global challenges.

IDEO, a design and innovation firm, developed OpenIDEO as a way to include a broader range of people in the design process through inspiration, concepting, and evaluation."


=Principles of the OpenIDEO Community=

Principle #1: Inclusive

Recognize and enable all levels of participation from different disciplines. It's about allowing anyone to contribute to the creative process. Whether it's a great insight, a beautiful sketch, an encouraging build, or a few words of praise, the platform allows everyone to take part in and feel as if they are a part of the process.



Principle #2: Community-centered

Remember the core strengths of the community and play to them. OpenIDEO is meant to foster a strong, vibrant, lively community that thrives on inspiration — and that we all trust will make a difference. Focusing on this community and its activities is essential.



Principle #3: Collaborative

Promote teamwork among individuals and teams by recognizing the many roles that are crucial to each step of the design process. Always choose collaboration over competition, and create an atmosphere for building on one another's ideas.



Principle #4: Optimistic

Stay optimistic! You never know when a wild idea might enable others to get closer to a viable solution.



Principle #5: Always in Beta

Design for continuous improvement and iteration and scale deliberately. That goes for the community, the platform, and these principles. To this end, please email your suggestions for making OpenIDEO better."
(http://openideo.com/about-us)


=More Information=

* [[Crowdsourcing]]


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]