
'''= "a nonprofit educational technology initiative based at Rice University".'''

URL = https://openstax.org 

=Description=

'''1. From OpenStax:'''

"OpenStax textbook projects are developed and peer-reviewed by educators to ensure they are readable and accurate, meet the scope and sequence requirements of each course, are supported by instructor ancillaries, and are available with the latest technology-based learning tools."

(https://openstax.org )


'''2. From the Wikipedia:'''

"OpenStax (formerly OpenStax College) is '''a nonprofit educational technology initiative based at Rice University'''. Since 2012, OpenStax has created peer-reviewed, openly-licensed textbooks, which are available in free digital formats and for a low cost in print. Most books are also available in Kindle versions on Amazon.com and in the iBooks Store. OpenStax's first textbook was College Physics, which was published online, in print, and in iBooks in 2012. OpenStax has also launched OpenStax Tutor Beta, adaptive courseware based on cognitive science principles, machine learning, and OpenStax content.

Aiming to compete with major publishers' offerings,[3][4] the project was initially funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the Michelson 20 Million Minds Foundation, and the Maxfield Foundation.[3][5][6] All textbook content is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Licenses; specifically, the books are available under the CC BY license (except for Calculus, which is CC BY-NC-SA), which means that instructors are able to use, adapt, and remix the content, as long as they attribute OpenStax.

In 2017, OpenStax announced that they were partnering with UK Open Textbooks to spread the use of their open content in the UK,[7] and partnering with Katalyst Education to form OpenStax Polska, bringing Polish-language versions of select OpenStax books to universities in Poland."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenStax)


==OpenStax CNX, formerly called Connexions==

"OpenStax CNX, formerly called Connexions,[1] is a global repository of educational content provided by volunteers. The open source platform is provided and maintained by OpenStax, which is based at Rice University. The collection is available free of charge, can be remixed and edited, and is available for download in various digital formats.

Founded as Connexions in 1999 by Richard Baraniuk, OpenStax CNX is based on the philosophy that scholarly and educational content can and should be shared, re-used and recombined, interconnected and continually enriched. As such, it was one of the first Open Educational Resources (OER) initiatives along with projects such as MIT OpenCourseWare and the Public Library of Science. The materials in Connexions are available under a CC BY Creative Commons license, which means that content can be used, adapted, and remixed, as long as attribution is provided."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenStax_CNX)


=Status=

From the Wikipedia:


"In 2022 OpenStax declared their product saved US$1.7 billion in education costs since 2012, 6 million students from 139 countries and 63 percent of higher education institutions in US use OpenStax.

The free, online version of OpenStax books are kept up-to-date on an ongoing basis. Instructors are encouraged to submit errata suggestions via the OpenStax website, and errata suggestions are reviewed by subject matter experts. Revisions are made when it is determined to be pedagogically necessary. New PDFs and print versions of the books are released each summer when substantial changes are present.

OpenStax's original goal was to publish openly licensed textbooks for the 25 highest-enrolled undergraduate college courses: they achieved that goal in 2016. In September 2020 they announced plans to double the number of textbooks they offer."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenStax)

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Open]]