

=Description=


From http://E-TextEditor.com/blog/2009/opencompany


The Open Company:


“Totally open. No concept of bosses or employees. Anyone could join in at any time, doing whatever task they found interesting, for whatever time they found appropriate.”

The real question is how to make the users real participants in the company. There is a lot more to be done than just coding. Everything from support to design and marketing could in principle be opened up to free participation. Obviously there are some things where mistakes could have seriously adverse effects on the company, but this is where it would be appropriate with levels of certification (maybe shown kind of like stackoverflow’s badges).

Imagine you had a company like this. Totally open. No concept of bosses or employees. Anyone could join in at any time, doing whatever task they found interesting, for whatever time they found appropriate. How could you possibly find a way to compensate them fairly?

The key is in a technology called Trust Metrics. In essence this is a technique for rating each other, but with the key distinction that the way ratings are calculated makes cheating ineffective. This is a new technology, which has not been applied for this purpose before, but it has already proven itself as the underlying principle behind such well known technologies as Googles pagerank and the certifications on Advogato.

By basing the compensation on continuous rating by your peers, it becomes possible to start out by just participating a bit in your free time, and then gradually, as your ratings increase, spend more and more time on the project. It may eventually come to fully supplanting your day job, becoming your primary source of income, or you may choose to just keep it as something you do on the side. And not only can nobody stop you from participating, there is nobody who can fire you either. This makes it a far more secure way to make a living, where your status is solely dependent on your own ability and effort, rather than on arbitrary decisions from some superior.

“not only can nobody stop you from participating, there is nobody who can fire you either.
You could question the fairness of being rated by your peers like this, but keep in mind that the way it is done in companies now, is pretty much completely opaque, with some boss judging you in a pretty much arbitrary manner. At least here you will have full disclosure of why and how you are being rated. Also, it is not completely unprecedented. There are companies like W.L.Gore, which for decades has used peer ratings as the sole basis for compensation. But they have obviously not been open for free participation."
(http://E-TextEditor.com/blog/2009/opencompany)


=More Information=

Also covered at http://MetaGovernment.org/wiki/Open_company


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]