
=In General=


Toni Prug:

"As i have developed elsewhere, key attributes of the founding communities have been formalized best in the IETF and Free Software (Prug 2009). We could summarize them: one, a goal to create something that is shareable – making profit can only be a secondary goal. Two, open participation – anyone can join, based on enjoyment of work – and open processes and results of work. Three, core activity is base on volunteering, working groups and competence. Four, rough consensus and running code decision making principle is the norm, voting is used only in rare and extreme circumstances. Five, responsibilities are defined, to note some examples: for IETF it is protocol ownership, for FS software maintainer, for Debian GNU/Linux operating system package maintainer. Six, rights are based on contributions – in Open Organizations project, we called this implementation work (Geer, Malter, and Prug 2005). Roots of this principle are visible in the MIT Tech Model Railroad Club, the earliest hacker community we know of, where keys to the main room were given to new members, new hackers, only after they completed forty hours of work (Levy 1984, 21). Many authors also hold that having a trusted benevolent dictator is a key aspect(Coffin 2006), i do not share this view.I proposed that we could describe the model in short with the following formula: the Internet Model = FS + IETF, software + networking, or ethics + organization."
(http://hackthestate.org/2010/03/05/series-on-commuonism-open-process-the-organizational-spirit-of-the-internet-model-1/)


==More Information==

* [[Open Process as the Organizational Spirit of the Internet Model]] Toni Prug. [http://hackthestate.org/2010/03/05/series-on-commuonism-open-process-the-organizational-spirit-of-the-internet-model-1/]




=In Science=

'''= the sharing of research procedures in science.''' 


"Data has no value in and of itself unless the process used to generate it is appropriate and reliable. Disputes over the validity of claims are rarely based on the data themselves but on the procedures used either to collect them or those used to process and analyse them."
(http://blog.openwetware.org/scienceintheopen/2008/09/30/a-personal-view-of-open-science-part-i/)


==More Information==

#[[Openness in Science]]
#[[Open Access]] to publications and [[Open Data]], i.e. the availability of raw material are the other 2 requirements for [[Open Science]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]