'''* Whitepaper: [[Open Climate]].  Leveraging blockchain for a global, transparent and integrated climate accounting system. By Martin E. Wainstein.'''

URL = [https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf? pdf]


=Abstract=

The [[Open Climate Project]] is an open source initiative exploring the application of distributed ledger technology (DLT) and other emerging technologies, such as IoT (Internet of Things), big data and machine learning, to the challenge of helping the world keep a transparent climate accounting system towards the climate targets set in the 2015 Paris Agreement — i.e. maintaining anthropogenic warming below 1.5oC. Global climate accounting, the process of recording climate actors and their actions in respect to the shared account of the planet’s climate state, occurs in diverse set of registry platforms that are individually centralized and collectively dispersed and unlinked.

This is often due to lack of trust between actors, resisting to share data that exposes them to scrutiny. 

This project involves a software ‘platform of platforms,’ distinguished here as the Open Climate1 platform, the development of climate communication protocols, and a shared user interface as portal to the system. The platform acts as a common integrator that can reconcile climate records and functions from both legacy and DLT-based climate platforms in the pursuit of helping maintain a decentralized ‘ledger of ledgers’. With climate actors and their associated records mapped in a shared network— ranging from countries, to companies to individuals — DLT and other cryptographic tools are primarily used to: provide general transparency alongside individual data privacy, prevention of double counting in the digital certification and trading of climate actions, and a platform for contractual automation of rules and mechanisms with financial nature; from Paris Agreement stocktakes to carbon pricing and rewards for mitigation outcomes.


'''We present here the architecture for the Open Climate platform as well as describe its full stack prototype.''' 

Whilst the platform is currently incubated at the Yale Open Innovation Lab (openlab) it combines multiple other platforms in advanced technological stages; incubated and developed by a growing network of collaborators. For the combined development, the open climate project adopts a multi-stakeholder open innovation framework and consortium to actualize this ambitious endeavor through radical collaboration."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

=Status=

* The Open Climate platform, portal and integration protocols are in an alpha prototype phase. Platform can be accessed at www.openclimate.earth

==Current Open Climate’s state and next steps==

Martin Wainstein:

"After over a year of architecting and several months of
incubation, the project is in an advanced prototype phase
and is currently deploying its first real-world pilots. U
The blueprint of the project’s meta architecture is in its
first full draft, and maps how data and process flows cross
multiple layers of the technology stack, spanning from
IoT-based datasets, to platform functions, blockchain
ledger records, smart contracts and user interface
displays. The architecture is tested by different proof-ofconcept of these data flows but will require a higher level of testing by directly integrating of the platform
ecosystems of the initial collaborating partner. Our realworld pilots are focused on the certification and minting of digital climate assets from the generation of renewable
energy by non-state actors (eg. private companies). We
are primarily focusing on the compatibility of these assets
(eg. mitigation outcomes) with subnational and national
climate records in order to enable the automated nested
accounting system once those assets are retired. Other
next steps are outlined in Part III of this document."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])


=Discussion=

==Integrated platforms and working groups under an open innovation framework==

Marvin Wainstein:


"The [[Open Climate Project]] and its underlying global climate
accounting system and platform cannot be developed in
silo, and certainly not under legal layers of protected
proprietary software. It requires a higher level of
participation, collaboration and interoperability among
climate stakeholders and technological providers; from
established government and private actors, to new
climate action innovators and, ultimately, individual
citizens. Innovation needs to not only occur in blockchain
for climate accounting and related software systems but
in decentralized institutional models that can steer and
maintain global projects and their associated business
models. Blurring organizations’ IP boundaries in the
innovation process allows a rich ecosystem for such
solutions to emerge. Here we present the open innovation
framework adopted by the project and its initial
participants.

As a platform of platforms, Open Climate would lack
significant value without the integration of its constituent
platforms via application programming interfaces (APIs)
and shared protocols. This section introduces the first
group of integrated platforms with their respective
technological capabilities, how they participate in the
project as part of working groups to deliver robust realworld pilots, and their intention to form part of a growing network and consortium to develop and govern the
underlying climate accounting system. Furthermore, it
presents the overall project development timeline until
the release of the operational Open Climate platform,
proposed here to be governed by a decentralized
autonomous and self-sovereign organization."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])