'''= public domain 2D clip art images'''

URL = http://openclipart.org/wiki/

NOTE The main Open Clip Art Library website is offline because of scaling issues with the project and our current hosting. We are currently in process of moving to http://osuosl.org/ Until then, please contribute to http://wiki.creativecommons.org/cchost and this wiki.


=Status 2010=

"The Open Clip Art Library has grown, from humble beginnings in early 2004, into a massive collection of over 24,000 scalable vector images, all created by 1200+ artists from around the world.

OCAL is a powerful platform, through which, all work uploaded to the site is licensed to the public through Creative Commons’ “Public Domain Dedication”. This means that anyone can download and use the entire SVG library for any purpose, including both free and commercial works!

OCAL now boasts an easily navigable collection, made possible by new thumbnail previews. It has now become much easier to search and download clip art that suits any situation. The new site layout includes an updated theme, from Andy Fitzsimon, that emphasizes user interaction by placing more importance on the portal to upload created work, as well as displaying selections from the ever-growing collection.

Behind the scenes, members of Fabricatorz, including, among others, Bassel Safadi, Michi, Ronaldo Barbachano, and Brad Phillips, have helped push The Open Clip Art Library onto the Aiki Framework. This new PHP + MYSQL platform allows programmers to easily create and work with content management systems from the web."
(http://www.facebook.com/notes/jon-phillips/open-clip-art-library-20-is-here/352895521610)


=More Information=

Part of the [[Open Content Library]] project

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Sharing]]