

=Definition=

West and O’Mahony:

“One type of technical community that has
received a great deal of empirical attention is an
open source software development community.
These communities are composed of individuals
who collaborate toward a common goal but do
not share a common employer and are not
governed by an employment hierarchy. By using
both online and offline means, open source
software communities collectively produce
software that is freely and publicly available –
creating in effect a shared public good that can
be used for either public or private purposes.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Typology of Community vs. Corporate Relationships=

The following excerpts makes the following distinctions:

-	recognizing firms directly as participants or indirectly through employees
-	informal vs. formal social structures to manage membership
-	individually vs. collectively founded (organic vs. synthetic)
-	autonomous vs. sponsored


==Introduction==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“ Some communities explicitly recognize
firms as participants, while in other cases firms
participate indirectly through employees (i.e.,
sponsored contributors) that represent the firm’s
interests (Dahlander and Wallin, 2006). 

Often, an open source community will create an
informal or formal social structure to manage
membership and joining (von Krogh, Spaeth and
Lakhani, 2003; O’Mahony and Ferraro 2007),
but little has been done to understand how these
projects are governed (see Shah, 2006; Markus,
2007; O’Mahony, 2007 for recent exploratory
exceptions).

In addition to collaborating with
autonomous open source communities, a
growing number of corporate and government
sponsors have founded their own open source
communities to meet either public or private
objectives. “
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)



==Organic vs. Synthetic==

West and O’Mahony:

West and O’Mahony (2005)
distinguished between individually-founded and
organizationally-founded open source
communities, designating the former as
“organic” and the latter as “synthetic”. These
distinctions emphasized the different character
of these two types of community founders and
their prospective growth strategies. While
organic projects are founded by individuals and
grow through grass roots communications,
synthetic communities are founded by
corporations and grow with more strategic
direction. 

Since communities can evolve along
different trajectories after their founding, in this
paper, we refer to autonomous and sponsored
communities to focus on their current
governance structure (cf. Markus, 2007;
O’Mahony, 2007) as opposed to their founding
state. For example, a synthetic community could
begin as a sponsored community, but evolve to
become fully autonomous – as was the case with
Netscape’s release of Mozilla and its subsequent
transition to independence. By using the
categories of autonomous and sponsored, our
aim is to provide a more precise categorization
to help scholars examine open source
communities over their lifecycle.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


==Autonomous vs. Sponsored==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We define an autonomous open source
community as one that is presently independent
of any one firm and community managed (cf.
O’Mahony, 2007). A community-managed
governance system operates outside the reach of
authority embedded in employment relations.
Contributors to an open source project may be
volunteers or may be paid by their employers to
work on the project, but decision-making on the
project takes place independently from the
employment structure that guides the workplace.
These projects may be supported by a non-profit
foundation created specifically to support the
project, but such foundations have little
authority over their members (O’Mahony,
2005).

A sponsored open source community is one
where one (or more) corporate entities control
the community’s short- or long-term activities.
To refine these distinctions, in thus study, we
examine how sponsors approached the task of
building an open source community and how
these communities differed from their
autonomous counterparts.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Discussion=

==The role of technical communities in corporate innovation==

West and O’Mahony:

“To some extent, firms and technical
communities have always collaborated (Allen,
1983) to create standards (e.g., Isaak, 2005),
shared infrastructure (Bradner, 1999), and
innovation outcomes (Hargrave and Van de Ven,
2006) that are bigger than any one firm can
achieve. 

Empirical work suggests three reasons
why firms participate in technical communities.

First, there is increasing evidence that path
breaking innovations cannot occur without a
community to interpret, support, extend and
diffuse them (Hargrave and Van de Ven, 2006;
Schoonhoven and Romanelli, 2001; Hargadon
and Douglas, 2001; Hunt and Aldrich, 1998;
Christensen and Rosenbloom, 1995; Rosenkopf
and Tushman, 1994; Tushman and Rosenkopf,
1992; Anderson and Tushman, 1990; Van de
Ven and Garud, 1989). Research on
technologies such as medical devices, bicycles,
computer hardware, and electricity show that
new technologies are shaped by human
institutions that provide a context for the
interpretation and use of such technologies
(Bijker, Hughes and Pinch, 1987).

Second, research on collective models of
innovation (von Hippel, 2005; von Hippel and
von Krogh, 2003; Hargrave and Van de Ven,
2006; Allen, 1983) and on community technical
organizations (Rosenkopf, Metiu and George,
2001; Rosenkopf and Tushman, 1998) shows
that communities of lead users help firms not
only in interpreting and applying new
innovations, but in their creation and further
development by refining new design iterations
(von Hippel, 1988, 2005; Shah, 2006; Murray
and O’Mahony, 2007). A large body of evidence
suggests that firms in many industries (toys,
entertainment, medical devices, manufacturing,
sporting goods, music) benefit from
contributions from community members
(Jepperson and Frederiksen, 2006; von Hippel,
2005; Franke and Shah, 2003; Lakhani and von
Hippel, 2003).

Third, although it is not widely recognized,
technical communities provide a vehicle to
coordinate the work of both firms and
individuals in developing new technologies and
standards (Rosenkopf et al, 2001; Mowery and
Simcoe, 2005). Technical communities offer
individuals leadership opportunities (Fleming
and Waguespack, 2007; O’Mahony and Ferraro,
2007) and enhance their technical credibility
(Hars and Ou, 2002; Lerner and Tirole, 2002).
For example, participation in a specific public
community (such as standardizing the http
protocol as a member of the Internet
Engineering Task Force) allows participants to
both develop and advertise domain specific
knowledge (Fleming and Waguespack, 2007).

The degree to which firms benefit from
collaboration with technical communities can
also depend on features of the technology itself
such as the degree of modularity (Baldwin and
Clark, 2000), or the number of complements,
linking mechanisms, or interface technologies
required (Tushman and Rosenkopf, 1992).
While practitioners have long argued that
effective management of such communities can
help support firm goals (Williams and Cothrel,
2000; Armstrong and Hagell, 1996; Godwin,
1994) little empirical work has been done in this
area.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)




=Source=

'''Article: The [[Role of Participation Architecture in Growing Sponsored Open Source Communities]].''' By Joel West (San Jose State University College of Business) and Siobhán O’Mahony (UC Davis Graduate School of Management)
February 6, 2008 preprint version of  Industry and Innovation, Special Issue on “Managing Open Innovation Through Online Communities”

URL = http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance