

=Discussion=

Keith Aoki:

"Some farmers are seed “hackers.” Although their
source code—the DNA coding—is closed to them, nature itself or human
intervention generates new “hacks” by crosses and mutation, and farmers
select hacks that they judge beneficial. The tantalising prospect opens up
that [participatory plant breeding] might be able to capture the power of
the “bazaar” development model in the same way that the open-source
software movement has. . . . If [participatory plant breeding] can harness
the creativity of farmer “hackers,” wouldn’t this be a better and safer way
of trying to double rice production in the next twenty years than relying
on Big Science to pull off a second Green Revolution?

An open source PGR model would be based on the idea that farmers are
both users and developers of different types of information technology.

Such a model might be applied not only to the development of plant
varieties via selective breeding, genomics, and genetic manipulation of
PGRs, but also to the development of related machinery/technology and the
sharing of agricultural information, knowledge, and other agricultural
know-how.

New plant varieties and related technology developed and created using
this participatory process could then be made available to farmers and plant
breeders with a GPL-styled license with the same “viral” effect—any
subsequent modifications must be openly accessible under the GPL
terms.142 Plant varieties subject to a GPL-like license would be covered
under a license that explicitly conditions the receipt of the plant materials
on a contractual promise that there would be no downstream restrictions on
the rights of others to experiment, innovate, share, or exchange the
PGRs.

An application of the open source software model, or a variant of it, may
be a viable option in the PGR context. Historically, farmers have been
selecting seeds and selectively breeding crops for centuries in order to
create new varieties. However, while farming practices developed around
the globe and over millennia, plant breeding as an organized industry has
only been in existence for a little over a century. Intellectual property
protection for PGRs then, is an even newer phenomenon. Diamond v.
Chakrabarty served as a watershed moment when the U.S. Supreme
Court opened the door to patenting living organisms. In light of this
history, it makes sense to carve out some particular niche, exception, or
regulation pertaining to PGRs for food and agriculture.

Application of an open source PGR model could also yield positive
developments, in that it may lead to increased understanding about PGRs.

An application of the model would entail creating, maintaining, and
growing an inclusive user community of farmers, plant breeders, and
researchers through which information and technology may be exchanged
freely via decentralized commons-based peer-production networks. Such
networks would increase the understanding of plant germplasm among
individual farmers and researchers, thus leading to increased capacity
building, rather than as passive consumers of technologically advanced but
legally inaccessible crop technology systems. Also, like software
programmers, farmers have varying criteria they employ when evaluating
seeds, depending on locale, the size of their holdings, etc.

An open source PGR model thus would help ensure that farmers in
particular local situations would be able to develop and cultivate plant
varieties adapted to local climate, soil, and other conditions. This is a much
different result than the situation where multinational agrochemical
corporations heavily promote “crop technology systems” that attempt to
adapt local conditions to accommodate their seeds via expensive chemical
inputs, rather than adapting a seed to local conditions. Additionally, such
corporations are reluctant to invest in any field where the market size is too
small or the profitability of the venture is not readily apparent.148
Another plus point is that an open source PGR model would help prevent
further erosion of genetic diversity accelerated by the increasing intellectual
propertization of PGRs. The open source model could lead to plant quality
improvements because, by analogy in the open source software context,
“given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow.” An open source PGR
model would contribute to increased availability and genetic diversity of
PGRs by making germplasm less vulnerable to crop diseases that would be
able to wipe out a monoculture crop and to the manipulative moves of an
increasingly oligopolistic small number of powerful firms.

“[L]ike software, seed production is a process which has a large fixed
cost but which produces a product that can be cheaply distributed [or
copied].”150 With software, duplication is digital, whereas with seeds,
duplication is the result of the self-replicating nature of the seed itself.

Moreover, the costs of contribution to an already existing and openly
accessible plant variety (as would be a computer program in the software
context) is low compared to the cost of starting from scratch if permission
cannot be secured to work with materials protected by intellectual property
rights.

As mentioned above, an open source PGR model would also serve as a
means of spreading risk and sharing costs among farmers, “farmers’ rights”
groups, and other smaller entities involved in the agricultural sector. Under
an open source PGR model that promoted participatory open source
breeding projects, smaller seed companies would be able to compete with
larger companies by lowering research and development costs, and farmers
would be able to participate in creating new varieties suited to local
environments, promoting in situ PGR conservation.

In situ conservation, as opposed to ex situ storage in seed banks, is
significant because it encourages preservation of traditional farmer knowhow
as well as promoting genetic diversity.153 Additionally, the
motivations for using an open source model in the PGR context are
arguably more profound than in the software area—namely, farmers’
survival, PGR preservation, and feeding regional and global populations.

While an open source model for PGRs has attractive aspects, such a
model also presents potential problems that need careful consideration. In
the open source software context, the creation and management of a user
community is critical.155 The role of the project leader includes the
provision of the basic intellectual content and the addition of new
contributions. Other tasks also include the setup and maintenance of
effective community structures to maximize users’ motivations to
contribute and the keeping up of morale within the user/contributor
community."
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1390273)


==Policy Infrastructure Proposals==

Keith Aoki:

"As with GNU/Linux, it would be crucial to create an institutional
structure that coordinated the activities inherent in an open source PGR
model. These activities would include, at minimum, bringing farmers, plant
breeders, and public and private researchers together; informing the parties
about the uses and abuses of intellectual property law; and educating them
on ways that a GPL-like license could be used to facilitate open access to
PGRs. Might MASIPAG or similar organizations come to fill the void
of replicable models for serving developing countries?

Yet another option is the creation of international or international-level
crop-specific agencies. With the logistical support of the various regional
agricultural research centers, national seed banks, and financial backing
from the FAO and private foundations, such agencies would either acquire
rights to critical bio-patents pertaining to PGRs or negotiate with the patent
holders to grant licenses to the public, such as the “golden rice” license, and
dedicate them to the “public domain.”168 These entities would also collect
and disseminate information, support innovations, and furnish technical aid
to researchers, plant breeders, and farmers."
((http://ssrn.com/abstract=1390273))


=More Information=

* Book: Aoki, K., 2008. Seed Wars: Controversies and Cases on Plant Genetic Resources and Intellectual
Property. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.

* Article on [[Common Genomes]], see: Deibel, Eric, 2006.‘Common Genomes: Open Source in Biotechnology and the Return of the Commons’. Tailoring Biotechnologies, 2 (2): 49–84.


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Open Technology Transfer]]

[[Category:Policy]]