
URL = http://www.opennetworkingfoundation.org/


=Description=

"The Open Networking Foundation is a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting a new approach to networking called Software-Defined Networking (SDN). SDN allows owners and operators of networks to control and manage their networks to best serve their needs. ONF’s first priority is to develop and use the OpenFlow protocol. Through simplified hardware and network management, [[Open Flow]] seeks to increase network functionality while lowering the cost associated with operating networks."


=Discussion=

Some details:

"The SDN approach arose out of a six-year research collaboration
between Stanford University and the University of California at
Brkeley. Essential to SDN are two basic components: a software
interface (called OpenFlow) for controlling how packets are forwarded
through network switches, and a set of global management interfaces
upon which more advanced management tools can be built. The first task
of ONF will be to adopt and then lead the ongoing development of the
OpenFlow standard (www.openflow.org) and encourage its adoption by
freely licensing it to all member companies. ONF will then begin the
process of defining global management interfaces.
 
OpenFlow enables networks to evolve, by giving a remote controller
the power to modify the behavior of network devices, through a well-
defined "forwarding instruction set". The growing OpenFlow ecosystem
now includes routers, switches, virtual switches, and access points
from a range of vendors."
(http://www.openflow.org/)



[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]