


=Source=

By [http://open-governance-and-learning.posterous.com/open-government-vs-open-governance Maya Nair], based on work of [http://www.aheadofideas.com/?p=590 Dan Bevarly]:


=Table=



<table class="MsoTableGrid" border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; border: medium none;">

<tr style="height: 9.85pt;">
<td valign="top" style="padding: 0in 5.4pt; height: 9.85pt;" width="103">
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="258">
<p style="text-align: center;"><strong>Open Government</strong></p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="277">
<p style="text-align: center;"><strong>Open Governance</strong></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top" style="" width="103">
<p>Definition and Differences</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="258">
<ul type="disc" style="margin-top: 0in;">
<li>Structured by the        government with access to information and communication. Standardized        and you get what you see. </li>
<li>Open government has to        do with the institution itself and its structure, or mechanics.</li>
<li>Open government        directives do not require what we have come to call Web 2.0 solutions to        be successful.&nbsp;</li>
</ul>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="277">
<ul type="disc" style="margin-top: 0in;">
<li>Facilitates        collaborative exchange among individuals or groups of people. Allows        people to consult in an open setting based on what is arranged by the        government. You get what you see, but at the same time you are allowed        to change what you see according to how you would like to see it. </li>
<li>Open governance has to        do with its processes.</li>
<li>Will require the collaborative        technologies provided in Web 2.0 solutions to succeed.</li>
</ul>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top" style="" width="103">
<p>Keywords</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="258">
<p>Transparency, Inclusive, Accessibility</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="277">
<p>Widespread, Public Engagement, Web 2.0</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td valign="top" style="" width="103">
<p>Examples</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="258">
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</td>
<td valign="top" style="" width="277">
<p>&nbsp;</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr style="height: 13.9pt;">
<td style="" colspan="3">
<p style="text-align: center;"><span style="color: #000000;"><strong>Common Denominator: The Internet</strong></span></p>
</td>
</tr>

</table>




[[Category:Graphics]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]