
'''= "focused on improving the security of software. Our mission is to make software security visible, so that individuals and organizations worldwide can make informed decisions about true software security risks".'''

URL = https://www.owasp.org/

=Description=

"The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is a 501(c)(3) worldwide not-for-profit charitable organization focused on improving the security of software. Our mission is to make software security visible, so that individuals and organizations worldwide can make informed decisions about true software security risks.

Everyone is free to participate in OWASP and all of our materials are available under a free and open software license. You'll find everything about OWASP here on or linked from our wiki and current information on our OWASP Blog. OWASP does not endorse or recommend commercial products or services, allowing our community to remain vendor neutral with the collective wisdom of the best minds in software security worldwide. We ask that the community look out for inappropriate uses of the OWASP brand including use of our name, logos, project names and other trademark issues.

There are thousands of active wiki users around the globe who review the changes to the site to help ensure quality. If you're new, you may want to check out our getting started page. As a global group of volunteers with over 42,000 participants, questions or comments should be sent to one of our many mailing lists or directed to the OWASP Contact Us Form. "
(https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Main_Page)


[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Open]]