
'''= “OpenDesk is a collection of simple furniture, designed to be cut by a CNC machine. Download and print it yourself or have it made for you by a local maker".''' - Joni Steiner OpenDesk Designer & Co-Founder

URL = https://www.opendesk.cc/

=Definition=

"OpenDesk uses digital fabrication to connect you directly with designers and makers.  OpenDesk is a global platform for local making. You can use it to download, make and buy furniture for your work space."
(http://openitagency.eu/open-desk-open/)


=Characteristics=

By DIDIY:

==Community==

"The OpenDesk team selects designers that participate in the official design
catalogue. Community members can publish their designs in a community
section."


==Licensing==

Designs can be downloaded for non-commercial use.


=Business Model=

Revenue models:

Opendesk is an online platform connecting customers, makers and
designers. 


When customers buy an Opendesk product directly from a
registered maker they pay the sum of:

1. manufacturing cost: fabrication, finishing and any other costs as
set by the maker (excluding any services like delivery or on-site
assembly);

2. design fee: as 8% percent of the manufacturing cost;

3. platform fee: as 12% percent of the manufacturing cost
(OpenDesk);

4. channel fee: as 18% percent of the manufacturing cost
(OpenDesk).

Designers who participate sell under your their name and brand and —
within the structure of the OpenDesk business model — set their own
pricing for commercial and non-commercial use, choose license terms and
retain all the rights to their work, including the right to sell anywhere else.
Professional makers with access to a CNC workshop, when joining the
platform, are granted a commercial license to make Opendesks.
Modes of production Designs are contributed by the participating designers; local makers
produce the desired furniture inhouse in a nearby makerspace or
professional fabrication lab."

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=Governance models= 

• The project is owned by Fabbed Ltd traded as OpenDesk.
• The project as such is not replicable but can be used as an
inspiration.

(http://www.didiy.eu/public/deliverables/didiy-d6.3-1.0-pub.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Product Hacking]]
* in French: http://www.lesoir.be/302275/article/styles/air-du-temps/2013-08-20/des-meubles-open-source-pour-ne-plus-aller-chez-ikea
* interview with founder, http://makingsociety.com/2013/08/a-smart-open-design-startup-is-born-opendesk/
* '''opendesk is NOT open source''', http://openitagency.eu/open-desk-open/

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]