

=Description=

"Open Access Networks present a layered model in which
different service providers can share the same infrastructure.
The participating entities agree in a set of rules that govern
their collaboration. In a basic model, a neutral opera-
tor takes care of the infrastructure. Then, multiple service
providers offer a multiplicity of services such as TV, telephone
and Internet access over the shared open access network. The
service providers use a share of their incomes to pay to the
network operator for the common infrastructure.

This model represents savings for the service providers, as
they can reach a large number of customers without incurring
in costly infrastructure deployment. Furthermore, it lowers the
entry barrier for new service providers and fosters competition
and innovation. The users have a larger number of options to
choose from and select the service providers that better adapt
to their needs. As it is easy for an user to switch from one
service provider to another, the service providers have a good
incentive to keep their customers happy. Happy customers
spend more money on communication services which is, in
turn, beneficial for the service providers.

In this model, the final users, house owners, the City Hall
or other organizations may have interest in collaborating in
the extension of the access network. A single investment in a
neighborhood will provide the citizen with a diverse offering
of services. Forzati et al. report that 95% of the municipality
networks in Sweden operate according open access network
models.

The neutral operator is in a privileged position as it owns the
network that all the others ISPs need to use. Consequently, it
is recommended that the neutral operator is a for benefit (not
for profit) organization. The neutral operator should not be
allowed to offer services to the final user, and should treat
all service providers equally, following some agreed rules [1].
The service providers still operate under a market competition
logic. Nevertheless, in spite of being competitors, the service
providers need to collaborate to maintain the neutral operator."
((https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true) )


=More Information=

* Concept: [[Bottom-Up Broadband]]

* [[Bottom-Up_Broadband_Project]]

* Article: Bottom-up Broadband: the Open Source Spirit in Networking Initiatives. [https://github.com/jbarcelo/open_networks_paper/blob/master/bub.pdf?raw=true] 

* M. Forzati, C. P. Larsen, and C. Mattson, “Open access networks, the Swedish experience,” in International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), Munich, Germany, 2010.

* M. Oliver, J. Zuidweg, and M. Batikas, “Wireless Commons Against the Digital Divide,” in IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society ISTAS, New South Wales, Australia, 06 2010.

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]