
'''Book: Charlene Li. Open Leadership'''


=Description=

"In Open Leadership Charlene Li (the coauthor of blockbusting bestseller Groundswell) offers the next step resource that shows leaders how to tap into the power of the social technology revolution and use social media to be “open” while maintaining control. This important book explains how Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Yammer, Jive and other popular social media sites can improve efficiency, communication, and decision-making for leaders and their organizations.

As Li explains, openness requires more — not less — rigor and effort than being in control.  Open Leadership reveals step-by-step, with illustrative case studies and examples from a wide-range of industries and countries, how to bring the precision of this new openness to both inside and outside the organization. The author includes suggestions that will help an organization determine an open strategy, weigh the benefits against the risk, and have a clear understanding of the implications of being open. The book also contains guidelines, policies, and procedures that successful companies have implemented to manage openness and ensure that business objectives are at the center of their openness strategy.

By embracing social media, leaders can transform their organizations to become more effective, decisive, and ultimately more profitable in this new era of openness in the marketplace."
(http://www.charleneli.com/open-leadership/)


=Review=

cgm:

""Li argues that social media-enabled services and sites can "improve efficiency, communication and decision-making for leaders and their organizations." The book is less a sequential follow-up to her impressive "Groundswell" collaboration with former Forrester colleague Josh Bernoff than a more forceful and practical reinforcement of many of the same themes, albeit with a special emphasis on mission-critical leadership skills. Key ingredients of "open leadership" success, Li suggests, include respecting employee and customer power, sharing constantly to build trust, nurturing curiosity and humility, holding openness accountable, and (are we ready for this everyone?) forgiving failure.

"Importantly, Li aggressively takes off the table all our lame excuses for not having a credible "ROI" strategy for social media. She does acknowledges upfront that the "difficulty with today's new social technologies -- like Facebook, blogs, discussion forums and Twitter -- is that they appear to lack clear, direct benefits compared to more established relationship channels," but she then proceeds to articulate such direct benefits. She offers, for instance, ROI templates like the "New Customer Lifetime Calculation," which smartly marries traditional lifetime value metrics with new value sources, from referrals and insights to ideation and user-contribution systems and support."
(http://notetaker.typepad.com/cgm/2010/06/i-recently-reviewed-charlene-lis-new-book-open-leadership-for-my-ad-age-columnheres-a-linkand-an-excerptli-argues-that-so.html)


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Books]]