
= from a draft proposal under discussion at [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GmgZ_fpZX9F1t0LGkD4KGbZV-AGG17dGoP9CeDARS1A/edit?hl=en&forcehl=1]

For context, see the introduction under: [[Open Company Sector]]

=Characteristics=


Indy Johar on the [[Open Limited Company]]: 				
	
"Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to all economic activity internal and external in the company from employee reimbursement, expenses, transfer pricing, contracts to investments etc., focused on value created and level of compensation at each step of the supply chain might also be captured. (ie, What is the farmer paid?): Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.
					 							
Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards all Human Resource Data in the company from the Gender and Ethnicity as well as other employment conditions, leave entitlements, etc; Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.
					 							
Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to energy and resource use and externalities in the company on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis: Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.
	
Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to beneficial ownership of every single aspect of the company and any vehicle over which it has fiduciary control, majority ownership, controlling ownership or interlocking ownership;  Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to all tax paid by the company both direct, indirect and via employees.  Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to all accounts, trusts, foundations, companies, banks and any other legal vehicle at all based in any jurisdiction which is engaged in unfair tax competition or any form of secrecy legislation ( see definitions below).  Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to all contracts and relationships of the company and its staff, owners and directors, influencers, investors etc with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain. 

Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards of any political donation, lobbying expenditure and the like, whether directly to politicians or parties or indirectly to unaccountable lobbying organisations such as the Corporation of London. Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards all whole or partial property, asset and land holdings. Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.
					 							
Commit to providing Open, Transparent and Real-Time data with regards to corporate policy, governance structure, ownerships. Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit to providing an Open, Transparent and Real-Time Freedom of Speech for all employees, staff, contractors, supplies chains, customers to comment publicly on any aspect of the corporate commitments highlighted above.  Commit to upholding this right in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.
 
Commit to providing an Open, Transparent and Real-Time API of the data committed above to any organisation which upholds the commitments listed above, Commit to providing this data in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain.

Commit that all data, api’s and information released under the open sector charter will remain open under creative commons licence,  in every jurisdiction in the world in which it is economically active, broken down by jurisdiction; with a commitment to year on year drive this throughout its entire supply chain. (Q Johns 18/06/13)"
(https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GmgZ_fpZX9F1t0LGkD4KGbZV-AGG17dGoP9CeDARS1A/edit?hl=en&forcehl=1)


[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Open]]