

=Discussion=

 
Aaron Saenz:

"According to Mac Cowell from DIYbio.org, there’s a lot of interest in the DIY biology community to continue developing new open versions of lab equipment. These projects have varying amounts of support and we could see spectrofluorometers, microfliuidic systems, and centrifuges in the near term. But there’s another aspect to hardware that might be coming along in the same time period: automation. As was discussed during the DIY biology panel at the Open Science Summit, it’s only a matter of time before someone starts adapting non-bio open hardware into the bio-lab. For example, MakerBot’s 3D printer could be used to handle heated liquids. Essentially, open hardware from the ‘Make Culture’ could be used to bring robots into the DIY bio lab. That may help hobbyist biologists not only perform modern bio experiments, but to do so quickly and without tedium. Cowell himself if working on a webcam microscope that can pan across samples through a mobile phone interface.

I should perform a big reality check here, however, and point out how basic these lab instruments really are. We’ve had the majority of these technologies for decades. Putting them in the hands of DIY biologists isn’t going to turn them into MIT. Also, most of these projects are still in the beginning phase of their development. Selling a few dozen kits isn’t going to reshape an industry. Even if we enable a million amateur biologists with these kinds of lab tools (is that even possible?) there would be a wide range of modern biology that would be outside of their capabilities."
(http://singularityhub.com/2010/08/03/making-the-modern-do-it-yourself-biology-laboratory-video/)

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]