
'''= an organization committed to facilitating vigorous innovation in plant breeding by preserving the right to unencumbered use of shared seeds and their progeny in breeding programs.'''


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Corporate appropriation of plant genetic resources, development of transgenic crops, and the global imposition of intellectual property rights are now widely recognized as serious constraints on the free exchange of seeds and the development of new cultivars by public breeders and small seed companies. In response, legal and operational mechanisms drawn from the open source software movement have been proposed for deployment in plant breeding. In the United States, an Open Source Seed Initiative (OSSI) has been organized by a working group of plant breeders, farmers, non-governmental organizations and sustainable food system advocates. OSSI promotes innovative plant breeding that produces resilient and productive cultivars adapted to a multiplicity of sustainable agroecosystems. It works to encourage and reward the sharing rather than the restriction of germplasm, to revitalize public plant breeding, and to integrate the skills and capacities of farmers with those of plant scientists."


'''2. Jack Kloppenburg:'''

"The Open Source Seed Initiative (OSSI) was established in May, 2012,
by a group of public plant breeders, small seed company plant
breeders, farmer-breeders, and advocates for seed sovereignty. OSSI
was formed in order to enhance vigorous innovation in plant breeding
by the creation of a licensing framework for germplasm exchange that
would preserve the right to unencumbered use of shared seeds and their
progeny in subsequent use. We had hoped that we could develop a
legally defensible license for germplasm in the way that the free and
open source software movement developed its licenses.

We spent nearly two years trying to develop a legally defensible
license. While we found that we could write a legally defensible
license, we also found that it would be unworkable for a variety of
reasons (these reasons are outlined in “Kloppenburg et al 2014"). In
summary, the legal requirements of the license are so complex as to
make transmission of the license impractical and unlikely. Second,
drawing as it would on the legal “tools of the master” (see
“Kloppenburg 2014"), a license is philosophically and politically
unacceptable to many organizations, mostly but not entirely in the
Global South (we are especially grateful to colleagues at GRAIN and
ETC Group for helping us understand this perspective).

In February of 2014, OSSI made the hard but considered decision to
abandon efforts to develop a legally defensible license and to shift
to a pledge. This moves OSSI’s discourse and action from the legal
field to the terrain of norms and ethics. We have found this shift to
be stimulating, reinvigorating,  and productive. The licensing
approach was pulling us into a policing and bureaucratic orientation
that was not congenial. Although our pledge is likely not legally
binding, it is easily  transmissible, it is viral, it is an
uncompromising commitment to free exchange and use, and it is a very
effective tool for outreach and education. The pledge is printed on
all OSSI-distributed packets and reads:
*“This Open Source Seed Pledge is intended to ensure your freedom to
use the seed contained herein in any way you choose, and to make sure
those freedoms are enjoyed by all subsequent users. By opening this
packet, you pledge that you will not restrict others' use of these
seeds and their derivatives by patents, licenses, or any other means.
You pledge that if you transfer these seeds or their derivatives you
will acknowledge the source of these seeds and accompany your transfer
with this pledge.”**
*
The response to our April 17 action appears to confirm our decision to
go with a pledge rather than a license. Not only have we received
expressions of support from around the world, we have received over
300 orders for OSSI’s free (as in speech, not as in beer!) seed from
14 countries. There is clearly substantial interest in the US and
internationally in what OSSI is doing. The potential for advocacy is
enormous. Further, the demand for, and willing ness to pay for, OSSI
seed was unexpected and substantial. This demand is likely not
principally related to the agronomic characteristics of the seed, but
to its sociopolitical content. It would appear that there is very
considerable potential for supplying a market for “free seed” that is
analogous to the market for “fair trade.” The implication is that
carrying “free” seed in a commercial seed catalog can be attractive to
small seed companies.

OSSI will proceed with its work in the United States. We emphasize
that we have no intention of becoming a seed company or a distributor
of seed. We hope to establish a brand and logo associated with our
pledge. We hope that breeders, seed savers, seed libraries, gardeners,
and farmers will choose to exchange and share materials using our
pledge. We especially hope that small, independent seed companies will
offer OSSI-branded seed as part of their regular product mix (as High
Mowing Organic Seeds is doing now - see
http://www.highmowingseeds.com/organic-seeds-midnight-lightning-zucchini.html).
OSSI is envisioned as a vehicle for providing the organizing core of a
network of free seed advocates.

Here in the USA, OSSI intends to proceed now to:
•    register OSSI as a nonprofit organization
•    develop our web site as a resource for information on open source
seed
•    develop an OSSI “brand”
•    send mailers of OSSI varieties to prominent people and
organizations as outreach
•    plan a second release of OSSI varieties for 2015
•    work with our member seed companies to offer OSSI-branded cultivars

While OSSI is US-based and US-oriented, there is clearly a large and
global reservoir of interest in and support for “open source seed.”
Can OSSI help facilitate development and growth of a global movement
in support of free and open source seed?

OSSI understands that thinking about application of open source
mechanisms to seed has been going on all over the world for some time,
and that conditions vary considerably by place and sociopolitics. We
do not propose to insist on any particular approach. We have, however,
engaged and thought through many of the issues  - practical and
theoretical - that you are encountering and that you are asking us
about. We hope that our experience will be useful to your own work.
Responding individually to your comments and queries will take come
time. Would it not be cool and productive if a bunch of us could get
together at one place at the same time? Can we find funds to support
an international  conference/workshop on free and open source seeds?"


=Status=

J. Scott Applewhite:

"A group of scientists and food activists is launching a campaign Thursday (17/4) to change the rules that govern seeds. They're releasing 29 new varieties of crops under a new "open source pledge" that's intended to safeguard the ability of farmers, gardeners and plant breeders to share those seeds freely.

It's inspired by the example of open source software, which is freely available for anyone to use but cannot legally be converted into anyone's proprietary product.

At an event on the campus of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, backers of the new Open Source Seed Initiative will pass out 29 new varieties of 14 different crops, including carrots, kale, broccoli and quinoa. Anyone receiving the seeds must pledge not to restrict their use by means of patents, licenses or any other kind of intellectual property. In fact, any future plant that's derived from these open source seeds also has to remain freely available as well."
(http://www.npr.org/blogs/thesalt/2014/04/17/303772556/plant-breeders-release-first-open-source-seeds?)


=More Information=

* NPR audio documentary at [http://www.npr.org/player/v2/mediaPlayer.html?action=1&t=1&islist=false&id=303772556&m=304041910]


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Commons]]