
'''= "offers students free textbooks that meet scope and sequence requirements for most courses. These are peer-reviewed texts written by professional content developers".'''

URL = http://openstaxcollege.org/


=Description=

Richard Adhikari:

"OpenStax College now offers titles for five of the introductory college courses that attract the most students: physics, sociology, anatomy and biology for both majors and nonmajors.

The initiative grew out of Connexions, an effort launched back in 1999 as a content-sharing site for educational materials. Connexions was founded by OpenStax College's founding director, Richard Baraniuk, who is a professor of engineering at Rice University.

OpenStax College follows traditional processes when it comes to sourcing content. It has authors, reviewers and traditional content developers, and it negotiates payments for them in work-for-hire agreements.

OpenStax College accepts content in any form and converts it to digital output in various formats, including PDF. It uses Creative Commons licensing so instructors can redistribute materials to students for free.

Students, meanwhile, can access the site and download books at no charge without having to log in. Access to downloaded texts does not expire."
(http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/78776.html)


=Status=

"Since 2012, the initiative has been producing peer-reviewed open source textbooks under a Creative Commons license.

This year, the organization expects to save some 40,000 students at 300 educational institutions about US$3.7 million on textbooks, it announced on Tuesday. Since June 2012, OpenStax College's free books have been accessed online by more than 1.7 million people and downloaded more than 170,000 times."
(http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/78776.html)


[[Category:Education]]