

Draft english version; elaborated from the Spanish at http://wikisprintp2pspanish.titanpad.com/ep/pad/view/15/latest

By [[Bernardo Gutierrez]] and the #P2PWikisprint community


=Description=

"IBEROAMERICAN 'OPENNESS' CAMPAIGN// CAMPAÑA IBEROAMÉRICA ABIERTA // CAMPANHA IBEROAMÉRICA ABERTA


WHAT AND WHEN

The Open Iberoamerican campaign is an open initiative that aims to mobilize citizens of the Iberoamerican countries, advocating to governments and institutions through cultural lobbying towards embracing free licenses, libre software and open data that create an incentive for open knowledge. The campaign will have two different parts:

1) Focused campaign on the OIGA.ME platform. A dedicated, feasible petition that will be sent through mail to relevant people in all countries of Iberoamerica. It will be a petition of a "minimum concensus" that will be written in conjunction with collectives, networks, organizations and citizens. Furthermore, people will be able to customize it, so that others can adapt it to their own agenda.

2) A decalog draft, written collaboratively. "Open Iberoamerica" will be an open, collaborative process, created online. Our idea is to write a simple decalog, concrete and understandable that will be used as a plan outline for any government, institution or organization that agrees with the petition through OIGA.ME. The decalog will also aspire to turn into a reference draft for any government, institution or organization that decides to turn towards open practices.

To force a commons-oriented profound social change, towards peers interactions, where transparency, participation and open code will be the base of our economic and political model.


When


Who

It's an initiative by the expanded community which came to be through the #P2PWikisprint by the P2P Foundation on March 20th, which continues active with the hashtag and inititiative #GlobalP2P.

How

The "Open Iberoamerica" campaign has concrete and visible objectives (petition and decalog). However, it is a perfect excuse to socially disclose the new open and participative paradigms. It is also a good opportunity to continue activities within the community through events, processes and activism days around the world."


[[Category:Movements]]