

= these are open platforms that bring players in a sector together in order to redesign towards sustainable and participative value chains and eco-systems, which mutualize knowledge which a network of producers (and/or [[Produsers]]) can use to develop ecosystems that create sustainable livelihoods for communities and their commons


=Directory=

==By Sector==


===Cross-Sector===

* [[Envienta]]: "We figured out a new lifestyle, focusing on households. A laterally scaled socioeconomic model begins at the tiniest piece of our society: the individuals and the families. To make our model time and cost-effective, we bring domestic developments under one roof."

* innonatives.com ; How does it work, Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5CM7eEhMARM

===Fashion===

* The [[Post-Couture Collective]]


===Food===

* the [[Open Food Network]]
* [http://www.yellow-seed.org/how-it-works Yellow Seed]

===Housing===

* [[WikiHouse]]


===Transportation===

* [http://ampool.fr/our-project-a-modular-and-connected-vehicule/ Ampool]: modular and connected vehicle for open and connected mobility

* [http://francecraft.fr/ FranceCraft]: "FRANCECRAFT propose une nouvelle plateforme industrielle, digitale et locale, qui libère l’automobile de ses contraintes pour fabriquer et innover autrement."

==Mainstream Business Alliances==

* [[Low Carbon Technology Partnerships Initiative]]

==By Country==

May sound contradictory but even global platforms often are anchored in a key originating country

=Related Material=

==Directory of [[Platform Cooperatives]]==

Via J.Nathan Mathias' [https://civic.mit.edu/blog/natematias/what-is-platform-cooperativism-and-why-is-it-important review of Trebor Scholz inaugural lecture] at the [[Platform Cooperativism]] conference:

===[[Cooperative Online Labor Brokerages and Marketplaces]]===

* In Germany, Fairmondo started as a global marketplace owned by its users -- like a co-operative ebay. 

* In SF, Loconomics is a freelance co-operative where freelancers have shares and have a voice in running the company.


===[[Produser-Owned Platform Cooperatives]]===

These sites, 

* like Resonate (music), 
* Members Media (film), and 
* Stocksy (stock photography), 

allow producers to co-own the platforms to which they are selling their work. The objective of these co-operatives are to create careers for their producers, who co-own systems.

===[[City-Owned Sharing and Exchange Platforms]]===


Trebor notes that even in the US, cities own hotels, hospitals, and many public services. He describes work by Janelle Orsi to imagine publicly-owned platforms: muni-bnb would be a city-owned airbnb system that invests profits into city projects. all-bnb would be modeled after the Alaska Permanent Fund and would pay residents for the profits made by sharing hosting. Another idea is the "sharing city" Seoul, who offer a city-operated taxi hailing system.


===[[Union-Backed Cooperative Platforms]]===

* The California App-Based Drivers Association unionizes drivers who participate in sharing economy platforms. 

* In New Jersey, the Union Taxi Cooperative also operates its own platform.



[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]