
'''= companies consulting on [[Open Innovation]] like NineSigma, InnoCentive, Yet2.com, IdeaCrossing, or Hyve'''

URL = http://mass-customization.blogs.com/files/extract_the-market-of-open-innovation_2010-report.pdf



=Typology=

'''1. Service Approaches'''

"We distinguish three main service approaches for open innovation – managing communities, providing special (social) software, or operating as an open innovation consulting agency. The community approach is the predominant service offered among all surveyed OIAs (84%). Yet we find combinations. In 37% of the cases the accelerators tend to offer a minimum two different approaches. About 44% of the surveyed OIAs are mainly consultants and community managers. 43% of all OIAs run competitions (mostly idea contests). Nearly 34% of the accelerators apply workshops (mostly brainstorming), often of different workshop types. Most of the OIAs offer tools and methods from several categories to accomplish their services."
(http://mass-customization.blogs.com/mass_customization_open_i/2009/12/the-market-for-open-innovation-first-study-to-compare-the-offerings-methods-and-competences-of-inter.html)


'''2. Profit Models'''

"We find five different approaches for structuring the OIAs’ profit models: Charging a product license fee, billing person days, a subscription based model, charging a service or success fee, or demanding a posting fee. Prices float within a wide range. The overall minimum stated in our survey is $15 for an account, the maximum $400,000 for a consulting project. In average, an open innovation accelerator asks $25,000 for one project."
(http://mass-customization.blogs.com/mass_customization_open_i/2009/12/the-market-for-open-innovation-first-study-to-compare-the-offerings-methods-and-competences-of-inter.html)


=More Information=

Report: The [[Market for Open Innovation]]. [http://www.lulu.com/product/6149440/]


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Companies]]