
'''Article: Open Source Software and the “Private-Collective” Innovation Model: Issues for Organization Science. By Eric von Hippel and Georg von Krogh. Organization Science/Vol. 14, No. 2, March–April 2003'''

URL = http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/hippelkrogh.pdf

==Abstract==

"Currently, two models of innovation are prevalent in organization
science. The “private investment” model assumes
returns to the innovator result from private goods and efficient
regimes of intellectual property protection. The “collective
action” model assumes that under conditions of market
failure, innovators collaborate in order to produce a public
good. The phenomenon of open source software development
shows that users program to solve their own as well as shared
technical problems, and freely reveal their innovations without
appropriating private returns from selling the software. In
this paper, we propose that open source software development
is an exemplar of a compound “private-collective” model of
innovation that contains elements of both the private investment
and the collective action models and can offer society
the “best of both worlds” under many conditions. We describe
a new set of research questions this model raises for scholars
in organization science. We offer some details regarding
the types of data available for open source projects in order
to ease access for researchers who are unfamiliar with these,
and also offer some advice on conducting empirical studies on
open source software development processes."


=Excerpts=

"Society has a vital interest in encouraging and rewarding
innovation. Presently, there are two major models characterizing
how this may be done. The first, the “private
investment” model, assumes that innovation will be supported
by private investment and that private returns can
be appropriated from such investments (Demsetz 1967).
To encourage private investment in innovation, society
grants innovators some limited rights to the innovations
they generate via intellectual property law mechanisms
such as patents, copyrights, and trade secrets. These
rights, in turn, assist innovators in getting private returns
from their innovation-related investments (Arrow 1962,
Liebeskind 1996, Dam 1995).

'''In the private investment model''', any free revealing
or uncompensated “spillover” of proprietary knowledge
developed by private investment will reduce the
innovator’s profits from its investment. It is therefore
assumed that innovators will avoid such spillovers to the
extent possible—although they will occur nonetheless
(Audretsch and Feldman 1996, Audretsch and Stephan
1999, Harhoff et al. 2000). At the same time, the
monopoly control that society grants to innovators under
the private incentive model and the private profits they
reap represent a loss to society relative to the free and
unfettered use by all of the knowledge that the innovators
have created. Society elects to suffer this social loss
in order to increase innovators’ incentives to invest in
the creation of new knowledge.

'''The second major model for inducing innovation is
termed the collective action model'''. This model applies
to the provision of public goods, where a public good
is defined by its nonexcludability and nonrivalry: If any
user consumes it, it cannot be feasibly withheld from
other users (Olson 1967, p. 14). The collective action
model operates in science and elsewhere (e.g., Merton
1973, Aldrich 1999, Monge et al. 1998, McCaffrey et al.
1995, Coleman 1973, Eyerman and Jamison 1991, Hess
1998, Melucci 1999). It requires that contributors relinquish
control of knowledge they have developed for
a project and make it a public good by unconditionally
supplying it to a “common pool.” This requirement
enables collective action projects to avoid the social loss
problem associated with the restricted access to knowledge
of the private investment model. At the same time,
it creates problems with respect to motivating potential
contributors to collective action projects.

Because contributions to a collective action project
are a public good, potential beneficiaries of that good
have the option of waiting for others to contribute and
then free-riding on what they have done (Olson 1967).
One solution to this problem is to supply some form
of monetary or reputation or other subsidy to contributors
to collective action projects to raise their level of
motivation. For example, many societies provide monetary
subsidies for basic research for this reason. The
social structure of science itself then operates via norms
of reciprocity and knowledge sharing among scientists
to insure contributions to public goods are made, and
to offer reputation-based rewards for good performance
(Merton 1973, Stephan 1996).

In the case of open source software development
projects, we see an interesting compound of the private
investment and collective action models of innovation.
We term this compound the “private-collective” innovation
model. In this model, participants in open source
software projects use their own resources to privately
invest in creating novel software code. In principle, these
innovators could then claim proprietary rights over their
code, but instead they choose to freely reveal it as a public
good. Clearly, the net result of this behavior appears
to offer society the best of both worlds—new knowledge
is created by private funding and then offered freely to
all. However, it also creates an intriguing puzzle. As
Lerner and Tirole (2000) put it: “Why should thousands
of top-notch programmers contribute freely to the provision
of a public good?”

Much of the research needed to answer that puzzle
is yet to be done. Answering it will involve, we
think, revisiting and easing some of the basic assumptions
and constraints conventionally applied to the private
investment and collective action models of innovation.
In essence, we think that each of the two basic
models—in an effort to offer “clean” and simple models
for research—have excluded from consideration a very
rich and fertile middle ground where incentives for private
investment and collective action can coexist, and
where a “private-collective” innovation model can flourish.
We think this middle ground is where open source
software projects in fact reside. The end result of exploring
it will be, we think, a deeper understanding of a
promising new mode of organization for innovation that
can indeed deliver “the best of both worlds” to society
under many conditions. In the remainder of this section
we consider how open source software development
practice deviates from the conventional assumptions of
the private investment and collective action models of
innovation. Then, we show how the conditions actually
faced by open source software projects offer the basis
for a novel, private-collective model for the motivation
of innovation.

The central deviation we believe that open source software
projects display with respect to the assumptions
about incentives embedded in the private investment
and the collective action models of innovation is that
contributions to open source software development are
not pure public goods—they have significant private
elements even after the contribution has been freely
revealed. 

More specifically, the private-collective model
of innovation occupies the middle ground between private
investment and collective action models by:

•Eliminating the assumption in private investment
models that free revealing of innovations developed with
private funds will represent a loss of private profit for
the innovator and so will not be engaged in voluntarily.
Instead it proposes that under common conditions free
revealing of proprietary innovations may not involve a
loss of profit to innovators who developed those innovations
with private funds. Indeed, under some conditions
free revealing may actually result in a net gain in private
profit for the innovator. For example, free revealing can
increase innovation diffusion and so increase an innovator’s
innovation-related profits through network effects.

•Eliminating the assumption in collective action models
that a free rider will be able to obtain benefits from
the completed public good that are equal to those a contributor
can obtain. Instead, it proposes that contributors
to a public good can inherently obtain private benefits
that are tied to the development of that good. These benefits
are available only to project contributors and not to
free riders and represent a form of “selective incentives”
for project participation that need not be managed by
collective action project personnel."
(http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/hippelkrogh.pdf)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]