
=Description=

"Open Enlightenment is a project dedicated to the honest and down-to-earth discussion of the very real and natural human phenomenon known as enlightenment.

For a quick overview of enlightenment and its historical significance, you can read our free ebook, Open Enlightenment: Isn’t it time we were honest about spirituality?


In the past we’ve used the blog as a means of exploring and developing our personal views of awakening; in the future, we hope to use the site as a launch pad to publish books, deliver courses and provide further free public resources.


..


Open Enlightenment was founded in 2009 by Alan Chapman and Duncan Barford.

Alan Chapman is a writer and teacher concerned with producing an accurate, contemporary and comprehensive view of awakening, and establishing a publicly visible and accessible organization that can offer the guidance of enlightened teachers for those interested in exploring the phenomenon personally. In other words, a new Western tradition of enlightenment. He is currently accepting students.

Alan experienced enlightenment within the framework of the hidden (or ‘occult’) Western tradition of enlightenment known as Magick. For several years, Alan has maintained The Baptist’s Head website with his colleague Duncan Barford, where a record of their experiences with magick and the process of enlightenment – known to magicians as ‘The Great Work’ – can be found, alongside numerous essays, podcasts and articles on the Western tradition. Alan is author of the magical primer Advanced Magick for Beginners.

Duncan Barford dabbled in magick as a teenager and underwent certain experiences that nagged him throughout his later life, until he finally investigated reality properly and found himself following the path to enlightenment alongside Alan.

Since his awakening in March, 2009, Duncan has become interested in sharing his insights with others through writing and teaching. He figures that if he can get enlightened then probably a whole lot of other people can too. Occult Experiments in the Home, his book on the paranormal, magick and spirituality, is due out later this year. Currently he is particularly interested in exposing how contemporary culture can obstruct our realisation of the Good."
(http://openenlightenment.org/?page_id=2)


=More Information=

#[[Alan Chapman on Open Enlightenment]] [http://vimeo.com/12973875]


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]