
'''= ODAI does not develop Standards and is not a duplicate, off-shoot or competition to any Standard bodies or committees. Standards are usually not fully implementable as developed. ODAI is an initiative to appeal for "[[Openness]]" in the usage (design & implementation), testing, deployment, performance measurement and optimization of existing Standards and to share these processes and results.''' 


URL = (http://www.odaiworld.org/)


=Description=

"The Open Design and Architecture Initiative (ODAI) spawns from the idea of the "Open Source" movement is in many ways analogous to the Open Source Initiative (OSI) which brought about Open source, Open hardware, Open Data, Open StreetMap and others. There is no doubt that this "Open" philosophy will continue to grow, revised, refined and expand to areas where this practice will proof beneficial and even essential as the collaborative engine for success.

ODAI is the grass-root version of ITU-T's resolution 44, Bridging the Standardization Gap (BSG) which focuses its goal on promoting "...development and adoption of “open, interoperable, non-discriminatory and demand-driven standards...." in the developing and developed countries including all who are interested in the implementation of a standard. ODAI is about using/implementing these Standards openly, collectively and sharing the processes and results.

ODAI does not develop Standards and is not a duplicate, off-shoot or competition to any Standard bodies or committees. Standards are usually not fully implementable as developed. ODAI is an initiative to appeal for "Openness" in the usage (design & implementation), testing, deployment, performance measurement and optimization of existing Standards and to share these processes and results. By sharing, these Standards will essentially be revised and refined by a much larger group of people who had put these Standards to real live production tests.

The standardization process and the practice of patenting any and every new ideas that are not fundamental for other ideas to build on is totally a closed group effort. This limits participation from non-[Working Group] folks from developed and developing countries. This stifles innovations from a broader-based audience. It disallows collective collaboration (i.e. working together, peer reviews, revise & refine) for better designs, implementations, testings, measurement and deployment processes and results involving standards, increases cost due to complicated multiple royalties and monopolies opportunities in driving the technology forward let alone slowing down progress."
(http://www.odaiworld.org/)


=More Information=

[[Open Design and Architecture Initiative Definition]] [http://www.odaiworld.org/index.php?p=1_2_ODAI-Definition]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Movements]]