Corporate open standards drive spearheaded by IBM:

URL = http://opencloudmanifesto.org/opencloudmanifesto1.htm

=Description=

"One thing is clear: The industry needs an objective, straightforward conversation
about how this new computing paradigm will impact organizations, how it can be
used with existing technologies, and the potential pitfalls of proprietary
technologies that can lead to lock-in and limited choice.

This document is intended to initiate a conversation that will bring together the
emerging [[Cloud Computing]] community (both cloud users and cloud providers)
around a core set of principles. We believe that these core principles are rooted in
the belief that cloud computing should be as open as all other IT technologies.
This document does not intend to define a final taxonomy of cloud computing or
to charter a new standards effort. Nor does it try to be an exhaustive thesis on
cloud architecture and design. Rather, this document is intended for CIOs,
governments, IT users and business leaders who intend to use cloud computing
and to establish a set of core principles for cloud providers. Cloud computing is
still in its early stages, with much to learn and more experimentation to come.
However, the time is right for the members of the emerging cloud computing
community to come together around the notion of an open cloud."
(http://opencloudmanifesto.org/opencloudmanifesto1.htm)


=Discussion=

'''1.'''

Bradley Kuhn from Autonomous:

"I have read their
manifesto, and it seems quite corporate focused (which may explain why
they have gotten so many corporations to endorse it), and doesn't seem
to espouse many overlapping principles to the [[Franklin Street Statement]]."


2.

Andrew Lewman from Autonomous:

"In the news recently is the Open Cloud Manifesto
(http://opencloudmanifesto.org/).  It is light on content, and not much
of a manifesto at all.  I believe this is a fine start, but perhaps more
marketing than an actual working group.  The name "Open Cloud Manifesto"
follows the trend of prepending Open in front of everything. We have Open
source.  Open computing. Open standards. And now, Open Clouds. I encourage
this trend.  However, it needs to go one step further.  The Open Cloud
statement needs to take the next step and include Free network services.
The Franklin Street Statement (FSS,
http://autonomo.us/2008/07/franklin-street-statement/) by the Autonomo.us
working group lists the characteristics of an optimal free network
service.

The FSS lists some key ideas for Service Providers:

- Choosing Free Software for their service
- Release customizations to their software under a Free Software license.
- Allow the Users to control their own data

These can be easily incorporated by the group behind the Open Cloud
Manifesto.

We are not talking about free as in zero cost.  Free Networks, much like
Free Software, can charge money for their efforts; including support,
development, desired customizations, etc.  However, the software is
Free as defined by the Free Software Foundation (http://www.fsf.org).
You as a user of a Free Network Service have the ability to download the
software and setup the same service on your own.  The majority of users
will not do this, for the simple fact they are opportunistically lazy.
I will happily use, and pay, for your service so long as I have the
same control over my data as if I ran it myself; on my own hardware, or I
suppose, my own "cloud".  

By empowering the users with control over their own data, allowing them to
clone your service using the same software as the provider, and using Free
Software; you offer a Free Network Service.  As a User, this is your data,
entrusted to a third party in many cases, you should demand nothing less."
(email draft, April 2009)

=More Information=

#Reasonable coverage and links here: http://www.cloudave.com/tag/open%20cloud%20manifesto
#Background from Business Week at http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/mar2009/tc20090329_463505.htm?


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Movements]]