An Open Source Market Economy is a new economic contract based on recent productive insights to work within present day economies that maximize wealth personally and for the welfare of all. "Maximum benefit" is the result of applying an economic practice that seeks to meet the interests of the product holder, product producer, and the environment which provides resources for product construction. 

Proprietary production methods are translated to the greatest extent to maximize benefit. Knowledge of production is presented freely and in detail using digital media like web pages. The primary focus is on the generation of products much like the open source software community focuses on a single software program. Monetary profits or earnings potential come second. For this model to be of maximum benefit and become widely adopted, productive knowledge must be vastly accessibile and comprehensive so to accelerate knowledge transfer in a way that generates products and therefore economies intended for continued use.

This model attempts to produce locally and individually before accessing material sources abroad, yet does not ignore non-local sources as preferable options if necissary. The goal is to produce personally in the same manner purchases are made. Widespread adoption of this general method will provide fertile ground for the advancement of abundance.

=Maximum Benefit: A More Ethical Self Interest=

= Wealth Generation vs Market Growth =

==Theory of Recursive Production==

==Personal Production vs Global Production== 
==Monetary Systems without Financial Growth==

==Price "At Cost"==

Goods purchased in a Open Source Market Economy are encouraged for production "at cost" by default. This occurs due to widespread information and resources available to generate a product locally or personally. The cost is based on material availablility and labor time spent to generate a product. A truer profit comes of this by lowering prices of other goods and services in an economy, thereby stengthening a currency backed by this model until purchasing power through montary means is no longer neccissary.

=Replication=
==Replicator (Person)==

Replicators, quasi-consumer/producers, have access to instruction-by-instruction knowledge of assembly. This knowledge is shared freely on the web so anyone may choose or have the ability to become replicators. A map of resources listed by community and region is available to use for free or at cost to construct a product. A community support fabrication facility or Open Source Fab Lab must be designed and constructed to facilitate this aim. 

Replicators will further refine designs until they can self assemble or self replicate. When self assembly is accomplished in a product area, this will nullify labor value, enabling product creation more abundantly than before, reducing costs to materials alone until they too are made and managed in the same regenerative manner.

Replicator propagation advances competition so the value of currency increases in order to attain if prefered stronger purchasing power or the ability to purchase more product with less.
===Purchaser Savings & Benefit Acceleration===

Replicators that become entrepreneurs can sell products for the price of labor or based on supply and demand. The first replicator of a product may sell an item in a town based on market value. When a second replicator enters the market environment to produce an item of the same or better quality, cost will either remain the same or become reduced. Three or more replicators that occupy the same market will likely compete and sell for less. The open source nature of the enterprise ensures cartels or monopolies do not form for purposes of artificial scarcity. The more replicators that occupy the same market space, the further benefit to purchasers.

==Replicator (Artefact)==

The Replicator as artefact is a machine which performs the functions of the laborer. Replicator machines will be manufactured for purposes of mass production on a local or personal scale. Some replicators may only generate one item with little human involvement while others may generate more than one product.



=Open Source Property Agreements=

This agreement is generally used by large legacy market participants to better compete in a growing Open Source marketplace. Property, in essense, is shared between firms to generate products of greater value. This can prevent corporations from losing competitive advantage by becoming too monopolistic, bureaucratic, confusing, and therefore costly. Firms that produce the best products or assembly methods share information freely within a partner network for maximum competitive advantage for maximum benefit for both the producer and consumer. Partnerships are generated through contractual agreements that ensure products are generated to the highest standards for the least amount of cost. Each agreement will differ according to the mutual objectives of the productive agents.

=Conclusion=

Due to the nature of a preserved pact of sharing or networking, under the right conditions, the pursuit of maximum benefit will accelerate to a point profits are abandoned and earnings dwindle. Money, though may be generated less over time, will increase in value until the neccissity of exchange and the currency it represents is no longer required to sustain livelyhoods. At this stage no market per se exists, instead, a [[Post-Scarcity]] economy remains. The ability to have post-scarcity conditions in all domains is only limited by human innovation.


[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Open]]