= OpenX / OpenSolar: Contractual automation for p2p project finance of climate actions

=Context=

Martin Wainstein:

"The climate transition requires over $1
trillion/year in financial capital to achieve the
established climate goals. Part of these funds
will come from international climate
funds, multinational development banks, and
countries. However, the lion share of climate
finance needs to be mobilized by private
capital. Whilst we have explored the role of
linking capital from governmental funds and
shared climate funds with climate action data
using smart contracts (see related mentions in section 3.2.1), a focus of
the Open Climate project has been the
development and function integrations
around project finance of climate actions. This has been primarily
developed and tested with one of the 
integrated platforms in the Open Climate system, OpenX."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])



=Description=

Martin Wainstein:

"OpenX is a platform developed in a collaboration between
the Digital Currency Initiative at the MIT Media Lab and
the Yale Open Innovation Lab. It is a partner project of
Open Climate and is, in itself, another platform of
platforms but with a specific purpose on climate finance.
This section describes the main functions of OpenX with a
focus on one of its platform instances —OpenSolar— in
the context of a pilot project involving international
climate financing between investors in the European
Union, United States and Rwanda.

The OpenSolar platform uses the Stellar blockchain and
IoT-based smart contracts for disintermediation and
contractual automation in financial processes to drive
community-owned solar projects and microgrids. OpenX
is its underlying platform framework extendable to
climate finance as whole and integrated with the Open
Climate platform. 

The platform is designed with a project marketplace
where multiple investors can be pooled to finance a single
project (i.e. crowd investment) even if these have
different return expectations. This includes the blending
of mainstream investors that expect market rates returns
on investment, with impact investors that allow
concessionary or first-loss capital as long as there are
certifiable social and environmental returns.

Receivers of the project’s assets (eg. renewable energy
infrastructure or other climate asset), are often the endusers
of these services and local community actors. Although
initially debtors, receivers pay for the services provided
by the project (eg. solar kWh) through regular utility-like
payments with no down payment and gain full ownership
of the assets once payments accrue to cover capital costs
and investors. All financial transactions and rules are
automated through the project’s smart contract, hosted in
the OpenSolar platform as an escrow account with
capability to hold and transact stable digital currency.

Payments from receivers to the contract are driven by IoT
data (eg. power meter data), which is also used by another
key function of the project contract; the minting of a
digital climate asset (i.e. token) as attestation of the
underlying climate value. In the case of solar energy, this
is a Renewable Energy Certificate (1MWh) and displaced
carbon equivalencies.

The OpenX platform is designed with full integration to
the Open Climate platform so that the same smart
contract mechanism can be used for other climate
mitigation projects, such as forest conservation initiatives.

The OpenX and OpenSolar platform has been tested in
real-world projects for the financing of solar energy in
schools in Puerto Rico. Since 2019, the project expanded
its scope to include platform considerations to allow
cross-border investments for financing distributed solar
infrastructure in rural Africa. Specifically, thanks to a
collaboration between Yale University and the Rwandan
government, the platform is currently being tailored to
deploy its first international climate finance pilot.

The pilot project seeks to show an operational proof-ofconcepts of: the use of decentralized ledger technologies (DLT) for cross-border crowd investment using a Climate
Bond as its security, the use of a cross-border bank
network using DLT for expedited clearing and settlement
processes, the use of smart contracts to perform  
automation in the acquisition of financed public
infrastructure by a local community, and the use of an
international digital climate asset, integrated with the
Open Climate platform to be included as climate
accounting compatible with UNFCCC’s Paris Agreement."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])


=Source:=

'''Whitepaper: Open Climate. Leveraging blockchain for a global, transparent and integrated climate accounting system'''. By Martin E. Wainstein.

([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]
[[Category:Crypto Economy]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]