
= OpenCoopt is an [[Open Technology Cooperative Initiative]] 

URL = http://opencoopt.org/


=Description=

"OpenCoopt makes non-profits aware of useful open source applications. OpenCoopt is a membership based cooperative whose members share the knowledge and costs of deploying Open Source solutions. Our mission is to understand the technology needs of our members and deliver the Open Source solutions that fits those technology needs. OpenCoopt does continual research focused on how the Open Source community can help our members. All the knowledge, research and improvements to any Open Source applications are shared with our membership. We provide training, support, implementation and customization of open source applications upon request only.
Despite efforts to make technology systems easier to use and maintain, they are becoming more complex and even more difficult to manage and maintain.  Along with that comes the recognition that today, a modern organization cannot operate, let alone compete, without information systems and management technology involved on some level.  These days it's difficult to keep a PC running for any length of time before it's infested with spy ware and viruses, even if the software to prevent these things is present.  And there are a number of other anomalies that sometimes make it seem like these technologies may be more trouble than they're worth. Still, it's getting harder to do business or manage any effort without some form of technology involved somewhere.  In addition to the in page links referenced here, a web search using your favorite service will reveal many more. We know there are better ways to address these problems than those the market typically presents us. This site will be working to present solutions to these and other issues.
 
We recognize that technology is really just a tool.  And like any other tool, it doesn't do any good if you don't know it exists or how to use it.  Over the last decade, we have seen those tools evolve to often wonderful, and often complex, things.  Still, in the end, it's about people.  It's about developing awareness and wrapping up these technologies with people and rational process that will make it work for you.  It's about evaluating possibilities in a realistic and rational light and mobilizing a people based technology and business development initiative to bring it all together.  Business and technology, one does not exist without the other.  It is also worth mentioning that many of these technologies can be applied in a way that significantly reduces energy requirements which results in positive environmental impact.
 
In a nut shell, that is what OpenCoopt hopes to accomplish.  We will describe our concepts in other parts of this site and will always welcome input on developing initiatives and direction from the communities we serve.   As with any other Cooperative effort, this organization is based on democratic principles.  Our members have a say in the directions we go and what we do.  But we've got a few ideas :)"
(http://opencoopt.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=46&Itemid=75)


=More Information=

#[[Free Software Cooperatives]]
#[[Open Source Hackers Cooperative]]


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]