What is an open movement?


=Description=

Proposed definition by Michael Bauwens:


1. An open movement is a movement which uses open
inputs, both in terms of people and in terms of
cultural material.

Being open to people means that an open organization
welcomes the input of everyone, without a priori
filtering of contributors. However, this openness may
be qualified by the purpose of the organization, and
appropriate anti-hijacking (against spamming, trolls,
etc…) and netiquette-based rules.

Using open cultural material means that it uses
content that is open for usage and modification, i.e.
either material that is already using open licenses,
or material that is newly created through such
licenses.


2. An open movement uses open and transparent
governance processes. Open movements use participatory
governance structures and aim to lower the threshold
of participation. The working of the organization are
transparent and verifiable, including for aspects such
as its accounting practices, its collective choice
mechanisms, etc…


3. An open movement produces for the commons, and
insures that its own production is open and free where
possible. Where costs need to be recouped and income
generated for its producers, it does so based on the
principles of equity, both towards its own producers
and towards the users of its products.


=More Information=

See the overview entry on [[Openness]], and the specific entry on the [[Open Organization]]

Technical discussion of this definition here at http://www.vodes.net/rev/btforum/index.php?topic=153.msg343;topicseen#msg343



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Open]]