
'''= "to develop a fundamentally new financing strategy for land and buildings for solidarity-based agricultural initiatives and regionally integrated organic farms".'''

URL = https://www.opencrowdinvest.org/

=Description=

"In the second half of 2017, the Kulturland cooperative began developing its own CrowdInvest website. The first pilot CrowdInvest campaign was conducted at the biodynamic Luzernenhof ( crowdinvest.Luzernenhof.de ) and exceeded all expectations. At the end of the campaign, more than 100 comrades, lenders and patrons contributed € 958,500 to the financing of agricultural land and residential and commercial buildings. In addition, the Court was able to win 80 new members (20 of them on the waiting list) for its solidary agriculture, thus securing long-term economic viability for the farm.

In a second phase of the development the experiences of the first campaign are to be worked on in order to optimize processes and to develop a replicable concept. The CrowdInvest website of the Luzernenhof is to be further developed into a cross-court CrowdInvest platform. In the summer and winter of 2018, two more pilot campaigns are to be conducted with solidary and regional farms. The goal is to acquire 500,000 euros each in capital for land and / or buildings and if necessary to win 50 new SoLaWi members for the farms each.

The aim of this CrowdInvest platform is to develop a fundamentally new financing strategy for land and buildings for solidarity-based agricultural initiatives and regionally integrated organic farms. It is intended to enable young, motivated and competent people to live and work in fair conditions and without debts on farms. To ensure this, we build community property on land and the residential and farm buildings ("New commons"). Investment in equipment remains the responsibility of the manager. Broad publicity campaigns are needed to attract people to this concept and to drive forward the transformation towards sustainable agriculture."
(https://www.opencrowdinvest.org/de)

=More information=

* The [[Terrafina Foundation]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Germany]]