Proposal by Marcin Jakubowski (after a joint discussion with Michel Bauwens in August 2008):

=Description=

"Product Forge. At a ready
implementation - it could be a place where PHYSICAL product or process development efforts could host their projects. This would be analogous to product forge. It would basically be a one-stop shop for
communicating to the world all the open source physical products that
are being developed. It will be a communications, recruitment, and
funding tool. Crowdsource funding baskets can be attached to each
project.

We need to get our minds together to determine the design of the
website and standards of the products featured. There should be a
clear way to determine deliverables, assess progress, help out, etc.
To facilitate this, a Product Label of some sort should be defined to
make the quality/progress/needs of each project transparent. 

We should define: a format for the website, standards for website entries, and standards/assessment of products themselves.


How to define importance, product selection, product standards? I ask
you all to help define the standards/needs/other issues further, and
come up with consensus on the website. I think we should apply for a
grant of some sort to have a full-time manager for Product Forge.

 
=Characteristics=


From the OSE side, we'd like to include the following ratings/standards:

1. Evaluation of open source and ecological features of product - such as in the OSE Specifications -
http://openfarmtech.org/index.php?title=OSE_Specifications

2. Evaluation of economic significance of product. We have coinded a
Product Selection Metric back in last year's proposal:
http://openfarmtech.org/index.php?title=Product_Selection_Metric

3. Technology follows [[Open Source Technology Pattern Language]] -
http://openfarmtech.org/index.php?title=Pattern_Language

4. Product development cycle should be refined/standardized via
Product Forge. We have an initial thoughts on a process -
http://openfarmtech.org/index.phptitle=Ecotechnology_Buying_Club#Basic_Goals_-_OSE_Product_Cycle

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]