
=Discussion=

==Open Source Software and Automobiles==

Michael Clark:

Since everything is more vivid now, the revolution that is in motion with regards to open source software in cars can be understood much better. In other words, the introduction of such software enables designers to develop even more brilliant vehicles without the need of starting from scratch. Quality and efficiency are two important aspects that are addresses effectively by the use of open source since there is a certain level of standard that has already been set for all to adhere to. Many developers will concur that open source improves the entire globe owing to the reason that every car is brilliantly designed and consequently manufactured.

It would be disastrous to ignore the relevance of safety when driving. This is why open source is relatively vital as far as cars are concerned since the vehicles of today are computerized and generally complicated to a very great extent. Software that is used in the computers installed in these vehicles therefore plays a leading role in the functionality of the cars. In order for efficiency and safety to be observed, it is mandatory for designers to ensure that all modern automobiles operate optimally and the open source software in cars facilitates this.


Technology has its downfall but this should not be a cause for alarm. Manufacturers of these computerized cars normally emphasize on regular check ups as part of the maintenance process so that all bugs that interfere with the smooth running of the car’s software can be fixed in due time. In addition to this, vehicles normally experience numerous mechanical issues frequently and these are normally brought about by the tear factors. Lastly, it is important to note that human error is an aspect that leads to most accidents on the road so this is an issue that has to be addressed whenever safety in driving is concerned."
(http://2lix.com/2012/01/12/latest-revolution-open-source-software-cars/)


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]