'''= developing of trusted and secure computing systems based on open source software.'''

URL = http://www.opentc.net/


=Description=

"The Open Trusted Computing (OpenTC) consortium is an Research & Development project focusing on the development of trusted and secure computing systems based on open source software. The project targets traditional computer platforms as well as embedded systems such as mobile phones.

The goal of OpenTC is to protect against system-related threats, errors and malfunctions.

The lack of platform security in today's computers has given rise to waves of successful attacks, resulting in severe damages to enterprises and potential failure of critical infrastructures.

The OpenTC consortium will define and implement an open Trusted Computing framework.The architecture is based on security mechanisms provided by low level operating system layers with isolation properties and interfaces to Trusted Computing hardware. These layers make it possible to leverage enhanced trust and security properties of the platform for standard operating systems, middleware, and applications.

The suggested architecture is applicable to a wide range of platform types, e.g. servers, GRID technology, mobile phones and industrial automation. It provides basic building blocks for complex, distributed scenarios with inherent, multilateral trust and security capabilities. The framework will be built  around the "Trusted Platform Module" (TPM) specified by the Trusted Computing Group (TCG) and the new generation of x86 CPUs from Intel and AMD

To enable maximum community benefit, project results will be integrated in and distributed as Open Source software, supporting Linux in particular.

The project aims to have first Open Trusted Computing prototypes available around the time when proprietary Trusted Computing operating systems and solutions are expected to hit the market.

You can read more about the goals and objectives of the project and the various activities addressing these goals, in the relevant sections of this website.

Contact coordination(AT)opentc.net for more information."


=More Information=

[[Trusted Computing]]


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Open]]