=Hoddinott and Bailetti=

==The four factors of openness==

Peter Hoddinott and Tony Bailetti [http://www.osbr.ca/archive.php?issue=10&section=Ar#A2]:

“we had occasion to find ourselves struggling as we tried to make sense of instances of the word open in the context of community code. For example, we found instances where open meant that releases of the code were made available to the general public (i.e., non-members of a consortium); however, releases to the general public were delayed 12 months from the time it was available to the members of the consortium. We also found instances where what open meant depended upon the level of membership. The more expensive memberships provided these members more privileges to participate in and influence the processes, for example with veto power. In these examples, open is not equated with full access; instead, open is a matter of degree and that degree is metered out in a distinctly defined hierarchy of privilege. 

This seeming confusion and differences about what is open and what is source and the use of open source to refer to phenomena that fall well outside the OSD, led us to conclude that we need to better understand the characteristics of the systems in which open source assets are produced, used and distributed. 

We conceptualize any such system as being comprised of four components: 

1.	'''Network''': the network of individuals and organizations that produce, use and distribute an asset

2.	'''Processes'''; the processes, approaches, rules and understandings that lead to the production, use and distribution of an asset

3.	'''Governance''': the governance structure of the organization and the projects within the organization

4.	'''Value''': value created through collaboration and value appropriated through competition

We observe that a healthy open source system is required to compete with a strong proprietary system; that is, an open source system cannot compete by virtue of the distribution license alone. 

'''What one would generally agree upon as being an open source system could be expressed in terms of the health of its four components.''' Such a definition would not be static, but would arguably be more accurate and useful in determining the true value of an open source system. For example, one could speak in terms of a system not having reached the status of being open source until it is deemed to be healthy. And an open source system may subsequently cease to be an open source system if its health deteriorates beyond some point. This line of inquiry could then further leverage health of the four components as a means for distinguishing other types of systems such as closed systems and community systems. 

Our initial suggestion as to what is relevant for assessing the health of each of the four components of a system is as follows: 

1.	'''Network''': Large, distributed and diverse: We distinguish between an asset produced by a well developed network from an asset produced by a small number of collocated producers who have similar characteristics. A general reference model for an open source asset would be one that is produced by a well developed network that is able to integrate, test, and quality assure contributions from a large number of diverse individuals and organizations dispersed throughout the world

2.	'''Process''': Includes meritocracy where one is recognized for the quality of their contributions; transparency in communications and guidelines; recruitment and promotion methods; and mechanisms for dealing with difficult people

3.	'''Governance''': Includes participation; relationship between contribution and the influence that can be asserted; membership's influence over a project, influence over the overall system governance, and ability to alter the governance structure

4.	'''Value creation and appropriation''': Usefulness of the asset; how free-riders are addressed--if it is too easy to appropriate value no one would pay for a membership or undergo an apprenticeship to move from being a developer/contributor who writes code or documentation to a committer with write access to the codebase; access to the asset by virtue of the license.”
(http://www.osbr.ca/archive.php?issue=10&section=Ar#A2)


=West and O'Mahony=


==Source==

Article: The [[Role of Participation Architecture in Growing Sponsored Open Source Communities]]. By Joel West (San Jose State University College of Business) and Siobhán O’Mahony (UC Davis Graduate School of Management)
February 6, 2008 preprint version of  Industry and Innovation, Special Issue on “Managing Open Innovation Through Online Communities”

URL = http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf


== Definition: [[Transparency]] and [[Accessibility]] ==

West and O’Mahony:

“Transparency meant that the
code was publicly available, that most of the
software production process was discussed on
public mailing lists or discussion boards, and
that the software release cycle and goals were
also provided on the community website.”


“The second type of openness
sponsors considered when designing a sponsored
community was the degree of accessibility —
the amount of control sponsors would relinquish
to the community. An accessible community not
only provides visibility, but allows some
outsiders to gain access to either the project’s
code repository, community planning processes,
or strategic decision-making.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)

==Introduction==


West and O’Mahony:
 
“there were two
distinct types of openness: transparency and
accessibility. Transparency allows outsiders (i.e.
non-sponsors) to understand what is happening
and why — and, in the case of an open source
community, allows use of the community’s final
product, the source code. Accessibility allows
external participants to directly influence the
direction of the community to meet their specific
wants and needs, regardless of whether the
external party is a hobbyist or an organizational
adopter. In some cases, external contributors
could be sellers of goods and services that might
either compete with or complement the
sponsor’s business.

How were these two different types of
openness provided? By comparing our data
across 12 sponsored open source projects, we
found that the design choices made by sponsors
of open source communities could be
categorized into three dimensions: 1) the
organization of production; 2) community
governance and 3) intellectual property.

Decisions with regard to the organization of
production shaped how code development would
took place, while community governance
decisions shaped the processes by which
decisions were made within the community; and
intellectual property design decisions affected
the allocation of rights to use the community’s
output.

these three dimensions of
community design formed the basis of a
participation architecture.”

(Note from West and O’Mahony: The concept of an “architecture of participation”
was initially articulated by O’Reilly (2005) as a
set of heuristics that encourage participation and
innovation. The “participation architecture”
construct we develop here is intended to meld
that earlier usage with an interorganizational
analog to the “technical architecture” of Baldwin
and Clark (2006).}
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)

==Typology Introduction: The Three Dimensions of Design==

'''i.e. 1) the organization of production; 2) community governance and 3) intellectual property.'''

West and O’Mahony:
 
““there were two
distinct types of openness: transparency and
accessibility. Transparency allows outsiders (i.e.
non-sponsors) to understand what is happening
and why — and, in the case of an open source
community, allows use of the community’s final
product, the source code. Accessibility allows
external participants to directly influence the
direction of the community to meet their specific
wants and needs, regardless of whether the
external party is a hobbyist or an organizational
adopter. In some cases, external contributors
could be sellers of goods and services that might
either compete with or complement the
sponsor’s business.

How were these two different types of
openness provided? By comparing our data
across 12 sponsored open source projects, we
found that the design choices made by sponsors
of open source communities could be
categorized into three dimensions: 1) the
organization of production; 2) community
governance and 3) intellectual property.

Decisions with regard to the organization of
production shaped how code development would
took place, while community governance
decisions shaped the processes by which
decisions were made within the community; and
intellectual property design decisions affected
the allocation of rights to use the community’s
output.

these three dimensions of
community design formed the basis of a
participation architecture.

We found that the degree to which
sponsors’ offered transparency or accessibility in
these key areas affected sponsors’ ability to
attract external participants and grow these
communities. By examining sponsors’
community design decisions, we discovered that
one of the primary challenges sponsors faced
was how to how manage the tension between
controlling the community in order to leverage
their investment in it and opening up access to
the community in order to attract greater growth
of participants.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)

==Openness in the Organization of Production==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We identified three design parameters
that provided contributors with transparency and
accessibility to production processes:


1. Live code access provides transparency
by offering the community the chance to review
the most recent “live” version of source code on
the community website — which is more likely
to have bugs than a finished product. Nearly all
of the sponsored communities (10/12) allowed
external participants to anonymously access the
most current source code, subject to the
sponsor’s license terms. External contributors
were thus able to follow the community’s
development cycle and contribute bug reports if
they were so inclined.


2. Public commit process refers to the
opportunity for community members to become
directly involved in the production process by
earning (through demonstrated technical
proficiency) the right to directly commit
software changes to the community repository.

While all of the autonomous communities
provide such accessibility, only some (5/12) of
the sponsored communities did so. Seven of the
sponsored communities did not publicly explain
how one could go about acquiring commit rights
to their projects, but most of them (6/7)
encouraged people to send code patches via
email.

The lack of information about gaining
committer rights is not necessarily an inhibitor
for participation but it limits the status and
influence that a contributor can achieve. As one
community member explained, “people can be
phenomenally valuable contributors without
having access for a long time. Somebody else
can check their code, but people don’t like it. It
is seen as a mark of belonging.” Sponsors that
did not provide commit rights recognized such
rights would increase participation but were
unwilling to relinquish that much control over
their code.

3. Subproject creation is a mechanism by
which a community based on the sponsor’s
original code can grow to assume new
functionality or new directions. We defined
subprojects as new “start-up” projects that were
allowed to govern themselves and address unmet
needs independent of the larger community;
allowing creation of such subprojects provides
accessibility by decentralizing control over
growth and innovation in the community. While
all of the autonomous projects allowed
community members to autonomously propose
subprojects based on their own initiative, only 5
of the 17 sponsored communities did so.


Source code access
offers potential external community participants
transparency into the development process
which can help them learn how the code is
developed. Without awareness of the
community’s production process, the learning
curve to make a meaningful contribution and
thus gain membership or access within the
community will be limited. The ability to create
subprojects offers access to external parties by
providing them opportunities to shape the future
direction of the project. This type of access
sends a powerful signal as to the ease with
which external contributors can get new ideas
proposed and accepted. Allowing individuals the
right to earn commit rights offers the ultimate
degree of accessibility – the ability to make
direct contributions to the code.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)



==Openness in Governance==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We define openness in open source
governance as the amount of decision-making
control that sponsors relinquished to the
community.”

To provide both leadership and legitimacy, some
communities have a formal concept of
membership, vesting members with key
governance decisions, and are thus more
accessible to participants. For other
communities, de facto control remains with
founding individuals (due to superior legitimacy
or technical knowledge) or with founding firms
(that provide the bulk of ongoing resources).
The design levers available for managing
openness in governance include:

1. Nonprofit foundations. All five
individually founded communities and two
sponsor-founded communities created a formal,
legal, non-profit foundation to help manage
community governance and assets; however, for
historical reasons, the Linux foundation plays a
more limited role than the others. As O’Mahony
(2003, 2005) identifies, such foundations
provide institutional permanence independent of
any one individual, as well as legal status to
negotiate with external entities (largely for the
provision of resources). Because the creation of
a non-profit foundation requires a board of
directors and regular meetings, the introduction
of such organizations also increased the
transparency of control of the community assets.

2. Membership. Four out of five of the
individually founded open source communities
have formal processes by which an individual is
recognized as a member; one community
recognized both individuals and firms as
separate classes of members. Only one sponsor
founded community project created a nonprofit
foundation with a membership base, while two
others were under development at the time of
our study. After offering external contributors
membership rights, this sponsor experienced
unprecedented growth in participation.
Communities with a membership base provide
members with some voice in formal governance
matters (typically through annual elections and
the right to vote on project wide decisions such
as license or name changes), while nonmembership
communities remain either fully
sponsor-controlled or retain ad hoc governances
mechanisms.

3. Membership fee. Two communities (one
individually founded and one sponsor founded)
obtain funds from interested firms by selling
memberships at a range of prices. In general,
membership fees were not adopted by sponsors
trying to create communities, but by those
sponsors trying to create commercial
ecosystems.

4. Release authority. The ultimate test of an
online production community is who makes the
final production decisions. For an open source
community, this decision occurs when software
is released. This authority may vest in the
members, the affiliated foundation or remain
with the sponsor or individual founder. Again
there is a dramatic differences in openness
between autonomous and sponsored projects: the
community holds authority in all but one
autonomous community (Linux), but only in two
of the 12 sponsored communities. Such limited
accessibility appears to reflect the sponsor’s
desire to align the features, quality and schedule
of open source releases to its commercial goals.”

In conclusion:

“By creating a
membership organization and the opportunity to
elect leaders, a few sponsors offered potential
contributors the ability to develop a sense of
belonging and become more vested in the
community’s future. The ability to gain
“membership status” was viewed as a
motivational and recruitment tool. Sponsors who
adopted these community design features did so
with the belief that divesting some control was
necessary in order to attract talented
contributors. However, most sponsors did not
create an independent form of governance,
retained exclusive release authority, and final
say on all key community decisions.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


==Openness in the Governance of Intellectual Property==

West and O’Mahony:

Parameters of openness:

“1. Content ownership. Most communities
that created an affiliated foundation also vest
ownership in the foundation (Linux an
exception), as did two sponsored communities.
For the other sponsored communities, ownership
remains with the sponsor. Ownership of the
content by a foundation provides a credible
assurance to community participants that the
code will remain available to participants in
perpetuity (O’Mahony 2005). The direct
ownership of the code by sponsors in most of
the communities was a clear direct and symbolic
measure of their design to maintain ongoing
control over the terms by which outside
participants access the code.

2. Subproject ownership. For the projects
that allowed creation of new subprojects, the
conditions of access were not necessarily the
same as for the core code. For the five sponsored
projects that allowed subproject creation, in four
cases, ownership of the subproject output was
the same as for the core project (two owned by
the sponsor, two owned by the foundation); for
one sponsored project, the output was owned by
the contributing community members.

3. Software license. 10 of the 12 sponsored
communities use one of the more than 50
licenses approved by the Open Source Initiative.
As Lerner and Tirole (2005) and others have
noted, the most popular open source license is
the GNU General Public License (GPL). This
widespread use and popularity among potential
participants influenced the decisions of two
sponsors — Mozilla and Helix — to offer their
product under both their own license and the
GPL, while other sponsors mentioned the
importance of using a license deemed
compatible with the GPL or the Lesser GPL
(LGPL). Two sponsors used licenses that are as
yet unapproved by the OSI. One community
(Sendmail) was founded using an approved
license (BSD) but the sponsor subsequently
chose to release a major update under a nonapproved
license that discriminates against forprofit
users. The last (Sugar) created its own
license (adapted from the Mozilla Public
License) that required publicity for their
technology when used by service providers.4

4. License type. Open source licenses such
as the BSD or Apache license allow recipients to
use the code largely without restriction, while
“free software” licenses (notably the GPL)
compel recipients to return any modifications or
changes (West, 2003). Rosen (2004) classifies
these two types as “permissive” and
“reciprocal”; a few licenses (such as the LGPL)
impose reciprocal obligations on part but not all
of the code. Four of the sponsored communities
in our sample use a dual license strategy to
implement price discrimination, with non-profit
users selecting the free reciprocal license (i.e.
the GPL) and for-profit users customarily paying
to use the software without the reciprocal
obligations (cf. Välimäki, 2003).


In conclusion:

The ownership of code
was the most dramatic difference between
autonomous and sponsored projects, in that the
sponsor in nearly all cases retained ownership of
the core (if not subproject) code. A subset of the
sponsors used the objectionable restrictions of
the reciprocal license to provide revenues
through a dual license policy, but otherwise the
sponsored and autonomous communities followed similar license policies, either using
standard or their own open source licenses.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=More Information=

West, Joel, 2003, “How open is open enough?
Melding proprietary and open source
platform strategies,” Research Policy 32 (7),
1259-1285.

West, Joel, 2007. “Value Capture and Value
Networks in Open Source Vendor
Strategies,” Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Hawai‘i International Conference on System
Sciences, Waikoloa, Hawai‘i, p. 176.

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Governance]]