
'''= "Open Sauces is a collection of projects, writings and events related to sharing of food, food culture and food systems".'''


URL = http://opensauces.cc


=Description=

"Open Sauces is a collection of projects, writings and events related to sharing of food, food culture and food systems. Although their format might change, these activities all combine tasting, socialising and learning. Open Sauces brings together people interested in both environmental and cultural and scientific and systemic aspects of cooking, eating and sharing food. We come together in members’ kitchens, in labs, studios and public spaces, keeping the source of our sauces and other culinary delights open for anyone interested in testing out our recipes or joining the Open Sauces Cooking Club.

The mixing of disciplines, of multicultural traditions and playful explorations that make up contemporary food culture can greatly benefit from openness and sharing. Akin to the open source movement in software development, the traditionally secretive world of food and cooking has already begun to benefit from demystifying the source of its ingredients and processes. This is leading to new perspectives on resilient food production. Furthermore, openness can stimulate home-cooks, healthier diets, better science and more inspiring dishes. Sharing knowledge can invigorate food preparation and consumption, as well as undoubtedly evoke other improvements that we can’t yet conceive of. By increasing the accessibility and transparency of food systems we can enhance their resilience, an essential trait in the face of unstable climatological and economic conditions."
(http://fo.am/open_sauces/)



[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Open]]