
'''= "an open platform, which brings together knowledge and best practices about European natural capital and ecosystem services".'''

URL = http://oppla.eu/

=Description=

"Base: European

Year of foundation: 2016

Commons orientation: It is based on a commons approach,
based open collaboration over the platform.

Oppla is an open platform, which brings together knowledge
and best practices about European natural capital and ecosystem services. It was developed in 2016 from the cooperation of
two research projects funded by the 7th Framework Program
of the European Commission. The site operates through the
collaboration of 60 universities, research groups, agencies and
companies (OpenNESS and OPERA). Its objective is to simplify the way knowledge is shared, obtained and created to better
manage environmental resources. It is designed to respond to the
different interests and needs of stakeholders, offering multiple
services online and offline for free. Among the online services,
the platform has a forum (“Ask Oppla”) for open collaboration
and distributed (crowd-sourced) calls for action where all users
can be involved. The platform is also a medium to disseminate
environmental solutions. It features a “knowledge-Marketplace”
where participants can receive guidance, software tools, and 
access to an open database and to other useful resources to
disseminate the results of projects. It also has a space to foster
networking and Interaction among the users worldwide.

Offline services, including generally workshop-like events,
help users work together to develop solutions to current challenges. One such event was called “Transforming the Culture of
Environmental Decision-Making”, that aimed to identify common themes, different perspectives and strategies that allow the
generation of change regarding environmental issues. The main
results of these events are reports developed by multiple authors,
as well as articles for further discussion."


=Source=

* Sharing Cities: A [[Worldwide Cities Overview on Platform Economy Policies]] with a focus on Barcelona. By Mayo Fuster Morell (ed.) et al. Dimmons Research Group, 2018.

URL = http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Policy]]