
=Description=

CASSE:

"Management of the economy in a full world
and avoidance of uneconomic growth urgently
require a transition to a steady state economy
of optimal scale. We need to understand the
real relationship between the economy and its
containing ecosystems. But finding the Goldilocks
scale of the economy—the size that’s not
too small, and not too large, but just right—is
no easy feat.

In cases where the benefits of growth outweigh
the costs (for example, where excess ecological
capacity exists and people are not consuming
enough to meet their needs), growth is warranted
prior to establishing a steady state economy.
In cases where the economy has overshot
ecological bounds, degrowth is necessary before
stabilization. Businesses, governments and
citizens will need to adjust the scale of the
economy through accurate measurement of
benefits and costs, trial and error, regulation of
markets, and political will. This task of homing
in on optimal scale is a critical challenge of our
times, and the key to reaching a viable future."
(http://steadystate.org/wp-content/uploads/CASSE_Brief_Sustainable_Scale.pdf)


=Discussion=


==[[Uneconomic Growth]]==

CASSE:

"Long before the economy threatens the resilience
of ecosystems, economic growth can become
undesirable. Much growth (i.e., increasing GDP)
consists of “defensive expenditures,” products
and services that counteract the negative consequences
of other economic activities. An example
of a defensive expenditure is the treatment of
cancer caused by industrial pollution.
Even assuming a product causes no direct harm
to its user, its production inevitably contributes
to the depletion of natural resources. The tradeoff
between products and natural resources may
be worthwhile when the economy is small, but
as it grows, the additional products become increasingly
costly. Through much of human history
people have been made better off by having
and consuming more things. In high-consuming
countries today, however, the costs of increased
production often outweigh the benefits. Further
growth has become uneconomic."
(http://steadystate.org/wp-content/uploads/CASSE_Brief_Sustainable_Scale.pdf)




[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]