=Description=

(translated from the French)

Louise Guillot, Rémy Seillier et Sebastien Shulz:

"Unlike the ordoliberal State which guarantees free and undistorted competition, an ordo-communal State would have the role of guaranteeing free and united cooperation. This fundamental principle would make it possible to think about a transition towards a more collaborative, fair and sustainable economy. It establishes cooperation within and between companies, citizen participation and concerted decision-making to achieve economic objectives while taking into account social and environmental issues.

From this perspective, the market retains a place to organize certain sectors of economic activity, although with significant regulations. Rather than considering competition as the sole driver of economic efficiency, this approach recognizes the value of solidarity to build more resilient and inclusive societies. In short, ordocommunalism establishes a society in which actors have a greater interest in cooperating."

(https://aoc.media/opinion/2024/04/11/de-lordoliberalisme-a-lordo-communalisme/)


=Characteristics=

Louise Guillot, Rémy Seillier et Sebastien Shulz:

"Then, ordo-communalism, as a counter-model to neoliberalism, could rely on certain broad general principles aimed at regulating the market, limiting the excesses of capitalism, and organizing an economic system by promoting cooperation and solidarity. We propose here a first set of principles which can constitute a basis for discussion with political movements and citizens wishing to build a society of the commons.

* Monetary democracy: Money becomes a tool for social justice and environmental stability. Citizens, businesses and public authorities collectively take control over the currencies they use.

* Preservation of resources: Economic actors are accountable for the preservation of the shared resources on which they depend and which they affect in the exercise of their activity. This principle places limits on the market and affirms the collective (and not just public) responsibility to maintain resources for future generations.

* Social property: Forms of social property make it possible to overcome the defects of the proprietary order by more equitably sharing the rights to use and manage resources useful for human flourishing. They make it possible to rebalance the power of owners, whether public or private, with that of citizens and workers while guaranteeing the interests of future generations.

* Cooperation: Cooperation is becoming a central organizing principle of the economy and society. It is about favoring lasting partnerships rather than competitive relationships without constraints.

* Right to citizen contribution: Every citizen is able to demand from the State that it allows them to actively contribute to the production and management of the resources and places that concern them. This means investing in education and social inclusion to ensure that all people have the opportunity to fully participate in the economy and benefit from its benefits."

Horizontal subsidiarity: Public authorities favor citizen organizations in the conduct of activities of general interest. But they remain present in the event of a failure in the self-organization of citizens by intervening to guarantee fundamental rights and collective well-being when necessary."

(https://aoc.media/opinion/2024/04/11/de-lordoliberalisme-a-lordo-communalisme/)


=Discussion=

==For an overhaul of State action through the prism of the commons==

Louise Guillot, Rémy Seillier et Sebastien Shulz:

"These general principles could be applied to guide the different roles of public authorities (planning, redistribution, taxation, etc.) but also the transformation of their organizational methods.

Ordo-communalism would call for new regulations and economic policies to organize a cooperative economy.

For example, by generalizing entrepreneurial models such as cooperative societies of collective interest, or by establishing new legislation, such as the establishment of an enforceable responsibility to maintain the commons. This responsibility to maintain the commons would require the modification of articles 1832 and 1833 of the Civil Code in order to make the company exist as a collective project, the purpose of which is neither reduced to the search for profit, nor to the simple consideration social and environmental issues, but in its responsibility to take care of the commons that it affects through its activity.

The transformation of public authorities through the logic of the commons would also lead to a move away from bureaucratic logics or logics dictated by new public management and towards more open, cooperative and democratic public institutions.

As an illustration, when Social Security was created, it carried out a mission of general interest while being administered by private law organizations which were subject to democratic governance, with the election of representatives of contributors. Despite successive reforms, Social Security constitutes a fine example of how commons thinking allows us to design “de-stateized” administrations, organized in accordance with the principles of cooperation, shared ownership and subsidiarity.

Another example of a transformation of the administration, attempting to move away from the private management model[13], is the recent development initiated by the IGN, taking direct inspiration from the commons[14]: training of agents in the use and deployment of “geocommons”, contribution of public agents to the development of these open and shared (non-public) resources, cooperation with the communities maintaining these digital commons.

It is urgent to democratize the State and regain control of its reform.

The strength of the neoliberal offensive lies in the fact that it was able to make the State a weapon to organize society around the free market, productivism and consumerism. This is why it seems crucial to us to regain control of state reform. In order to build a counter-model, we must commit ourselves to methodical and strategic work to transform our public institutions, as well as existing structures and regulatory frameworks. This work is all the more urgent to face the acceleration of the privatization of the health and education sectors, the reduction of public services, the reduction of support for intermediary bodies, the financialization of the social and solidarity economy, etc.

Although the task is colossal, it is not impossible. The State is not a monolithic bloc serving and inspired by the market. The State already plays, in many places, a role as guarantor of cooperation and solidarity. We must commit to strengthening this voice."

(https://aoc.media/opinion/2024/04/11/de-lordoliberalisme-a-lordo-communalisme/)

[[Category:P2P_Law]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Commons]]