
=Discussion=

Tim Morgan:

"The SEEDS model indicates that the average person worldwide will be poorer by 9.5% in 2030, and by fully 20% by 2040, than he or she is today . It follows from this, of course, that his or her ability to carry debt and other financial burdens and to pay taxes will be correspondingly impaired.  

Two further trends, both of which are of fundamental importance, can be anticipated as consequences of the de-complexifying process.  

One of these is simplification, which describes a rolling contraction in the breadth of choice on offer to consumers, and a corresponding contraction in systems of supply.  

The second is de-layering, meaning the removal of intermediate economic processes.  

The de-layering effect can be illustrated using food supply as a comparatively simple example (though the issues involved extend right across the gamut of products and services).  The pre-industrial system for supplying food had few stages between farmer and ultimate consumer. There were, to be sure, millers, carters, coopers, green-grocers, butchers and a number of other trades operative between producer and customer, but there was nothing on the scale of today’s plethora of intervening layers, which run from fertilizer suppliers and agricultural consultants at one end of the spectrum through to packaging and marketing consultants at the other.  Looking ahead, the application of simplification and delayering to the chain of food supply suggests that, whilst product choices will narrow (ten sorts of breakfast cereal, perhaps, rather than fifty), some of the intervening layers will contract, whilst others will disappear altogether. Simpler products and simpler product ranges require fewer intermediate stages. Extended across the economy as a whole, the implication is that we face what might be called a “great extinction” of trades, specialisations and, indeed, of whole sectors. As and when this forward trend gains recognition, it’s likely that businesses and individuals will endeavour to withdraw from activities which are at high risk of being de-layered out of existence. Surveying new horizons The economic processes described here are going to have far-reaching implications, most of which will be matters for subsequent discussion. First, though, it makes sense to recap the critical points of the foregoing. The fundamental change now in prospect is that economic de-growth will set in, and will eliminate most of the expectations hitherto covered by the term “the economy of more”. The rate at which the economy shrinks (and the average person becomes less prosperous) will be influenced by a number of variables, of which critical mass and utilization effects are amongst the most important.  '''A reasonable working assumption, generated by SEEDS, is that people are going to get poorer at annual rates of about 1%,''' though there will, needless to say, be major regional and national variations around this trend.  This rate may not sound all that dramatic – though we need to bear in mind that it is almost certain to worsen – but the shock effects of the onset of de-growth are likely to be profound, not just in the economic and financial spheres, but socially and politically as well.   As the economy gets smaller, it will also become less complex. Central strands here are likely to include both simplification (of products and of processes) and de-layering. The latter will involve contraction in some areas of activity, and the elimination of others.  The coronavirus crisis itself is providing us with a foretaste of some of these anticipated trends."

(https://surplusenergyeconomics.wordpress.com/2020/06/19/175-the-surplus-energy-economy/

[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Degrowth]]