

=Description=

Joe Brewer:

"Social movements throughout history have achieved lasting success by altering
institutional structures and cultural norms to reflect their core values and beliefs. Their
achievements can be seen in 

(1) the emergence of new social practices like interracial
marriage or the honoring of indigenous traditions; 

(2) adoption and enforcement of policy
frameworks like the Bill of Rights or the Endangered Species Act; and — in some circumstances —

(3) as novel organizational forms that alter the institutional landscape like
the new hybrid for-profit/non-profit legal charter for the benefit corporation or the
crowdsourced archive of information known as Wikipedia."
(http://empathysurplus.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/governance-structures-for-social-movements1.pdf)


=Example=

==The [[General Assembly Organizational Frame]]==

Joe Brewer:

"here are a variety of organizational frames that can be deployed to build capacity in
grassroots movements. The most central one used by Occupy was the general assembly — an open public forum for deliberation where all decisions are made by consensus and
new agenda items can be introduced by any participant in the process. 

The organizational frame at play here is the General Assembly Frame
which can be thought of as a
container that represents the physical space where people gather to discuss matters of
importance to the community.

Strengths of the General Assembly Frame include:

• All participants have equal power.
There is no centralized decision-making
body or hierarchical authority.

• Agenda items are ranked by their overall relevance and importance to the
entire group. No “special interest” or “elite power” can bias the agenda toward
their private ends.

• All decisions represent a consensus view of the majority present. Thus they
embody the core tenant of democratic practice where everyone has equal voice
and there is no tyranny of the minority.

For a group that organized itself in opposition to elite power, this structure makes quite a
lot of sense. Yet it also contains within it a major limitation that warrants special note — the
consensus process is notorious for producing sub-optimal outcomes. While it does lead
to decisions that reflect the majority view, many compromises tend to arise along the way
that may be overly incremental and moderate. In circumstances where the emphasis is on
minor improvements to an existing set of issues, this process works rather well. But in
times where radical or revolutionary disruptions are necessary, it is often ineffective at
promoting innovative paradigm-shifting changes to existing systems.

This tendency can be seen in risk-averse thinking across the group, a lack of creativity as
“groupthink” dominates the dialogue, or a muddled “everything but the kitchen sink” set of
solutions that stand little chance of producing workable solutions to the real-world
problems—with all their nuanced complexity—that the group came together to address.

Furthermore, the consensus process tends to be very time consuming and slow to
progress. During times when agility and rapid response are essential for success, it
becomes a highly undesirable way to achieve collective outcomes."
(http://empathysurplus.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/governance-structures-for-social-movements1.pdf)


==The [[Activation Network Organizational Frame]]==

Joe Brewer:

'Another important structure used by Occupy
was the [[Swarm]]
where a leaderless movement
emerged spontaneously in multiple locations all
at once. The key organizational frame behind
this behavior is the
Activation Network Frame — where multiple nodes of a network are
constantly monitoring for threats and each is
able to engage in rapid response to changes in
the local environment. Examples of the
activation network include the hive behavior of social insects and the immune response of
a complex multi-cellular organism.

Social insects (bees, wasps, termites, etc.) constantly monitor the chemical trails left by
individual members of their hive and respond quickly to the release of stress markers in the
proximity of a new predator or some other disruption to their normal routines. Multi-cellular
organisms have special cells within their bodies—one example being the lymphocytes in
the blood of mammals that attack viruses and tumors before they are able to spread—that
float throughout the body and respond locally when a harmful contagion is discovered.

The key features of an activation network are
decentralization and localized rapid engagement. The Occupy Movement spread quickly as local community members organized themselves into encampments and protest actions. There were no visible
leaders who could be targeted across the movement and specific actions reflected the
local character of each group and the concerns they rallied around."
(http://empathysurplus.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/governance-structures-for-social-movements1.pdf)

* Learn more at
http://www.chaoticripple.com/2011/occupy-wallstreet-swarm-behavior-and-self-organized-criticality/



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]


[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]