
=More Information=


==Bibliography==

Books:

Baldwin, Carliss Y., and Kim B. Clark 2000. Design Rules: the Power of Modularity.
Volume I. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Garud, Raghu, Arun Kumaraswamy, and Richard N. Langlois, eds. 2003.
Managing in the Modular Age: Architectures, Networks and Organizations.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Raymond, Eric S. 2001. The Cathedral and the Bazaar. Musings on Linux and Opensource
by an Accidental Revolutionary, revised edition. Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. Also online:
‹http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/›.

Torvalds, Linus 1999. “The Linux Edge,” in DiBona, Chris, Sam Ockman, and
Mark Stone (eds.), Open-sources: Voices from the Open-source Revolution.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates, Inc.: 101-11. Also online:
‹http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/opensources/book/toc.html›.

Essays:

Benkler, Yochai 2002. “Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and the Nature of the Firm,”
Yale Law Journal 112(3): 369-446 (December). Available at:
‹http://www.yale.edu/yalelj/112/BenklerWEB.pdf›.

Bessen, James. 2001. “Open-source Software: Free Provision of Complex Public
Goods.” Available at: ‹http://www.researchoninnovation.org/opensrc.pdf›.

Coase, Ronald H. 1937. “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica (N.S.) 4(16): 386-405
(November).

Garzarelli, Giampaolo. 2004. “Open-source Software and the Economics of
Organization,” in J. Birner and P. Garrouste (eds.), Markets, Information and
Communication. London and New York: Routledge: 47-62.

Kuan, Jennifer W. 2001. “Open-source Software as Consumer Integration into
Production,” Working Paper (January). Available at:
‹http://ssrn.com/abstract=259648›.

Langlois, Richard N. 2002. “Modularity in Technology and Organization,”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 49(1): 19-37 (September).

Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole 2002. “Some Simple Economics of Open-source,”
Journal of Industrial Economics 50(2): 197-234 (June).

Osterloh, Margit, and Rota, Sandra G. 2004. “Open-source Software
Development - Just Another Case of Collective Invention?” Working
Paper, University of Zurich (March). Available at:
‹http://ssrn.com/abstract=561744›.

Simon, Herbert A. 1998. “The Architecture of Complexity: Hierarchic Systems,”
in Idem, The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd edition, second printing.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press: 183-216. Originally published in 1962,
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 106(6): 467-82 (December).

Simon, Herbet A. 2002. “Near Decomposability and the Speed of Evolution,”
Industrial and Corporate Change 11(3): 587-99 (June).

von Hippel, Eric 1989. “Cooperation Between Rivals: Informal Know-how
Trading,” in Bo Carlsson (ed.), Industrial Dynamics: Technological,
Organizational, and Structural Changes in Industries and Firms. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers: PAGES.

von Hippel, Eric, and Georg von Krogh 2003. “Open-source Software and the
‘Private-Collective’ Innovation Model: Issues for Organization Science,”
Organization Science 14(2): 209-223 (March-April).

Wheeler, David A. 2003. “Why Open-source Software/Free Software (OSS/FS)?
Look at the Numbers!,” (September 8). Available at:
‹http://www.dwheeler.com/oss_fs_why.html›.

Wheeler, David A. n.d.1. “Open-source Software/Free Software (OSS/FS)
References.” Available at: ‹http://www.dwheeler.com/oss_fs_refs.html›.

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]