
'''* Book: No Shortcuts: Organizing for Power in the New Gilded Age. By Jane F. McAlevey. Oxford University Press, 2016'''

URL = https://global.oup.com/academic/product/no-shortcuts-9780190624712

=Description=

"In No Shortcuts: Organizing for Power in the New Gilded Age, Dr. Jane F. McAlevey investigates the reasons behind the recent failures of unions and lays out a way forward for the progressive movement. McAlevey, an experienced community, electoral, and labor organizer, presents a dozen case studies of unions and social movements seeking to effect change in the twenty-first century. As she analyzes each case, she identifies the reasons for the movement’s success or failure. Progressives can win, McAlevey argues, but lack the organized power to enact significant change, to outlast their bosses in labor fights, and to hold elected leaders accountable. No Shortcuts shows that what victorious movements have in common is the use of grassroots mass organizing rather than the top-down strategies such as advocacy that have recently gained favor. Beyond the concrete examples in this book, McAlevey's arguments have direct implications for anyone involved in organizing for social change. Much more than just a cogent analysis, No Shortcuts explains exactly how progressives can go about rebuilding powerful movements at work, in communities, and at the ballot box."
(http://www.socialistproject.ca/leftstreamed/ls333.php)



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]