
'''* Article: The Origin of Slow Media: Early Diffusion of a Cultural Innovation through Popular and Press Discourse, 2002-2010. By Jennifer Rauch. Transformations, Issue No. 20   2011 — Slow Media'''

URL = http://www.transformationsjournal.org/journal/issue_20/article_01.shtml


=Summary=

"Since the turn of the 21st century, people from diverse walks of life have begun to form a sub-cultural movement whose members reduce their overall time spent with media and/or their use of specific communication technologies in order to constrain the influence of digital devices and networks on their personal, professional, and family lives. For example, some people have adopted the Sabbath Manifesto ritual of unplugging as a modern way of observing a weekly day of rest, some participate in Adbusters’ long-running Digital Detox Week campaign to disrupt corporate-commercial culture, and some reduce their use of fast, digital media in favor of slow, analog activities. The perspective of such groups and individuals who espouse these innovative cultural practices are typically not “Luddite” or “against technology”; rather, they recognize the various benefits and limitations of new forms of media and want to use it in a more deliberate way.

Recent attention to the concept of “Slow Media,” in particular, suggests that we are observing a moment of transformation in the way that many people around the world think about and engage with mediated communication. With the term “slow” now established as familiar shorthand for leading a more balanced life (see Honoré, In Praise of Slowness), Slow Media can be understood as both a philosophy and a practice: First, it represents an appreciation or re-appraisal of “heirloom” forms of media, such as print or analog, and questions popular desire for ever-more information and ever-faster communication. Second, it espouses the practice of “slowness” in media production and consumption, which shifts usage toward slower mediated (or even unmediated) activities, often by temporarily or permanently reducing one’s time spent with digital networks and devices.

When and where did the concept of Slow Media originate? For me, at least, the idea struck in 2009 as I was contemplating the always-connected, speed-obsessed, present-minded nature of human life in the 21st century. As detailed in the blog I began at that time (slowmedia.typepad.com), a handful of people seem to have autonomously generated a similar notion in recent years and made the perhaps obvious connection with the Slow Movement, best known for its food iteration that has exerted great influence on affluent, industrialized societies during the past decade (see Petrini, Slow Food). A chance conversation about my Slow Media blog and year-long project of going offline with reporter Sally Herships, whose curiosity might have been piqued by her own ambivalence toward digital habits, led to a National Public Radio (NPR) broadcast in the United States and a spate of attention from the press and public-at-large (Herships, “A Slow Media Movement”).

In this article, I create a snapshot of Slow Media’s origins by looking at its early diffusion through popular and press discourse. I explore the following questions: Who first proposed the concept of Slow Media, and how did those people envision it? When and where did this subculture capture the journalistic imagination and enter the public agenda? Which primary sources and references have most influenced popular discussions of Slow Media, to date? Which news providers have afforded it the most attention? The empirical core of this study is an analysis of media texts such as articles, broadcasts, essays and blog posts collected from print and online publications. As someone who has served as an expert source on Slow Media to numerous journalists, I also draw on some of my own experiences. I focus here on three periods of development: the precursors who made autonomous proposals envisioning a cultural movement; the 2009 emergence of Slow Media as a cultural force; and the diffusion of this new ideology during the first year. I also discuss chronological, geographic and institutional patterns that show when and where people began talking about Slow Media, how the idea entered the public agenda, and which texts have been most influential in disseminating its principles.

My present goal is to introduce and describe early reports of the Slow Media phenomenon, posing a few questions for future research and leaving to other researchers some worthy tasks of theorization and analysis that are beyond the scope of this article. The concept of Slow Media is, of course, philosophically intertwined with that of Slow Food. In his extensive meditations on how slowness has improved the recursive relationship between eating and growing of food, Petrini argues that while industrialization has yielded much good, it has also produced an unsustainable environment of monocultures and a technocratic worldview where speed has become a too-important criterion for judging human activities. His influential critique of food systems has many parallels with those addressing the impact of communication systems on popular thought and behavior, from Socrates to Thoreau, Ellul, McLuhan, Mander, Meyrowitz, Postman, Roszak, and others. Several writers who find increasing quantity and decreasing quality in messages problematic suggest that the modern digital media environment now risks producing a harmful monoculture, too (see Carr; DeZongotita; Freeman; Gitlin; Lanier; McKibben; Powers; Turkle). These books together signal that the techno-utopian thrust of the late 20th and early 21st centuries is facing a broad reconsideration, of which Slow Media is one part.

This study focused on identifying discourses about this subculture in the mainstream press and on high-ranking websites — in other words, sources that are likely to influence public knowledge about and attitudes toward Slow Media, though it goes without saying that press reports of a new sub-cultural idea do not necessarily result in widespread public adoption of its principles. The texts analyzed here were drawn from a database query of articles along with a Google query of websites featuring the term “slow media” in a context referring to a philosophy, practice or movement that addresses media production or consumption (rather than other unrelated phrases, such as “slow media response” or “slow media day,” where “slow” does not modify “media”) I limited the search to blogs and websites appearing in the first five pages of results, since these sources are typically the most relevant, the most visited, and the most linked-to. This search was supplemented by a few articles that I already knew about or that were otherwise brought to my attention. [1]

While Slow Media received a good deal of attention in stories produced by journalists, bloggers and other writers, only a small subset of this content featured original reporting that used first-hand interviews. The majority of people writing about Slow Media published either essays expressing personal opinion or stories using secondary sources, e.g. references or links to authoritative articles that were based on first-hand sources. The total number of texts that I found discussing Slow Media was 39. Of these, seven texts were original statements proposing the philosophy; seven stories offered original reporting based on interviews with people who engaged in Slow Media practices; 16 texts took the form of essays produced by people commenting on Slow Media (in response to discourses that others had originated); and nine texts simply cited first-hand reports and essays, re-posting or linking to those original sources."


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Articles]]