
'''* Essay: The Original Meaning of “Democracy”: Capacity to Do Things, not Majority Rule. Josiah Ober'''

URL = http://www.stanfordalumni.org/leadingmatters/los_angeles/documents/OriginalMeaningDemocracy.pdf


=Description=

"Democracy is a word that has come to mean very different things to different people.

In origin it is, of course, Greek, a composite of demos and kratos. Since demos can
be translated as “the people” (qua “native adult male residents of a polis”) and kratos
as “power,” democracy has a root meaning of “the power of the people.” But power
in what sense? In modernity, democracy is often construed as being concerned, in the
first instance, with a voting rule for determining the will of the majority. The power
of the people is thus the authority to decide matters by majority rule. This reductive
definition leaves democracy vulnerable to well-known social choice dilemmas, including
Downs’ rational ignorance and Arrow’s impossibility theorem: If democracy as a
political system is reducible to a decision mechanism based on a voting rule, and if
that voting rule is inherently flawed as a decision mechanism, then (as critics have long
claimed) democracy is inherently flawed as a political system.1 If democracy is, at its
core, something other than a decision mechanism based on a voting rule, social choice
dilemmas may not prove to be inherent flaws in democracy as a system.

This paper concerns the original Greek meaning of “democracy” in the context
of the classical (fifth and fourth centuries B.C.) terminology for regime-types. The
conclusion is that democracy originally referred to “power” in the sense of “capacity
to do things.” “Majority rule” was an intentionally pejorative diminution, urged by
democracy’s Greek critics (Raaflaub 1989, Ober 1998).2 Of course, we are not bound
by any past convention, much less by the inventors’ original definition: if we can devise a
better meaning for a political term, it should be preferred. But if common modern usages
are not particularly good, in the sense of being “descriptively accurate” or “normatively
choiceworthy,” then there may be some value in returning to the source. Reducing
democracy to a voting rule arguably elides much of the value and potential of democracy.

The original Greek meaning, while having no inherent authority for us, suggests ways
to expand our modern conception of democracy and thereby (incidentally) to render
it less vulnerable to the problems associated with aggregating diverse preferences by
voting."


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Articles]]