* Book: [[Pierre Levy]], Aux Origines de L'Intelligence Collective. 

URL = [http://www.archipress.org/levy/aql.htm] - 


=Interview=

Interview with the author, Pierre Levy:

* Fabiano Incerti and Douglas Borges Candido: "In your books 

#Collective Intelligence: For an Anthropology of Cyberspace (1994) and
#Cyberculture: The Culture of Digital Society (1997), 

you argue that the Internet and digital
technologies develop collective
intelligence, enabling new forms
of collaboration and knowledge
sharing. However, there is growing
concern that excessive use of social
networks and digital technologies
is associated with distraction and
delayed learning among young
people. How do you view this
apparent contradiction between
the potential of technologies to
strengthen collective intelligence
and the negative effects they
can have on the cognitive and
educational development of
young people?

R2 - I never claimed that the Internet
and digital technologies alone, and as
if the technologies were autonomous
subjects, would develop collective
intelligence. I claimed that the best use
we could make of the Internet and
digital technologies was to develop
human collective intelligence, which
is very different. And that is still what
I think. The idea of a “knowledge
space” that could be deployed above
the commercial space is a regulatory
ideal for action, not a factual prediction.
When I wrote Collective Intelligence –
from 1992 to 1993 – less than 1% of
humanity was connected to the Internet,
and the Web did not exist. You will not
find the word “Web” anywhere in the
book. However, today – in 2024 – we
have well over two-thirds of the world’s
population connected to the Internet.
The context is therefore completely
different, but the change in civilization
that I predicted 30 years ago today
seems obvious, although normally
we have to wait several generations to
confirm this type of mutation. In my
opinion, we are just at the beginning of
the digital revolution.

As for increasing collective
intelligence, many steps have been
taken to make knowledge accessible
to everyone. Wikipedia is a classic
example of a company that works on
collective intelligence, with millions
of volunteer contributors from all
countries and discussion groups
among experts for each article.

There are almost seven million
articles in English, two and a half
million articles in French and more
than a million articles in Portuguese.
Wikipedia is consulted by tens of
millions of people every day and
several billion every year! Free
software – now widely adopted and
distributed, including by large web
companies – is another important
area in which collective intelligence
is in command. Among the most
widely used free software are the
Linux operating system, the Mozilla
and Chromium browsers, the
OpenOffice suite, the Apache HTTP
server (which is the most widely used
on the Internet), the GIT version
control system, Signal messaging
and many others that would take too
long to list. I would add that digitized
libraries and museums, as well as
open access scientific articles and
sites like ArXiv.org, are common,
which has been transforming the
practices of scientific research and
communication. Today, everyone
can publish texts on their blogs,
videos and podcasts on YouTube or
other websites, which was not the
case thirty years ago. Social networks
allow the exchange of news and ideas
very quickly, as we see, for example,
on LinkedIn or X (formerly Twitter).
The Internet has therefore truly
enabled the development of new
forms of expression, collaboration
and knowledge sharing. There is still
much to be done. We are only at the
beginning of the anthropological
transformation that is underway."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)


=More information=

''Excerpt from a book, on historical precedents for the concept.''  Extensive [http://wiki.aardrock.com/Collective_Intelligence english summary] by Martien van Steenbergen.


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]