'''= organizational [[Tensengrity]]''', concept proposed by Timothy Wilken, '''a “system of human organization that creates a conflict-free environment for decision making and action implementation”.'''


URL = http://www.synearth.net/Restricted-Confidential/OT.pdf


=Description=

Timothy Wilken:

"Life’s pattern of organization is the tensegrity, it has been in use on earth for over three and
one half billion years. The tensegrity is the basis of organizing all living systems including
our own bodies. Up until now we humans have not understood the mechanism and
therefore could not use this pattern to organize our marriages, our businesses, our
organizations and institutions, our communities, or even the entire human species.

Humans who organize themselves using the pattern of tensegrity will find themselves
orders of magnitude more efficient, more productive, more creative, more intelligent.
More importantly they will be much more successful in pursuing their goals and desires
Within this half century, we humans have developed ergometric science to help us
improve our tool-making. Ergometric scientists tell us how to best design tools to fit the
human form. By carefully measuring both the physiology and psychology of the human
body, today’s scientists are seeking to determine the best designs for new tools. They know
that the best tools are those that fit you like a well-tailored glove fits your hand.
Recently ergometric science has been much advanced by a breakthrough in our
understanding of human intelligence. With the development of the “dual mind” model of
human intelligence it is now possible to design tools that fit the human “mind-brain”. In
other words, we can now ergometrically engineer tools to fit the way we humans think.

We humans are the toolmakers, and in our history we have made many tools — both
simple and complex. The most complex and complicated of all our tools are our
organizations — the corporations, institutions, militaries, and governments of earth. These
are also the most important tools in all our lives, for they significantly influence both the
quality and quantity of our lives. Of all the tools we might seek to ergometrically engineer
to fit the human “mind-brain”, there exists no greater potential benefit for all humankind
then by applying this science to our most complex tools — our human organizations.

One such tool has recently completed development, and is now available to organizations
for immediate application. This first ergometrically designed tool for human
organizations is called the Ortegrity. The Ortegrity is a “mind-brain” compatible system
of organizing humans. It can be used by a small group of individuals or a giant
corporation with hundreds of thousands of employees.

The Ortegrity is a “system of human organization that creates a conflict-free environment
for decision making and action implementation”.
(http://www.synearth.net/Restricted-Confidential/OT.pdf)

=More Information=

#[[Buckminster Fuller]]


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Synergy]]