'''= [[Open Source Car]] project'''

URL = http://www.theoscarproject.org/


=Description=

"It is the goal of the OScar Project to develop a car according to Open Source principles. In our opinion, a car is not a vehicle full of high-tech gadgets. Instead, we are looking for a simple and functional concept to spread mobility. Form follows function.

Apart from that, OScar is not just a car. It is about new ways of mobility and the spreading of the Open Source idea in the real (physical) world. On this website, you will find a great community of developers and drivers who want to invent mobility anew and together.

The project started in 1999. In December 2005, it reached release 0.2."


=Status=

"A wave of initial enthusiasm surrounded
the project. However, activity diminished substantially
in 2001. Merz managed to revive
the project in 2005: apart from the core team
of four people, around 100 enthusiasts were
engaged in this project (i.e., they contributed
to the project by making at least one entry within
the discussion forum). From these 100 participants,
15 were very active, i.e., they added a high
double-digit number of entries to the discussion
forum."
(R&D Management 39, 4, 2009)


=Discussion=

Research on motivation of contributors:

"Perhaps the most important extrinsic motivation
at the OScar project concerns the objective of
developing an environmentally friendly car. This
aspect not only was frequently mentioned by our
respondents but also figured in the respective
forums and manifesto. Closely related is the will
to establish a community that incorporates people
who share a common interest (cf. Lave and
Wenger, 1991).

In contrast to the copyright philosophy that
prevails in the automotive sector, participants
were also stimulated by patent-free collaboration
(OScar, 2006b).

Engaging in the OScar project is also considered
to be beneficial due to the opportunity it
presents for learning and developing novel skills
and technical insights. This is predominantly
based on the assumption that learning is deemed
a collective accomplishment.

As for intrinsic motivational stimuli, OScar
members claimed that they consider working for
the project a creative pleasure, as participants feel
challenged by demanding tasks that match with
their respective skills.

Bearing in mind that cars are also dependent on
their physical (in this case, virtual) appearance,
esthetics are deemed important (cf. in a similar
vein Kaiser et al., 2007). Although OScar can only
be sensed via the developers’ screens, esthetic
experiences are likely to be evoked by novel
designs.

As noted above with regard to Wikipedia and
OSS projects, there also seems to be a strong sense
of belonging among members of the OScar community.
Because of members’ shared interests and
Is open source software living up to its promises
objectives, the cohesiveness of the community is
likely to be intense.

In the case of OScar, the
contributors stated recurrently that they
need a modular structure in order to develop
the project simultaneously through separate
initiatives. This aspect is also reflected in the
few formal dimensions that guide the development
of OScar: among detailed technical
guidelines (e.g., the length of the vehicle ought
to be 4 m), the car is required to be simple,
sturdy, easily maintainable, and modular.

At the OScar project, various technical requirements
also set the agenda for the contributors and
may have prevented further engagement from
others. For instance, the data and dimensions
(e.g., tilted rear), as well as the performance
(e.g., a maximum speed of 145 km/h), were specified
beforehand.

Contrary to what is true in the OSS
realm, for the development of tangible products,
feasibility studies are inevitable. As for
Wikipedia, this challenge has been tackled by
offering a virtual encyclopedia. However, at
the OScar project, the need for feasibility
studies is essential. The car cannot be designed
and tested without tangible test objects
and phases, which we assume to constitute a
severe hindrance."


=Source=

Is open source software living up to
its promises? Insights for open
innovation management from two
open source software-inspired projects.
Gordon Muller-Seitz and Guido Reger. R&D Management 39, 4, 2009 375)


=More Information=

[[Product Hacking]]


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Transportation]]