'''= [[Open Source Drug Discovery]] (OSDD) is an initiative to provide affordable healthcare to the world through a global platform where the best minds can collaborate and collectively solve complex problems associated with discovering novel therapies.''' 
[http://www.osdd.net/osdd_vision.htm]

URL = http://www.osdd.net/


=Description=

'''Our mission is to make available affordable medicines to every single person of the developing world. We aim to bring openness and collaborative spirit in the entire drug discovery process with the objective of keeping drug cost low.''' [http://www.osdd.net/osdd_mission.htm]

"OSDD is a CSIR-led Team India consortium with a global partnership. It's vision is to provide affordable healthcare to the developing world by providing a global platform where the best minds can collaborate & collectively endeavor to solve the complex problems associated with discovering novel therapies for neglected tropical diseases like malaria, tuberculosis, leishmaniasis, etc. It is a concept to collaboratively aggregate the biological and genetic information available to scientists in order to use it to hasten the discovery of drugs. This will provide a unique opportunity for scientists, doctors, technocrats, students and others with diverse expertise to work for a common cause.

The success of open source models in Information Technology (For e.g. Web Technology, The Linux Operating System) and Biotechnology (For e.g. Human Genome Project) sectors highlights the urgent need to initiate a similar model in healthcare, i.e. an open source model for drug discovery.

Funding source - The Government of India has committed Rs. 150 crores (US $38 million) towards this project. An equivalent amount of funding would be raised from international agencies and philanthropists. About Rs 46 crores (US $12 million) has been already released by the Government of India.
(http://www.osdd.net/about_us.htm)



=More Information=

#[[OSDD License]]: licensing agreement proposed by OSDD India


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Movements]]