=Intent=

Instead of emails sent to diverse mixes of individuals, this will be the open discussion page for the 2015 conference.

==Cancelled==

No sponsors emerged and the various stovepipes were not interested.

=Why Are We Doing This?=

==Why Open Source Everything?==

As [[Dmytri Kleiner]] puts it so well in his statement on [[Radical Openness]], to be open is to be free is to not be a capitalist tool (we paraphrase). Capitalism, a form of organization that concentrates profits while externalizing costs, has toxified the earth and deprived humanity of its potential, many industrial era accomplishments notwithstanding. The scarcity concept is a false one. Hoarding of knowledge is harmful to others. The time has come to move well past the open source initiatives in the information technology arena, and to a lesser extent in manufacturing and materials, and go for the whole enchilada -- open source everything with an equal emphasis across all nine opens but singling out here [[Open Intelligence]] (education, intelligence, research), [[Open Governance]], [[Open Provisioning]] (energy, food, shelter, water), and [[Open Space]].

2015 appears to be a tipping point year, not only with respect to capitalism, but also with respect to democracy, [[Open Democracy]] being one of our most important opens -- with the caveat that ALL the opens are important because they hang together or they hang separately.  It is our view as curators and facilitators that the time has come for Open Source Everything to become a meme, a mind-set, and movement. That is why we are doing this.

==Why the Conference?==

The many opens (http://tinyurl.com/OSE-LIST / over sixty by one count) appear to be isolated from one another. Not only are there many ways in which various opens could help one another, but there are also many common areas -- such as creating new legal protocols that scale ([[CC-NC]] does not scale). The three founding personalities, [[Robert Steele]], [[Marcin Jakubowsky]], and [[Michel Bauwens]] have concluded that the time is right to create an intermediate cross-fertilization structure (the nine major sub-categories) and seek to organize ourselves the way [[Linus Torvalds]] organized the LINUX network of volunteer contributors.

==Why the Wiki==

In the process of organizing the conference and engaging with multiple potential sponsors including representatives of the [[Open Source Initiative]] and the [[Open Source Hardware Association]], [[Robert Steele]] realized we had the cart before the horse -- we needed to do community-mapping and trust-building across the various opens that we wish to help cross-fertilize, rather than just pop up with a conference.

=Proposed Structure=

==New Concept==

Perhaps the biggest change in our approach is that we have been inspired by the [[Open Circle Economy]] to make this much bigger than open source everything, by inviting the [[NATO Strategic Foresight]] endeavor, and the [[Millennium Project]] under the leadership of [[Jerome Glenn]], to be represented in the wiki and at the conference. Our intent is to both connect needs statements to those who devise open source solutions for those needs; and to create, for the first time, a truly open wiki that enables one-click cross-fertilization. This may lead to a separate day featuring the Millenium Project and NATO in the morning, and solutions workshops in the afternoon.

At this time three positive outcome scenarios are envisioned from a persistent focus on open source everything:

# Electoral Reform -- restoring integrity to the governance process and thence to the economy and society
# Open Source Activist Tool-Kit and Network -- empowering activists everywhere to share information and make sense
# Bottom of the Pyramid Empowerment -- creating open source solutions for provisioning, education, health, and all other needs of the 99%

13 June 2015: [[Letter to Speakers and Sponsors]]

==Original Concept==

Two competing ideas: a one-day or two-day conference only, and a three day event in which each day is separately organized. Three days (intended to warrant international travel) for further discussion:

# Open Data, Open Intelligence, Open Governance -- discuss at [[OSE-21 2015 Day One]]
# Open Software, Open Space, Open Infrastructures -- discuss at [[OSE-21 2015 Day Two]]
# Open Health, Open Provisioning, Open Manufacturing -- discuss at [[OSE-21 2015 Day Three]]

=Speaker Discussion=

At this time (10 June 2015) a number of speakers are confirmed as available contingent on funding, they can be viewed at http://ose-21.org / OSE-21 2015 Conference Web Page. We plan to revisit the entire structure of the conference on or about 6 July 2015, in partnership with the sponsors or curators for each of the nine sbu-categories  that have been established.

==Confirmed Speakers==

Confirmed speakers are based on the event taking place the week of 7 December 2015.

# [[Stephen E. Arnold]]
# [[Michel Bauwens]]
# [[Joan Blades]]
# [[Ellen Brown]]
# [[Lee Camp]]
# [[John D. Caputo]]
# [[John Congdon]]
# [[Kaliya Hamlin]]
# [[Ran Hock]]
# [[Christian Iaione]]
# [[Marcin Jakubowski]]
# [[Peter Joseph]]
# [[Sayed Karim]]
# [[Debilyn Molineaux]]
# [[Catarina Mota]]
# [[Cynthia McKinney]]
# [[Greg Newby]]
# [[Hunter Newby]]
# [[Joshua Pearce]]
# [[Arno Reuser]]
# [[Philip Rutter]]
# [[Elisabet Sahtouris]]
# [[David Solomonoff]]
# [[Robert Steele]]
# [[Jen Ziemke]]

Others are being invited to be properly represented here at the P2P Foundation Wiki without obligation, and if desired, to be confirmed for the conference.

=Venue Discussion=

[[Robert Steele]] explored the [[Hotel Pennsylvania]] where [[Hackers on Planet Earth]] takes place every two years, and crossed it off because of both unresponsive sales personnel and a final quote of $25,000 a day. He also explored [[Metropolitan West]] where the sales staff was very professional and responsive, but the final price tag for two days came to $75,000 when all costs were tallied -- these people charge separately for chairs, tables and staff.


[[Category:Open]]
[[Category:Conferences]]