= serverless portal system


URL = http://osiris.kodeware.net/


=Description=

"Osiris is an engine that makes possible to build anarchic forums and portals where members directly choose rules and conventions by themselves.
Osiris portals are serverless, so they spread through the P2P network members. This allows the portals to be independent of central servers, free and indestructibles since they are supported by every portal member.
Moreover, all the sent contents are anonymous, enabling a strong privacy protection and ensuring that no one can overwhelm this experiment of free thought and knowledge distribution.
Osiris can also build monarchic portals for a traditional moderation."


=Status 2011=

Paolo Brini:

"Various groups around the world use Osiris to keep indestructible
"web sites" without servers and without the www.

I have been personally involved in spreading Osiris in various
communities. It is a project which was thought 5 years ago. The software
is a CMS simple to use, allows to create forum, blogs and other portals,
and is used with success since years ago by bittorrent communities and
activists in hostile environments. A portal created with Osiris is
almost indestructible, since it is duplicated in its entirety on all
nodes which share, in a p2p protocol, that portal.

After a long debate, the authors have decided that Osiris will be soon
released under GPL (it is closed source right now and this is
interpreted as a major fault).

Today Osiris has been cited by the 2nd most read italian newspaper (1st
online) and this could help its diffusion. People in Osiris are also in
the NeuMon (the most powerful Net Neutrality monitor I have ever seen -
Herdict is a tiny toy in comparison) project and are also the people who
invented a working system to make domain names seizures by USA
ICE/ICANN/VeriSign/Afilias ineffective (currently the system is up and
running with success on airvpn)."
(FC Forum discussion list, February 2011)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]