URL = http://www.osor.eu/expert-studies/OSS-procurement-guideline-public-draft-v1%201.pdf

Recommendations for open source friendly public procurement in the European Union.

=Excerpt=

From the introduction:

"European governments are increasingly considering the
use of Open Source Software (also known as Free
Software or Libre Software, or FLOSS1) as a means of
reducing costs, increasing transparency and
sustainability. A number of debates have taken place on
the costs and benefits of open source software, and much
discussion and interest has been expressed from the
perspective of information technologists.

Meanwhile, the European Commission has launched the
Open Source Observatory and Repository, OSOR, with
the intention of supporting open source software as the
epitome of collaborative development of software in the
European public sector.

In this context, with this guideline, the authors consider
open source software not as a technical topic, but
essentially as a matter of public procurement. The
authors look at the process of public procurement, its
principles and requirements; how public procurement
works with software, across EU Member States; and how
public procurement approaches open source. The authors
explain how open source can be best addressed with
public procurement, and provide guidelines for how to
acquire open source software through the public
procurement processes.

This is not a general purpose guide for procurement of
software. This guideline is specifically designed in order
to clearly and simply explain how public administrations
can acquire open source.

Also, this guideline draws on the extensive legal analysis
conducted by the Dutch government's OSOSS
Open Standards Manual and Open-Source Software in
tenders: Open standards and open-source software and
tendering rules in 2005. This was followed by a further
practical guide published in 2007 by NOiV, the successor
organisation to the OSOSS programme2.

The Dutch guideline was prepared in a context of
considerable policy debate around open source software.
The Dutch parliament had passed a motion (in 2003)
calling for the use of open source software and open
standards in the public sector. A number of studies on the
attitudes towards and use of open standards and open
source software in the Dutch public sector were
conducted. Finally, in 2007 the Dutch government
adopted a formal policy mandating the use of open
standards and a preference towards open source
software. The Dutch guideline thus does not need to
come with a justification for this policy, since that was
already performed by previous studies; and it is rooted in
the specific context of the Dutch policies towards open
source and open standards.

At the European level, there are no such policies. This
guideline is therefore meant to be applicable in any
context within EU Member states, regardless of the
existence of any policy. Indeed, the purpose of this
guideline is to allow individual public administrations at
the regional, national or local level to acquire open source
software, even if there is no policy regarding open source.

This guideline shows public administrations'
procurement officers, policy makers and IT managers
how to do this following European procurement rules
alone, with no need for any specific open source policies.
One might ask: what is the justification for this guide?
With the launch of the OSOR, it is natural for public
administrations to want to try to use open source
software, starting with the software that will be
published on the OSOR. Many public administrations are
unclear how to go about this, and need advice and
guidelines. One important function of the OSOR is to
provide a space for the publication and sharing of advice
and guidelines related to open source in the public sector.

This guideline responds to the needs of OSOR users.
A further justification, though, is provided by the
existence of widespread "poor practices" in public
procurement that lead to non-transparent, anticompetitive
discrimination in software procurement. This
discrimination is in favour of proprietary software, and
typically specific proprietary products and their vendors.

The annex to this guideline, "Current situation in the
Eropean Union", provides evidence of such widespread
practices from surveys and analysis of tender databases.
(The annex also provides an overview of public sector IT
and open source procurement in EU Member States.)

Such poor procurement practices occur, at least partly,
because public administrations may not be aware of
better practices; and because they may not be aware that
it is possible to acquire open source software - or how to
do so. There is a need for information, and the goal of this
guideline is to meet that need.

The main part of this guideline, following this
introduction, is intended for a broad readership. It is
intended to provide practical guidance to policy makers,
IT managers and procurement officials at the level of
national, regional and local government. It is therefore
intended to be readable and relatively short."



[[Category:Policy]]