=Discussion=

==[[Oswald Spengler and Friedrich Hayek on the Clash of the Three Historical Ethical Systems]]==

Alistair Crooks:
 
"Man has evolved directly from such primate groups, and then lived
for generations more in similar, simple, hierarchical groups largely
controlled by the same inherited, genetically derived, protocols of our
primate ancestors. Spengler describes this period of human prehistory in ‘The Decline of the West’:
Life as experienced by primitive and by fellaheen peoples is just the zoological
up and down, a planless happening without goal or cadenced march in time,
wherein occurrences are many, but, in the last analysis, devoid of significance.

But around the time of the invention and introduction of farming,
rising population densities increased the likelihood of contact
between different ‘troops’, and the changing nature of these
interactions forced these groups to develop larger and more complex
social structures. With increasing contacts there was a transition
towards a linear development of successive cultural forms. This linear
‘history’ is referred to by Spengler as the ‘world-as-nature’  view of
history, since it has similar features to linear nature of biological, i.e.
natural, evolution.

''- "The professional historian […] sees it (history) like a sort of tape worm,
industriously adding on to itself one epoch after the other."''


Spengler used derogatory terms to describe this ‘world-as-nature’
view of history because to his mind the old subdivisions into
historical categories of Ancient, Medieval and Modern dealt
inappropriately with the evolution of his ‘wave-cycles’ of the later
complex societies. Significantly, the linearity of ‘world-as-nature’
implied that the future is unknowable, whereas his interpretation of
the repeated cycles of ‘world-as-history’ rendered the future as
knowable. But that does not concern us here. How ever much
Spengler liked to reject this linear, ‘world-as-nature’ model of
history, it is clear that we can follow a linear development in prehistoric societies.
If one looks at the political structure of the Australian Aborigines
we find that the focal unit of power is what is referred to as the
‘clan’. The clan is a small hierarchical family group, numbering from 
1 up to 30, or even 50 individuals maximum, headed by an all
powerful patriarch. Hierarchy is defined largely by the stage of
initiation into clan secrets. Clans are loosely grouped together into
larger dialect groups, commonly referred to as ‘tribes’, which come
together for ceremonies, to share seasonal food abundances like swan
eggs during the swan breeding season, to obtain wives, or for warfare.
These ‘tribes’ are not political units per se in that there is no tribal
leadership structure, each clan remaining strictly autonomous within
the ‘tribe’. What we can see here is that the political structure of the
Australian Aborigine revolves around one which is only slightly
removed by learned culture from an earlier, pre-historic, ‘troop’-like
structure. Learned culture which controls religion and law, called
‘The Dreaming’ by Aborigines and ostensibly handed down from
spirit ancestors, sits above older inherited traits, but in reality only
provides the justification for the inherited, hierarchical structures of
the clans. 


Anthropologist, William Stanner, summed it up quite neatly:

- ''The narrow self-interest of men exploits The Dreaming.''


Following the Australian Aborigines, I am drawn to the work of
anthropologist, Napoleon Chagneon and his descriptions of the
political structure of the Yanomamö Indians of the Amazon basin. 

It would appear that here groups were living closer together than the
Australian Aborigines and were therefore more likely to come into
contact with each other. Because of intergroup aggression, these
groups had developed into larger defensive, and indeed offensive,
associations. These groups were still strictly close family, but now
numbering up to 300 individuals. Chagneon explained that while
increasing size was considered advantageous for defensive or
offensive reasons, the Yanomamö had not developed the cultural
mechanisms to hold such large groups together, and internal
divisions often caused them to fission back into smaller groups.
These groups traded increased vulnerability to outside aggression for
a stronger internal group solidarity and lower internal aggression.
Again, however, I point to the hierarchical structure of these groups,
and the all-powerful patriarch who had complete control over all of
his group.

In the linear development that I am suggesting we would now step
on to tribes, and then kingdoms. Perhaps it is not necessary to go into
any great detail here as most people will be familiar with internal
political structures of both, and have their own personal favourites. 

What I have described here are living examples displaying possible
steps in the evolution, segments of the tape worm if you prefer, to
larger and more complex societies as we pass from primate ‘troop’, to
clan, to tribe, to kingdom. These new political entities required the
negotiated development of new learned cultural forms to hold larger
and larger numbers together, in opposition to the old inherited
instincts which naturally induced animosity and suspicion towards
any individuals other than close family members of the ‘troop’. This is
what was referred to by Hayek in the quote above regarding the
second of his ‘moral traditions’. These comprise the set of learned
culturally-derived traditions passed on over the centuries that arose
by trial and error - traditions that may seem haphazard with many
seemingly strange inexplicable anomalies, the origin and justification
for which is long forgotten, but which ultimately have worked in
holding cultures together into larger workable groups. Hayek used
the ‘biological term’ ‘group selection’ for this second ‘moral tradition’
but in no way did he intend us to believe this was other than learned
culture.


In his book ‘The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism’ Hayek
made the clear distinction between the first two ‘moral belief’ systems
that have been described above.

 "I have been attempting to explain how extended order of human co-operation has evolved despite opposition from our instincts."

- "This book has shown mankind as torn between two states of being. On the one
hand are the kinds of attitudes and emotions appropriate to behaviour in the
small groups wherein mankind lived for more than one hundred thousand
years, wherein known fellows learnt to serve one another, and pursue common
aims. […] On the other hand there is the more recent development in cultural
evolution wherein we no longer chiefly serve known fellows or pursue common
ends, but where institutions, moral systems and traditions have evolved that
have produced and now keep alive many times more people than existed before
the dawn of civilisation, in pursuing thousands of different ends of their own
choosing in collaboration with thousands of persons whom they will never know."

The older instinctive inherited moral belief system was appropriate
for the use in small groups, but as societies grew, new learned
cultural forms were needed to override certain behaviours which
were no longer appropriate in larger group settings. In a sense it’s the
very origins of ‘political correctness!’.

However, critically, we should note that the underlying structure
of these new associations, the new cultural institutions, closely mimic
the original political structures that had developed over the 25
million years of primate behaviour, or Hayek’s one hundred thousand
years of human behaviour. The inequality inherent in the leadership
by a dominant male in the ‘troop’ became leadership by a patriarch,
followed by leadership by a tribal chief, followed by leadership by a
king, as the associations enlarged by novel necessity, and the new
political structures were devised. By the same process, the subdominant males became, in effect, a ruling aristocratic class under
the king.

All successful ‘cultures’ evolve by developing the cultural tools
needed for survival, and all appear to have followed this same path,
developing the same inequality in their political forms, based on this
initial starting point of hard-wired genetic inequality. It worked for a
million generations and thus was an automatic default starting point
for cultural evolution into larger groups as well.
Thus, when Spengler spoke of the natural order of things being
hierarchical, unequal if you like, and yearned for the old proven
system of the old ruling families and a peasantry who are ruled more
or less by consent, he was indirectly alluding back to the ‘natural’
inequalities derived from the primitive ‘troop’."

...

When the new so-called ‘bourgeois’, or ‘burgher’, elites wanted to take over from the
established aristocracy, they pled the case to ‘reason’ for the
establishment of a society of equals (with themselves as the
democratically elected leadership of course). Here we encounter
Hayek’s third level of ‘moral beliefs’. These are the set of moral beliefs
derived by the intellectuals who believe that by the power of their
own intellect they would be able to derive a better set of moral beliefs
for the organisation of society than the seemingly haphazard form
that currently exists. This is the ‘fatal conceit’ that Hayek referred to
in his book of the same name. And what Spengler called ‘a piece of
intellectual stupidity’.

As we have seen, Spengler had no time for the intellectuals and
their utopian ideas, who claimed to be ‘rational’, but misused ‘reason’
as a weapon to displace the old aristocracy and assume power for
themselves. 


In ‘The Hour of Decision’ he derides the ‘Age of Rationalism’:

- The word (Rational) is familiar enough, but who knows how much it implies? It
is the arrogance of the urban intellect, which, detached from its roots and no
longer guided by strong instinct, looks down with contempt on the full-blooded
thinking of the past and the wisdom of ancient peasant stock. It is the period in
which everyone can read and write and therefore must have his say and always ‘knows better.’


These elites based their claim for power on the so-called ‘reasonable’
proposition that all people were created equal and therefore should
have an equal democratic right to determine who ruled and how.

This, however, was actually based on the Pauline fallacy of ‘All souls
are created equal’ - ‘All men are created equal’ – ‘When Adam
delved and Eve span, who was then the gentleman?’ That is, the
fallacy of equality was based on the now dubious proposition of the
Biblical story of man’s creation six thousand years ago, that everyone
equally has a soul, and that all people were created equal before a
‘God’. I am suggesting that not too many people who are cheerleaders
of democracy these days would actually agree with this proposition,
and yet they continue to base their utopian models on this fallacy."

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)


==On the Clash Between System 1 and 2==

Alistair Crooks:

"Hunter and gatherer societies live in the here and now. They live in
isolated family groups. They maintain the old inherited responses of
charity, altruism and generosity for the person’s ‘inner group’, but
fear, suspicion and aggression for the ‘outer groups’ which surround
them. They need to be spontaneous, aggressive, impulsive. They have
a well-developed flight-or-fight response. They hunt when they are
hungry and consume food surpluses as soon as they are caught
because there is limited potential for food storage. Their survival
strategy is based on immediate gratification.
Farmers who follow this survival strategy, that of immediate
gratification and who eat the seed required for the new season’s
planting, or eat their breeding stock because they are hungry, will not
remain farmers for long.

Successful farmers need to be forward planners. Farming societies
tend to live in larger closer social groups. In larger communities,
aggression may not be a great advantage, while cooperation and
negotiation skills are more highly regarded and rewarded attributes.
Food needs to be carefully husbanded (seed for next season’s
plantings, domesticated animals for breeding stock). The survival
strategy of farmers is based on deferred gratification.

Thus, while we carry with us a burden of a million generations of
inherited behaviours favouring immediate gratification, we have but
a few inherited behaviours that a successful farming community
would need to counter this deeply ingrained, but counter-productive,
survival strategy imposed on us from our primitive ancestry.
However, over time, by trial and error, we have developed the learned
behaviours and developed the cultural institutions essential to
counter those old inherited traits to become successful farming
communities. Deferred gratification has for a long time succeeded
over immediate gratification. This learned culture is Hayek’s second
moral tradition taking precedence over his first moral tradition."

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)


== The Clash between the 2nd and 3rd System of Ethics ==

Alistair Crooks:

"To Friedrich Hayek, the ‘fatal conceit’, as in the title of his book,
was the belief of the academic elites (his ‘socialists’) that since they
have access to modern rational thinking and logic, they are in a
position to design a social ‘order’ which, because it is based on pure
reason, would of necessity be superior to the rules which had arisen
haphazardly before.

Imagining that all order is the result of design, socialists conclude that order
must be improvable by better design of some superior mind.
...

Of course, they mean their own ‘superior mind’. Again, this is Hayek’s
third moral tradition usurping his second moral tradition, as was
defined above.

With respect to social order, Hayek made a particular point in
emphasizing the importance of maintaining the distinction between
the ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ groups, and the need for the separate ‘rules of
engagement’ for each of these groups in which learned cultural
distinctions have naturally arisen over time. With one group it’s
‘family’, and the other group it’s ‘business’. These two groups
coincide with the old ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ groups of primitive society
where the old inherited responses of charity, altruism and generosity
for the person’s ‘inner group’ and fear, suspicion and aggression for
the ‘outer groups’ which surround them has been somewhat
ameliorated by learned culture to perhaps just suspicion and
wariness of the ‘outer’ groups.

However, according to Hayek, intellectual elites, because it seems
so ‘reasonable’ to them, believe that people could use culture to
extend the old innate responses of charity, altruism and generosity,
normally reserved for the person’s ‘inner group’, to the ‘outer groups’
as well, without collapsing the special relationships within the
individual’s ‘inner group’ and dissipating the cohesiveness of the
social group as a whole. To Hayek this is the goal of ‘socialism’ and
the Socialist State which he warned cannot be achieved without
destroying the core group of any society.

The origin of the word ‘socialist’ is from the Latin socius – socii –
an associate, colleague, or someone known personally to you. Thus,
‘society’ traditionally was a group of people known to each other, with
an agreed common sense of purpose in forming that association. This
accurately reflects the situation of human ‘societies’ for many
thousands of years.

This principle, however, has been misappropriated by the
socialists. They use the warm and fuzzy (‘instinctive nostalgia’) sense
of the word ‘society’, i.e. a small group of people known to one
another with an agreed shared purpose as implied in the Latin origin
of the term ‘society’, but then apply the principle to a larger group of
people who don’t know each other (i.e. to Hayek’s ‘outsiders’) and
who don’t necessarily have any shared purpose with the ‘inner group’.
They then use the fact that the groups have joined for one specific
purpose, i.e come together in a market place, to impose conditions on
another purposes even though the people involved do not share a
common aim with respect to those purposes. "

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)


==Explaining the Wave-Cycle of Spenglerian Civilizational Decline==

Alistair Crooke:

"Man is inventive and capable of modifying his inherited behaviour with learned culture,
and yet it appears that it is the genetic inheritance which provides the
parameters which underlie just how much flexibility learned culture
can have.

The two different forces that I propose control the evolution of
Spengler’s ‘wave-cycles’ presented here can now be woven together
to provide a possible narrative.

An early, primitive, human group would demonstrate innate
aggression to his neighbours in the protection of his territory.

However, if there was an expanding population and more frequent
interaction between groups, there may be a perceived need to temper
that aggression to take advantage of new opportunities relating to
defence, offence, or even simply for new trading opportunities by
forming bigger associations. Under those circumstances there would
be an impetus to invent learned culture which allowed man to sidestep his innate, aggressive behaviour in order to form those larger
associations. If there was a perception of an increased external threat
and this led to the formation of larger and larger defensive
associations, this need for larger defensive associations could
contribute to the maintenance of group stability in spite of rising
group numbers, and help suppress any innate desire to break up and
reform back into smaller groups. Those that could not develop that
learned culture and fissioned would be unlikely to survive. Notably,
the larger and larger associations I envisage were functional because
they still honoured the fundamental, innate, hierarchical structure of
the original ‘troop’.

In parallel with this there was the development of a different
strand of learned culture. Rising population pressures promoted the
move towards farming and settled life. This required the suppression
of the more primitive inherited propensity to immediate gratification
by a learned culture which promoted deferred gratification. Again,
the perception of an external threat could also contribute to the
acceptance of increasing levels of productive reinvestment, into
defence, while promoting the suppression of any innate desire for
immediate gratification like ‘ego-satisfying’ consumption.

In this way it is possible to see how positive feedback between
neighbouring competing groups could generate the up-cycle part of
the ‘cultural’ ‘wave-cycle’ until it became a civilization.
At the peak of the ‘wave-cycle’ group size may reach the sort of
limit that learned culture could no longer hold together, and any
internal inhomogeneities in the group, ethnic or class, could start to
eat away at group stability and create internal rivals for power.

Similarly, the accumulated wealth of an expanding civilization, or 
indeed any inequalities in wealth distribution, could reach a point
where the innate desire for consumption begins to press against the
learned culture of deferred gratification. It is possible that these
limits could be achieved at the point at which the civilization has
outgrown its neighbouring rivals, and the perceived defensive need
for large group size, or the need for productive investment in defence,
is no longer seen as relevant.

At this point there would be a reawakening of primitive inherited
instincts and the casting aside of old learned culture, and the
civilization would begin its descent on the down-cycle part of the
‘wave-cycle’.

Of course, modern man is a farmer and not a hunter or gatherer
and so the descent would not be right back into the forest, how ever
much ‘romantic nostalgia’ might will it. Following Spengler’s
suggestion with respect to the rise of Caesarism41, it is probable that
some charismatic person with leadership aspirations would be able to
mobilise sufficient support to take over the remnants and impose his
own version of a hierarchical structure on it as the new ‘dominant
male’.

I suggest that such a model is actually independent of the actual
form of learned culture, as long as the learned culture can achieve the
broad aims of allowing large group associations and deferred
gratification, and so represents a hypothesis that is at least feasible.
This would need to be tested in more detail against each civilization,
and each of Spengler’s stages in the development of each civilization,
to see if any validity can be established."

(https://www.oswaldspenglersociety.com/_files/ugd/7a5287_1d347b7e423649e9860b2238bb8aaba3.pdf)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]