

'''Out-cooperating = concept from Christopher Spehr which denotes competition through better cooperation.'''


=Context=

Christopher Spehr at
http://www.networkcultures.org/geert/out-cooperating-the-empire-exchange-with-christoph-spehr/


"We have two important notions. The first is that some people, some  
cooperations, some structures get out-cooperated by others in the  
course of things. This is a typical way economy develops – its  
Darwinian logic, if you like. And the dark side to the all-too-often  
friendly discourse of cooperation. ‘Let’s all do it together, but do it  
funkier than the rest’. Today it happens to the editors of the  
Encyclopedia Britannica who get out-cooperated by Wikipedia. They  
cannot compete. But it happens to millions of workers as well – in the  
harbours, in the ship industry, in the production of goods, in the  
proliferation of services. They lose their jobs, or they have to work  
for less income, with longer working days, harder conditions, less  
rights. Is this the same thing? Obviously, we have an idea of positive  
out-cooperating – this is when new forms of collaboration arise that  
are applied by the workers themselves, and old forms of hierarchy get  
ruled out in the same process. And we have a notion of negative  
out-cooperating – that is, when global power structures aim at the  
dis-empowerment of workers and local people, when hierarchy is  
re-inforced by the power of being global, of combining and re-combining  
global workforce, resources and markets without participation of  
workers and people. Can we say which is which in any case? That would  
be important, even if it’s not all simply black and white, of course."


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]