
Refers to the ability to annotate the web, independent from the original author's intentions.

==Definition==

From http://www.communitywiki.org/en/WebAnnotation#OverlayWeb

The OverlayWeb makes the entire world wide web editable.

The OverlayWeb is a second web that twins the world wide web. When surfing the OverlayWeb, you aren’t limited to the original author’s version of any webpage. The owner’s version of the webpage is just one branch in the revision history tree for the page. You, the person browsing the page, decide which branch or branches to focus your attention on.

==Context==

[[Web Annotation]], from 
http://www.communitywiki.org/en/WebAnnotation

WebAnnotation is the idea that the whole web should be open to edit by those reading the web sites. People could then leave notes for themselves and each other, about the site specifically or about the content of the site (and those notes would then show up other places where the content shows up.)

There are several ways to do WebAnnotation:

* The most basic kind of annotation is bookmarking (Social Bookmarking). One person tells other people that a site is interesting enough to link to.
* Another simple kind of annotation involves having users rate web sites. One person tells other people a little more information on how interesting it is.
* A more complicated kind is to have a parallel web, an Overlay Web, as it were. When several people write comments about a particular web page, one who views (through the lens of a OverlayWeb) that web page, sees all those comments.
* Another is to annotate names and phrases, which we call Phrase Annotation. When several people write comments about a particular phrase, one who views (through the lens of a —-) any web page that contains that phrase, sees all those comments."
(http://www.communitywiki.org/en/WebAnnotation)

==Examples==

There are several OverlayWebs in existence right now, and likely to be many more in the future.

* Hypothesis – open source web annotation = https://web.hypothes.is 
* WikalongExtension – a wiki-based OverlayWeb URL = http://wikalong.phunnel.org/wiki/ (dead)
* AnnoteaProject – a W3C led annotation system URL = http://www.w3.org/2001/Annotea/ (link alive, project apparently died in 2003)


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Technology]]