=== Racism and Racial Equality ===

* [[Racial Equality Frames and Public Policy Support]]: "We demonstrate that despite leftward shifts in public attitudes towards issues of racial equality, racial framing decreases support for race-neutral progressive policies. Generally, the class frame most successfully increases support for progressive policies across racial and political subgroups." [https://osf.io/tdkf3/]


====Anti-Bias Tools and Training====

* "A review of nearly 1,000 studies of anti-bias tools found little evidence that they have any impact. In fact, recent studies suggest anti-bias training's primary effect may be to encourage discrimination: Firms with diversity training end up with fewer minorities in management, and field research finds that training both reinforces stereotypes and increases animosity against minority groups." [http://static1.squarespace.com/static/5186d08fe4b065e39b45b91e/t/51e3234ce4b0c8784c9e4aae/1373840204345/Paluck_Green_AnnRev_2009.pdf]


====Health====

* [[Explaining Differences in Medical Outcomes]]


====Policing====


* Commons- and p2p-based approaches to violence work: "Researchers at New York University analyzed data from 264 cities over a 20-year period and estimated that for every increase of ten CBOs focused on crime and community life in large cities, there was a nine percent reduction in murder and a six percent reduction in violent crime. A report from the John Jay Research and Evaluation Center shows that Cure Violence sites in Brooklyn and the South Bronx experienced greater declines in gun injuries than did comparison areas." [https://publicseminar.org/2020/09/for-safer-streets-invest-in-community-anti-violence-groups/]

* Racialized policing: [[Perceptions of Police Violence Across the Political Spectrum in the US]] Report: How Informed are Americans about Race and Policing? McCaffree, K. & Saide, A. Research Report: Sceptic Research Center, CUPES-007 | February 20, 2021 [https://www.skeptic.com/research-center/reports/Research-Report-CUPES-007.pdf]


===Education and Learning===


'''* The Evergreen Affair: A Social Justice Society. By Shaun Cammack. THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, Master of Arts Program in the Social Sciences, August 2020''' [https://shauncammack19352070.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/final-the-evergreen-affair-shaun-cammack.pdf?]

'''"In the final analysis, I argue that the Evergreen affair was the manifestation of a coherent social system implicated by a thick system of belief, characterized by victimhood morality and ethnocentric ideas, which ultimately resulted in a racially hierarchical social order."''' '''See also: ''our own analysis of [[Woke Ideology]]''.'''


====Censorship, Deplatforming, Cancel Culture in and around Academia====

* Academic freedom issues (deplatforming, cancel culture):

#[[Political Discrimination, Punishment, , and Self-Censorship in Academia]]; Report: Academic Freedom in Crisis: Punishment, Political Discrimination, and Self-Censorship. by Eric Kaufmann CSPI Report No. 2, March 1, 2021 [https://cspicenter.org/reports/academicfreedom/]


===Psychology and Psychotherapy===


'''* Article: The tendency for interpersonal victimhood: The personality construct and its consequences. By Rahav Gabaya, Boaz Hameiribc, Tammy Rubel-Lifschitz. Personality and Individual Differences. Volume 165, 15 October 2020, 110134''' [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0191886920303238]

"In the present research, we introduce a conceptualization of the Tendency for Interpersonal Victimhood (TIV), which we define as an enduring feeling that the self is a victim across different kinds of interpersonal relationships. Then, in a comprehensive set of eight studies, we develop a measure for this novel personality trait, TIV, and examine its correlates, as well as its affective, cognitive, and behavioral consequences.

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Race]]
[[Category:Statistics]]
[[Category:Research]]