=Source=

Text below is slight reworking of a compilation and overview by Amanda Jansen and
Timothy Holborn: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UK9eWFjQRbGtF7wAMBNyntT7kZNpvSIe5cSY_VAuE0Q/edit#heading=h.hnkfq6amf134 Existing open value accounting initiatives]

Gitter Room for Discussion:  https://gitter.im/webcivics/OVA 

=Description=

Timonthy Holborn:

"These solutions seek to define value flows which then can be placed in a ledger, collective intelligence system or spreadsheet for contributive accounting, open value account and collaborative accounting.

Solutions are of a different nature: from spreadsheets or working tools for money allocation and evaluation and management of hours and tasks / roles to blockchain solutions and open value accounting to transformative models for a new economy. Some working, some in development."


=Directory=

== [[Ouishare]] ==

Ouishare operated before blockchain was available in spreadsheets exercising the idea of blockchain and open value accounting / having a basic income idea of spreading money over projects in ordinary spreadsheets. Prognosing the outcome of efforts and the distribution of money as well as collaboratively evaluating efforts and money streams.

Old: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15ryGNj-bqpMDW06xE0L3eo4QeFKgbF-8DnnxUdRe9xE/edit?usp=sharing
New:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/19GWeOGKTEN6iaBxr92_H3h2797zCzgTs0JoIx5kPENs/edit?usp=sharing

Basic income try out with project budgets (50% of Ouishare’s then annual budget available for non solid issues):
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1QNxnd9fM_rYtfN1rgiYVbcl_PjW1Mu8SkzU_KQY8IK8/edit?usp=sharing 

Backfeed xperiment in Ouishare in 2016:

#https://www.ouishare.net/article/decentralizing-part-of-ouishare-with-blockchain-experiment-1
#https://www.ouishare.net/article/how-to-slowly-lose-control-decentralization-experiment-2
#https://www.ouishare.net/article/between-friction-and-seamlessness-ouishare-decentralization-experiment-chapter-3

==[[Cobudget]]==

Currently Ouishare and Enspiral use Cobudget as a tool to manage money. Cobudget is a tool and a methodology that makes resource allocation participatory. It enables all members of an organization to get involved in decision-making by proposing projects and allocating funds to the proposals they like.

URL = https://cobudget.co/

==[[Backfeed]]==

Backfeed attended the Ouishare summit in 2015 starting up a project together with Ouishare to create the first blockchain based experiment of open value accounting in which each and everyone’s needs and contributions are met with adequate rewarding out of existing budgets. 

Until 2016:

#http://backfeed.cc/
#http://backfeed.cc/assets/docs/TechnicalSummary.pdf
#http://backfeed.cc/assets/docs/BackfeedEconomicModel.pdf
#http://github.com/Backfeed

Updates and articles:
#https://www.coindesk.com/primavera-de-filippi-blockchain-quest-decentralize-society
#http://magazine.backfeed.cc/

==[[Daostack]]== 

(follow up on Backfeed)

Backfeed has been stopped as a project and went into a next initiative: Daostack.

#https://daostack.io/
#https://daostack.io/wp/DAOstack-White-Paper-en.pdf
#https://github.com/daostack

Relation with Backfeed:

#https://daotalk.org/t/relationship-between-daostack-and-backfeed/29
#https://medium.com/daostack/daostack-and-previous-projects-3ba3c0b69fd1

Daostack articles:

#https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/better-organize-decentralize-matan-field-daostack/
#https://cryptovest.com/reviews/daostack-ico-review-aiming-to-usher-in-an-era-of-decentralized-autonomous-organizations/
#https://medium.com/daostack/daostack-in-2019-76d7634e27c6

A synthesis of the answer provided by DAOstack’s architect Matan Field is that with Backfeed he had taken too much on himself as at some point he was effective the CEO, CTO, chief scientist, and chief product. Besides, in his words, the project lacked focus overall. Due to the many questions regarding function and design of decentralized collaborative platforms, during 18 months of work, Backfeed circled through 5 different products in search of the ultimate one that would materialize the vision and bring it into reality. Thus, it became clear that the team should stop and really specify the product it needs/wants to develop, before jumping again into further development.

==[[Sensorica]]==

Practical experience in fab labs in Montreal and collaborating with innovation research in open value networks. Long track record in developing an accounting system. Currently a project Verdun (5M) to create a collaborative framework for 5 fablabs.
http://www.sensorica.co/home/about-us
http://valuenetwork.referata.com/wiki/Main_Page
http://www.sensorica.co/home/working-space/activity-clusters/sensorica-infrastructure
National Open Innovation Collaborative Ecosystem

==[[Association Valeureux]] & [[Wezer]]==

A collective intelligence system of collaboration from France for individuals, groups and pairs from Sybille Saint Girons. Wezer is the digital platform in development momentarily used by the Mutual Aid Network. 

#https://www.valeureux.org/blog/produits/plate-forme-numerique/
#http://www.valeureux.org/blog/wezer-2/
#https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pLsL-aOpv3o

See also: https://www.mutualaidnetwork.org/ (currently working with Wezer).

==[[Faircoin]]==

To build a currency that is stable, global and incorruptible. Our aim is to create an innovative glocal economic system from the bottom up in favor of an alternative and post-capitalist model, paving the way for a collective change towards a life based on values in common. FairCoin is our means of exchange. Its value is determined by the community and it never devalues. The ongoing revaluation process of FairCoin contributes to distributing the wealth inside the community using the coin. Cooperation, ethics, solidarity and transparency are key factors for us to create a truly just system for everyone. The development and use of powerful interconnected digital tools (global) and regional networks (local) are crucial for our success.

#https://fair-coin.org/
#https://steemit.com/cryptocurrency/@sirwinchester/faircoin-activates-world-s-first-cooperative-blockchain-introducing-the-proof-of-cooperation-consensus-poc

Criticism from the p2p field:

“Until then we will have to mess around and argue in these imperfect muddy online chat groups and task tracking systems, between functionaries, and fairserfs, building an economy that allows for human and algorithmic error and imperfection, and for varying types of unfairness to continue existing.”

* https://p2pfailures.noblogs.org/un-fair/?

Cleaned fork on FairCoop’s:

#https://github.com/learndeepmilwaukee/valuenetwork
#http://nrp.webfactional.com/

==[[Economic Space Agency]]==

“The next step takes the logic further: not only stealing from the rich and giving to the poor (like Robin Hood did), but exploring, building new ecologies, new ecosystems, new universes, new possibilities, new worlds of value. For this purpose the Robin Hood hydra grew a new head: a start-up company Economic Space Agency, Inc. (ECSA). Economic Space Agency builds tools with which we can create economic space — not only to distribute something existing or produced in a pre-existing space, but to reorganize/rebuild the space itself. Two trends are converging and making open source economy possible: the moldability and plasticity of financial technologies and the decentralization and disintermediation provided by distributed ledgers.”

#https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/from-robin-hood-to-economic-space-agency/2017/04/08
#https://medium.com/economic-spacing/glossary-for-gravity-and-space-a8d62f6a2111
#https://medium.com/econaut/the-ecsa-tech-stack-a-technical-session-941ea94434fe (videos)
#https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HxqlId13F9Dw7SbAEi3MgC5VAMJAaMtbIfo1B5V7560/edit
#https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BV0-B-VwWXQKWA_JCagTSmEPopgyjBGGrQZ3FSr-6JI/edit?usp=sharing

==Holochain REA accounting==

Holo-REA is developing an REA (Resource-Event-Agent) framework on Holochain for operational management and accounting for economic networks as well as single business organizations. The scope will be like an ERP system for networks, but implemented as agent-centric P2P nodes using a suite of small apps that can all work together.
#[[Holo-REA]]
#https://github.com/holo-rea/holo-rea
#https://developer.holochain.org/guide/latest/faq.html

==[[P2P Foundation]]== 

(overview / wiki on accounting)

#http://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Accounting_for_Planetary_Survival
#https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Resource-Event-Agent_Model
#https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Category:P2P_Accounting

==[[Slicing Pie]]==

Introductory Video: https://youtu.be/sqUHmlFPpkY 

Slicing Pie is a series of tools and models that supports dynamic equity arrangements for start-up projects.  Their tools include a spreadsheet alongside other tools, considerations and more broadly - modelling.  

==[[Mikorizal]] software==

“This software is operational software for peer-to-peer networks that are creating or producing something and experimenting with different economic relationships. So this could be open value networks, food networks, worker cooperatives, and others. Could even be small business ecosystems.

This version of the software came from the open hardware arena, but is becoming more generalized for other types of networks. It has had several names, but most people have been calling it NRP, for Network Resource Planning, or OCP for Open Collaborative Platform.

You could compare it to an ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system except that it is not for enterprises nor is it focused on planning. Or you could compare it to an SCM (supply chain management system) except that it is not really focused on management, either.

It includes:

* flexible networks of networks (which can include other organizations that are not networks),
* resource management and recipes,
* planning and coordination for producing, using, exchanging and sharing value,
* tracking events that produce, use, exchange and share value,
* tracking contributions from individual network members of work and resources,
* connecting value streams from idea to manufacture to end use and following them back,
* distributing income according to contributions using "value equation" decided by contributors,
* accounting views for a network, organization, project, individual.

==[[Bettermeans]]==

https://github.com/Bettermeans/bettermeans
http://bettermeans.com/

==[[Ushahidi]]==

Ushahidi, Inc. is a non-profit technology company with staff in nine countries whose mission is to help marginalized people raise their voice and those who serve them to listen and respond better. It has been instrumental in creating the Kenyan tech ecosystem, known as the Silicon Savannah, and its employees have gone on to found iHub, Akirachix, and BRCK.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ushahidi

==[[Cake Equity]]==

Accounting of shares for shareholders.

“Cake helps all kinds of companies manage their equity. Whether you want to raise capital faster, manage your investors or simply trade shares - better your business by using Cake.”

http://cakeequity.com/

==[[Fairmondo]]==

Not an accounting system, but a platform that is scaling fair commerce and that has a strategy for a fair salary scale of maximum 1 to 7.

“Fairmondo is the project to create a global online-marketplace - owned by its local users. This will be realized through a network of autonomous local co-operatives in every country that joins in. The first of these was founded in Germany in December 2012.
We are now working on internationalisation. If you want to be updated on the progress, or if you have suggestions or want to get involved, please send an email to: global@fairmondo.com” 

#https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-new-cooperatives-the-case-of-fairmondo/2018/03/28
#https://primer.commonstransition.org/4-more/5-elements/case-studies/case-study-fairmondo
#https://www.fairmondo.de/global

==[[Cocoon Projects]]==

According to the IFTF report:“Cocoon Projects: In Cocoon, each activity has a credit value, which is estimated by all the contributors individually. These estimates can be changed at any point in time until the activity is completed. Once the activity has been completed, its value in credits is distributed among all the contributors who took part in the activity. Each contributor evaluates how much value (as opposed to time or effort) each person’s contribution played in the final result. The system averages all of the contributors’ evaluations and distributes the activity credits appropriately.”
http://cocoonprojects.com/en/

==[[Giveth]]==

“Giveth.io is re-engineering charitable giving, by creating an entirely free, open-source platform, built on the Ethereum Blockchain. Our system cuts out bureaucracy and enables makers to create a high level of transparency and accountability towards Givers. For example: At any point until the moment funds are locked, a Giver can decide to withdraw them.”

#https://giveth.io/
#https://wiki.giveth.io/dapp

=More information=

* Group accounting (Acknowledged of problems):<br />https://sites.google.com/site/economicgroups/Home/problemsofgroupaccounting 

* Report on positive platforms Institute for the Future:<br />http://www.iftf.org/fileadmin/user_upload/downloads/ppj/DesigningPositivePlatforms_for_IFTF.pdf

* Harmonious working patterns v.02, author Josh Fairhead:
:“We need to scale and integrate causes in general for exponential value creation. We also need to shift global patterns from zero-sum games to reciprocal ones or face a planetary lose-lose scenario. Single organisations often have problems with alignment, let alone non-entities with infinite stakeholders. How do we create a metastable commons?”<br />https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Qa-U2twXdte1sjgbx6VXa2ekohGkEp0rpzOSPiZ6hmY/edit?usp=sharing

* Tiberius Brastaviceanu:<br />“Hi all, I took note of the “DNA of collaboration ” document. The idea is interesting, but I think it is insufficient to explain collaboration in open networks. In trying to understand commons’ based peer production networks, we make use of living systems, social intelligence, game theory and other theoretical frameworks. See more here.” <br />http://valuenetwork.referata.com/wiki/Main_Page

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]