
* Article: Joshua M. Pearce and Usman Mushtaq,Overcoming Technical Constraints for Obtaining Sustainable Development with Open Source Appropriate Technology]”, ''Science and Technology for Humanity (TIC-STH), 2009 IEEE Toronto International Conference'', pp. 814-820, 26-27 Sept. 2009.

URL =  http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5444388&isnumber=5444349 

=Abstract=

"[[Open source appropriate technology]] (OSAT) refers to technologies that provide for [[sustainable development]] while being designed in the same fashion as free and [[open source software]]. Facilitated by advances in information technology software and hardware, new ways to disseminate information such as wikis and Internet-enabled mobile phones, the global development of OSAT has emerged as a reality.  This paper shows the sharing of design processes, appropriate tools, and technical information is enables more effective and rapid development of appropriate technologies for both industrialized and non-industrialized regions. This sharing will require the appropriate technology community to adopt open standards/licenses, document knowledge, and build on previous work.  This paper offers solutions in the form of both business models and tools to overcome technical constraints of OSAT development in the forms of the platforms necessary on which to share and build knowledge about appropriate technologies. These solutions are  open, easily accessible for those in need, have a low barrier to entry for both users and information creators, and must be vetted in order to utilized as a trustworthy source on critical information needs. Current progress towards implementing these solutions will be reviewed and recommendations will be made to further increase the rate of OSAT development."

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Sustainability]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]