

* see the graphic at http://p2pfoundation.net/File:P2pCommons_slide_corrected2.jpg

Explanatory video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sO-QJLDpHQ0 ; see: [[Transformative Proposals of the P2P Foundation]]


=Directory of Concepts=

Check the concepts proposed here below:

#[[Assembly of the Commons]]
#[[Chamber of the Commons]]
#[[Commons Transition Plan]]
#[[CopyFair License]] ; [[Commons-Based Reciprocity License]]
#[[Ethical Entrepreneurial Coalition]]
#[[Open Cooperative Development Agency]]
#[[Open Cooperativism]] ; [[Open Cooperatives]]
#[[Partner State]]
#[[Phyles]]
#[[United Transnational Republics]]

=Discussion=

==David Bollier's Introduction==

David Bollier:

"So what might a commons-based economy actually look like in its broadest dimensions, and how might we achieve it?  My colleague Michel Bauwens of the P2P Foundation offers a remarkably thoughtful and detailed explanation in a just-released YouTube talk, produced by FutureSharp. It’s not really a video – just Michel’s voiceover and a simple schematic chart – but the 20-minute talk does a great job of sketching the big-picture strategies that must be pursued if we are going to invent a new type of post-capitalist economy.

Michel focuses on the importance of three specific realms that are crucial to this new vision – ecological sustainability, open knowledge and social solidarity. Each is critical as a field of action for overturning the existing logic of market capitalism. 

Fortunately, there are many promising developments in each of these realms. Many parts of the environmental movement seek to go beyond the standard “market-oriented solutions.” There is a growing body of open source-inspired projects for software code, information, design and physical production, which is now spawning new types of global sharing of information with distributed local production. And there are many advocates and initiatives for social justice and fairness in the economy, such as cooperatives and the solidarity economy movement.

The problem, says Bauwens, is that these movements do not generally connect with each other or coordinate internationally. He therefore sees the need for “meta-economic networks” to bridge these fields of action. So, for example, we need “open cooperativism” enterprises to bridge open knowledge systems and cooperatives, so that open-licensed systems are not simply dominated by large corporations in the way that Google, Uber and Airbnb have done. We also need to develop an “open source circular economy” to bridge the worlds of eco-sustainability and open knowledge.  We will never address major environmental problems if the technological and product solutions are based on proprietary knowledge; open circulation of knowledge can change that.

Bauwens also sketches a compelling scenario by which commons-based projects can begin to develop a new politics through such vehicles as a new “ethical entrepreneurial coalition,” a “Chamber of Commons,” and “Commons Assemblies.”  He calls for new types of cooperative finance that can support sustainable production (based on the idea of sufficiency shared by all) as well as the mutualizing of knowledge (vs. its privatization via patents and copyright) and social solidarity (to ensure just and fair distribution of any surplus value created).

While the overall vision may strike skeptics as utopian, the truth is that many of the ideas in Bauwen’s scenario are already underway, if not well-developed.  What’s mostly missing is a wider orientation and commitment to a coherent, shared vision such as this one.  There is also a need for new bridges of social practice and coordination among the three key fields of action."
(http://www.bollier.org/blog/michel-bauwens-heres-what-commons-based-economy-looks)

David Bollier

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Foundation]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]