==Discussion==
Redirect to [[Property]]?

What is the difference between property ownership and [[Possess]]ion? --[[User:Ownut|Ownut]] 22:13, 27 January 2008 (PST)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ownership ''Ownership is the state or fact of exclusive rights and control over property, which may be an object, land/real estate, intellectual property (arguably) or some other kind of property. It is embodied in an ownership right also referred to as title.''

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Possession_%28law%29 ''In law, possession the control a person intentionally exercises toward a thing. In all cases, to possess something, a person must have an intention to possess it. A person may be in possession of some property (although possession does not always imply ownership). Like ownership, the possession of things is commonly regulated by states under property law.''

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Property ''Property designates those things commonly recognized as the entities in respect of which a person or group has exclusive rights. Important types of property include real property (land), personal property (other physical possessions), and intellectual property (rights over artistic creations, inventions, etc.). A right of ownership is associated with property that establishes the good as being "one's own thing" in relation to other individuals or groups, assuring the owner the right to dispense with the property in a manner he or she sees fit, whether to use or not use, exclude others from using, or to transfer ownership. Some philosophers assert that property rights arise from social convention. Others find origins for them in morality or natural law.''

----