This design competition is open to anyone. More than one entry per artist is allowed. The designs should be attractive and make extensive use of the iconography of the 99% movement. It should attempt to capture the feeling of the movement without making specific assertions for which there is not consensus.

Entires must be submitted by midday on 20th October, Wall Street time (EST)

== Requirements ==
*The certificate will be 4,500 x 1,800 pixels landscape, two sides, 600dpi
*"The bearer of this certificate has supported, directly or indirectly, the '99%' occupation movement which started in Wall Street, 2011. This certificate is NOT money and cannot be redeemed."
*Issued at Liberty Plaza
*Copy Left logo
*There should be no numeric indication of quantity or denomination.

== Design Competition Rules ==

Post your designs, as 500px wide jpg in the comments to this page. Be sure to make sure you can be contacted!

By posting your design, you are allowing the holders of that web site permission to alter, reproduce and sell the design for the benefit of the movement.

The winner will be asked to present the design in a layered graphical file.

All images used must be attributable with an appropriate use-license.

The winner will receive 20 certificates from the first print-run, and bragging rights.

If subsequent designs are commissioned to make a set, the winner will be offered the privilege first, of doing the creative work.

== Judging ==
The winner will be determined by vote by attendees in a session at [http://contactcon.com|ContactCon] The Judges have yet to be determined.

== Examples ==
[http://complementarycurrency.org/gallery.php Complementary Currency Resource Centre gallery]

[http://www.communitycurrency.org/perception.html Perception dollar]

[http://graphics8.nytimes.com/images/blogs/themoment/posts/1119brixtonlb.jpg Brixton Pound]

[http://samarasproject.net/2005/12/local_currencies_1.html Ithaca Hour]