
'''= project to calculate and demonstrate the capacity of an integrated peer production model to substantially reduce the material footprint of production, while retaining the welfare achievements of complex modern societies'''

Main coordinators: [[Xavier Rizos]] and [[Celine Piques]]; with the assistance of [[Jose Ramos]] of the [[Commons Transition Coalition]] in Melbourne (and Footscray Makerspace) ; and [[Vasilis Kostakis]] and [[Vasilis Niaros]] of the [[P2P Lab]]


=Description=


=More Information=

==General Resources==

* [[World History as a Thermodynamic Process]]; longer text for background: [[Mutation of Economics into the Fifth Integral-Arational Structure of Consciousness]]

* The [[Role of Technology in Current Ecological Problems]]. Interview of Alf Hornborg interviewed by Adam Robbert & JP Hayes. 

* [[Information Technology is Good for the Environment and for the Climate]]. Joe Romm. vs. ''' [http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/03/how-sustainable-is-digital-fabrication.html How Sustainable is Digital Fabrication?]'''

* Paul Mobbs: 1) '''The “[[Limits to Technology]]”: Ecological Boundaries of the Information Age.''': [http://www.fraw.org.uk/mei/archive/presentations/limits_to_tech-annotated_slides-2011.pdf] 2)  [[Practical Guide to Sustainable IT]].

* [[Thermodynamic Perspectives on the Role of Technology in the Circular Economy]]: A systems and thermodynamics perspective on technology in the circular economy. By Crelis F. Rammelt and Phillip Crisp 

* [[Urgent Policy Considerations for a Sustainable Society in the Context of Peak Resources]]



==P2P Foundation Authors==

* '''[[Why is Open Hardware Inherently Sustainable]]?''' Michel Bauwens; however, the current practices still fall short of the promise: [[Potential of Open Design for Eco-Efficient Product Development]]. But, there is hope: [http://www.shareable.net/blog/10-open-hardware-projects-to-save-the-earth 10 Open Hardware Projects to Save the Earth].

*Vasilis Kostakis, Kostas Latoufis, Minas Liarokapis, Michel Bauwens. "The convergence of digital commons with local manufacturing from a degrowth perspective: Two illustrative cases". Journal of Cleaner Production. http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Journal-of-Cleaner-Production.pdf 

* Kostakis, Vasilis, Niaros, Vasilis, Dafermos, George, and Bauwens, Michel. 2015. “Design Global, Manufacture Local: Exploring the Contours of an Emerging Productive Model”. Futures, 73, 126-135. http://www.p2plab.gr/el/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Futures.pdf 

* Kostakis, Vasilis, Roos, Andreas and Bauwens, Michel. 2015. “Towards a Political Ecology of the Digital Economy: Socio-environmental Implications of Two Value Models”. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Env-Innov-and-Soc-Trans.pdf 

* Kostakis, Vasilis and Papachristou, Marios. 2014. “Commons-based peer production and digital fabrication: The case of a RepRap-based, Lego-built 3D printing-milling machine”. Telematics and Informatics, 31, 434-443. http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/TI.pdf 

* Kostakis, Vasilis, Fountouklis, Michail and Drechsler, Wolfgang. 2013. “Peer Production and Desktop Manufacturing: The Case of the Helix_T Wind Turbine Project”. Science, Technology and Human Values, 38(6), 773-800. http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/STHV1.pdf


[[Category:P2P Foundation]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Research]]