==Towards a Cooperative Commonwealth==


'''Our book of the year is [[Humanizing the Economy]] by John Restakis. See why below.'''

2014 was definitely the year of the commons – cooperative convergence. Two objective trends especially since the systemic economic crisis of 2008 are the revival of the commons, mostly driven through peer production; AND a revival of cooperatives and cooperativism, which had been subjected to a certain decline and even a neoliberal degeneration in the period since the 1980’s. What was new in 2014 is that these two sectors started talking and looking at each other. At the P2P Foundation, we call for a new synthesis in the form of open cooperativism, i.e. cooperatives which consciously and structurally co-produce commons, as pioneered by the Catalan Integral Cooperative or the Allianza Solidaria in Quito.

The best record of this, which we don’t count as a book, is the following report of a in-depth convergence conversation by leading commoners and cooperativists:

'''* 0. “TOWARD AN OPEN CO-OPERATIVISM. A New Social Economy Based on Open Platforms, Co-operative Models and the Commons. A Report on a Commons Strategies Group Workshop Berlin, Germany, August 27-28, 2014. By Pat Conaty and David Bollier. CSG / Boll Foundation / Foundation pour le Progres de l’Homme, 2014.'''

We strongly urge everyone to read this.

Our top book about the cooperative commonwealth tradition is paradoxically a book that appeared in 2010, but that strongly deserves a second life. It is the marvelously well written book by John Restakis, entitled “Humanizing the Economy”, which places cooperativism in its historical tradition, and presents innovations such as solidarity cooperatives. Learn there about the cooperative tradition in Emilia-Romagna and the innovative Seikatsu movement in Japan. Since, John Restakis has developed a much stronger understanding of the commons and worked with the P2P Foundation and myself on the commons-cooperative convergence. The evidence of this lies in our P2P-Foundation published e-book on the Commons Transition, which has strong chapters by John Restakis on the convergence of the commons economy, the partner state approach, and the cooperative economy. Finally, our own book, “Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy” co-authored by Vasilis Kostakis, gives a detailed vision of expectations related to this cooperative commons economy: will it fullfill its promise, of fall victim to the forces which extract its value for purely private benefit of large multinationals of netarchical capital?

'''* 1. Humanizing the Economy. Co-operatives in the Age of Capital. by John Restakis. New Society Publishers, 2010'''

'''* 1. 1. b eBook: COMMONS TRANSITION: POLICY PROPOSALS FOR AN OPEN KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY. By Michel Bauwens and John Restakis. P2P Foundation, 2014'''

'''* 1.1.c. Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy. By Vasilis Kostakis and Michel Bauwens. Palgrave Macmillan, 2014'''

The second trend, the revival of the commons, produced two very important book this year, by David Bollier and Jeremy Rifkin.

David Bollier’s book is a very well written general introduction of what ‘commoning’ means for human life, comparable to these great classics like The Gift by Lewis Hyde; Jeremy Rifkin’s book may not go deep enough in the problematic transition, but gives a great historical introduction to changes in the modes of production, and why the commons is now an economic fact, destined to grow not just in the so-called ‘immaterial’ economy, but also in the physical economy, through the ‘margical cost’ effects of distributed energy and 3D printing.

'''* 2. Think Like a Commoner. A Short Introduction to the Life of the Commons. by David Bollier. New Society, 2014'''

'''* 2.1. The Zero Marginal Cost Society: The Internet of Things, the Collaborative Commons, and the Eclipse of Capitalism. by Jeremy Rifkin. Palgrave Macmillan, 2014'''


'''More good books on the Revival of Cooperativism:'''

* 3. Capital and the Debt Trap. [[Learning from Cooperatives in the Global Crisis]]. By Claudia Sanchez Bajo and Bruno Roelants. Palgrave MacMillan (2013)

“The recent financial crisis has had a devastating impact around the globe. Thousands of businesses have closed down and millions of jobs have been cut. Many people have lost their homes. Capital and the Debt Trap explains how key economies have fallen into a ‘debt trap’, linking the financial sphere to the real economy, and goes beyond, looking into alternatives to the constant stream of financial bubbles and shocks. Overlooked by many,cooperatives across the world have been relatively resilient throughout the crisis. Through four case studies (the transformation of a French industrial SME in crisis into a cooperative, a fishery cooperative in Mexico, the Desjardins Cooperative Group in Quebec and the Mondragon Group in the Basque country of Spain), the book explores their strategies and type of control, providing an in-depth analysis within a broader debate on wealth generation and a sustainable future.”

'''* 3.1 e-Book: [[Democratic Wealth]]: Building a Citizens’ Economy. Ed. by Stuart White, and Niki Sethi-Smith. openDemocracy and Politics in Spires, 2014'''

“Democratic Wealth’ is a collection of essays that challenges the poverty of thinking around economic policy, particularly after the 2007 financial crash. It explores the renewed interest in republicanism and suggests this as a framework to shape an economy that serves the common good. It is a selection of articles from a series published by openDemocracy and Politics in Spires, a blog run by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

'''* 3.2 eBook: Alternatives To Capitalism: [[Proposals For A Democratic Economy]]. by Robin Hahnel, Erik Olin Wright. New Left Project, 2014'''

“New Left Project’s new e-book, Alternatives to Capitalism: Proposals for a Democratic Economy, is now available for download. In it the leading radical thinkers Robin Hahnel and Erik Olin Wright take on the crucial but all-too neglected question: what kind of society should we be fighting for instead of capitalism? Hahnel favours ‘participatory economics’. Wright advocates ‘real utopian socialism’. Alternatives to Capitalism puts these practical proposals through their paces in an in-depth, frank and extremely instructive debate about the central question of our time.”


'''* 3.3 Gary Alexander. [[eGai]] Growing a peaceful, sustainable Earth through Communications. Published by Lighthouse Books, ISBN 0907637248 (2nd ed. 2014)'''

A updated second edition. See here for reviews.


'''* 3.4 [[Co-operatives in a Post-growth Era]]. Creating Co-operative Economics. Edited by Sonja Novkovic and Tom Webb. Fernwood Pubn. (with Zed Books), 2014'''

“Featuring a remarkable roster of internationally renowned critical thinkers, this book presents a feasible alternative for a more environmentally sustainable and equitable economic system. The time has never been better for cooperatives everywhere to recognize their own potential and ability to change the economic landscape.”


'''* 3.5 Robert Costanza and Ida Kubiszewski. [[Creating a Sustainable and Desirable Future]]: Insights from 45 Global Thought Leaders. World Scientific, 2014'''

“The book offers a broad, critical discussion of what a sustainable and desirable future should or can be, with chapters written by some of the world’s leading thinkers, including: Wendell Berry, Van Jones, Frances Moore Lappe, Peggy Liu, Hunter Lovins, Gus Speth, Bill McKibben, and many more.”


==Commonfare, new solidary mechanisms for the new labor==

* Creditocracy and the Case for Debt Refusal. OR Books, 2014
URL = http://www.orbooks.com/catalog/creditocracy/
"analysis of the various ways in which the creditor class preys upon the majority through the creation and maintenance of debt"

* [[Digital Solidarity]]. By Felix Stalder.

* [[Mutual Aid Beyond Communism]]


===Networked Labor===

* [[Digital Labour and Karl Marx]]

* [[Cyber-Proletariat]]

* [[Cybertariat Comes of Age]]


===The progressive Solidarity Economy===

* [[Building Democratic Alternatives Beyond Capitalism for Today and the Future‎‎]]

* [[Solidarity Economy Alternatives for People and Planet]]

* [[Solidarity Economy Alternative]]

* [[Mutual Ownership Revolution That Britain Needs]]



==Cultures of the Commmons==


* [[Monastic Rules as Form-of-Life]]. Giorgio Agamben.

* [[Anthropological Trompe l’Oeil for a Common World]]

* [[Rise of the Network Commons‎‎]]

* [[Radio Audiences and Participation in the Age of Network Society]]

* [[Wikipedia and the Politics of Openness]]

==Reinventing Organizations==


* [[Reinventing Organizations]]

* [[Peer-to-Peer Leadership]]

* [[Workers Control from the Commune to the Present]]

* [[Question of Organisation After Networks]]


==The state in crisis vs. emerging new state forms==

* [[End of Power]]

* [[Cybernetic State]]

* [[Route Map to the Enabling State]]


===The Crisis===

* [[State of Crisis]]

* [[Global Race To Reinvent the State]]


==Protocol Wars==

* [[Algorithms of Capital]]

* [[Black Box Society]]


==Reconstructing Equality==


* [[Capital in the Twenty-First Century]]. By Thomas Piketty.

* [[History of the Struggle Against Power Inequalities]]

==Reconstructing the Urban Commons==

* [[Metropolitan Revolution]]

* [[Power of Neighborhood and the Commons]]

* [[How to Out Your Local Economy]]

* [[Ambient Commons]]


===Smart Cities and their critique===

* [[Against the Smart City]] 

* [[Smart Cities as Democratic Ecologies]]


==Collective Action After Networks==

* [[Media, Politics, and the Struggle for Post-Capitalist Democracy]]

* [[Horizontal Hope]]

* [[Collective Action After Networks]]''. By Rodrigo Nunes.

* [[DIY Citizenship]]

* [[Social Movements in the Internet Age]]

* [[Planning for Protest]]

* [[Many Faces of Anonymous]]



==Recreating P2P Infrastructures==

* [[Deep Lab Book]]

* [[On Catholics and Software]]

==Full List==


#''[[Tragedy of the Private and Potential of the Public]]''
* ''[[Global War for Internet Governance]]''
* ''[[Quest for Identity and Autonomy in a Digital Society]]''
* ''[[Prince of Evolution]]''
#''[[Acquisitive Society]]''
#''[[Autopsy of an Island Currency]]''
#''[[Virtual Economies]]''
#''[[With P2P Towards a Post-Capitalist Society]]''
#[[Anthrobscene]]

[[Category:Books]]