'''= research lab in Ioannina, Greece'''

URL = http://www.p2plab.gr/en/

"The organisation’s physical space in Ioannina (Greece) comprises a co-working and meeting space, a library and a fabrication lab with 3D printers and microcontrollers."


=Description=

'''1.'''

The P2P Lab is an independent media lab interested in interdisciplinary research on free and open-source technologies and peer-to-peer practices.

Its mission is to:

*strive for integrative insights on the open technologies and the peer-to-peer practices.
*provide consultancy support to organisations and institutions regarding open technologies and relevant socio-economic trends.
*produce novel global techno-economic solutions to local problems.
*write, edit and publish articles, reports and books in the diverse range of topics we investigate.
*organise open events for reflection and action as well as to educate people about critical and creative tools for society-changing.


'''2.'''

The P2P Lab is a not-for-profit
organization based in Ioannina, Greece. It is dedicated to research
and advocacy around peer-to-peer (P2P) dynamics in technology,
society and economy. The P2P Lab works for the development and maintenance of a global knowledge
commons, encompassing a global community of researchers and activists that advocates and monitors
models of peer production, peer governance and peer property in every field of human activity.
Our research network empirically explores and expands the theoretical work produced on P2P and
commons-oriented practices to ascertain their viability in real-world applications. The P2P Lab
researchers produce academic peer-reviewed publications and coordinate and participate in research
projects, focused on free/open-source technologies and commons-based practices.
Our wider network includes institutions and organisations from academia and civil society, active
grassroots social movements and public and private sector institutions working for the transition to a
P2P-driven, commons-oriented future.


=Details=

== Facilities & Equipment ==

In the lab you may find two open source 3D printers along with various filaments; open source micro-controllers; a library with interdisciplinary literature; sensors, etc.

* You may [http://p2plab.gr/en/facility click here] for images of the P2P Lab

== Members ==

P2P Lab’s members are:

*[[Alekos Pantazis]], Research Fellow.
*[[Alex Pazaitis]], Research Fellow.
*[[Chris Giotitsas]], Research Fellow.
*[[Christina Priavolou]], Research Fellow.
*[[Vasilis Kostakis]], Founder.
*[[Vasilis Niaros]], Research Fellow.

P2P Lab's community of members, fellows and collaborators spans over a diverge field of international academics, researchers, activists and artists dependent on each project.

P2P Lab will gladly collaborate with communities or individuals who want to build a P2P Lab in their city inspired by the idea of solidarity franchising.


= Projects =

Relevant Previous Projects or Activities

1. “Phygital: Catalysing Innovation and Entrepreneurship Unlocking the Potential of Emerging
Production and Business Models” - (2017-2019): 923,300.75 EUR (subsidy contract to be
signed). A project funded under the Interreg V-B Balkan-Mediterranean 2014-2020 program,
which documents, analyses, tests, evaluates, and creates awareness about a new mode of value
creation. This new mode is based on the conjunction of the digital commons (e.g. open
knowledge, software and design) with desktop manufacturing and automation technologies
(e.g. from 3D printing and CNC machines to low-tech tools and crafts).

2. “A Knowledge Alliance between HEIs, Makers and Manufacturers to Boost Open Design &
Manufacturing in Europe (OD&M)” - (2017-2019): 984,865 EUR. An ERASMUS+ project that
develops an alliance between Higher Education Institution, traditional manufacturers and
innovation communities of digital-savvy makers, in order to set up a trust-based framework for
the generation of knowledge and capacity to embed open manufacturing in the triangle.

3. “P2P Value: Techno-Social Platform for Sustainable Models and Value Generation in
Commons-based Peer Production in the Future Internet” - (2013-2016): 2,454,698 EUR. A
project to foster the commons-based peer production (CBPP) phenomenon by providing a
techno-social platform specifically designed to facilitate the creation of resilient and sustainable
CBPP communities.

4. “COOPERLAND” - (2014-2015): 190,944.05 EUR. A project funded under the Europe for Citizens
Programme. COOPERLAND aimed at creating a European platform for cooperative practices to
encourage citizen participation.

=Status=

The P2P Lab became fully autonomous in 2016. The Stichting Peer-to-peer Alternatives (which used to be the P2P Foundation's main vehicle) has taken over the international research networking activities of the P2P Foundation, under the coordination of [[Jose Ramos]].

=History=

George Dafermos:

"Bauwens’ influence was also instrumental in the development of the P2P Lab, which constitutes the research branch of the P2PF (Bauwens & Pantazis, 2018). This was founded in 2012 by Vasilis Kostakis, a core member of the P2PF and one of the most active academic researchers in its network, who has been Bauwens’ main theoretical collaborator since then.

The P2P Lab is a research collective made up of Kostakis and his postgraduate and PhD students from Tallinn University of Technology. The group has been a rich source of publications in academic journals, helping to spread the theories of the P2PF to the community of social scientists. At the same time, it has been P2PF's main vehicle for participating in various scientific research projects (such as P2P Value, Phygital and Cosmolocalism) which function as a platform for the advocacy of peer production."
(http://peerproduction.net/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Chapter-07_Prophets-and-Advocates-of-Peer-Production.pdf)



=More Information=

* See one of the [https://www.p2plab.gr/en/archives/1119 key] projects for 2016-2019.

* The P2P Lab is an [https://www.ttu.ee/institutes/ragnar-nurkse-department-of-innovation-and-governance/ RND] and [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Main_Page P2P Foundation] spin-off.

* See the [https://www.p2plab.gr/en/archives/category/projects/past past] and [https://www.p2plab.gr/en/archives/category/projects ongoing] projects of the P2P Lab.

* See P2P Lab's [https://www.p2plab.gr/en/publications list of publications].

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Greece]]