
Provisional list, based on the last 100 bookmarks available [http://www.delicious.com/mbauwens/Bauwens-Lectures here]

See also: [[What is the P2P Foundation and Its Role in Research]]


=Conferences Co-organized=

* International Commons Conference, Berlin, Germany, October 31, 2010 [http://culturadigital.br/blog/2010/11/15/a-cultura-digital-brasileira-na-conferencia-sobre-o-%E2%80%98commons%E2%80%99-em-berlim/]



=Directory of Conferences with participated in=

Provisional list, in more or less reverse chronological order:


==2011==

* Gathering 11, Melbourne, June 2011 [http://gathering11.net/]
* Open Knowledge Foundation, OKCon 2011, Berlin, Germany, June 2011 [http://okcon.org/2011/programme]

===May 2011===

* Beni comuni digitali. Terra Future. Florence, May 21, 2011 [http://www.zoes.it/it/content/blog/beni-comuni-digitali-domenica-22-maggio-wowowe]
* Netaurdio, London, UK, May 2011 [http://netaudiolondon.org/news/michel-bauwens]
* Politechnico de Milano, Milan, Italy, May 2011 [http://www.polimi.it/eventi/dettaglioevento/article//michel-bauwens-947/]
* Feasta, Dublin, Ireland, May 8, 2011 [http://www.feasta.org/2011/04/15/an-introduction-to-peer-to-peer-may-8th/]
* Semantic Web Laboratory, Galway, Ireland, May 2011 [http://newtechpost.com/2011/05/06/michel-bauwens-peer-to-peer-alternatives]
* Platform Politics, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK, May 2011 [http://www.anglia.ac.uk/ruskin/en/home/your_university/anglia_ruskin_campuses/cambridge_campus/find_cambridge.Maincontent.0015.file.tmp/St%20George%20House.pdf]
* Mindfield, Dublin, Ireland, May 2011 [http://yfrog.com/h7fbdnvj]
* Re-rooting digital culture - media art ecologies | www.furtherfield.org, London, UK, May 2011 [http://www.furtherfield.org/event/re-rooting-digital-culture-media-art-ecologies]


===April 2011===

*  p2pu - open governance and learning; Online symposium April 2011 [http://oufm.open.ac.uk/fm/30d8a1-2775]


==2010==

* Mekong ICT Camp 2010. Chiang Mai, Thailand. [http://www.dtinews.vn/news/news/international/mekong-ict-camp-2010-connecting-experts-media-and-tech-industry.html]
* Seminario Universidad 2.0 Observatorio Astronómico, Universidad Nacional de Colombia - Sede Bogotá, Colombia [ http://www.flickr.com/photos/universidaddos0/4666543926/]
* Programa de Doctorado, Universidad del Rosario on Fundación Karisma; P2P, la revolución informal y el futuro de las instituciones educativas! [http://www.livestream.com/fundacionkarisma/video?clipId=pla_eb5889ca-a495-47f2-860f-465db8732399&utm_source=lslibrary&utm_medium=ui-thumb]

===November 2010===

* MoodleMoot 2010, 2nd International Congress of E-Learning and Free Culture. Buenos Aires, Argentina, November 19, 2010 [http://www.gcoop.coop/noticias/michel-bauwens-de-visita-en-la-cooperativa]
* FLACSO Seminar, Buenos Aires, Argentina, November 18, 2010 [http://flacso.org.ar/actividad_vermas.php?id=947]



===October 2010===

* art biennial of "unstable and temporary art forms". Article 2010. Stavanger, Norway, (September 15-October 15) [http://www.stuff.co.nz/dominion-post/arts-life/4339559/Breaking-the-ice-on-climate-change]
* International Commons Conference, Berlin, Germany, October 31, 2010 [http://culturadigital.br/blog/2010/11/15/a-cultura-digital-brasileira-na-conferencia-sobre-o-%E2%80%98commons%E2%80%99-em-berlim/]
* CGAC y en la sede de la Fundación Cidade da Cultura. Camina ao Andar, La Geografía de la Afinidad: Procomún neonómada, g-localidades habilitadas y tiempo integral. Santiago de Compostella, Spain. October 2010 [http://www.xunta.es/notas-de-prensa?content=/Portal-Web/Contidos/Novas/nova_estandar8240.html]
* Assolombarda, CNPDS - The effects of new communication technologies upon information; Tavola Rotonda su “LA CULTURA CHE NASCE DAL SOCIALNETWORKING”. Milan, Italy, October 23, 2010 [http://www.camisanicalzolari.com/2010/10/la-cultura-che-nasce-dal-socialnetworking.html]
* Free Culture Forum, Barcelona, Spain. Sustainable open business models. October 2010 [http://2010.fcforum.net/program/]
* Chamber of Commerce, the Spanish Ministry of Culture and the European Commission. el Foro Europeo de Industrias Culturales, en Barcelona, Spain. [http://www.elperiodico.com/default.asp?idpublicacio_PK=46&idioma=CAS&idnoticia_PK=700835&idseccio_PK=1009&h=100401]
* Paying Attention. Linkoping, Sweden. October 2010 [http://www.woohaaa.com/?p=2265]


===September 2010=== 

* University of Tampere, with Tere Vaden. [http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=150198148335623]
* INF5780 - Autumn 2010 (Open source, open collaboration and innovation) - University of Oslo. Oslo, Norway. September 23, 2010 [http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF5780/h10/]
* Open World Forum, Paris, France, September 30, 2010 [http://2010.openworldforum.org/attend/speakers/michel-bauwens.html]



===August 2010===

* Societing Summer School in Finanza, Economia ed Etica, Salerno, Italy, August, 2010 [http://www.societing.org/2011/02/societing-tv_2-come-le-reti-peer-to-peer-producono-valore/]



===May 2010===

* Seminario Uninomade sulla rete,  Venezia Mestre (Venice), Italy (May 7/8, 2010) [http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/geert/2010/06/16/late-report-on-the-uninomade-meeting-may-78-2010/]
* Universidad Nomada, Sala Conservas, May 2010 [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/talkingabout-p2p-foundation/2010/05/04]


===April 2010===

* Consumers International's 2010 global meeting on A2K | Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 21-22 April, 2010 [http://a2knetwork.org/report-cis-2010-global-meeting-a2k]


===March 2010===

* Open Koffie Speciaal van Ambtenaar 2.0. ; ministerie van LNV (ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality). The Hague, Netherlands. 23 maart 2010 [http://vimeo.com/10824644]
* Lift Austria, Vienna [http://liftlab.com/think/laurent/2010/03/19/michel-bauwens-at-lift-austria-enable/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+LaurentHaug+%28LIFT+lab+%2F+laurent%29&utm_content=Bloglines]
* European Centre for the Experience Economy. Open Business models Workshop by Michel Bauwens, Amsterdan, The Netherelands. 22nd of March [http://www.experience-economy.com/2010/03/16/open-business-models-workshop-by-michel-bauwens-22nd-of-march-1400-1730/]
* European Research project MIG@NET. Athens, Greece [http://inlovewithlife.wordpress.com/2010/03/17/p2p_foundation/]

==2009==

* Amherst Community Television. Amherst, Mass. [http://204.213.244.104/Cablecast/Public/Show.aspx?ChannelID=1&ShowID=4224]


===July 2009===

* 4º Encuentro Inclusiva-net: Redes y procesos P2P. Medialab-Prado Madrid, Spain (07.07.09) [http://www.flickr.com/photos/medialab-prado/3697897245/]



==2007==


===April 2007===

* Swinburne University in Melbourne Australia on August 7, 2007. Organised by Darren Sharp [http://www.meaningfulrelations.com/index.php?option=com_community&view=videos&task=video&userid=62&videoid=69&Itemid=135&lang=en]




[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Foundation]]