List of current categories. The number of posts in each reflects the level of use of each of them. Use the column of "comments" to indicate if needs to be merged or moved.

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Cultures & Ideas''',56,
—— Collective Intelligence,270,
—— Copyright,153,
—— Integral Theory,39, could be moved to Theory '''-> DONE'''
—— Open Access,37,
—— Open Content,168,
—— Open Data,34,Merge with "Open Content" ok**  '''-> DONE'''
—— Open Design,238, merge with open hardware*  '''-> DONE'''
—— Open Education,54,Merge with "P2P Education" ok  '''-> DONE'''
—— Open Innovation,146, under Economics '''-> DONE'''
—— Open Models,296,
—— Open Standards,109, move to tech '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Architecture,110,
—— P2P Bibliography,71,
—— P2P Books,461,
—— P2P Culture,399,
—— P2P Education,193,
—— P2P Epistemology,250, under Theory '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Fiction,6,Almost no use. Merge with books? see comment  '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Lifestyles,82,
—— P2P Music,58,
—— P2P Spirituality,273,
—— P2P Subjectivity,288,
—— Sharing,146,
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Economy and Business''',43,
—— Crowdfunding,75,
—— Crowdsourcing,140,
—— Ethical Economy,213,
—— Food and Agriculture,132,
—— Gift Economies,98,
—— P2P Business Models,481,
—— P2P Company Watch,52,
—— P2P Economics,1237,Merge with parent category '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Energy,134,
—— P2P Labor,102,
—— P2P Localization,68,
—— P2P Money,293,
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Events''',17, ONLY FUNCTIONAL
—— Conferences,99,
—— Open Calls,23, add: "and CFP's"?. This category is only functional.
—— P2P Event,176,Merge with parent category ok
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Featured Content''',38,THIS IS JUST FUNCTIONAL
—— Featured Book,171,
—— Featured Essay,75,
—— Featured Graphic,1,
—— Featured Movement,21,
—— Featured Person,16,
—— Featured Podcast,5,
—— Featured Project,56,
—— Featured Tool,2,
—— Featured Trend,18,
—— Featured Video,97,
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Media,21,
—— Link recommendations,80, can be deleted '''-> DONE'''
—— Podcasts,64,
—— Social Media,314,
—— Video,711,Rename to plural ok '''-> DONE'''
—— Visualisation,5,Rename to plural ok '''-> DONE'''
—— Wikipedia,15,mmm? maybe rename to a broader concept? can be deleted '''-> DONE'''
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Orange Report''',0,Delete since not used '''-> DONE'''
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''P2PF/Orange Report''',17,Move...where? delete '''-> DONE'''
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Politics''',25,
—— Activism,144,
—— Anti-P2P,130,
—— Cognitive Capitalism,187, move to economics  '''-> DONE'''
—— Empire,120,
—— Open Government,78,
—— P2P Action Items,85, move to events
—— P2P and Nature,16,Merge with "P2P Ecology" ok '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Collaboration,291,Too broad?
—— P2P Commons,620,
—— P2P Ecology,386,
—— P2P Gender Issues,21,
—— P2P Governance,677,
—— P2P Healthcare,42,
—— P2P Legal Dev.,86,
—— P2P Movements,795,
—— P2P Philanthropy,6,Almost unused ok for delete  '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Politics,1193,Merge with parent category '''-> DONE'''
—— P2P Public Policy,696,
—— P2P Rights,74,Merge with other? keep  '''-> Ok!'''
—— P2P Warfare,53,
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Technology''',10,
—— Free Software,164,Rename to FLOSS? ok
—— Mobile Developments,20,Too specific? merge with "P2P Development"?
—— Open Hardware,181,
—— P2P Development,227,**
—— P2P Infrastructures,75,
—— P2P Manufacturing,222,
—— P2P Mapping,11,
—— P2P Research,55,
—— P2P Science,197,
—— P2P Software,70,Merge with "P2P Developments"?**
—— P2P Technology,537,Merge with parent category
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Theory''',10,
—— P2P Hierarchy Theory,416,Name is unclear? not to me <g>
—— P2P Theory,1026,Merge with parent category
—— Peer Production,413,
—— Peer Property (IP),404,Peer property is not the same than Intellectual Property (IP)...
</tab>

<tab class=wikitable sep=comma head=top>
Category,Posts,Comments
'''Uncategorized''',1630,Too many here. We should define a default category.
</tab>



=Comments by Michel Bauwens=

* I suggest merging the following three under one heading: Open Data and Access i.e. :

—— Open Access,37,
—— Open Content,168,
—— Open Data,34,Merge with "Open Content"

:: I merged all of them into Open Content. --[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)
----
* I suggest merging P2P Culture, P2P Fiction into one as  P2P Art and Culture
:: Done it. --[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)
----
* I suggest morphing P2P Architecture into  P2P Architecture and Urbanism.
:: I rename it as you suggested. --[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)
----
* I suggest merging Open Design and Open Hardware into Open Design and  Hardware
:: Done it. --[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)
----
* P2P Development is about 'development' of countries, thus under Economics;
:: Done. --[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)
----
* P2P Software be merged with FLOSS
:: I dont agree. Peer-to-peer software is not alway FLOSS and should be a category by itself.--[[User:Yaco|Yaco]] ([[User talk:Yaco|talk]]) 23:17, 23 February 2013 (UTC)


[[Category:P2P Foundation Blog]]