Curated selections from the discussions on P2P Infrastructure at the Google Group: [http://groups.google.com/group/building-a-distributed-decentralized-internet Building a Distributed Decentralized Internet]


This documentation project is related to the [[ContactCon]] conference to be held on October 20, 2010 in NYC.



==Q & A 001 from Building a Distributed and Decentralized Internet==

Curated material compiled by Venessa Miemis:

Q1. Is it that we want to be able to use the web we know today on a
decentralized hardware and software infrastructure? Why?

A1. Yes, we should be able to take existing open protocols and web
technologies and run them on a distributed internet. It can work with
what will very likely be a reasonable
investment on targetted development in the traditional web application
"stack". I'd like to see a distributed hardware/network medium where
people can pool hardware resources and network connection node
resources to run some variant of practically anything they can do on
the internet now (starting with the simplest things, like message
passing, etc).

A1:Counterpoint.  The very best distributed stuff we do right now is
in data centres, where bandwidth between nodes is massive, and we can
handle the coherence stuff on high volatility data. Those guys really
can plug anther node in and get N + 1 benefit. If it was possible, we
would do it between datacentres, and then between individual
computers, but it is just not feasible with our current technology.

There is a subset of problems for which we can achieve fine grained
distributed (lower volatility data gets easier, as does data for which
very eventual consistency is ok), but that really is the question - is
that subset sufficient? There's some discussion about techies and non-
techies here, so I think we need to be clear that the ideal of the
distributed internet from a philosophical perspective and the reality
of the technology at this point in time are different things. We also
need to be clear that a distributed internet won't behave the same as
our current internet. e.g. latency, reliability and performance
profiles will noticeably be different.

Q2. What are existing US rules (and EU rules too) around radio
spectrum? Particularly http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_spaces_(radio)
in US?

A2. EU has no white spaces yet, as far as I'm aware. The US recently
announced its rules so white spaces protocol finalization and use
should begin in the next year or two.
FCC rules:
There are Part-15 bands (also called ISM) where any unlicensed user
can transmit up to a ceiling of power (100mW for 2.4gHz, etc). These
devices must receive all interference and minimize their transmission
of interference. All of these rules are about interference avoidance
and mitigation. They also protect licensed users above all
others...like if you point a relatively small transmitter at a
satellite's transponder and jam it you might go to jail.

Modern radio technologies are able to use any part of the spectrum as
efficiently as possible and "tune around" interference. Ultra Wideband
radios can pull transmissions out from below the noise floor on many
bands, so that most users can't even hear them because they don't know
what to look for. This stuff is here now and has made licensing a tool
for incumbent monopolies and not really a technical issue.

Q3. What is possible now for packet forwarding, using radio relays in
unlicensed spectrum? (Reading through
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-10-174A1.pdf)

A3. In general you can use repeaters in ISM or White Spaces bands
provided you adhere to power and antenna height requirements. This is
technically moot.


==Q & A 002==

Venessa Miemis:

Q1. Could we use Shortwave, UHF, or VHF radio links for information
backhaul?
 
A1. Shortwave and VHF are only really good for low-bitrate
applications like messaging (things like BPSK on the lower-end and
1200BPS x.25 on the upper-end).
Alternative Option: HF rigs (10m-band radios, etc) and messaging with
a protocol called ALE.
 
Q2. Could we use tunnelling within the current infrastructure, as
implemented in the FreeNet software?
 
A2. FreeNet creates more problems than solutions at this point.
(documentation to support this opinion?)
Alternative Option: CCN (www.ccnx.org) which is a new protocol being
developed by Van Jacobsen at PARC to replace TCP/IP.
 
Q3. Can we hack diaspora* or similar software to create a killer app
for a distributed network?
 
A3. Diaspora is already a distributed network, no?
 
Q4. How important is the idea of federation? Does federation lead
directly back to centralization of control structures?
 
A4. Federation requires centralization at some level. Confederation
maybe not.
 
Q5. Is EM spectrum a human right? Is network access? How can we bring
such access to as many people as possible?
 
A5. Problem: there hasn't been a truly carrier-less access system
commercialized yet. TCP/IP is biased towards carriers, and fails for
certain topologies like mesh, grids, taurii.
Potential Solution: CCN could be a solution, but once it hits the
standards bodies it will be carrier-ized beyond recognition.
Main Issue to be addressed: how to get around carrier and government
monopolies on spectrum, infrastructure and core protocols
 
Q6. Is it a better scenario to have everyone running a copy of
something locally like diaspora or StatusNet and just doing requests
from computer to computer? Or, is a better architecture one in which
we all share parts of our CPU, storage, bandwidth by way of packet
passsing like a giant grid?
 
A6. My opinion is that we could do multiple architectures all from our
machines and connections. There's no reason I can see that we cannot
have both "personal web servers" and also offer our systems as a
shared grid resource.
 
Q7. If fixing the spectrum economy were taken as a long-term goal,
could there be an interim version of a distributed internet to get us
by in the meantime? One that may fall short of a fully realized
distributed internet but wouldn't require a structural change like
that up front? (Or perhaps, it could be a first step toward that
ultimate vision?)
 
A7. no answer here... but i can see a roadmap being created with
multiple pathways forward, perhaps all of which can be pursued, and
see which one(s) work best. i'm hearing options that assume a carrier
infrastructure, and other options that suggest a carrier-less
infrastructure.
One potential solution for experimentation: Flybox



[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Autonomous Internet]]