
==Definition==

1.

Peer to peer pornography is erotic and sexual material made by and for peers. It can take the form of, text (live chatting), images, videos (live webcam), virtual worlds and so on.

2. From the Wikipedia:

"Porn 2.0, named after "Web 2.0", refers to pornographic websites featuring user-generated content. Sites may include social networking media including features such as user-based categorizing, webcam hosting, blogs and comments. This is in contrast to the static content offered by "Web 1.0" porn sites. Porn 2.0 sites may offer features similar to mainstream Web 2.0 services such as video communities (Metacafe, Vimeo, YouTube) and social sites (Tumblr, Twitter), general blogging, (Blogger, DailyBooth, Lookbook) and photo hosting (Flickr, Photobucket, Picasa).

Since their inception, Porn 2.0 Web sites have garnered great popularity, but have meanwhile encountered various legal and other difficulties. Among these difficulties are concern about the digital content copyright, trade media and affiliating partnership advertising. Other concerns include the idea of sharing vs. privacy in Security 2.0 and legal ramifications of large quantities of free, user-generated pornographic content on the Internet. To solve these problems temporarily, a method of implementation of zero-dollar charge credit card verification is implemented in MaxPorn and RTA & age verification consent in PornoTube respectively.

For Porn 3.0, news media often suggest the usage of 3D stereoscopy, multi-angle DVD neural impulse actuators, and peripheral controller and devices similar to game controller vibration, eliminating less probable technologies such as holograms."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Porn_2.0)

=More information=

==Links==
*[http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amateur_pornography Wikipedia, Amateur Porn]
*[http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Porn_2.0 Porn 2.0]