
'''* Article: P2P Search as an Alternative to Google: Recapturing network value through decentralized search. By Tyler Handley. Journal of Peer Production, Issue 3, July 2013'''

URL = http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/p2p-search-as-an-alternative-to-google-recapturing-network-value-through-decentralized-search/

=Abstract=

"This paper examines the intersection between Google's desire to "database the world's knowledge" and the many ways in which Google's approach affects both the nature of the information users find and how they find it. The paper will argue that Google has monopolized the socially constructed nature of the World Wide Web; Benkler's concept of social production will be used as an example of this process.  Google capitalizes on the attention economy, using a combination of PageRank and personalization to dominate the search market.  To do so, it must store and retain vast amounts of user data, this data being a representation of the cultural and social relations of Google users.  By storing user data in "centralized" logs, Google's approach to search opens up questions about how such sensitive data should be stored, and what the ownership of such a social 'map' by a private corporation means. To further establish the meaning of Google's position this paper outlines the potential for new contrasting forms of search, that allocate more control to the user. In particular, this paper will analyze the Peer-to-Peer distributed search engine YaCy to see how it can alleviate the specific problems of various censorship and filtering that affects Google search results, and how it can address the wider issue of the private appropriation of social and cultural networks. This comparison of Google and Peer-to-Peer search will allow a clear view of the issues at stake as search is developed over the next decade, issues which will have resonating consequences on what information we receive."
(http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-3-free-software-epistemics/peer-reviewed-papers/)


[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Articles]]