'''Book publishing project of Michel Bauwens and Samuel Rose, with James Burke for illustrations and multimedia interventions.'''

Status: abandoned project for now


=Title and Justification=


==Title==


MB: The Peer to Peer Encyclopedia

MB: The Peer to Peer Revolution


==SubTitle==


MB: A toolbook for a new life and a new society???

SR: An (Emerging?) New Way To Collaboratively Solve Human Problems?

=Table of Contents=


==Project One: The Book==


'''Foreword by famous person'''


'''Introduction by Michel Bauwens and/or Samuel Rose'''


===Part One: The Foundations: The Three Meta-Paradigms===

''Covers the principles involved''


'''Chapter 1: Paradigm One: Everything shall be Open and Free'''








INTRO

This chapter could possibly offer some or all of the examples above. It should also discuss how making resources open and free for re-use allows for:



*Open processes up to all people involved in a system. When Open and/or free for re-use, managers, employees, and customers now can cooperate and collaborate and have a voice in the direction of decision making about change and innovation. Businesses have a direct line voice to fromn their customers and employees.

This chapter should also explain the the appropriate places that Open and free for re-use can thrive as a core part of a capitalistic business model, and examples such as IBM, Apple Mac OSX, Sun, etc cna be given.

Perhaps also a brief history of how "Open" emerged as a paradigm from people trying to create free software (reference [http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog/WEBSUC.html Weber's The Success of Open Source]), and how it is starting to come to be extended to many areas of human creation, both by existing institutions and by groups of individuals that come together to solve a problem.

LIST OF KEYWORDS

''What is "Open", and why?  [[Open Source]], [[Open Knowledge]], [[Open Design]], [[Open Futures]], [[Open Data]], , [[Open Access]], [[Open Archives]], , [[Open Business]], [[Open Organization]], , [[Open Content]], , [[Open Hardware]], , [[Open Standards]]



  


'''Chapter 2: Paradigm Two: Participation shall be extended to all; and all shall collaborate'''


'''Chapter 3: Paradigm Three: Our common production shall remain common'''

''Covers the Commons, the Public Domain''



'''Chapter 4: Distributed Networks'''

===Part Two: The P2P Processes===


'''Chapter 5: Peer Production or the Sharing Economy'''

''Covers free software/open source, the Wikipedia experiment, etc..; open hardware, open design''


'''Chapter 6: Peer Governance or Absolute Democracy'''

''Covers leadership/management of peer production projects specifically''

''Covers new forms of participative democracy generally''


'''Chapter 7: Peer Property'''

''Covers licenses such as the GPL/CC Licenses and property forms such as trusts, cooperatives, open capital''



===Part Three: The Applications===


'''Chapter 8: Business and Economics'''



'''Chapter 9: Politics and Society'''



'''Chapter 10: Philosophy and Spirituality'''



'''Chapter 11: Art, music and creativity'''



==Project Two: The DVD==


'''The P2P Manuscript'''


'''The Document Vault'''


'''The Audio Vault'''


'''The Video Vault'''



=Lay out and illustration=

Hugh D'Andrade, hughillustration.com
Mona Caron, monacaron.com

(both recommended by Chris Carlsson, who will reconnect in October)


=How to go about it=

I have posted some questions in [[Talk:Book_Project]]. I'd like to outline our plan here. I see that some structure has emerged so far here with chapters and content, but I'd like to know prettymuch how we are going to structure the whole thing exactly, so that I can get to work on parts of it. For example, from what I can tell, it looks like we are going to have some "chapters", as detailed above, but also a seperate section that includes and "ABC" encyclopedia. is that right?-SR

=Proposal For Possible Other Items To be Included=