

Author: Michel Bauwens


=Abstract:=

The emergence of distributed networks, defined by capacity of agents to freely determine their
actions and relations, and of the internet and the social web in particular, have created a new set
of technological affordances creating a broad range of open knowledge and open design 
communities functioning according to a ‘peer to peer’ social logic. These communities have set
in motion a new set of social processes for the creation of value, which we could summarize as
peer production (the ability to produce in common), peer governance (the capacity to selforganize) and peer property (the capacity to make common production universally available).

The social web has created the possibility to create complex social services, and ‘productive
systems’, through the global coordination and scaling of small group processes of mass
participation, moving them from the periphery of social life to its very center.
The aim of this paper is to describe the characteristics of this new social process, and to see how
they are specifically related to the issue of human happiness.


=Text=

==The Emergence of Passionate Production==

The emergence of this new mode of production has already been quite substantially described 
and researched with recent summaries in a series of books and monographs.
Using Ronald Coase’s (i) transaction cost theory, Yochai Benkler (in The Wealth of Networks
ii) has examined the particular conditions under which commons-based peer production can 
emerge, and these conditions are strongly related to the emergence of a globally distributed 
network for the production and sharing of knowledge, i.e. the capability to reproduce non-rival
information goods at marginal cost. The main thesis could be summarized as follows: When
costs of participation are low enough, any motivation may be sufficient to lead to a contribution.
This new mode of producing social value is also a new mode of governing human collectives and 
in particular a mode of technological development, which has become very widespread as a
method to develop software. Steve Weber proposes a detailed examination of the open sourcedevelopment and governance process in his book The Success of Open Source iii . There is a near
consensus in the pragmatic research community that is represented by Venture Capital iv, that
open source is now expected to be a default strategy for their investments, and that there is only 
a limited future left for pure proprietary software strategies. Another detailed description,
focusing more on general knowledge production, is an upcoming book by Queensland University 
researcher Axel Bruns, who describes it as a process of produsage, because production and usage
are merging v , and are undertaken by communities of produsers. An earlier description, and a
long argument and explanation of why open source functions better for complex projects such as
software, is of course Eric Raymond’s widely known The Cathedral and the Bazaar vi . Alexander
Galloway’s book Protocol is an in-depth examination of the issue of power distribution vii in 
distributed networks.

Commons-based peer production also creates a wide variety of hybrid modalities, whereby 
institutions and companies adapt practices that have a number of characteristics of peer
production, but with the process being integrated in the value chain of the controlling companies.

The landmark book here is Eric von Hippel’s The Democratization of Innovation viii which  describes the emergence of social innovation outside of the corporation, by user-led  communities ix or by ‘lead users’ x
, and he shows how such social innovation is now at the heart of
the industrial process. Don Tapscott’s Wikinomics is a description of how companies are
adopting such practices of open participation in their competitive strategies, and has many 
examples of co-design xi , co-creation xii and crowdsourcing xiii as different ways to integrate wider
participation in the value chains. His conclusion is that such practices become competitive
necessities and a new baseline for successful business operations. The expectation is that there is
now in operation a law of asymmetric competition xiv , which hypothesizes that any for-profit
company that does not integrate participation, is at a competitive disadvantage against those that
do, and that any for-profit entity that is faced with competition from a for-benefit entity, will
have a difficult time to survive. The paradigmatic example if of course the emergence of Linux 
as a strong contender for the operating system of computers, and which is already an essential
part of the internet’s infrastructure. Charles Leadbeater’s book We Think xv is probably the book
which takes the largest societal point of view, through a description of participation in the full
social field. His contention is that a new social process of mass amateurization xvi has created a
sociological group of Pro-Ams xvii , ‘professional amateurs’, the result of the increasing level of
general education, is changing expert-based practices as well as the relations between experts,
pro-Ams, and the general public.

Peer production is also categorized as a new common property xviii
format, because the common production is generally made publicly available. This emerging format of common ‘peerproperty’ is described in an edited book of research papers by Rishab Ayer Ghosh, entitled Code.
Such common property format creates new legal and institutional formats, varieties of the old 
format of the Commons, which is associated with a vibrant research community. Peter Barnes' 
book entitled Capitalism 3.0. xix
has been instrumental in creating an awareness of new
institutional formats for the governance of commons such as trusts.

The emergence of peer production, governance and property is therefore associated with the rise
of three new paradigms regarding social organization. Indeed the social reproduction of
passionate production requires open and free input, participatory processes and commonsoriented outputs, resulting in a process of social reproduction that Prof. Nick Dyer-Witheford 
calls the “Circulation of the Common xx
”. Social movements organized these three paradigms are
emerging in every field of human activity.

Though peer production is becoming a social practice that is essentially active in the field of
immaterial production of knowledge and immaterial services such as software, where the
condition of non-rivalness of goods prevails, our networked information economy already means
that this practice is nested in the very core of value creation.

However, it would be erroneous to think that the emergence of peer production is restricted to
the field of immaterial production. The reasons are not difficult to understand.
First of all, the development of the universal copying machine that is the computer, coupled with
a universal distribution mechanism (of course conditioned by physical and cognitive access)
means that it becomes increasingly counterproductive to maintain legal and technological
restrictions on the free flow of knowledge. Not only is there increasing social pressure against
more restrictive intellectual property legislations, and an increasing research consensus and 
political effort to show how they can restrict innovation, but new legal forms allow for the
creation of legitimate forms of open content, such as the General Public License xxi
and the Creative Commons xxii formats. Every physical production necessitates an immaterial design fase,
and there is therefore a natural emergence of open design communities in various fields
xxiii , for example around open sustainability and appropriate technology movements.
The creation of smart objects means that a new configuration between physical, legal, and digital
aspects of entities facilitates the creation of a new types of commons (think of Couchsurfing.com
for hospitality exchange, Bookcrossings.com for the sharing of books, the massive experiment
in Paris, France for a publicly supported Commons of bicycles, etc.. . As the whereabouts ofobjects cannot be monitored, it becomes easier to use open licenses for physical objects, and to
monitor potential abuse through technology.

Finally, there is a combined series of trend in financial and productive capital favoring the
emergence of new modes of producing physical objects.

To mention them briefly: 

1) integrated desktop manufacturing environments for design xxiv; 

2) the trend towards rapid manufacturing and rapid tooling xxv ; 

3) personal fabricators xxvi and 3Dprinting; 

4) the development of multi-purpose machinery xxvii ; 

5) social lending xxviii and other
distributed funding formats.

While the sphere of producing  and distribution of physical goods must obey the logic of rival
goods, there is nevertheless an important correlation between the further miniaturization and
‘distribution’ of the means of physical production (with a trend towards lowering capital
requirements), and the already achieved means of information production and distribution.
Hypothetically, when rising costs for energy and raw materials are combined with lowering costs
for capital, an economic model combining open design with more localized production can be
envisaged. Erik von Hippel’s Democratization of Innovation mentions already several economic
sectors, where such ‘built-only capitalism’ is already practiced, such as in the extreme sport
communities.

From this relation are emerging various hybrid forms of linkage between the non-monetary logic
of peer production, and the monetary logic of the world of scarcity.
Currently, three main models may be distinguished:

1) Sharism. Individuals share their creative expression through proprietary platforms. While
the sharing is non-monetary, the proprietary platform is funded by selling the attention of
participants to the advertizing world. This is basically the model behind the emergence of
Web 2.0 social web platforms.

2) Commonism. A commons is created by self-organized communities. This is associated 
with for-benefit institutions that manage the necessary physical infrastructure (Apache
Foundation, Mozilla Foundation, Wikimedia Foundation). Finally, around the companies,
an ecology of businesses are created that produce scarce added value for the market.

These companies in return practice various forms of benefit sharing to sustain the
commons from which they benefit.

3) Crowdsourcing: unlike the previous models, based on the production of use value and only derivative exchange value, in this model, there is distributed production of
commodities and thus for exchange value. The platforms can be proprietary
intermediaries (istock photo model), or can integrated in corporate value chains (Lego Factory).


==1. The Characteristics of Peer Production and their relation to human happiness==

Peer production quite radically overturns many of the key characteristics of industrial
production. Here is a review of these characteristics, linked to how these new practices may be
related to a ‘surplus in happiness’.

We refer to the overview of motivational studies in Alexander Kjerulf book about happiness at
work for a summary of why intrinsic positive motivation results in the highest productivity at
work xxix .

To gauge the following characteristics with the factors enhancing happiness, please refer to the
summary of research by Francis Heylighen xxx .


- '''Voluntary engagement to projects'''

Passionate production is based on the voluntary engagement and therefore structurally eliminates
coercion. Individuals can therefore choose the projects for which they feel most fit, and that
corresponds to their desires, life projects and search for meaning. Fully coercive methods of
work, such as slavery and serfdom, result in lower productivity . They also necessitate a costly 
apparatus of coercion and control. Methods of relative coercion, such as dependence based wage
work, generate a productivity based on mutual self-interest, but have also in-built limits. Not
rewarded activities will generally not be performed, innovation is only a function of competition.

Motivation studies show that the most productive form of motivation is the intrinsic positive
format, surpassing intrinsic negative and intrinsic positive in its results. Peer production 
structurally weeds out such motivations retaining only intrinsic positive ‘passionate’ motivation.


'''- Self-selection of tasks'''

Peer production is not organized as a predetermined division of labor, but on a modularization of
granular tasks that can be self-selected. Individuals will naturally select those tasks for which
they feel an interest, a fitness and for which they think they have the requisite skills. Less
appealing tasks are not concentrated but are distributed as well, and can be taken up by 
volunteers. Some peer projects require that the less appealing elements of a task are supplied 
together with the rest of the contribution, thereby insuring a fair distribution of the unappealing 
requirements.


'''- Equipotentiality and anti-credentialism'''

The self-selection tasks is associated with a particular vision of the human and a particular form
of evaluation judgment, based on the concept of equipotentiality.

Anti-credentialism signifies that there is no longer a strong separation between the informal and 
formal curriculum that an individual represents. What count is demonstrated ability, not prior
formal proof. It is therefore based on the goal of inclusion rather than a mechanism of exclusion.

Furthermore, individuals are no longer judged on any kind of ‘unified essence’ but are
recognized as complex beings, and the granular self-selected tasks will those that the individual
judges to correspond to a particular skillset. This is the principle of equipotentiality.

Here is a quote on the topic by transpersonal psychologist Jorge Ferrer,note in particular the
statement in bold.

“An integrative and embodied spirituality would effectively undermine the current model of
human relations based on comparison, which easily leads to competition, rivalry, envy, jealousy,
conflict, and hatred. When individuals develop in harmony with their most genuine vital
potentials, human relationships characterized by mutual exchange and enrichment would
naturally emerge because people would not need to project their own needs and lacks onto 
others. More specifically, the turning off of the comparing mind would dismantle the prevalent
hierarchical mode of social interaction—paradoxically so extended in spiritual circles—in which 
people automatically look upon others as being either superior or inferior, as a whole or in some
privileged respect. This model—which ultimately leads to inauthentic and unfulfilling
relationships, not to mention hubris and spiritual narcissism—would naturally pave the way for
an I-Thou mode of encounter in which people would experience others as equals in the sense of
their being both superior and inferior to themselves in varying skills and areas of endeavor(intellectually, emotionally, artistically, mechanically, interpersonally, and so forth), but with 
none of those skills being absolutely higher or better than others. It is important to experience
human equality from this perspective to avoid trivializing our encounter with others as being 
merely equal. It also would bring a renewed sense of significance and excitement to our
interactions because we would be genuinely open to the fact that not only can everybody learn 
something important from us, but we can learn from them as well. In sum, an integral
development of the person would lead to a “horizontalization of love." We would see others not
as rivals or competitors but as unique embodiments of the Mystery, in both its immanent and 
transcendent dimension, who could offer us something that no one else could offer and to whom
we could give something that no one else could give."

In equipotential systems of cooperation, individuals are always naturally judged for what they do
best, since they have self-selected the tasks for which they have the highest competence,
motivation, and inclination.


'''- Elimination of fixed hierarchies and permission'''

The process of production itself is self-organized. Production is not geared towards
predetermined products, under a command and control structure, but the process of production is
‘probabilistic’. Permission  asking  and a priori filtering or selection is replaced by a freedom to 
try various approaches, which are only subsequently validated by the community. This means
that both hierarchical dependence, but also time-consuming democratic negotiations, are
eliminated. The individual can fully express himself and his capabilities. It is clear that such a
process is very efficient to minimalize frustrations due to the unequal distribution of power.

There is no dependency to obtain resources, no mechanism needed to allocate scarce resources.


'''- Communal validation'''

Distributed production is matched with distributed control. Instead of a priori filtering by 
gatekeepers, various collective choice systems will evaluate and judge contributions. Generally
speaking this eliminates the power and privilege located with certain individuals, and requires
participation of all produsers. In highly technical environments such as in free software projects,
is generally the most competent and engaged individuals that become maintainers of subprojects
and responsible for quality control. However, there is no financial dependence associated with these individuals, and the inherent possibility of exit and forking as alternatives to the volunteers,
mean that the the maintainers are themselves strongly bound to community norms and 
community approval. The main aim of peer governance modes is to eliminate the possibility of
collective individuals separating themselves from the community. The model chosen is usually 
that of a combination of ad hoc meritocracies which are in constant evolution and dependent on 
the various microprojects. The analogy of a jazz band, with different soloists taken over the lead 
according to the different fases of musical expression, is often used to denote the logic of peer
governance.


'''- Holoptism and transparency instead of panoptism'''

While traditional corporate production is based on panoptism and the ‘need to know’, i.e. on 
widespread information retention practices, which sustain the unequal access to allocation and 
ecision-making, peer production projects are constituted around full transparency and the
countervailing principle of holoptism. This dictates that all info is fully available, through
automatic capture of participation and contribution, to all users and participants. This clearly 
eliminates many factors of frustration and unhappiness from the productive process.


'''- Not products, but artefacts –in-progress'''

Produser communities do not make finished products, but build knowledge artefacts that are
never finished but also in continuous progress. This means an absence of deadlines and abolishes
the micro-management by hierarchies. Rather, the vision leadership and participant community 
will set strategic goals, will discover new needs as the process unfolds, and continuously work 
on the improvement of the artifact. This way of work has an enormous stress-reduction potential.


'''- Production for use value, not exchange value'''

Peer communities do not produce commodities for sale, but knowledge artefacts that are needed 
for their social life. There is the absence of any alienation that results from making unnecessary 
commodities that need to be sold.- Convergence of individual and collective interests
Peer production is not based on altruism, nor on coercive forms of collectivism, but on valueconscious design of social systems that enhance the convergence of individual and collective
interests. Because of the non-rivalness of information goods, sharing increases reputation,
knowledge and chosen relationships, resulting in multiple benefits for individuals, those involved
in the exchange, and the wider community. A rather extraordinary congruence of individuality
and relationality is obtained.


'''- The flow of infinite amelioration'''

Participants not only self select their tasks, but also when they do it, and the chosen moments
will naturally corresponds to the judgment of participants as to their natural capacity to perform.
This permits natural workstyles that correspond better to the personal biological cycles and the
social cycles necessitated by the family and community life.

The results of the above indicate that passionate production also produces individuals which 
increase their autonomy, their possibilities of cooperation and support, the ability to find and 
exercise their competences and fitness with tasks, the possibilities to create meaning through
joint projects, and the ability to work according to natural rhythms and flow. While these
potentials may not always be fully realized, and are tempered by the necessities for financial
survival, they are almost always structurally superior to the possibilities inherent in coercive
work environments. While specific research on the relation between peer production is as yet
scare, Erik von Hipple specifically links user-innovation activities to increased happiness (von 
Hippel, 2005, p. 242-244). An overview of the relation between knowledge-based economic
activities and increased happiness, mentions several studies showing the relationship between 
open source participation and increased joy and flow xxxii.

==Issues, Problems and Opportunities==

The possibility of peer production first of all poses the problem of access. The participatory
potential is limited by the joint factor of lack of physical access, not yet assured for the majority
of the world population, and cognitive access. Universal broadband and social web literacies are
key factors enabling participation.

It seems also clear that while peer production does a number of things better than the previous
alternatives, it will also create its own new set of problems. For example,the problems of quality
control in the Wikipedia have been well covered by the media. The hybrid co-existence of
sharing communities and proprietary platforms is also rich in all kinds of tensions.

The potential of peer to peer technology to create positive social affordances, can also be used in
radically different ways. The centralized Domain Name System of the internet can be used both 
for insuring a global infrastructure of participation, or to enable censorhip by authoritarian states.

The lowering capital requirements for social production, also allow for the production of
negative social goods, such as distributed violent insurgencies and criminal conspiracies. For
objective peer to peer infrastructures to serve as conditions for the production of positive social
goods and surplus happiness, cultural-subjective adaptations are needed, in particular converting 
scarcity-forms of human consciousness (I loose by sharing) by abundance-predicated formats
(we all win by sharing). The potential is there, but it needs to be activated, and public policies
will be a crucial role in such endeavors (just as the availability of the book required universal
education policies to create literacy).

Peer production also creates a challenge for the overall organization of our societies.
At present, a relative minor part of this massive value creation is being transformed into 
monetizable exchange value, which is not only a problem for for-profit entities, but for peer
producers themselves. Proprietary web platform owners can make money selling the attention of
the communities to advertisers. Commons-oriented companies (say IBM with Linux), create
scarcities around the commons. And crowdsourcers lower their cost of production while
increasing the pool for their own innovation processes. But one can immediately see that the
ratio from use value to its capture through monetizable exchange value capture is minor. To 
simplify, one could say that while use value is growing exponentially, monetization is only
increasing linearly.Referring to the earlier concept on asymmetric competition, this presents a difficulty for companies. They have to adopt open/free, participatory, and commons oriented strategies to
compete, BUT at the same time, without any 'closed', 'scarce' aspects, there can be no value
capture! Both revenue-sharing and benefit sharing practices are subject to possible exploitation 
and lack of equity.


Let us consider the following additional issues:

Innovation is becoming more and more social, i.e. becoming an emerging property of the entire
social field of networks, rather than an internal characteristic of for-profit institutions.
Entrepreneurship is becoming divorced from capitalism, and edge competencies replace core
competencies as key competitive quality.

Society and the market players are increasingly benefiting from the positive externalities of
social cooperation, but we lack an efficient return mechanism.

Peer production projects might be collectively sustainable (as long as they can replace
individuals who leave with at least as many entrants), but the individuals involved in passionate
and creative production still need to sustain themselves.

Hence a crisis of precarity, of which creative professionals are not just the victim, but it is also 
often times a matter of choice, with paid employment becoming a means for the more
meaningful passionate value creation. But what is fun at 25 becomes problematic when one
wants to sustain families.


==What can be done?==

Despite the issues above, the achievements and further potential of peer production are already 
such, that they would justify supportive policies. In addition, if the law of asymmetric
completion were to be confirmed, and there are in fact already many instances of open strategies
trumping closed ones, which are being monitored in the wiki of the P2P Foundation, then it
follows that both institutions, companies, and nations have reason to adapt and sustain such 
practices.

For-profit entities can start supporting, either the commons or communities from which they are
benefiting, or social innovation more generally, since it is the pool from which value is created.Companies need to more activily support social innovation by expanding their practices of
“benefit-sharing”.

Public authorities can also evolve towards a Partner State model, whereby they can enable and
empower direct social production and social innovation. The evolving Transitional Labour
Market policies which are evolving in Europe to take into account the mobility of contemporary 
workers, need to be enriched with an understanding that the periods of non-work, are potentially 
such as creative, necessary, and socially useful than the episodes of paid employment.

Ultimately, we need forms of income, which are divorced from the need for production for the
market.
The peer producers themselves can also directly organize their interface with the market, and 
they can do this be following principles of equity and transparency, which are directly in tune
with the underlying values of peer production. The OS Alliance of open source software
developers in Austria, is a pioneering model for such efforts.

In conclusion, we have seen how peer production as a mode of production, and the peer to peer
dynamic as a mode of being, have the potential to surpass under certain conditions the other
modes of production, concerning productivity, political participation, and distributive potential.
Subjectively, it means more happiness as it allows intrinsic positive motivation to bloom.
Intersubjectively, it represents more relational wealth, through its higher modes of synergestic
cooperation and collective intelligence.

Therefore, we have to learn first to recognize and accept that peer production is indeed emerging
as a new logic for our economy and civilization; and second, if we indeed accept the argument
that it is a ‘better’ mode, then we have to find out, how we can extend and protect it. What is at
stake is nothing less than human happiness.


=Bibliography=

* Barnes, Peter. Capitalism 3.0: Enriching Ourselves By Enhancing Our Commons, BerrettKoehler, 2006.
* Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks. Yale University Press, 2006
* Galloway, Alexander. Protocol. How Control Exists after Decentralization. MIT Press, 2004
* Ghosh, Rishab Ayer, (ed.). Code. Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Commons: MIT
Press, 2005.
* Kjerulf, Alexander. Happy Hour is 9 to 5. Lulu, 2006.
* Leadbeater , Charles. We Think: the power of mass creativity. Profile, 2007
* Raymond, Eric. The Cathedral and the Bazaar. O’Reilly, 2001
* Tapscott, Don and Anthony D. Williams. Wikinomics. Penguin, 2007
* Von Hippel, Erik. Democratizing Innovation. MIT Press, 2005
* Webber, Steve. The Success of Open Source. Harvard University Press, 2005


=References=

Further background on peer production from the author:

The Political Economy of Peer Production, in: CTheory, at
http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499

General information is available through the wiki of the Foundation of Peer to Peer Alternatives,
via http://p2pfoundation.net


=Notes=

                                                       
i
Yochai Benkler. Coase’s Penguin, or Linux and the nature of the firm. From
http://www.benkler.org/CoasesPenguin.html  
                                                        
ii
Available at http://www.benkler.org/wealth_of_networks/index.php?title=Main_Page

iii
Extensive summary available at http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/Oekonux/Research/SuccessOfOpenSource

iv
“We anticipate it's going to be very hard going forward to invest in closed source, because we don't think it's a good development mode.”. From: VC’s Expect Open Source to be Default Option, CBR, 4 July 2006,
http://www.cbronline.com/article_news.asp?guid=288BD3F2-E55F-49CC-A284-43926C5F66A5.
The commercialization of open source software is monitored here at http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/Open-SourceCommercialization ; the specific role of venture capital in that process is followed here at
http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/Venture-Capital

v
"Produsage can be roughly defined as modes of production which are led by users or at least crucially involve users as producers - in other words, the user acts as a hybrid user/producer, or produser, virtually throughout the production process. Produsage demonstrates the changed content production value chain model 

in collaborative online environments: in these environments, a strict producer/consumer dichotomy no longer applies - instead, users
are almost always also able to be producers of content, and often necessarily so in the very act of using it."
(http://snurb.info/produsage)

vi
Available at http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar/; critical review at
http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue4_12/bezroukov/index.html

vii
Galloway’s key concept of protocally power is explained here at http://p2pfoundation.net/Protocollary_Power

viii
First chapter available here at http://web.mit.edu/evhippel/www/books/DI/Chapter1.pdf

ix
Explanation of user-centered innovation at http://p2pfoundation.net/User-centered_Innovation

x
Explanation of Lead Users at http://p2pfoundation.net/Lead_Users

xi
Concept and examples at http://p2pfoundation.net/Co-Design

xii
Concept and examples here at http://p2pfoundation.net/Co-Creation

xiii
Concept and examples at http://p2pfoundation.net/Crowdsourcing

xiv
Asymmetric Competition refers to any competition between entities that do not follow the same logic, for
example between a for-profit company using paid staff and proprietary code, and a for-benefit institution drawing on a
voluntary community. Frank Hecker uses the concept in an examination of the competition between Microsoft                                                          
Explorer and the Mozilla Foundation’s Firefox browsers. See Frank Hecker, at
http://www.hecker.org/mozilla/asymmetric-competition

xv
Home page at http://www.wethinkthebook.net/home.aspx, draft version at
http://www.wethinkthebook.net/cms/site/docs/charles%20full%20draft.pdf

xvi
Concept explained at http://p2pfoundation.net/Mass_Amateurization

xvii
Concept explained at http://p2pfoundation.net/Pro-Am_Revolution

xviii
Concept of common property, as distinct from private and public property, explained at
http://p2pfoundation.net/Common_Property

xix
Available via http://capitalism3.com/

xx
Original paper at http://www.geocities.com/immateriallabour/withefordpaper2006.html, excerpts at
http://p2pfoundation.net/Circulation_of_the_Common

xxi
The GNU General Public License is explained by the Free Software Foundation at
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html

xxii
The CC License formats are explained at http://creativecommons.org/

xxiii
This whole area is monitored here at http://p2pfoundation.net/Category:Design; the article on Product Hacking contains an extensive list of such initiatives, at http://p2pfoundation.net/Product_Hacking

xxiv
Explanation at http://p2pfoundation.net/Desktop_Manufacturing;

xxv
Explanation at http://p2pfoundation.net/Rapid_Manufacturing

xxvixxvi
Explanation at http://p2pfoundation.net/Personal_Fabricators

xxvii
Explanation at http://p2pfoundation.net/Multiple-Purpose_Production_Technology

xxviii
Overview at http://p2pfoundation.net/Social_Lending

xxix
Summary here at http://positivesharing.com/2006/12/why-motivation-by-pizza-doesnt-work/

xxx
Overview of happiness, definition, factors, at http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/HAPPINES.html

xxxi
Jorge Ferrer, essay on the Embodied Participation in the Mystery,
http://www.estel.es/EmbodiedParticipationInTheMystery,%201espace.doc     
                                                     
xxxii
Hans-Jürgen Engelbrecht writes that such studies “have included the role of having fun or joy derived from
voluntary contributions to code of software products as at least one of the motivating factors for such activities (Hertel et al., 2003; Lakhani and Wolf, 2005; Lerner and Tirole, 2006). Whatever the specific activity, fun or joy
can lead to ‘flow’”

From http://www.cfses.com/documents/events/Engelbrecht_2007_Unhappiness_o


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]