= Introduction  =

P2P Urbanism may be understood as that collection of urban interventions carried out cooperatively by, amongst others, inhabitants, professionals, NGOs, public agencies, researchers, activists, artists, sociologists, and urban scientists meant to study, construct, and repair the city in a way that anyone may choose, participate, share, and modify theories, methods, and implementation technologies at any one time.<br> 

P2P urbanism is "open source urbanism", by the people, for the people. You can read an introductory essay in [[Peer-to-Peer Themes and Urban Priorities for the Self-organizing Society]]. 

The goal is to use this wiki page for the draft material for a geolocated P2P-Urbanism World Atlas at http://cityleft.blogspot.com/p/p2p-urbanism-world-atlas.html 

= Source Material  =

Delicious tags that can be used to update p2p urbanist projects: 

#http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Urbanism 
#http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Architecture 
#http://delicious.com/mbauwens/P2P-Cities

<br> 

= The projects  =

Please list your project here. If your country or region is not listed, add it! 

If you create a new wiki page to describe your project, please put <tt><nowiki>[[Category:Urbanism]]</nowiki></tt> in the markup so that it gets the correct category. 

Please use the following classification:<br> 

T-P2P = temporary P2P urban interventions<br>L-P2P = long-term P2P urban interventions<br>O-P2P = other P2P urban-related interventions (digital, etc.)<br> 

== Americas  ==

=== Mexico  ===

*Xalapa (L-P2P)

Project description: House and workshop designed with Christopher Alexander's methods. 

URL: .... <br> 

Location:&nbsp; Veracruz (Lat: 19.495561, Lon: -96.85438.) <br> 

Contributors:..... 

== Europe  ==

=== Estonia  ===

*Play-Tallinn (T-P2P)

Project Description: Our research tested the notion of an integrated regional identity formation as desired by region makers to determine whether this model, or alternate emergent forms better describe the situation of the Helsinki-Tallinn-Region (HTR). The cross border effects as well as historical pre-conditions manifest in the urban fabric of Tallinn appeared to us as an archipelago of ‘islands’, each with different economic, social, and cultural milieus; segregations overlooked or under considered by city planners and administrators. The model of the archipelago also created an inverse space between these hegemonic ‘islands’ where new inputs can enrich HTR’s diversity. These latter hypotheses were tested in Tallinn through a series of public interventions in May 2008, concluding with a discussion between city planners, architects, art critics and general public.<br> 

URL: http://www.cityleft.altervista.org/interventions/tallinn/tallinn.htm; http://eu-urbanism-bordercities.bauhaus-dessau.de/; http://heltalapelago.blogspot.com/ 

Location: Tallin, Estonia <br> 

Contributors: Bauhaus Kolleg (Agatino Rizzo, Reinhard Micheller, Tomas Jonsson, Ricardo Santacruz, Sukanya Krishnamurty, Filipe de Souza) <br> 

=== Finland  ===

*Olohuone (T-P2P)

Project Description: An urban intervention/experiment open for public use. A symbolic representation of s domestic "living-room" made of second hand furniture and objects, set in the busy interior of the Wets Hall of Helsinki Railway Station. In addition there was music from a sound system, books for people to read and take with them, free water from a water dispenser, blankets for people to keep warm, incense from Greece and Somalia, posters explaining the main idea of the installation as well as informative flyers in Finnish, Swedish, Somali and Russian language. Olohuone (living room in Finnish) was a platform for encountering the Other and possible for engaging into some form of communication and intercultural dialogue. Therefore, it was also a platform for a shift of perspective to stand a chance to occur. With Olohuone I wanted to challenge the dichotomous division of the public and private conditions of our lives.Olohuone was realised with the financial support of the Art Council of Finland, and the help of friends, in the period 21-29 of September 2005. 

URL: https://www.taik.fi/kirjakauppa/product_info.php?cPath=20&amp;products_id=10; http://www.saatchi-gallery.co.uk/stuart/FullSizeArt/ast_id/25590/image_id/179052/imageno/1 

Location: Helsinki, Finland<br> 

Contributors: Michail Galanakis 

=== Greece  ===

<br> 

=== Italy  ===

*Concept for the Reconstruction of L'Aquila (L-P2P)<br>

Project Description: What we propose is a form of transitional architecture specifically intended to quickly re-establish the functional 'social infrastructure' of damaged towns in ways similar to the original architecture being restored and in the immediate proximity of the original towns so that people are 'at home' and able to function as a community to support the restoration effort. Our key tool for this is a concept called Peer-To-Peer Architecture; building methods that allow the inhabitants of a community to design and spontaneously redesign their habitat as they see fit. Our main priority is, in fact, to develop a design process which is open to the local community. We think that after establishing a nucleus of our cargotecture we could then involve local stakeholders in the development of temporary settlements. This participation process is actually coherent to our P2P ideal. We think that for the self-sustainability of any design process a direct involvement of locals must be achieved.<br> 

URL: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/p2pfound-cities-project-proposal-for-the-reconstruction-and-the-preservation-of-abruzzo/2009/12/04<br> 

Location: L'Aquila, Italy<br> 

Contributors: Agatino Rizzo, Michel Bauwens, Eric Hunting 

<br> 

== Africa  ==

No projects listed yet. 

== Asia  ==

=== India  ===

*The Urban Typhoon Workshop (T-P2P)

Project Description: will be held in Khirkee Village from November 9-16, 2010. The Urban Typhoon Workshop invites artists, architects, academics, activists and other practitioners to work in Khirkee Village and conceptualize alternative scenarios for its future along with its inhabitants. 

URL: http://khojworkshop.org/blog/urban_typhoon_khirkee [http://khojworkshop.org/] 

This is an URBZ-KHOJ partnership. 

Location: New Delhi <br> 

Contributors: 

== Oceania  ==

No projects listed yet. 

[[Category:Urbanism]]