==THEMATIC ISSUES OF P2P NEWS==

* '''P2P Economic Governance, tools''', Issue 98 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p98
* '''P2P and Economic Governance, theory''', Issue 97 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p97
* '''Multitudes''', Issue 95 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p95
* '''P2P Political Theory and Practice''', Issue 93 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p93
* '''Empire and Multitudes''', Issue 92 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p92
* '''Peer Governance''', Issue 90 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p90
* '''P2P and Cooperation''', Issue 88 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p88 
* '''P2P Hierarchy Theory''', Issue 87 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p87
* '''On the Commons''', Issue 77 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p77
* '''P2P Cooperation and Activism''', Issue 76 of P2P News, at http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2p76
* '''A Spectrum of Politics and Governance Grounded in Empowered Citizen Dialogue and Deliberation''', at http://www.communicationagents.com/tom_atlee/2005/07/04/a_spectrum_of_politics_and_governance_grounded_in_empowered_citizen_dialogue_and_deliberation.htm

==SELECTED WIKIPEDIA ARTICLES==

* '''Alterglobalisation''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alterglobalisation
* '''Co-Intelligence''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Co-intelligence 
* '''Collaborative Intelligence''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_intelligence
* '''Free Content''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_content 
* '''Free software''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_software 
* '''Free Software Foundation''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software_Foundation
* '''Free Software Movement''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software_Movement
* '''Free Software Movement''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_software_movement
* '''Open Source Intelligence''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source_intelligence
* '''Open Source Movement''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source_movement
* '''Public Domain''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_domain
* '''Reputation''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reputation
* '''Smart Mobs''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_mobs 
* '''Social Networking''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_networking 
* '''Swarm Intelligence''', http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swarm_Intelligence

==KEY RESOURCES==

* Steven Clift monitors e-democracy initiatives, at http://www.publicus.net/e-government/


==ARTICLES==

* Summary of '''Internet Governance bodies''' by ACM's Ubiquity magazine. http://www.acm.org/ubiquity/views/v6i5_simoneli.html

* '''Grey Tuesday''' as an example of online music activism in action, at http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_10/howard/index.html

* '''Citizen Science''', http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/002974.html

* Some other examples:
** '''distributed proofreading''' for Project Gutenberg, at http://www.pgdp.net/ ;
** Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, http://www.mersenne.org/prime.htm ;
** NASA Clickworkers, http://clickworkers.arc.nasa.gov/top ; SETI http://setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu 

* Weblogs as a process of '''mass-amateurisation''', not mass-professionalistion, at http://shirky.com/writings/weblogs_publishing.html

* Blogs as '''the self in conversation''', at (http://www.itworld.com/Tech/2987/transcript_weinberger1_050201/pfindex.html

* '''Public domains vs. the commons''', For an investigation of the differences between the concepts, see the essays by James Boyle:
** [http://www.law.duke.edu/pd/papers/boyle.pdf The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain]
** [http://www.law.duke.edu/boylesite/foreword.pdf The Opposite of Property]

* This idea of a '''patronage economy''', citing the work of Paul David, is discussed by John Willinsky in an [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue10_8/willinsky//index.html article] for First Monday

* Research into Open Source as a '''collaborative social process''', [http://www.flosspols.org/ FLOSS-POLS], a EU-funded research project, claims it is ''the single largest knowledge base on open source usage and development worldwide''; and its 'third track' examines ''the efficiency of open source as a system for collaborative problem-solving''

* The peer-reviewed journal First Monday dedicated a [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_11/index.html special issue] to 'open source as a social process'. See in particular:
** [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_11/lehmann/index.html This paper] takes a closer look at FLOSS developers and their projects to find out how they work, what holds them together and how they interact;
** [http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_11/david/index.html A paper] titled '''on accountability in Open Source projects'''

* An evolutionary scheme for economics, by Wim Nusselder, see http://www.antenna.nl/wim.nusselder/schrijfsels/economics.htm

* Coordination defined by Philippe Zafirian, at http://perso.wanadoo.fr/philippe.zarifian/page122.htm

* '''The evolution of cooperation''': “''Evolution's Arrow also argues that evolution itself has evolved. Evolution has progressively improved the ability of evolutionary mechanisms to discover the best adaptations. And it has discovered new and better mechanisms. The book looks at the evolution of pre-genetic, genetic, cultural, and supra-individual evolutionary mechanisms.''" (http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Review_Complexity.pdf)

* Free sharing as an aspect of civilisation-building, at http://www.peripheries.net/g-sagot1.htm
* '''Cooperation studies''' are well monitored by by Howard Rheingold and and a whole team of collaborators at the [http://smartmobs.com Smartmobs] weblog.

* Here's a summary of '''cooperation theories''' maintained by Paul Pivcevic of the http://www.cooperativeintelligence.org/ website.

* The '''Working Group on Internet Governance''' has issued a report on the topic of reform. The WGIG is a group of experts tasked by the United Nations to think about and come up with a report about Internet governance. See at http://joi.ito.com/archives/2005/07/16/wgig_report.html or read the [http://www.wgig.org/docs/WGIGREPORT.pdf report] or visualize the [http://www.wortfeld.de/2005/07/wgig_report_understanding_it/ four scenarios]

* '''GNU Manifesto''' at http://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html

* The '''GPL license''' explained, at http://news.com.com/Sprucing+up+open+sources+GPL+foundation/2100-7344_3-5501561.html?tag=nefd.lede

* An article about the '''copyleft attitude''' and the emergence of the '''free art license''', at http://infos.samizdat.net/article301.html

* Richard Stallman on the '''free software principles''': http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/pragmatic.html

* French-language interview with Stallman: http://multitudes.samizdat.net/article.php3?id_article=214

* Richard Stallman on '''why it is okay to charge for free software''': http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/selling.html

* See also at http://www.opensource.org/ ; Background on the Open Source definition, by Bruce Perens, at http://www.perens.com/Articles/OSD.html

* '''Onion-like structure of authority''' in OS projects, http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue10_2/crowston/index.html

* See also an analysis of the relation between '''free software and capitalism''', at http://www.oekonux.org/texts/marketrelations.html

* '''Cognitive capitalism''': Yann-Moulier Boutang [http://multitudes.samizdat.net/article.php3?id_article=1656 here] or [http://www.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr/labo/walras/Objets/New/20021214/YMB.pdf here]
* Self-organisation and cooperation in cognitive capitalism, special issue of Solaris magazine, [http://biblio-fr.info.unicaen.fr/bnum/jelec/Solaris/d05/5introduction.html here] or [http://biblio-fr.info.unicaen.fr/bnum/jelec/Solaris/d05/5link-pezet.html here]

* An explanation of the concept of the '''general intellect''', at  http://multitudes.samizdat.net/article.php3?id_article=476

* On the concept of '''Worldwide public goods''', at http://www.upmf-grenoble.fr/irepd/regulation/Lettre_regulation/lettrepdf/LR48.pdf

* an overview of '''intellectual property regimes and their evolution''', at http://www.upmf-grenoble.fr/irepd/regulation/Lettre_regulation/index.html

==MISCELLANEOUS==

Panarchy, at http://www.panarchy.com 

''Panarchy, and by extension this website, is not a normative model; it is a descriptive one. Panarchy is not a utopian vision, or an attempt to describe a rational or just world order. Panarchy may not be good or bad, but it is coherent and consistent. Like the Industrial Era, Panarchy demonstrates certain ways of perceiving and interacting with the world throughout its breadth and depth. Panarchy emerges from the analysis of broad patterns of change in the world, which leads to an understanding the dynamics of systems and holarchies. By applying those understandings across all strata of society, we arrive at a description of where civilization is heading -- thus, Panarchy.

Panarchy is the pattern of relations that characterizes and defines the next era in human civilization. The totality of these relations - political, economic, social - is what constitutes global governance in the next cycle of civilization.  Mark Salter offers this definition: &quot;Panarchy means an inclusive, universal system of governance in which all may participate meaningfully'';.

Tom Atlee is founder of '''The Co-Intelligence Institute''', (http://www.co-intelligence.org) coined the term co-intelligence, which he usually defines as meaning what intelligence looks like when we take seriously the wholeness, co-creativity and interconnectedness of life. Collective intelligence is only one manifestation of co-intelligence. Others include multi-modal intelligence, collaborative intelligence, wisdom, resonant intelligence and universal intelligence.


[[Category:Peergovernance]]