
= different from [[Carsharing]] because it involves multiple kinds of vehicles



=Example=


==[[Just Share It]]==

By Phil Covington;

"Peer-to-peer (p2p) start-up – JustShareIt – feels the opportunity exists to bring these parties together in an on-line  vehicle-sharing marketplace, and to this end, launches this week, to bring owners (or sharers) and borrowers together, organized around  three key service goals: security, convenience and adventure.

The service works like this. Sharers post to the website the number of hours and times during the month that they are willing to make their idle asset available, they also set the price per period for which they are prepared to loan it. On the other side, borrowers use a mobile app to search  for what’s on offer nearby. Upon finding a suitable match, they click to make a vehicle booking for a specified amount of time. JustShareIt takes a commission from the rental fee for providing the platform to make the transaction possible. And that’s basically it. Sharers get to make some money and borrowers go out to play.

JustShareIt provides insurance and roadside assistance for the sharing period, and to ensure a high level of trust is engendered, the company undertakes background checks to ensure all parties to the transaction are approved into the sharing community.

At the heart of the service, and what makes JustShareIt unique, is a secure keyless access system enabled via a proprietary hardware innovation called RideLink. RideLink is hardwired into the ignition system of the sharers’ vehicle; by-passing the need for a physical key. Instead, vehicle operation is activated by their mobile app-enabled encrypted virtual key. When a booking is confirmed, the borrower’s mobile device will be able to unlock and remotely start the particular rented vehicle. The system is GPS enabled, so owners will know where their vehicle is at the start and end of the rental period and if desired, can even restrict the range of operation while on loan. Sharers also have the comfort of knowing that if the system is tampered with, their vehicle shuts down.

Owners wanting further security can make their vehicle available only to what the company describes as “private closed circles,” specifically defined communities of borrowers with which the sharer is comfortable. However, JustShareIt thinks that as people become familiar with the service, owners will want to share as often as possible. In addition, sharers who also want to become borrowers of other peoples’ assets can do so at discounted rates.

The company’s founder, Gaurav Kohli, says the idea behind the keyless operation is to make the service completely hassle free, as it removes the need for person-to-person vehicle hand-offs. In fact, the app-based, keyless operation, supporting not just cars, but multiple types of vehicles, differentiates JustShareIt from car-only p2p competitors, such as Getaround and RelayRides."
(http://www.triplepundit.com/2012/01/peer-peer-vehicle-sharing-start-justshareit-launches-san-francisco/)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]