An overview article on '''P2P 'streaming' infrastructure''' at http://open4all.info/up2speed.pdf It mentions the '''Open Source Streaming Alliance''' and the '''Direct Video Network'''.


=Discussion=

==We do not need streaming for video==

From Andrew Odlyzko's essay at http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/net.neutrality.delusions.pdf:

"Even if we allow video the dominant role in shaping the future of the Internet, we have
to cope with the second delusion captured in Cicconi’s quote, namely that movies should
be streamed. This is an extremely widely shared assumption, even among networking
researchers, as is discussed in Section 4. However, there is an argument that except for
a very small fraction of traffic (primarily phone calls and videoconferencing), multimedia
should be delivered as faster-than-real-time progressive downloads (transfer of segments
of files, each segment sent faster-than-real-time, with potential pauses between segments).
That is what is used by many P2P services, as well as YouTube. This approach leads to far
simpler and less expensive networks than real-time streaming. And there is a noticeable
minority of the technical community that regards this approach as the only sensible one.
A truly astonishing phenomenon is that this group and the far larger streaming advocacy
group do not seem to talk to each other, or even be aware that the other alternative is to
be taken seriously. This is discussed in Section 3.

Section 4 outlines '''why the faster-than-real-time transmissions of video (or music) are
the best solution''', and require a far less expensive network that requires neither any fancy
new technologies, nor any fancy new network management policies. Section 5 sketches out a
particular view of the history and present state of data networks, which suggests a scenario
of future evolution that supports the vision of faster-than-real-time multimedia transfers
in preference to the streaming mode of the evolution of data networks
The general conclusion is that the story presented by service providers, that they need
to block net neutrality in order to be able to afford to construct special features in their
networks for streaming movies, is simply not credible. If lack of net neutrality requirements
is to be exploited, it will have to be done through other, much more intrusive means. This
is discussed in the conclusions section."
(http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/net.neutrality.delusions.pdf)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Media]]