==From the P2P Foundation Blog==

*Follow the feeds from the P2P Foundation's Main Blog
**[http://feeds.feedburner.com/P2pFoundation RSS]

==RSS Feeds from the P2P Foundation Community Site==

*All latest activity
**[http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/activity/log/list?fmt=rss RSS]
*All forum entries
**[http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/forum?feed=yes&xn_auth=no RSS]
*All blog entries
**[http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/profiles/blog/feed?xn_auth=no RSS]
*Latest Video
**[http://p2pfoundation.ning.com/video/video/rss?xn_auth=no RSS]

==From the P2P Foundation Wiki==

*Recent changes
**[http://p2pfoundation.net/w/index.php?title=Special:Recentchanges&feed=rss RSS]:
**[http://p2pfoundation.net/w/index.php?title=Special:Recentchanges&feed=atom Atom]: 
*New Pages
**[http://p2pfoundation.net/w/index.php?title=Special:Newpages&feed=rss RSS]:
**[http://p2pfoundation.net/w/index.php?title=Special:Newpages&feed=atom Atom]:

*For advanced users
**History of a page
**DIY - This is possible for every page.   The link below gives you the changes for this page.  Use the code on the next line in your page to give you a link especially for that page.
**[{{SERVER}}{{localurl:{{FULLPAGENAME}}|action=history&feed=atom}} Atom]:
**<nowiki>{{SERVER}}{{localurl:{{FULLPAGENAME}}|action=history&feed=atom}}</nowiki>

==Creating Category Feeds==
We use [http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:GoogleNewsSitemap GoogleNewsSitemap] to create category feeds on the site.  Edit this page to see examples of how they are created.

===Examples===
====P2PCC Category RSS Feed====
This feed shows the most recent 10 articles that were added to the P2PCC category in an RSS feed.  It hides errors, and also includes redirected pages.
  *[[Special:GoogleNewsSitemap/&category=P2PCC | P2PCC RSS Feed]]

Code for example:
<pre><nowiki>
*[[Special:GoogleNewsSitemap/&category=P2PCC | P2PCC]]
</nowiki></pre>

===Options for Category Feeds===
You can use the following options to create a feed.  These are not necessary though and simply posted here for reference.  I fyou need to override the defaults you can do so with the following parameters.   All of these should be in a single line with no spaces.  Check the examples below if you have questions.  Parameters in [ ] are optional, stuff in ( ) means potential choices.  The extension uses (basically) the same parameters as [http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:DynamicPageList_(Wikimedia) DPL] so that's a good place to look for clarification.
<pre><nowiki>
*[/(rss|atom|sitemap)]
*[&category=Catname]
*[&notcategory=OtherCatName]
*[&namespace=0][&count=10]
*[&ordermethod=lastedit]
*[&order=ascending]
*[&redirects=only]
*[&stablepages=only]
*[&qualitypages=only]
*[&supresserrors=true]
*[&usenamespace=true]
*[&usecurid=true]
</nowiki></pre>

<pre><nowiki>

</nowiki></pre>
[[Category:P2P Foundation Publishing]]