
'''= "Large research project to build #CollaborativeEconomy organizations which are Decentralized, Democratic & Distribute their profits".'''

URL = http://p2pmodels.eu


=Description=

"P2P Models is a large research project to build Blockchain-powered organizations which are decentralized, democratic and distribute their profits, in order to boost a new type of Collaborative Economy. 


The project has three legs:

* '''Infrastructure''': Provide a software framework to build decentralized infrastructure for Collaborative Economy organizations that do not depend on central authorities.

* '''Governance''': Enable democratic-by-design models of governance for communities, whose rules are, at least partially, encoded in the software to ensure higher levels of equality.

* '''Economy''': Enable value distribution models which are interoperable across organizations, improving the economic sustainability of both contributors and organizations.


P2P Models is a 1.5M€ EU-funded interdisciplinary research effort for bootstrapping the emergence of a new generation of self-governed and more economically sustainable peer-to-peer Collaborative Economy communities. It is a 5-year project (2017-2022) which will be based in the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (Spain), with  advisors from the Berkman Klein Center (Harvard University) such as [[Yochai Benkler]], [[Mayo Fuster Morell]], or [[Primavera De Filippi]]. 

The project will contribute to the Blockchain ecosystem, from a commons-oriented approach (not focused on finance). It will build software modules, grounded on social theory, for the easy building of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations that aim to support collaborative communities. P2P Models is possible thanks to an ERC grant awarded to its Principal Investigator [[Samer Hassan]]. "
(http://p2pmodels.eu/)

=Directory of Related Projects=

P2P Models will aim to use or contribute to the following collaborative projects: 

* Amara, @AmaraSubs: Amara makes video globally accessible with closed captions & subtitles. Website: http://amara.org  Blog: http://about.amara.org 

* Aragon, @AragonProject: Build unstoppable organizations on Ethereum. Allowing the creation of value without borders or intermediaries. Join the community at https://aragon.chat .

* District0x, @district0x: A network of decentralized marketplaces and communities. Powered by Ethereum, Aragon, and IPFS.

* Zeppelin, @ZeppelinOrg: Zeppelin builds software to grow and protect the core infrastructure of an open, global economy, powered by blockchain technologies.

* FairCoop, @Fair_Coop: The Earth Cooperative for a #faireconomy #Faircoin


=Interview=

Silvia Díaz Molina and Elena Martínez Vicente interviewed by @genolomo:


'''* Can you describe what P2P Models is about? Who else is on the team, and what stage is the project in right now?'''

Silvia: I am still understanding what this project is about…hahaha. I’m lucky enough to have some master classes with Samer, our principal investigator, to know more about the tech part. I have a much clearer image about the social side of the project. We want to better understand how the governance and the distribution of value work happens in the CBPP (Commons Based Peer Production Communities), in order to know how blockchain could be useful for them. Fortunately, we have a sociologist-computer scientist in our team, David Rozas, who can be the link between the social and the tech part. We are 7 people in total, with different backgrounds and education but with activism in common. Also, we have a lot of collaborators and advisors who help us. We are at the beginning of the project, still taking off, maybe in the most challenging stage or where we should take more important decisions.

Elena: P2PModels is a research project full of difficult tech concepts so it is a beautiful challenge for me. Basically, we can summarize it in a question: Could we advance to a Commons Transition with blockchain?

The project has three main branches to build decentralized, democratic and distributed organizations. We intend to collaborate with international communities to learn from them and to think about technologies that could help to improve the lives of the people who work in these communities.

The people involved are Samer Hassan, principal investigator, David Rozas and Silvia in the sociological part right now, Sem and Antonio as tech advisors and Genoveva, our word-translator for humans.


'''* What are some of the projects being studied?'''

Elena: Right now, we are centered in designing better processes within the team, building the basis as a group and rethinking our team culture. A very important (and invisible) task. In terms of productive work, we almost have the pilot communities, for the ethnographic research. Secondly we are working on the brand, the new website and the communication strategy. We are just a few people doing a lot of stuff!

Silvia: That is one of the important decisions we should take and we are still thinking about it. We have drawn up the criteria to choose which projects could be interesting to study, and it seems like in the next months we can start some provisional social research but as I said, this is also under construction! We are full of verve, and we want to take on a lot of case studies but we have to be aware of our capabilities, in terms of time etcetera.


=More information=

* 5-page project summary via https://docs.google.com/document/d/1S8yKtUxyPV4OZAACe3JCwCmTN9sarr7g4V4IMSoELhc/edit

* more info via:

#Project Twitter: [http://twitter.com/P2Pmod @P2Pmod]
#PI Twitter: [http://twitter.com/samerP2P @samerP2P]
#Email: hi [at] samer [dot] hassan [dot] name

* Project Lead: [[Samer Hassan]]

* [[Open Methods and Tools for Community-Based Product Development‎‎ ]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]