Overview page for P2P Metrics

A peer to peer metric tries to measure some type of value within a distributed network.


=Introductions=

#[[Money is not the Only Value Measurement System]]
#[[Cooperative Wealth Building]]
#[[Netography]] becomes more important than Geography!
#[[Wealth Typology]]
#[[Wealth Acknowledgment Systems]]


=Directory of Metrics=

==Non-Monetary Metrics==

#[[Accountability Based Influence]]
#[[Content-driven Reputation]]
#[[Conviviality Metrics]]
#[[Customer Engagement Metrics]]
#[[Happiness - Unhappiness Continuum]]
#[[Metaverse Metrics]]
#[[Network Metrics]] 
#[[Open Value Metrics]]
#[[Share Ratio]]
#[[Social Accounting Metadata]]
#[[Social Graph]]
#[[Sustainability Product Selection Metric]]
#[[TPI Coefficient]]
#[[Trust Equation]]
#[[Trust Metrics]]
#[[User Labor Markup Language]]
#[[Virtual Location Metrics]] 
#[[Watts Strogatz Model]]
#[[Scale-free networks]]


See also:

#[[Adventure Economy]] ; [[Center for Adventure Economics]]
#[[Inclusive Wealth - Metric]]

==Companies==

#[[Spigit]]




==Well-Being Metrics==

For monitoring ecological/economic/human wellbeing progress, i.e. [[Alternative Measures of Human Well-Being]]:


#[[Inclusive Wealth - Metric]]
#[[Global Reporting Initiative]]
#[[Gross National Happiness]]
#[[Human Development Index]]
#[[Happy Planet Index]]
#[[Genuine Progress Indicator]]
#[[Continuum Development Index]]

==Other Metrics==

#[[Customer Network Value]]
#The [[Ecological Footprint]] is a data-driven metric that tells us how close we are to the goal of sustainable living.
#[[Gini Coefficient]]: measures inequality
#[[Systems Energy Assessment]], measures total energy use of businesses and other systems

=Discussion=

Umair Haque:

"Today, new reformers can kickstart radical macro institutional innovation. And It's not just for policy makers. In the 21st century, governance is no longer just about governments. What's different, now, is that smart entrepreneurs, investors, and companies can DIY it. Here are four areas where it's needed most, fastest:

'''New measures of national income'''. GDP is outdated; inaccurate, invalid, and unreliable. Better measures of national income that count real costs (like pollution) and benefits (like health) are what will shape better behavior from organizations and markets.

'''Measures of well-being'''. GDP is a measure of income. What's missing from that picture? Well-being, of course. More income doesn't automatically make everyone better off all the time, in the same ways. Without measures of well being to live up to, no better behavior is likely to ever flow from organizations and markets.

'''New currencies'''. A currency is an especially cruel a form of collective punishment, an implicit tax. In the aftermath of inevitable, regular-as-clockwork financial crisis, everyone holding a currency suffers, whether or not they had anything to do with said crisis. When currencies are created that are independent of countries and regions, people will the choice to escape the bone-headed organizations and markets within them. That, in turn, will set incentives for better behavior. Creating "product"? Stop. Create a currency instead.

'''New measures of returns'''. What counts as a "return," anyways? Increasingly, as we've recently discussed, bleeding edge investors are beginning to develop measures of returns to people, communities, and society. They provide a more nuanced, sophisticated picture of the value a firm has actually created — or a market allocated — than mere financial returns ("profit"). Better behavior from organizations and markets is ineluctably tied to better measurements of what is returned from them."
(http://blogs.hbr.org/haque/2010/06/four_economic_benchmarks_we_need.html)

=More Information=

See our tag: http://www.diigo.com/user/mbauwens/P2P-Metrics

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]