
'''* Article: “A peer-to-peer approach to energy production“, co-authored by Chris Giotitsas, Alex Pazaitis & Vasilis Kostakis. P2P Lab,'''

URL = http://www.p2plab.gr/en/archives/623 [http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf pdf]


=Abstract=

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"This paper strives to provide a theoretical study for energy production and distribution. We thus examine and discuss the evolution of energy systems technologies and their impact on the global socio-economic structure. We critically analyze the evolution of the energy production infrastructure and then review the renewable and decentralized energy production technologies, while focusing on the concept of microgrids. Ultimately, we propose an alternative model, inspired by the commons- oriented practices, currently observed in the production of information, that utilizes microgrids in order to create a peer-to-peer energy grid and then discuss the conditions necessary for the “energy commons” to emerge."


=Excerpt=


==Introduction==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"The advancement of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) have arguably provided the opportunity
for a “paradigm” shift in the way energy is produced
and distributed. An increasing number of people have
been experimenting through a variety of participatory
networks allowing them to manage, share and produce in
a collaborative manner. The foundations of a new social
order have been set, based on meaningful cooperation and
active participation [8,10,45], intensifying the intellectual
discussions that explore its applicable political and
economic range. The emergence of a new mode of social
production, named commons-based peer production
(CBPP), has signified an alternative way to create
information, i.e., software, design, culture and content
[10]. In the CBPP, openness and collaboration are
embraced to create common value. Prominent examples of
this new mode of production are the Free/Open Source
Software (FOSS) projects, the free encyclopedia Wikipedia,
but also open hardware projects like the Open Source
Ecology or the Wikispeed car. People have been exploiting
these interconnected spaces to actively shape and reproduce
technological advancements according to their
needs, in a paradigm where profit, power and control
seem to deteriorate in significance in the shade of values
like openness, sharing, cooperation and participatory
production.

Growing concern about global environmental and social
issues has stimulated a pursuit of a more sustainable
approach of how energy is being produced, valued and
consumed and more environmentally friendly, socially
responsible innovations have been gaining ground. Yet the
transition to a distributed, recourse-efficient approach in
the energy sector seems to be stalled by the still prevalent
logic of the past [65]. Following this logic, some of the most
promising technologies are pushed into the wealthcreating
centrally controlled pit of industrial production
and large solar energy fields are created in the desert and
big wind farms are set up, having a negative impact on the
environment instead. A revolutionary alternative of a
decentralized, smart energy grid where producers and
consumers merge via small-scale energy production is
necessitated, not only for the feasibility of the CBPP model,
but more importantly for the formation of a more feasible,
sustainable future of human societies.

This paper is using the experience gained by the CBPP as
a point of departure to explore its potential within the
energy sector, mainly focusing on electricity production
and distribution, valorizing practical evidence from the
implementation of existent microgrod projects (a form of
decentralized, small-scale energy production). The focus on
the electricity sector is not only based on the practices
documented, but more importantly in an attempt to
develop a socio-economic approach, emerging from a significant
milestone in the evolution of the energy sector,
energy transmission in the form of electricity. A revolution
closely bound with some of the main dynamics of the
current dominant mode of production and growth, which is
large scale manufacturing and domestic consumption.
Other energy sectors in society, such as transportation,
should not be underestimated however. This paper is only
narrowing down to this specific sector in order to emphasize
its main approach to the theoretical discussion towards
a commons-based energy production and management as
opposed to the centralized energy production and transmission
in the form of commodity or service, in the sense of
contrasting the centralized, one-to-many structure to a P2P
(peer-to-peer) network. The characteristics determining
the operation of highly decentralized energy networks (like
the transportation system), which transcend the operational
and productive range of society exceed the limitations
of the current study.

Hence, our aim is to develop a critical look on the evolution
of the energy system until today and then attempt to
tentatively propose a theoretical application of the mode of
production currently utilized in the information commons
towards the creation of energy commons. Specifically, the
structure of the paper is as follows: First the methodological
approach is explained. Then a historical account is
provided of how energy has evolved and how the industry
took shape till the current ICT-driven techno-economic
paradigm. Further, we provide the context in which our
theoretical proposal takes place, so renewable and
distributed energy are explained. Next, the P2P networks
and the CBPP are introduced with a description of the
proposed model to follow. Then, we discuss the possibilities
of a different energy paradigm. Last, the concluding
remarks of the paper are presented."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)



==Conclusion==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"The point this paper is trying to convey is that in order
for energy to evolve from being a commodity into a commons
we cannot simply rest until the technological level
for energy production reaches a threshold where it is cheap
enough for this to be possible. The conditions arguably
need to be created and this study attempts to contribute to
such a discussion. Research towards technology that provides
everyone free access to the means for cheap, clean
energy should be promoted instead of market-based
mechanisms that treat energy as a means for profitmaking.

Distributed, renewable energy can have negative
effects both on a social and an environmental level, such as
dispossession of rural communities or harming wildlife,
when capital accumulation is the ultimate goal. Further, it
is apparent that technology cannot be expected to solve all
any dimensions of the energy problem on its own. So for a
realistic application of this model in a grand scale, there
needs to be a shift in the entire socio-economic context.
Meaning a shift towards a new and sustainable mode of
production and consumption. CBPP, in conjunction with the
emerging desktop manufacturing technologies, arguably
presents a compelling alternative that could enable communities
to strive for change. Moreover, societies need to
shed their inherent indifference for the consequences of
the mass consumerism that was endorsed by the ever
expanding, fossil fuel powered system and embrace an
environmentally conscious lifestyle, in tune with the capacities
of the planet."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


==Historical Transitions in Energy Production==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"Energy flows define and determine life itself, so it makes
sense that they also influence human societies greatly. For
the largest part of the human species' history, energy surpluses
were minimal. According to Ref. [75] approximately
250,000 years ago began what could be described as the
first energy era, with two consecutive transitions to follow
and the last one still running its course. During that first
era, energy transformed from the simple process of
metabolizing food procured with foraging, to the utilization
of domesticated animals and a scarce use of fire. This shift
from foraging to cultivation assisted with energy harnessed
from animals could increase productivity in agriculture and
transportation up to 15 times to that of a farmer [74]. Innovations
like the wheel, metallurgy, the plough and the
C. Giotitsas et al. / Technology in Society 42 (2015) 28e38 29
sail increased efficiency [44]. Water contraptions were also
utilized to provide energy but it was not until the next
transition that they became prominent [75].

The second transition commences in the Middle Ages
and extends to the early modern ages, with the increasing
use of wind and water converters but also with more effi-
cient man-powered machines [75]. First was the vertical
waterwheel, which had been around for a long time but
was now widely utilized [66]. Innovations like the cam and
crankshaft offered the opportunity for more advanced hydropower
applications [58] and watermills spread all over
Europe, reaching culmination with large mills like Arkwright's
in the 1770s. Then wind powered devices
appeared, first post mills for water pumping and grain
milling and after, larger more advanced tower mills [31].

Sail ships became more efficient at utilizing wind, thus
enabling a boom of commerce and the transfer of these
innovations beyond Europe [75]. Coal was introduced in
energy production with Newcomen's steam engine, which
was mainly used to pump water from coal mines, and later
made efficient through Watt's improvements [32]. After
Watt's patent expired, steam engines were developed
greatly powering, along with further innovations in traditional
energy sources like the water turbine and improved
windmills, the industrial revolution [74]. The increasing
demand for fossil fuels in energy production was solidified
by the replacement of coal with oil, as the internal combustion
engine emerged [6].

The third transition ... begins with the
invention and implementation of systems for the generation,
the distribution and the use of electricity. This transition
is what fuels, and one might say shapes, the capitalist
industrial production. By the beginning of the 1900s, the
electric system had reached its final state which is still
largely unchanged today. The reciprocal motion that powered
the inefficient engines up to this point with the
assistance of belts and shafts was no longer necessary.

Electric engines revolutionized not only industrial production
but also households since energy could now be
transferred [13]. Energy consumption skyrocketed, and
power plants became larger and more efficient. Huge hydroelectric
and nuclear plants appeared since electricity
could be transmitted over long distances. However by
2000, only 10% of all commercial energy supply came from
these sources, with the rest 90% provided by fossil fuels
[75]. Peak unit capacities have risen 15 million times in the
last 10,000 years, yet only people in affluent societies
(about 15% of the total population is 2000) have the opportunity
to enjoy (and take for granted) this much energy
surplus [75].

As was mentioned in the introduction, what all energy
production sources had in common was that it seemed
preferable, given the technological capabilities, to be centrally
produced, controlled, and distributed and in big
plants, in a paradigm formed by cheap fossil fuels [65]. In
fact, the reliance on fossil fuels is so great, that electricity
generation emits 26% of global greenhouse gas emissions
and 41% of all carbon dioxide [40]. Next we look into the
fossil-fuel driven energy production industry that, arguably,
shaped (and was shaped, in a dynamic relationship,
by) the capitalist mode of production."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


==Renewable energy and the distributed system==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"Next renewable energy sources are introduced and the
distributed mode of production is presented. Solar and
wind power, besides hydro, emerged as the most viable of
alternative sources. Solar energy technology had already
been utilized up this point by countries like Chile and India,
while wind energy was mostly harvested in Scandinavia,
Holland and the Soviet Union initially [57]. By the 1990s the
interest for all sorts of green, sustainable energy sources
was evident all over the world.

Currently almost 80% of the world energy is still provided
by fossil fuels while energy demand is increasing in
all regions of the world [40]. In the face of climate change,
environmental destruction and the rising costs for fossil
resources, societies are driven to adapt and achieve sustainability.
Further, a great percentage (more than 1.3
billion) of the world population still lacks access to electricity
at home [39]. Technologies like carbon capture do
alleviate some of the harmful effects on the environment
but, in essence, only pose a temporary solution since,
while it is not certain when the deposits will be exhausted,
fossil fuel extraction is becoming more expensive and
depletion is inevitable [38]. Renewable sources along with
high energy efficiency seem like a compelling alternative.

For the most part, these technologies have been
government-supported and are, considering the potential
payoffs, significantly underfunded [69]. Also, in spite of
the unfavorable conditions, fossil fuels are still cheaper but
it is expected that with further research on renewables
this condition will change [69]. According to [67];
renewable energy technologies can be divided into four
broad categories based on the availability status. These
are: 1) technologically mature with market penetration in
several countries: large and small hydro, woody biomass
combustion, geothermal, landfill gas, crystalline silicon
photovoltaic (PV) solar water heating, onshore wind, bioethanol
from sugars and starch; 2) technologically mature
but with small markets in less countries: municipal solid
waste-to-energy, anaerobic digestion, biodiesel, co-firing
of biomass, concentrating solar dishes and troughs, solarassisted
air conditioning, mini and micro-hydro and
offshore wind; 3) technologies that are being developed
and have been commercialized in a small-scale: thin-film
PV, concentrating PV, tidal range and currents, wave
power, biomass gasification and pyrolysis, bioethanol from
ligno-cellulose and solar thermal towers; and 4) still being
researched: organic and inorganic nanotechnology
C. Giotitsas et al. / Technology in Society 42 (2015) 28e38 31
solar cell, artificial photosynpaper, biological hydrogen
production involving biomass, algae and bacteria, biorefineries,
ocean thermal and saline gradients, and ocean
currents.

There is, undoubtedly, a lot of research being conducted
on these technologies. After their emergence in the 1970s,
these alternative energy sources were viewed as capable to
herald a new sustainable and democratized energy regime
that would be rid of the issues that plague the current one
(see Ref. [51]. However, with the passing of the years, and
especially after the liberalization of the energy market, we
can arguably witness a shift towards research for largescale
implementation of these technologies as result of
corporate interest for profits. By the 1990s big energy
companies and energy trading companies (such as Enron
with their speculation scandal) had been greatly “financialized”
and today major investment banks are also energy
traders leading to short term investments in renewable
technology companies for speculative purposes. Thus
leaving the future of energy developments on the hands of
profit-maximizing financial speculators aiming towards
resource extraction [77]. So, instead of creating a new energy
regime, renewable energy sources are considered as
substitute for conventional ones in the same system [24],
leading to efforts for renewable energy production that are,
like their predecessors, detrimental to the environment
(see Refs. [42,72] and may cause severe problems to local
communities (see Ref. [12]."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


== The decentralized system==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"Meanwhile, the emergence of another set of technologies
that has brought about a new technological revolution
[61], has also enabled the introduction of a different
model of energy production. Terms like ICT and the
“Internet of Things” signal the capacity for interconnectivity
of objects beyond computers in a network.

This has enabled a transition from the traditional socioeconomic
structures to networked-based ones driven by
information production [16]. Thus, due to the wide availability
and affordability of ICT, increasing cooperation is
possible in the social, political and productive aspects of
society [8,10]. Similarly other terms like “Smart Grid” have
emerged to describe the way ICT is revolutionizing the
way energy is produced and distributed. This term entails
several applications like the monitoring and automation of
energy distribution systems, the intelligent monitoring of
the high voltage network, the usage of smart meters that
provide real-time data and other innovations that can
improve the efficiency of the centralized system discussed
above [56].

But, these technologies, along with the deregulation of
the energy industry [37], have also facilitated the promotion
of a different kind of energy system, the distributed
one. There are several definitions of what constitutes a
distributed generation (DG) network, depending on issues
like the purpose; the location; the rating of distributed
generation; the power delivery area; the technology; the
environmental impact; the mode of operation; the
ownership, and the penetration of distributed generation
[2]. A broad definition would entail a small source of
electric power generation separate from a large central
power source and placed close to the load that is usually
comprised of biomass based generators, combustion turbines,
solar power and PV systems, fuel cells, wind turbines,
micro-turbines, engines/generator sets, small hydro plants,
and storage technologies and can be either connected to
the grid or independent [20].

For the premise of this paper, renewable energy technology
and DG technology are viewed as invariably connected,
since DG through conventional means can, like
centralized production, have a detrimental effect on the
environment [73] and cannot offer long term sustainability
and autonomy. Further, the same can be said for renewable
energy when implemented according to the old paradigm.
Out of all the distributed energy structures we are focusing
on that of the “microgrids”, as modules for the formation of
a large smart grid. A microgrid is a network, in essence a
smaller version of the smart grid that was previously
described, of small-scale energy generation units [53].
Microgrids can function autonomously (islanded) or connected
to a larger grid. 


In this context, DG in microgrids has
several advantages:
 
Microgrids can be installed in remote areas with much
less cost than building infrastructure to connect them to
the central grid, they offer more reliability through the
diversification of energy sources but also are more
economically viable due to reduced transmission and
distribution costs [62,70].
 
They have the potential to greatly reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, but also health hazards tied to high
voltage power lines [3].

They improve energy efficiency through cogeneration,
meaning the utilization of the heat generated from
localized electricity production instead of doing it
separately [81].
 
Their capacity to operate autonomously, provides security
against failures of the main grid.

A better insight on the potential of microgrids for a
revolutionary distributed network, albeit in a rural environment,
as well as its feasibility in our context is provided
by the installation in Kythnos, a small Greek island in the
Aegean see, one of the several islands outside the main
national electricity grid. Designed and installed in 2001 by
the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) and the
Centre for Renewable Energy Sources and Saving, 4 km
away from the nearest medium voltage line, the facility
consists provides power for 12 houses [64], having as a goal
to be entirely supplied by solar energy produced by the PV
or stored and the diesel generator to be used only as a backup.

Intelligent load control systems are implemented in
each house to measure voltage, current and frequency and
coordinate remotely power line communication load
switches [78]. The monitoring and communication hardware
of the microgrid is able to detect component malfunctions,
enhances the performance and safety of the
power supply and collects performance data. This
particular element is one that is of significant interest
within the context of the study, providing a good example
of a self-sufficient, cost reducing and environmentally
sustainable system, implementing a distributed management
system, involving each house as a node providing
information for successful coordination, performance
optimization and network safety.

Another illustrative project for this paper's premise is
the ESUSCON (Electrificacion Sustentable Condor) micro-grid that was developed for Huatacondo, a small village at
the foothills of the Andes in Chile [50]. A central Energy
Management System (EMS) manages the components and
sends signals for optimizing their operation according to
load and resources forecasts [4]. Consumption data are
gathered and sent back to the EMS through smart meters.
For the communication between devices, the microgrid
uses a SCADA system (Supervisory Control And Data
Acquisition). Traditionally, SCADA systems gather data,
monitor and control equipment. In order to ensure the long
term success and sustainability of the project, the ESUSCON
team integrated a social aspect into their SCADA in order to
enable the community (who lacks technical expertise) to
perform the management and maintenance of the microgrid,
monitor consumption and generation, and engage in
decision making processes [60]. So, by acknowledging the
ideas and criticism of the people in the area, organizing
workshops and other educational activities and promoting
engagement in the operation and maintenance of the system
this social SCADA system is an important tool for the
adaptability of the microgrid [4], illustrating that through
participatory procedures, discussion and knowledge diffusion
it is possible for a community to produce and manage a
common energy pool, while maintaining the infrastructure
to do so. In the next chapter the proposed model will be
presented after a brief discussion about the commons and
the CBPP."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


==The [[Peer-to-Peer Energy Grid]]==

Giotitsas, Pazaitis & Kostakis:

"There is a general lack of extensive research on the
subject of P2P infrastructure implementation on energy
production. Ref. [5] suggests the use of P2P networks in
order for peers (assuming they are both produces and
consumers) to easily buy or sell, in this case, hydrogen. Ref.
[11] propose the implementation of different types of P2P
architectures in power grids and discuss their general advantages
and disadvantages. Our theoretical microgrid,
being a P2P network, can operate without a central control
node and the loss of any of its modules will not result in the
collapse of the whole system. Thus, new units can be added
or old ones replaced without having to alter the control
system. Each energy consumer of the grid is also a producer.
This can be achieved by various forms of microgeneration,
but as was previously discussed, we focus on
renewable energy sources like PV, small wind turbines and
others. This, of course, depends on the available renewable
energy sources of each area. Production takes places within
the house or close by in order to reduce transmission losses
and possibly utilize cogeneration (see Ref. [81]. Further, the
houses can be retrofitted in order to become more energy
efficient [17]. When a producer has surplus power, it can be
stored using various methods [79] but, since this procedure
is still quite costly and the current technological level does
not offer completely efficient storage, losses will occur. The
excess power can be distributed amongst the peers of the
microgrid, in order to avoid having wasted energy. Now,
instead of attempting to employ complex algorithms and
technological equipment to negotiate prices (as is usually
the case for DG research projects) for the buying and selling
of energy, the system could be engineered to allocate
excess energy according to where it might be needed.

Creating, in essence, a common energy pool within the
microgrid.

As mentioned before, a microgrid can operate both
autonomously and as a part of a grid. A second P2P network
is proposed on another level. One comprised of microgrids
in that are in close proximity from one another (in the
context of urban landscapes). This larger network may obey
the same rules as its component networks. Excess energy
from each individual microgrid can be distributed in the
rest according to their needs, basically creating an even
greater common energy pool. Similarly, if for any reason
one the microgrids collapses it would not compromise the
operation of the whole system. If there is still an energy
surplus, then the network can sell it to the central utility
grid, if possible (Fig. 1). The funds could be diverted to the
maintenance of the connectivity among the peers. There
appear to be two levels of common ownership possible.
One is that of the infrastructure for energy production (PV,
wind turbines, meters) and second is that of the energy
itself. So in our case, we are discussing the latter. Each
producer-consumer is able to join or leave the grid at will,
though within the grid the collective behavior is defined by
the community itself. Thus, the specific rules that will
define the form and the fine-tuning of the microgrid will be
shaped according to the goals and the desires of the
“commoners”. The main difference between information
and energy is that the former is abundant in that it can be
reproduced in nearly zero marginal cost. So peer produced
information (like FOSS) can be distributed freely to anyone,
whether they contribute to its creation on not, forming a
true information commons. Energy, on the other hand,
might be abundant (solar energy for instance) but it is not
possible, at least for the time being, to efficiently harness,
store and transmit it. Therefore, energy produced in our
model might be considered a commons only for those
participating in the production.

Since there is no research conducted to provide hard
data regarding the feasibility of this model, interviews
were conducted with four energy grid experts and a P2Poriented
hacktivist in order to obtain feedback regarding
the matter. These semi-structured interviews were guided
by the following questions: How are new technologies
revolutionizing the energy system? What role could the
CBPP and open technologies acquire in this context? Do
they think this proposed model is possible? If not, what
would they suggest could make it possible? What advantages
and disadvantages can they locate on the theoretical
model? What is your view on the idea of
decommodification of energy and the establishment of
energy commons? Based on the combined feedback from
the interviewees the following remarks can be made.

Regarding the theoretical model all interviewees feel that
it is consistent with the current trends for distributed
energy and they agree that, technically speaking, it is
entirely possible, with the technology necessary fully
developed and new options available in the near-term.
Open technologies can be implemented in the ICT
aspect of the microgrid but also, to some degree, on the
production itself thus reducing costs and providing
modularity and flexibility. Economically and logistically
the model does present challenges. Lack of research on
the specific model is mostly attributed to the focus of the
market demand on the dominant model. They point out
however, that this model presents similarities to multiagent
microgrids. Though, besides the structural differences,
what this model presents is a different socioeconomic
approach.


The following advantages have been noted about the
model:

1. It decommodifies energy, i.e., it removes the effect of
speculation through market mechanisms and eliminates
the economic-political power coming from centralized,
private production and management of an important
resource for society.

2. Small-scale producers/consumers develop an environmental
conscience due to the fact that they experience
first-hand the energy production process with its limitations
and side-effects.

3. It offers far greater resilience and security than the
current centralized system since the collapse of one of its
components does not influence the entire network.
4. It minimizes energy losses and the use of methods that
are harmful for the environment and it promotes
sustainability.

5. New technological options are being made available in
energy production and storage that could diversify
possible solutions for different geographic locations, but
also reduce the costs.


There are certainly challenges to this model according to
the interviewees. These are summarized as follows:

1. The main disadvantage is the high-cost investment,
especially in the case where only renewable sources are
used for production (for instance avoiding to use a diesel
generator). In this case the cost for energy storage, since
renewables cannot produce constantly, can be very high
(at least for the time being).

2. Another weakness is the relative inefficiency of smallscale
production in comparison with large-scale.
Although the interviewees agree that this inefficiency
is partly covered by the smaller loses due to the near
distance consumption compared to the great losses in
large distances. This difference is difficult to measure
without any hard data.

3. Another limitation of this model is its inability to include
technologies that are not possible to be deployed in
small scale. Hunting mentions ocean thermal energy
conversion, which despite being a technology with
many advantages and is actually carbon-negative, has
been shunned by renewable energy activists because it
does not fit the grass-roots alternative energy rhetoric.

4. They also point out that while this model would be
suitable for a suburban landscape, it could present a
difficult deployment in a dense urban space whose energy
needs are far greater and the capacity for renewable
energy production is limited, though this could potentially
be weighted out by more efficient use of energy
and space due to proximity.

5. Despite the deregulation in the energy industry, there is
not a clear legal framework or incentives that can facilitate
such a model (for barriers see also [9]). Further,
energy is highly “political”, thus there are parties that
oppose such attempts for a different paradigm."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


==Towards [[Global Energy Commons]] ?==

"Ref. [46] propose four different possible outcomes for
these social struggles over the P2P infrastructures, stemming
from the combinations of whether control will be
central or distributed along with whether the goal will be
the expansion of capital or the benefit of the commons. On
the one side, there can be found a new form of capitalism.
One adapted to the new techno-economic paradigm
brought forth by ICT [61]. This distributed capitalism takes
advantage of P2P infrastructures in order to exact profits
and ensure its continued survival. On the other side, we
witness the new commons-oriented practices, also made
possible by the same infrastructures. Within this framework,
our model falls into the distributed control of
commons-oriented P2P infrastructures. That of “resilient
communities” according to [46]. These communities,
emerging around the world, are poised against capitalist
growth and strive for sustainability, energy efficiency and
environmental awareness [49]. Movements like the Transition
Network are akin to the presented model in this
paper as they strive for a holistic shift from today's unsustainable
consumer lifestyle.

For our “energy commons” to become a global reality,
such communities need to develop a conscience that will
accommodate such a leap. The energy system needs to
attain the traits that made the Internet (and the P2P
infrastructure in general) so innovative. A turn towards the
spirit of sustainability and cooperation promoted by CBBP
appears like a viable vehicle for change. The energy system
proposed in this paper anticipates a similar shift from
traditional industrial production of scale to small-scale,
local production of scope enabled by desktop
manufacturing technologies and CBPP [45]. So the model
would aim to cover not just the domestic consumption but
also energy for the production of goods. Energy that usually
is outsourced to the market of goods and consequently fed
by another energy production source. It could be argued
that the seeds for this change are currently emerging. As
was mentioned already, a step towards open hardware is
being taken. Open source technology enables the unrestricted
and free adoption and adjustment of hardware
designs according to one's resources and needs, thus promoting
knowledge diffusion, innovation and cooperation
[63]. There are several examples of open designs for energy
production infrastructure available. For instance, the Rural
Electrification Research Group of the NTUA has developed a
cost-effective and fairly easy to reproduce wind turbine
[48] and a pico-hydro turbine based on designs that were
already available on the Internet, while [14] make a
compelling case for the advantages of open source development
for PV."
(http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf)


=Reference=

* all numbered references are listed here at the bottom of http://p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/1-s2.0-S0160791X15000251-main.pdf


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]