====P2P Foundation Wiki Taxonomy Maintenance====
This article outlines short and long term goals with regards to changes or modifications to the wiki taxonomy.

Other pages that are related:
*[[P2P Foundation Wiki Taxonomy]] provides a general overview of the taxonomy
*[[Help:Using Categories]] provides documentation for editors wishing to make use of categories
*[[:Category:P2P Foundation]] is the top-level category for the site.  All categories in use should be made subcategories of this category

====Keep in Mind====
This document focuses on particular categories and actions needed to bring them into alignment with the [[P2P Foundation Wiki Taxonomy]] article.

The current direction is to maintain a low barrier to entry, which means providing an easy way for users to add categories to pages, and that limits the 

Simple is good.  It's important that users, especially new users, feel comfortable adding information and that they don't run into any big complexity issues.

====P2P Foundation Knowledge Commons as Primary Container for Article Subcategories====
These are now established and outlined in the [[P2P Foundation Wiki Taxonomy]] article, which is a resource of second resort for users inquiring into advanced category usage.  Additionally, highly specific instructions are included at [[Help:Using Categories]] for new editors.  

The core subcategories currently contained within the [[:Category:P2P Foundation Knowledge Commons]] are:

<categorytree mode=categories hideroot=on>P2P Foundation Knowledge Commons</categorytree>

====Outstanding Tasks for Categorization====
*Categorize  Michel Bauwens's ordered Book into the [[:Category:P2P Theory ]] 
*Categorize uncategorized pages into at least one of the sub-subcategories of the [[:Category:P2P Foundation Knowledge Commons]]
*Categorize pages with a country category.  See [[:Category:World]] for examples
*Move [[:Category:Individuals]] pages to [[:Category:Bios]] by applying the right category.  Then move the page itself by renaming it  with Firstname Lastname (instead of last first).  
**Do a search and merge duplicates along the way.
*Use a bot to change Peerproduction to Peer Production and the like throughout the site.

[[Category:P2P Foundation Wiki Administration]]