
=Description=

Case Study: : Ecosystem leadership with culture and nature in climate- vulnerable cities

Sara Silva et al. :

"The Philippines ranks number one in the world with the highest natural
disaster risk in the world according to the Global Disaster Risk Index in 2024.
It is a country repeatedly and increasingly experiencing impacts from severe
weather (typhoons, droughts, flooding, storm surge, etc). Green Releaf has
worked with communities in the frontlines of climate emergencies through
ecosystem regeneration labs and learning journeys which partners with
place-based organizations across government, civil society, and sustainable
businesses as co-hosts and co-facilitators. Pamumuno Lab by Green Releaf
Initiative worked with three typhoon-stricken cities in the Philippines — Tabuk,
Tacloban, and Cebu City - for ecosystem regeneration and climate resilience
in a two year learning journey. It has been working with food, farm, forest, and
marine ecosystem innovators in designing, prototyping, and testing the
scalability of their work in collaboration with others in ways that would help
scale their solutions up by influencing policy and integration into
development plans; wide by replicating solutions across multiplers; and more
importantly deep, ways that heal silos, divides, and mental models held in
systems.

One of the ways they did this is by using creative climate narratives and
indigenous values. “Pamumuno” means leadership and comes from the root
word “puno” which means tree. The organization collaborated with the Living
Story Landscapes in engaging arts and culture along with wisdom keepers and
climate scientists in documenting climate narratives that were aimed to
inform local development plans. Its collaboration with the University of the
Philippines has inspired the university to pursue loss and damage studies
bridging the arts and science."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)


=More information=

* Learn more about their work via livingstorylandscapes.com and greenreleaf.org

[[Category:Philippines]]

[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]