'''* Book: Panarchy. Political Theories of Non-Territorial States. Edited By Aviezer Tucker, Gian Piero de Bellis. Routledge, 2017'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/Panarchy-Political-Theories-of-Non-Territorial-States/Tucker-Bellis/p/book/9780815370598


=Description=

"Panarchy is a normative political meta-theory that advocates non-territorial states founded on actual social contracts that are explicitly negotiated and signed between states and their prospective citizens. The explicit social contract, or a constitution, sets the terms under which a state may use coercion against its citizens and the conditions under which the contract may be annulled, revised, rescinded, or otherwise exited from. Panarchy does not advocate any particular model of the state or social justice, but intends to encourage political variety, innovation, experimentation, and choice. With its emphasis on explicit social contracts, Panarchy offers an interesting variation on traditional social contract theories.

Today, Panarchist political thought is particularly relevant and interesting in the context of globalization, increased international migration, the weakening of national sovereignty, the rise of the internet "cloud" as a non-territorial locus of political and protopolitical social networks that are not geographic, the invention of cryptocurrencies that may replace national currencies, and the rise of urban centers where people of many different political identities live and work together.

This is the first volume to bring together key philosophically and politically interesting yet often overlooked Panarchist texts. From the first published translation of de Puydt seminal 1860 article to contemporary Silicon Valley political theory, the volume includes Panarchist texts from different eras, cultures and geographical regions. The amassed wealth of theoretical insight enables readers to compare different texts in this tradition of political thought and distinguish different streams and varieties within this political tradition, in comparison with Cosmopolitanism, Contractarianism, and Anarchism."

=Contents=

==Part 1: Classical Foundations==  

1. Panarchy Paul Emile de Puydt  

2. Panarchy: A forgotten Idea of 1860 Max Nettlau  

3. On the Production of Security Gustave de Molinari  

4. The Evenings of the rue Saint-Lazare, Eleventh Evening Gustave de Molinari  

5. The Cosmopolitan Union  

6. The Gospel of Panarchy John Zube  

7. Anarchy, Panarchy and Statism John Zube  

8. Panarchy - Described by the simple system of Aphthonius John Zube  


==Part 2: Contemporary Theory and Philosophy==  

9. A Foundation for Panarchy Michael Rozeff  

10. Why Government Should Be Voluntarily Chosen Michael Rozeff  

11. The Right to Walk Away Gene Callahan  

12.The unbundled state: Economic theory of non-territorial unbundling Trent J. MacDonald  

13. The Best States: Panarchy as an Anti-Utopia Aviezer Tucker  

14.  The Nakamoto Consensus: A Framework for Ending Bad Governance Michael Gibson  

15. The Great Thought Experiment Max Borders  


==Part 3: Historical Precedents==  

16.  Extraterritoriality Shih Shun Liu  

17. Non-Territorial Governance, Mankind's Forgotten Legacy Richard C.B. Johnsson  

18. Choose Your Own Nationality Yves Plasseraud  


==Part 4: Hybrid Non-territorial and Territorial Models==  

19. Virtual Cantons Roderick T. Long  

20. A Utopia? Government without Territorial Monopoly Bruno Frey  

21. Federalism and Non Territorial Minorities Dietmar Kneitschel

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]
[[Category:Governance]]