
Podcast via https://soundcloud.com/user-193856180/episode-006-pandora-thomas-building-the-garden-of-social-relationships

=Description=

"In this episode we talk about Social Permaculture and how to cultivate the ecosystem of social connections and potentials in a system. Pandora has done amazing work, notably using Permaculture as a tool for transitioning people coming out of prison back into society in an uplifting way."

=Bio of Interviewee=

"Pandora Thomas full biography

The earth is my employer

Pandora Thomas is a passionate global citizen who works as a caregiver, teacher, writer, designer and speaker. Her work emphasizes the benefits of applying ecological principles to social design.

She studied at Columbia and Tufts University and with several permaculture and ecological design programs.

Her writing includes a children’s book, various curricula and a manual entitled "Shades of Green" for individuals wanting to teach green building to youth.

She has keynoted and lectured both domestically and internationally on topics ranging from diversity, social justice, youth and women's leadership, social entrepreneurship permaculture and sustainability.

She has designed curriculum for and taught groups all over the world as diverse as Iraqi and Indonesian youth to men serving in San Quentin and men and women returning home from incarceration.

Her most recent projects include co-founding the Black Permaculture Network, working for 6 years with Toyota to design and serving as a coalition member of the Toyota Green Initiative, which supports African Americans in understanding the benefits of adopting sustainable lifestyles; co-designing, teaching with and directing Pathways to Resilience-a permaculture and social entrepreneur training program that worked with men and women returning home after incarceration, and co-founding Women Designing Resilience-a re-entry program for women returning home from prison.

She has studied four languages and lived and worked in over twelve countries and her other achievements include being featured in the films The Future of Energy and Inhabit, presenting at Tedx Denver and SF, and being awarded internships and fellowships to the Center for the Study of Human Rights at Columbia University, Green For All, the Bronx Zoo and the Applied Research Center.

When she is not working you can find her spending time with her beloved mother and cats or in the redwoods."

=More information=

Pandora's Link: www.pandorathomas.com

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]