
=Videos=

Jonahtan Latham:

It is a series of three talks titled, collectively: Natural Origin or Lab Escape? The Emergence of SARS-CoV-2.
 

The three talks were presented to the EAT online community on Jan 8th, Jan 15th and Jan 22nd, 2021. Each is now published on the Youtube channel of Independent Science News.
The three talks describe aspects of our current thinking on the origin of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the nature of the underlying political/economic forces attempting to influence public perception, especially of its origins.

These talks are designed for people new to the virus origins debate but also are designed to important new information to satisfy those who are already very familiar with the arguments and the evidence. 



==Lecture 1: Why Wuhan?==

Could SARS-CoV-2 have come from a lab?  As this first talk details, the evidence for a natural zoonotic origin was always weak. Interestingly, the case for a natural origin has become ever weaker as the pandemic has progressed. In stark contrast, the evidence base for a lab origin has grown steadily. At present, numerous lines of evidence, outlined in this first talk, point strongly to a lab escape. 
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UAIQ7hH5VKw&t=461s


==Lecture 2: The Mojiang Miners Passage Theory==

Dr Latham introduces the various lab origin theories for the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, the cause of the COVID19 pandemic. In order of appearance: 1) Sirotkin and Sirotkin, 2) Segreto and Deigin, and 3) the DRASTIC theory. Dr Latham then discusses the latest thinking on the Mojiang Miners Passage Theory. This theory originated from the observation that RaTG13 (the closest related viral sequence to SARS-CoV-2) was sampled in 2013 from a mine (the Mojiang mine) that had recently been the site of a disease outbreak. In that outbreak, six miners were hospitalized and three died;  each had COVID-19-like symptoms. The ill miners were diagnosed at the time as likely suffering from an unknown coronavirus and it is known they had been shovelling bat guano. It is known that serum, and possibly other tissue samples, from four of the hospitalized miners were transported at the time to the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) for testing. The Mojiang Miners Passage theory proposes that, by the time these patient samples arrived at the WIV, the original mine virus had evolved inside the miners to become a highly adapted human pathogen. According to the theory, it was this virus which subsequently escaped and caused the COVID19 pandemic.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=59cXOHj0On8&t=30s


==Lecture 3: The Pandemic Virus Industrial Complex==

The military has its academic industrial complex and so does virus medical research. The Pandemic Virus Industrial Complex (PVIC) is busy on many fronts, only one of which is trying to suppress discussion of the potential lab origins of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
In this video, Dr Jonathan Latham, PhD, shares insights into the functioning and organization of the various elements that constitute the PVIC. How do its academic, military, and commercial aspects interact? Who, if anyone, pulls the strings? What does it fear from the revelation of a lab leak?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mq9HFlpc2uA

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Webcasts]]
[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]