Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E80UzSX5idc

=Description=

Speaker(s): Professor Helmut K Anheier, Professor Mary Kaldor, Ahmed Naguib, Laurie Penny ; Chair: Catherine Fieschi

'''1. Morosopher:'''

"This is a panel discussion about the new political movements of the last couple of years, including Arab Spring and the Occupy movement, and how they reflect the current state of the global civil society. I think one of the panelists puts it well when he argues that what we’re witnessing here is the re-emergence of the individual activist from the shadow of established non-governmental organisations. Discussing are professors Helmut K. Anheier and Mary Kaldor, Egyptian activist Ahmed Naguib and British activist and journalist Laurie Penny. The panel was held on May 2, 2012 at the Hong Kong Theatre in London."


'''2. From the organizers:'''

"As part of the launch of the tenth anniversary edition of the Global Civil Society yearbook, two of the founding editors will discuss the radicalisation of civil society with Ahmed Naguib and Laurie Penny, and ask what is new about the current politics of squares.

Helmut K Anheier is dean at the Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, and one of the founding editors of the Global Civil Society yearbook.

Mary Kaldor is director of the Civil Society and Human Security Research Unit, LSE, and one of the founding editors of the Global Civil Society yearbook.

Ahmed Naguib is an activist and co-founder of the Council of the Trustees of the Revolution in Egypt, who mobilised a march to Tahrir on 28 January 2011.

Laurie Penny is a journalist and feminist activist, and has tweeted regularly from both the London and New York Occupy actions under the moniker @pennyred.

Catherine Fieschi is the director of Counterpoint, a research and advisory group that focuses on the cultural and social dynamics of risk. Prior to directing Counterpoint, Catherine led the London based think tank Demos (2005-2008)."


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]