
=Discussion=

Darren Allen:

"Where is quality? Freedom, beauty, morality, love, truth, life and God—quality—is ultimately neither in the objective things of the world, nor in the subjective inner self. Positioning them in either leads to moral, logical and intuitive absurdities. The self creates objectivity and subjectivity—creates the difference between me here and you there. This doesn’t mean that there isn’t really a difference between me and you—obviously there is—but that difference is self-made.

This, naturally, cannot be known through the self, it can only be lived, or experienced, by something else; something which is not self, or selfish. There is no way to arrive at this panjective something else, any more than I can arrive at the room I’m in. All that can be said to someone insane enough to ask how to get to where they already are, is don’t try to leave.

It is perfect futility looking for quality subjectively within or objectively without. The only way to experience quality is to let freedom, beauty, morality, love, truth, life and divinity be, when they are, and let confinement, ugliness, immorality, hate, falsehood, death and profanity be, when they are. This ‘letting be’ reveals quality as it is, instead of leaving it to get what you want or avoid what you don’t, which removes you from what is, diminishes quality and makes an idea or a replicable, manipulable thing of it. This doesn’t mean passively accepting the situation, it means acting from the truth of it."

(https://expressiveegg.substack.com/p/panjectivism?)


[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Cosmobiological]]