

=Typology=

Source: “The	Motivated	Brain:	Improving	Student	Engagement,	Attention	and	Perseverance”
Excerpted	from	Chapter	2.		

"The seven primary systems include our raw emotional feelings, our instinctual emotional
behaviors, and how our bodies move and react as each system is activated. They are not identical in their
size or range. They do not work completely independently of one another. Each of the seven basic
emotional systems can be located within every mammal’s brain.		In	the	same	anatomical	regions	below	
the	cortex	and	contain	the	same	neurochemical	controls.

Panksepp refers to the first four as the “blue-ribbon” core emotions. They are based on wellorganized, consistent patterns of behaviors when the corresponding brain region is stimulated. These are
inborn capacities of our brain. They are present at birth and are not dependent on experiences for
development.


'''* The “Blue Ribbon” Core Emotions'''

1. SEEKING--Expectancy. Stimulating the nucleus accumbens and the lateral hypothalamus, areas
associated with the SEEKING System, will generate an urge to seek, expect, investigate, and be
motivated. The specific neurotransmitters (or neuromodulators) associated with each emotion have
also been identified. Dopamine (DA) is one of the main brain chemicals released when we are
seeking, anticipating, and being motivated.

2. FEAR--Anxiety. When the amygdala and periaqueductal gray (PAG) areas of the brain are
stimulated, the “fight, flight, or freeze” reaction will quickly emerge. Depending on the degree of
the perceived threat, the response may range from cowering to running away in terror.

3. RAGE--Anger. When the medial area of the amygdala is stimulated, the animal will propel
himself or herself forward to fend off the offensive object, and snarl or bite.

4. LUST--Sexual excitement. This primary emotion is generated in the amygdala and
hypothalamus. When animals are in the throes of lust, they exhibit courting behaviors and 
eventually attempt to culminate in mating behaviors. The tension of this emotion can become
negative if satisfaction is elusive!


'''* Additional Primary Emotions'''

5. CARE--Nurturance. When this system is aroused, an animal has strong impulses to tenderly take
care of another. It is the source of our human emotion of love. This primary emotion is generated
in the anterior cingulate and is fueled by the neurotransmitters oxytocin, prolactin, and opioids.

6. PANIC/GRIEF--Sadness. This primary emotion is often triggered by separation distress. When
people and animals are enjoying secure affectionate bonds, they have a relaxed sense of
contentment. When separated from the comfort of a caregiver or experiencing psychological
abandonment, they will react with crying and sadness at the loss.

7. PLAY--Social joy. Playful and light-hearted movements and laughter characterize this primary
emotion. It is a friendly enjoyment of interaction with others."

(https://www.asdn.org/wp-content/uploads/1-Motivated-Brain-Excerpt-pgs.pdf)

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:P2P Ethics]]