
=Description=

A. Aneesh:

"Panoptic governance, in short, is governance by continuous surveillance. Foucault
borrows the concept of Panopticon from Jeremy Bentham’s eighteenth century
design of prison architecture in which all the cells, arranged in a circular fashion
around a central tower, were made visible from the tower top:

- ''By the effect of backlighting, one can observe from the tower, standing
precisely against the light, the small captive shadows in the cell of the
periphery. They are like so many cages, so many small theatres, in which each
actor is alone, perfectly individualized and constantly visible. The panoptic
mechanism…reverses the principle of the dungeon; or rather of its three
functions – to enclose, to deprive of light and to hide – it preserves only the
first and eliminates the other two. Full lighting and the eye of a supervisor
capture better than darkness, which ultimately protected. Visibility is a trap.''
(Foucault, 1979, p. 200-01).

Foucault uses the example of the Panopticon to highlight deeper transformations
in systems of governance in modern societies, reflected in the tendency to
surveillance. One of the major effects of the Panopticon was to “induce in the
inmate a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the automatic
functioning of power,” Foucault (1979, 201) further explains,

- In view of this, Bentham laid down the principle that power should be visible
and unverifiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the
tall outline of the central tower from which he is spied upon. Unverifiable: the
inmate must never know whether he is being looked at at any moment; but he
must be sure that he may always be so.

The principles of this system of governance, according to Foucault, have spread
throughout the social body with generalized disciplinary effects. A gradual
extension of such mechanisms to all social realms in the last three centuries have
resulted in what he calls the “disciplinary society” with the primacy of cellular
structures. Therefore, it is not surprising that “prisons resemble factories, schools,
barracks, hospitals, which all resemble prisons” (Foucault, 1979, p. 228). We can
easily extend his analysis of disciplinary effects of surveillance mechanisms to
contemporary life. The growing prevalence of video cameras in shops, stores, and 
workplaces, and their use for disciplining the traffic on the streets have the effects
of inducing in people “a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures
the automatic functioning of power.” These surveillance systems share many
features of the Panopticon, where the inmate is “totally seen, without ever seeing”
and at the other end of power relations (in the central tower) “one sees everything
without ever being seen” (Foucault, 1979, p. 202). In the contemporary world,
surveillance is exercised not merely through camera-like devices; it is also put
into effect through computer technologies that record the behavior of the user for
the same purpose. Combining imaging and tracking technologies with relatively
invisible practices of what is called dataveillance, computers seem to have
enhanced the power of surveillance.

Surveillance systems at the workplace, even more than earlier industrial
bureaucracies, implement the model of invisible authority and visible workers at
the workplace. The new information systems can invisibly translate, record, and
display the worker’s behavior, making it universally visible without the
managerial eye, which is now inscribed in the system itself. As Shoshana Zuboff
(Zuboff, 1988) points out, information technologies not only automate operations
(that is, replace the human body by technology to carry out similar processes);
they also informate operations, that is, they also generate information about such
operations (for example, by keeping a log of each and every step of a process).
The generation of information about work behavior and productivity has obvious
disciplinary effects on the worker. While the gaze of the information systems does
not pose an immediate threat of being rebuked or discovered, it is more universal
as it freezes all work activity for possible future scrutiny. Logs of labor make
escape a theoretical impossibility. For instance, to detect manufacturing defects
in products, “the same PC that is used to conduct the functional test also logs the
test result by product serial number and technician. These results are then logged
to a database, tracked over time and routinely analyzed to identify common
failures. Failures can be statistically linked to specific technicians....” (Quiggle,
1997, p. 194). Software systems have not only appropriated the function of failure
detection, which is no longer subject to managerial oversight; they have also
made it difficult for the worker to escape the organizational gaze. There is a
variety of enterprise-level software systems (e.g., LittleBrother), for example, that
keep an ever-watchful eye on employees’ internet behavior, offering real-time
monitoring in addition to generating customized reports automatically. Similarly,
there are also small hardware devices that carry out similar surveillance functions.
KeyKatcher, a maker of a small keystroke logger that records employees’
keystrokes for scrutiny, advises employers to “use the KEYKatcher to monitor
employee computer usage compliance. Employees will spend less time browsing
the internet and sending e-mails if they are being monitored” (KEYKatcher,
2001).

Managerial enterprise is clearly related to the exercise of control through the
watch or the look, i.e., making the worker, and the work performed, more visible
for the managerial eye. 


One of the early management pioneers and successful 
managers Robert Owen (1771-1858) described his introduction to managing
workers as follows:

- I looked very wisely at the men in their different departments, although I
really knew nothing. But by intensely observing everything, I maintained
order and regularity throughout the establishment, which proceeded under the
circumstances far better than I had anticipated (Owen, 1857, p. 31-32).
The phenomenon of the look is crucial to the exercise of managerial authority.
Phenomenogically, Sartre (Sartre, 1966) has described the “look” as an attempt
to capture the freedom of the other. Being watched or being visible limits the
possibility of different modes of being to a frame of reference established through
existing power relations. Foucault’s (1979) concept of the “gaze” carries similar
import. The look or gaze employed in surveillance systems is an instrumentally
interested look. It is not only the responsibility of authority to look at the worker,
but also the responsibility of the worker to keep themselves in a position from
where they can be easily looked at. The panoptic look does not take place behind
the back of social language; it carries defined expectations; scales against which
one will be, and is being, judged. The look distinguishes good from bad;
therefore, it is important not only for punishment but also for reward. It is
important, therefore, for the employees to be visible, especially when they are
performing well, as there seems to be less possibility of good work being noticed
than bad work going unnoticed. Visibility thus emerges as an intrinsic aspect of
panoptic governance.

Both bureaucratic and panoptic forms of power derive their efficacy by what
Weber would call formal rationality; that is, they transform certain “formal”
aspects of governance whereby power no longer flows from persons; it is more
and more embedded in rules, positions, architectures and devices. Algocratic
governance also uses formal rationality, or rather, pure reason of symbolic logic,
to produce another set of effects. It is the third mode of organizational
governance. While bureaucracy signified the rule of office and the Panopticon
symbolized the rule of gaze, algocracy exemplifies the rule of code."
(https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Governance]]