
= open data tool for European Union data

URL = http://parltrack.euwiki.org

=Description=

By stefan marsiske, developer:

"Parltrack [1] is free software that liberates a lot of hard to process
data (like PDFs, word docs, and HTML pages) as reusable open data and
presents this as a kind of dashboard for activists, providing fresh
and relevant data not only for the concerned but the curious citizen
as well. Even pros from the European Parliament have praised it.

I am the developer behind Parltrack, and I care and try to do a lot
about topics like privacy, net neutrality, copyright, open data, open
government, free software, and so on. Being also an activist got me
into trying to increase our efficiency of our work on the European
level. You could say that Parltrack is one of the collateral benefits
of ACTA."



=Discussion=

==Crowdfunding Appeal==

Stefan Mariske:

"Unfortunately building free infrastructure and defending it does not
pay as well as selling it. Thus I was quite a bit distracted recently
from tending to Parltrack. However the data liberated by Parltrack and
the current feature set are only the tip of a very exciting iceberg,
so to be able to continue the Parltrack development and to keep it
free I started a crowdfunding campaign[2] on Indiegogo which also
works for Europeans.

The campaign is now starting its last week and I must say, with all
the support I got from all my friends helping me with the campaign so
far and so many new friends made this an experience totally worth
it. Datalove is spreading everywhere!

Parltrack might not be the tool that I expect to ever attract lots of
users (bots much more), but the impact of those who do use it might be
quite significant. Activists all over Europe used the data provided by
Parltrack during the campaign against ACTA. Both french rights
organization La Quadrature du Net (who also donated very generously to
this campaign) operate their Political Memory[3] and the German
lobbyplag.eu[4] initiative conducts their impressive amendment
analysis based on the free data provided by Parltrack. And by the way
Parltrack also pops up prominently in search results, providing good
information also for the casual and interested citizen.

For us - who are deprived of huge industry budgets - there is a lot of
potential to be developed in the liberated data. However there is only
a week left in the campaign, and the final goal is still a long-shot -
but then already a few hundred people could make a huge difference.

Here is the main campaign page[2] if you would like to donate right
away. If you are interested in a few more details before donating, I
compiled some supporting material[5] for your convenience. All support
is much appreciated, and will be reciprocated with free software and
open data!"


=More Information=

==References==

[1] http://parltrack.euwiki.org
[2] http://igg.me/p/316104/x/2150548
[3] http://memopol.lqdn.fr
[4] http://lobbyplag.eu
[5] http://www.ctrlc.hu/~stef/blog/posts/Parltrack_campaign_so_far.html

[[Category:Open Data]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Free Software]]