
'''= Partizaning (v): public art practices which strategically challenge, shape, and reinvent urban and social realities.'''

URL = http://eng.partizaning.org/

=Description=

'Throughout the 20th century, artistic movements have sought to challenge and break from traditional notions of art. This constant blurring of boundaries now means that any act or work done by an artist may be regarded as an object of art. Today, the distinction between art and non-art is almost impossible to make, and any classification is subjective.

Since the 1920s, radical artistic experiments have sought to destroy the boundaries between art and everyday life. Old industrial buildings, city streets, the Internet and mass media are increasingly replacing museums and galleries as the ideal forums and exhibition venues for modern art.

Today's activist urban residents do not think of art a distinct system. They use the language of art as a tool to challenge and change their daily reality: from DIY urban repair to struggling for new forms of state representation.

Unsanctioned interventions and interactions in our urban environments, combined with mass media connectivity, have become effective transformative tactics for a new, alternative vision for the future.

Partizaning is not just the name of our website. It is also a term to define a new phenomenon and strategy at the intersection of street art and social activism. We devised this term in Russia, where we demonstrate in a revolutionary tradition how self-motivated, unauthorized statements and unsolicited action can become key drivers of social and cultural change.

Our goal is to reflect and promote the idea of art-based DIY activism aimed at rethinking, restructuring and improving urban environments and communities."
(http://eng.partizaning.org/?page_id=2)

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Movements]]