
= also called [[Parecon]]

URL = https://participatoryeconomy.org/

=Description=

Via democraticplanning.com :

"A Participatory Economy (also known as [[Parecon]]) is a model for a post-capitalist economy rooted in libertarian socialism. It was first developed by Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel. In a Participatory Economy, productive resources are socially owned. Every workplace is self-managed by its workers, where every worker has one vote in their workers council, the highest decision-making body of the workplace. Worker councils are members of federations in their industry. In the workplace constitution, co-workers decide on how they wish to: a) allocate income between themselves, taking into account any differences in efforts or sacrifices, and b) combine tasks into jobs with a fair balance of empowering and fulfilling work so that everyone has the confidence and knowledge needed to participate in workplace self-governance.

Every household is a member of their neighbourhood consumer council for decisions around collective consumption where they live and where each member has one vote. Neighbourhood consumer councils are members of larger geographical regional federations where they send rotated and recallable delegates to make decisions around consumption which affect larger groups of the population.

Every year, these worker and neighbourhood councils, and their federations, take part in a decentralised annual planning procedure. Each worker and consumer council submits and refines their own self-activity proposals of what they intend to produce or consume for the year ahead. This happens in an iterative process where prices are updated over a series of rounds until a democratically accepted plan is reached to start the year. The plan is adjusted during the year. Longer-term participatory investment and development plans also take place, which more prominently feature the national industry and consumer federations."

(https://www.democratic-planning.com/info/models/)


=Directory=

Other models of [[Democratic Economic Planning]]:

# [[Cybersocialism (Cockshott/Cottrell)
# [[Amazon Socialism (Saros)
# [[Negotiated Coordination (Devine)
# [[Multilevel Democratic Iterative Coordination (Laibman)
# [[Half-Earth Socialism (Vettese/Pendergrass)
# [[Commonism (Sutterlütti/Meretz)
# [[Labor Time Calculation]] (Group of International Communists)


[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Movements]]