

URL = http://partidodelfuturo.net/ ; http://partidox.org/


=Definition=

"The X Party (El Partido X), also known as the Future Party, is a political party appeared publicly in early 2013 . It was submitted by online 8 January 2013 through his Twitter account (Partido_X), but the party had brewing and a year ago by a group of between 70 to 90 people close to 15M and movement of the culture and free software . This party advocates wikigobierno , the referenda , the popular legislative initiatives , the direct participation of citizens in the drafting of laws , the transparency and the use of the Internet as a tool. summarize their program in the phrase ” democracy, period “."
(http://johnpostill.com/2013/01/09/spains-partido-x-a-new-political-party-steeped-in-digital-culture/)

=Description=

"The X Party, the Party of the Future, is the party that has already won in the future.

The X Party is an unknown. Is the party that wins because it implements the program that allows a true democracy to be established, the one people can use to defend their interests.

The X Party, the Party of the Future enters parliament, opens its doors and returns sovereign power to the people through the implementation of its entire program: Democracy Full Stop.

In the future, every citizen has the possibility to improve and vote on laws that affect them or propose laws through popular legislative initiatives or to improve and vote those that affect them directly via binding referendums.

Laws are made online or through permanent spaces in public institutions (post offices, town halls, etc.), in the view of everyone, and everyone can contribute without being a multinational corporation, as has long been done in Porto Alegre, since 2003, or in Iceland with the recent 2011 Wikiconstitution.

Thus, the political elite as it was known in the old regime disappears, replaced by elected public employees who compile and run effective decisions directly expressed by the population.

These public workers have no say, though of course, as citizens they have the same right to propose and vote on all kind of laws. Just like everyone else.

In the future we are doing really well. Life is worth the while because it’s lived very comfortably: work is just and good because we have eliminated wasteful and unnecessary costs as those used to sustain the pathological rich, we have houses and our future citizens receive modern and adequate education and are healthy. Having eliminated these concerns that weighed down the progress of past generations, our people are dedicated to collaboratively taking up and practicing their skills and interests in a way that generates sustainable development that constantly increases general welfare.

The Future is here and it’s pretty good.
The X Party, the party that’s coming.

There is no better future than a good present."
(http://partidodelfuturo.net/en/el-partido/)


=Details=

Compiled by John Postill:

"History

It enrolled in the Register of Political Parties that of December 17, 2012, under the name of Party X, Party of the future.

Were presented with a video uploaded to YouTube on December 31, 2012 and a Twitter account in which was defined as “an operation to evict the Chamber citizen. Attentive on January 8. “Great excitement was generated and before the day of the presentation and had more than 3,000 followers on Twitter. Your site was announced days in advance but was not available until 10:00 on January 8. The X Party appeared through his Twitter account at 09:00 on January 8, 2013 and issued a series of tweets explaining his project.

    Congratulations! You have survived the end of the world!
    Although, in reality, this was not so difficult. What really has merit is to survive for so long to the crazy occurrences of those who govern us. In this country led by lunatics, the strange thing is that all remain alive.
    Enough! Now comes the real end of the world. The end of the world. It’s the beginning of ours. Let them where it hurts.
    If they are our problem, we will be yours.
    All hands: reboot the system. Day 8 is the beginning of its end.
    Party X

Ideology

As defined in its web, the political ideology of the Party X is logic. Its program contains only one point: Democracy and Point (popular legislative initiatives, referendums binding propositional, or aprobativos abrogative, Wikigobierno, actual voting and permanent transparency).

They are based on common principles that drive human initiatives Internet and the world as: free software , the open source , the free culture or free information . They claim that these principles are changing the way of doing politics, and do not correspond exactly to any ideology, doctrine or philosophy, but are rather a pragmatic methodology. A “how to” open, horizontal, transparent, cooperative and respectful, which is powerful enough to be applicable to almost any common issue.


Program

His program, called Democracy and Point, is based on four mechanisms to establish a “true democracy” where citizens have control over what is legislated and executed. The mechanisms proposed are :
Referendum mandatory and binding

Consultations to validate all structural laws, regardless of their origin (proposed by citizens or legislators). The referendum is to be binding. You can be proactive, or abrogative approbative.

    Binding on it because what is decided will be mandatory.
    Through purposeful because he may propose new laws.
    Abrogative it may repeal laws of equal or lower rank than the proposals.
    And because a referendum approbative laws may be adopted by parliament arriving participatory way, as the popular legislative initiatives (ILP) or legislative .

or drafting legislation WikiGobierno participatory and transparent
See also: Icelandic Revolution .

The laws WikiLegislaciones are constructed collaboratively and transparently between citizens and governments. An application example is the current Civil Marco Brazilian Internet where the government presents a draft which provides citizenship amended in several phases until a balanced legislation for all contributions. The WikiGobierno is the result of a democracy that includes expert participation of citizens to develop and manage the common affairs. The most developed examples WikiGobierno there in the world are:

    the Cabinet Digital Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil (in force since 2003)
    incorporating Better Reykjavik the government of the Icelandic capital.

The Cabinet Digital is a program of physical and digital participation. Citizenship proposed changes in public policies related to various programs. Moreover large open consultations on general issues and the community itself makes proposals and prioritize the best, which is that after the government implements.

Better Iceland and Better Reykjavic are two projects of participatory democracy and WikiGobierno. Both platforms have served to boost public participation in change processes and Iceland have been transposed by the new governments. Citizens incorporate ideas, discussed and prioritized. Spaces are enabled to participate in public institutions (post offices, libraries, town halls, etc..). The Best Party (party anomalous that now rules the Icelandic capital) drafted its election collecting 100 ideas prioritized by the community.
Voting rights real and permanent


Besides participating and monitoring throughout the entire design process of law and public policy, are also demanding the right to vote on them for what they consider citizens who are affected or interested (in Spain not pass legislation, but it is some representatives elected every four years ). The proposals listed in section 2 of WikiGobierno include the ability and tools for citizens to exercise the vote in a continuous and permanent.

They argue that, as voter registration in Spain is about 35 million voters and the Congress of Deputies has 350 deputies each seat is equivalent to 100,000 votes."
(http://johnpostill.com/2013/01/09/spains-partido-x-a-new-political-party-steeped-in-digital-culture/)



=Discussion=

==Comparing Partido X with Podemos==

From an interview of [[Francisco Jurado]] conducted by Carlos Delclos:

"* '''What was the Partido X experience like for you? Was it much different than Podemos?'''

In my opinion, Partido X had a clearer idea of what a “constituent” action was. When we were coming up with it, we thought of a tool that would change the rules of the game, as a step that was prior to changing political content and not procedural content. I still think this previous step is necessary, and that the campaigns and pedagogy of parties like Podemos should focus strongly on these procedural, systemic issues.

But Podemos was much better at using the indignados experience as a movement of overflow. Partied X tried to control its growth, even as it tried to maintain a certain anonymity, the sense that “we are no one”. This was why I left the project. I was convinced that we had to foment chaotic, overflowing, exponential growth, and that our anonymity had to stem from the fact that there were so many of us that we were impossible to identify.

Podemos understood and applied the logic of overflow, but it accompanied it with excessive representation in the figure of its leaders. Perhaps this makes sense at first, strategically. Leaders are more compatible with the media format. But in the long-term, it forces Podemos to suffer the fate of its leaders."
(https://roarmag.org/essays/podemos-spain-fransisco-jurado-interviw/)



=More Information=

#http://partidodelfuturo.net
#https://twitter.com/Partido_X
#https://www.facebook.com/PartidoXPartidodelFuturo
#http://www.youtube.com/user/ElPartidodelFuturo
#http://partidodelfuturo.tumblr.com

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Politics]]