'''* Report: Participatory guarantee systems (PGS) for consumers’ buying groups: A tool for farmer-citizen dialogues. By Laura van Oers and Jacob Smessaert. Copernicus Institute for Sustainable Development, Winter 2023'''

URL = https://unmaking.sites.uu.nl/wp-content/uploads/sites/446/2023/08/UNMAKING_PGS_Adviesrapport_Engels.pdf


=Description=

"This is an advisory report for farmer-citizen dialogues around the exploration of the potential for a participatory guarantee system (PGS) for consumers’ buying groups. It can guide participants in the process and the discussions.

A consumers’ buying group is a group of citizens who buy collectively from local farmers and producers. Vegetables, fruit, dairy, bread and other products are delivered weekly to a central location by producers, or collected by members of the consumers’ buying group. Here, the consumers’ buying group makes a choice of farmers or producers with which it does or does not enter into a relationship. A PGS can potentially help consumers’ buying groups establish concrete principles for sustainability which are adapted to local needs, opportunities and values. It allows producers to tell the story behind their products and production methods if they do not have an organic label. At the same time, it gives the consumers’ buying group insight into the sustainability of local producers."

(https://unmaking.sites.uu.nl/resources/resources-for-solidarity-payment-and-participatory-guarantee-systems/)


=Excerpt=

By Laura van Oers and Jacob Smessaert:

From the Introduction:

"This report explores the potential for a participatory guarantee system (PGS) for consumers’ buying groups in
the Netherlands. A consumers’ buying group is a group of citizens who buy collectively from local farmers
and producers. Vegetables, fruit, dairy, bread and other products are delivered weekly to a central location by
producers, or collected by members of the consumers’ buying group. Here, the consumers’ buying group
makes a choice of farmers or producers with which it does or does not enter into a relationship. This choice
may, for example, be made on the basis of quality requirements, practical principles or personal preferences.
A PGS can potentially help consumers’ buying groups establish concrete principles for sustainability which
are adapted to local needs, opportunities and values. IFOAM1
recognises PGS as a locally focused alternative
to organic certification schemes. It allows producers to tell the story behind their products and production
methods if they do not have an organic label (SKAL, Demeter, etc.). At the same time, it gives the
consumers’ buying group insight into the sustainability of local producers. PGS assumes active participation
of farmers and citizens in defining, measuring and evaluating sustainability and in developing appropriate
procedures to ensure and test sustainability principles. A PGS depends on trust between producers and
consumers of the consumers’ buying group and expects transparency, openness and cooperation from both
parties - for the purpose of development and mutual learning. Apart from abstract and political discussions on
sustainability, this in turn creates space for local and practice-based conversations. In this way, PGS can be
an important tool for farmer-citizen dialogues in transparent and sustainable local food chains.

In the PGS Field Lab, together with consumers’ buying group Goed Volk, we explored the social process for
setting up a PGS for local consumers’ buying groups that unites farmers and citizens. The PGS Field Lab
consisted of five sessions, each with its own focus. As PGS is relatively unknown in the Netherlands, the
experiences and lessons from this Field Lab could be valuable for various organisations in the Netherlands
that work around local and sustainable food systems. We also propose a pathway to guide new consumers’
buying groups in the Netherlands formulate and assure sustainability principles through a PGS."


From the Conclusion:

"In this report, we discussed the PGS Field Lab process, shared our impressions and drew several lessons for
conversations around local and sustainable food systems. We conclude that PGS can be an interesting tool for
farmer-citizen dialogues in the Netherlands. For us, PGS is not a linear path of 'agreement-check-evaluation'
but a round model in which dialogue is continuous and the sustainability vision can evolve and be kept in
focus together.

In the further development of PGS within the Dutch CSA network, we think it is important to think in
concrete terms about what exactly PGS is or what it can mean for consumers’ buying groups. Is the aim to
bring citizens closer to farmers and communities based on solidarity? Or, is it about autonomy from
supermarkets and industrial supply-chains and the elimination of third-party guarantees via certificates? Or is
PGS about creating new, ambitious criteria for defining and measuring sustainability? These things can of
course co-exist and partly overlap, but it we consider it important to think in what ways PGS best suits local
needs and realities."

(https://unmaking.sites.uu.nl/resources/resources-for-solidarity-payment-and-participatory-guarantee-systems/)


=Example=

* Goed Volk - Buying Group

"This chapter describes the Field Lab that took place in early 2022 with consumers’ buying group Goed Volk
in Lichtenvoorde. Loosely based on 'Theory U' (see Box 1), the Field Lab consisted of five sessions for both
consumers and producers. Various other regional producers with a focus on sustainability and strengthening
relationships with consumers were also present.

The sessions were designed and facilitated by Jacob Smessaert and Laura van Oers, researchers at Utrecht
University. The development of the sessions consisted of an iterative process in which outstanding questions
or wishes that followed from the session guided the design of the next session.

The Field Lab took place on a biweekly basis at Biotel Achterhoek in Lievelde, near Lichtenvoorde. Each 
session lasted about three hours and consisted of a) moments of self-reflection via 'personal diaries' in which
participants individually answered questions on paper (see Appendix A), b) presentations, c) discussions in
groups of various sizes, d) a freshly prepared meal and e) decisions or making follow-up agreements. Parts of
the sessions were recorded with an audio recorder for research purposes."

(https://unmaking.sites.uu.nl/resources/resources-for-solidarity-payment-and-participatory-guarantee-systems/)

[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Articles]]