
=Directory=

A selection from The [[Mesh]] directory at http://meshing.it/categories/6-government


* Americans Elect 2012

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/4440-Americans-Elect-2012

Americans Elect is the first-ever open nominating process. We're using the Internet to give every single voter—Democrat, Republican or independent—the power to nominate a presidential ticket in 2012. The people will choose the issues.


* Areyoulocal.co.uk

Areyoulocal.co.uk helps strengthen relationships among residents, groups, and businesses.


* Bright Neighbor

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/174-Bright-Neighbor

Bright Neighbor combines community involvement and social tools to help local governments and communities increase livability and sustainability. 


* City in Transition Initiative

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/3038-City-in-Transition-Initiative

The Cities in Transition Initiative is a three-year project designed to build a sustained network of leading policymakers and practitioners in five older industrial U.S. cities: Detroit and Flint, Michigan; Cleveland and Youngstown, Ohio


* City of Boston: Citizen Connect

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/3604-City-of-Boston-Citizen-Connect

The Citizens Connect mobile app helps residents make their neighborhoods even better. The app, which works on Android phones and iPhones, makes helps constituents report potholes, graffiti and other service issues. 


* [[City Camp]]

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/3018-CityCamp

CityCamp is an unconference focused on innovation for municipal governments and community organizations. As an unconference, content for CityCamp is not programmed for a passive audience. Instead, content is created and organized by participants


* [[CivicApps]].org

CivicApps.org aims to encourage every citizen to be an active participant in government by putting the data in their hands. The CivicApps.org site was developed to source, profile, and accelerate innovative ideas using Web and mobile technologies


* [[CIVICUS]]

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/58741-CIVICUS

[[World Alliance for Citizen Participation]] is an international alliance of members and partners which constitutes an influential network of organisations at the local, national, regional and international levels, and spans the spectrum of civil society. 


* [[Code for America]]

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/183-Code-for-America

Code for America helps city governments become more transparent, connected, and efficient by connecting web developers with people who deliver city services.


* Data.gov

Data.gov is a community that bridges policy makers, technologists, data owners, and citizens-each of us wants to get information to people who need to make decisions each day


* [[Google Apps for Government]]

Google Apps for Government lets agencies cut IT costs & empower employees. FISMA certification from the federal government attests to the security of your data. All these modern, web-based applications, just $50 per user per year. 
government 


* [[Gov 2.0 Radio]]

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/4632-Gov-2-0-Radio

Gov 2.0 Radio is where government and technology reformers come to talk


* [[Government 2.0]]

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/4653-Government2-0

Government 2.0 is a German government camp.


* [[Govfresh]]

Url = http://meshing.it/companies/58623-Govfresh

GovFresh works to inspire government-citizen collaboration and build a more engaged democracy. We feature Gov 2.0, open gov news, guides, TV, tech, people and official U.S. government feeds, all in one place.Gov 2.0 Radio


* GovLuv

URL = http://meshing.it/companies/58546-GovLuv

GovLuv is a website that connects government representatives and citizens using the magical power of Twitter.


* [[Livable Streets Initiative]]
 
URL = http://meshing.it/companies/220-Livable-Streets-Initiative-

The Livable Streets Initiative is an online community for people working to create sustainable cities through urban planning, design, and transportation policy. We provide free, open source, web-based, resources to citizens


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Policy]]