


=Text=

Gregg Lahood:

"I divide transpersonal psychology into three broad epochs, and while they all
overlap and have fuzzy borders three patterns can be teased out. 

'''Epoch one is the pretranspersonal movement''', sometimes called the ‘‘psychedelic revolution,’’
which was/is highly politically motivated. 

With roots in the early 1950s
and the Beat Generation (and earlier American Romanticism) this movement
gathered momentum throughout the 1960s and 1970s (peaking during the
Vietnam War and the civil strife occurring in the United States between 1963
and 1975 and becoming powerfully linked to the political/religious enactment
of an alternate spiritual counter-reality).

This grassroots movement intentionally hybridizes psychedelic states with
Eastern religious postulates (e.g., samadhi, satori, wu, dharmakaya, moksha,
satchitananda, etc.) and cosmic consciousness, which culminates in the
movement’s formalization a year after psychedelics are banned in the United
States. The transpersonal research of Abraham Maslow and Stanislav Grof are
seen as the seminal foundations of the formalized movement, and Grof becomes
the central activist over the next 10 years.

The following statement from Rick Fields’ study of how Buddhism infiltrated
the United States is an important window into this fascinating era:

Whatever else LSD became in time; at that moment it was the messenger
that led a fair number of people into the dazzling land of their own mind.
What had begun as the private discovery of a few intellectuals and experimenters
had spread in a flash, and for a split second of history it was as if the
veil had been rent and all the archetypes of the collective unconscious
sprang forth. More often than notFfor reasons no one could explainFthese
came in the guise of the gods and goddesses of the Hindu
pantheon . . . blue-hued baby Krishna standing on a glowing white lotus.
[1992:249]

As early as 1957, Gary Snyder, who was one of the counter culture’s favored
(American/Buddhist) poets, writes: 

Those who think a great deal about the wisdom traditions [perennial traditions],
have remarkable results when they take LSD. The Bhagavad-Gita,
the Hindu Mythologies, the Serpent Power, the Lankavatara Sutra, the
Upanishads, the Hevajra Tantra, the Mahanirvana Tantra, to name a few
texts, become, they say, finally clear to them. They often feel that they
must radically reorganize their lives to harmonize with such insights.
[1957:109]

Huxley’s charter for psychedelic mysticism or rather psychedelic perennialism
had taken root.


'''Epoch two, the neoperennial er'''a, roughly from 1977 to the mid-1990s was
dominated by the writings of Ken Wilber. Wilber’s work is widely acknowledged
as a vastly creative attempt to bring Western and Eastern philosophy,
science, mysticism, and culture into a single coherent model. Wilber’s accretions
to transpersonal psychology include a celebratory neoperennialism with
an evolutionary telos boasting an Orientalized nondual end-stateFone ‘‘always
already’’ all pervading universal truth applicable to all cultures and all persons
in all times. Wilber’s vision of perennialism during this epoch becomes
axiomatic to transpersonalism, and his voluminous writings canonical for his
many followers. However, his evolutionary account of perennialism and transpersonal
consciousness is met with serious criticism from many other voices
within the movement (Winkelman 1993; Heron 1998; Rothberg and Kelly 1998;
Ferrer 2002). Wilber jumps ship leaving the transpersonal movement to form
his own school.


==Epoch three: the participatory-turn.== 

"From the early 1990s beginning with
Richard Tarnas’s analysis of the epistemological consequences of Grof ’s psychedelic
research (1991) the participatory epoch begins. This represents a revisionist
impulse from within the movement, and here transpersonalism is re-booted
without recourse to the authority of its perennial fetish (indeed it is on a critique
of perennialism that later participatory theorists nourish themselves) (see Heron
1998; Ferrer 2002). For Heron and Ferrer, perennialism, that once authoritative
(but unquestioned) idol standing at the heart the transpersonal movement, has
become a Jonah (complex)Fto be thrown overboard. I quote Heron:
We cannot know from past forms of divine becoming what its innovative
future holds in store. The attempt to extract from the past a primordial tradition
of universal religious truth holding for all contexts in the future, is
vain denial of the inherent unpredictability of the divine womb of time."
[1998:12]


=Discussion=

Gregg Lahood:

Details and critique about the role of Jorge Ferrer in the participatory turn:


"Jorge Ferrer perhaps has done the most to unbind the transpersonal movement’s
adhesion to the perennial philosophy. After deconstructing the
perennial core and deftly exposing the bad seeds he concludes that a new image
for transpersonal theory was needed and suggests ‘‘An Ocean with Many
Shores’’ (2002:133). According to him, the common realm shared by religious
traditions is not some ultimate perennialized spiritual state, but rather ‘‘the
overcoming of self-centeredness’’ leading to ‘‘a liberation from corresponding
limiting perspectives’’ (144). This he calls the Ocean of Emancipation, entry
into this ocean may well be accompanied by one of a multiplicity of transpersonal
disclosures and transconceptual cognition.

These disclosures can be of ‘‘traditional spiritual shores’’ (e.g., Buddhist sunyata
or emptiness, Hindu samadhi or absorption, Christian apatheia, or
childlike trust in God) or they can disclose an entirely new and novel shore. He
writes for example: ‘‘The Ocean of Emancipation has many spiritual shores,
some of which are enacted by the world spiritual traditions, others of which . . .
may not have emerged yet’’ (Ferrer 2002:149).

Ferrer’s is a cogent, insightful, and liberating account; however, I suggest this
cartography, in its attempt to unbind the marriage of paradises in the U.S.
context, carries over from its predecessors a subtle form of boundary fetishism
and potentially a tacit appeal to religious purity, an appeal that hybridity theorists
would claim as untenable. The shores appear in Ferrer’s model as separate,
‘‘particular,’’ ‘‘incompatible,’’ ‘‘independent’’ (2002:146–148), shores seemingly
not in too much contact with each otherF‘‘Each spiritual shore is independent’’
(148).

Ferrer claims that the traditional ultimates found in Sufism, for example,
would be incompatible with the ultimates found in Buddhism (that may well
be so) (2002:47), and he uses the Dalai Lama’s authority and strict boundary
defining and essentializing claim that even other schools in Buddhism ‘‘do not
actually understand the doctrine of emptiness’’ (148) to make his
point. However the roots of both Tibetan Buddhism and Sufism are not so
clearly demarcated. According to Vincent Crapanzano, ‘‘Historically, the origins
of Sufism have been related to such diverse movements as Christianity,
Neo-Platonism, Gnosticism, Zoroastrianism, and Buddhism’’ (Crapanzano
1973:15). June Campbell suggests that Tibetan Buddhism itself is a
cultural me´lange blending polytheistic Iranian Mithraism, Indian Tantric
Buddhism, and ‘‘existent practices of shamanism’’ (1996:36). She reminds
us that Mircea Eliade had noted the ‘‘scarcely studied problem of the
similarities between the Tibetan and Iranian traditions’’ (Eliade 1964
cited Campbell 1996:39). She writes that ‘‘Tibetan Tantic Buddhism skilfully
mixes the philosophies Buddhism, with Tantric yoga and shamanism
of the ancient past’’ (44). The spirit-scapes that Sufism and Tibetan Buddhism
(and indeed all traditional spiritual shores) have nourished have emerged
not from pristine origins, but from religious, political, cultural, and human
blur.

When Ferrer describes the U.S. context as one in which a decline of Christianity
(theism) led many Westerners to an interest in indigenous and Eastern
traditions (nondualisms) he is actually talking about the process of hybridity:
Some have rejected their religious roots, travelled to India or South America
. . . Others have adopted some kind of spiritual eclecticism or syncretism,
importing and mixing from a variety of religious traditions those beliefs and
practices that they consider to be vital at certain times and for certain purposes.
[2002:xvii]

In disabling perennialism Ferrer must strongly affirm the ethnohistorical, the
social/cultural, and the relational matrix of transpersonal participatory consciousness,
thus, ‘‘participatory events that can emerge in the locus of an
individual, a relationship, a collective identity, or a place’’ (2002:3). However,
given that these are sites where hybridizations occur then not only are the
shores in his metaphor hybrid but they really ought to be mixing, mingling, and
miscegenating with each other. Ferrer’s Ocean of Many Shores, according
to the ideas presented here, should really be constituted of hybrid spiritscapes:
Oceans of many hybrids of hybrids.

Yet Ferrer tends to speak only of traditional shores and shores that have not
yet emerged (2002:149). I suggest this cartography seems to model a kind of
(cosmological) multiculturalism. To be sure, Ferrer’s diversity and pluralism is
more culture friendly than Wilber’s model, yet as Ian Clothier writes, there is a
misleading and tacit assumption that in the notion of a multicultural society
there is a kind of ‘‘forest of cultures’’ approach:

Over there is an Indian, to the right someone from Tonga, and standing next
to the German is someone from Nigeria. It is unnecessary to point any accusatory
fingers regarding this assumption, but important simply to state
that this vision is incomplete: in between the trees of the forest of cultures,
are the hybrid bushes of cultural pluralism. [2006:19]

Ferrer’s notion of separate shores seems to have an affinity with this multi
cultural model (over there is sunyata, here is samadhi, there is the angel
Metatron, yonder lie the Names of God). However, the trope of multi
culturalism has also been exploded by the concept of hybridity; Bhabha contends,
for example, that

Cultural diversity is the recognition of pre-given cultural contents and customs;
held in a time-frame of relativism . . . Cultural diversity is also the
representation of a radical rhetoric of the separation of totalized cultures
that live unsullied by the intertextuality of their historical locations, safe
in a Utopianism of a mythic memory of a unique collective identity.
[1994:52]

Thus Ferrer’s deployment of distinct cultural/spiritual shores as an antidote
to the Wilberian position may inadvertently reify a subtle fetishizing of cultural
boundaries (instead of an appeal to one purity we have an appeal to many purities,
albeit in dialogue with each other). His cosmological cartography, as with
Wilber’s, is incomplete and needs to acknowledge and incorporate the vertigoinducing
force of cosmological hybridity; however in doing so their respective
models will likely explode so drastically as to be unrecognizable from their
present forms."

=Source=

* Paradise Bound: A Perennial Tradition or an Unseen Process of Cosmological Hybridization?. By gregg lahood. April 2009 issue (20.1) of Anthropology of Consciousness.


[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Relational]]