=Discussion=

==Participative Oligarchies in Web 2.0==

David de Ugarte:

“One of the more frustrating phenomena in the Web 2.0
experience is the clash between new users attracted to its
participative discourse and the power networks constituted
by other users. In 2006 and 2007 there were frequent
outcries against the latter kind of groups in Wikipedia (the
so-called bureaucrats or librarians) and digg, where
influential members of the community even offered their
decision power to marketing agencies in order to spread
pieces of news and promote websites.

This phenomenon has been intensely discussed in the
blogosphere, giving rise to endless debates and equally
endless moral convolutions.

However, the formation of participative oligarchies is
an inevitable and necessary result of the conjunction of
network effects and 2.0 logic.

The typical example of a network effect is the
telephone or the fax machine. It has almost become a
cliché that, for the third user of the telephone line, gaining
access to the network meant being able to speak to two
other people. But for the fourth, it meant being able to
speak to three other people, and so on. By the network
effect, the more members a network has, the more
valuable it will be for a non-member to join it, and the less
value will he or she add to the network by joining it.


In communication networks such as the telephone or
fax, this will not affect, in principle, my way of joining the
network: the fact that there are more fax users will not
make me decide to only receive faxes and feel lazy about
sending them. This is the case with all networks generated
by one-to-one communication technologies.


Let us now add 2.0 logic to the network effect. One
way of understanding Wikipedia and digg is that they are
attempts to collectively build a finite repository common
to all users. How do network effects affect incentives for
individuals?


Let us take as an example 11870, a common
repository of Spanish restaurants and small businesses. I
have been using it for some time now, but I haven't signed
up as a user yet. Its main usefulness for me is being able to
send the phone numbers and location maps for the
restaurants where we will be meeting to my friends and
customers.

Users like me will only be motivated to add content if
our usual or favourite restaurants are not included in the
repository. But as members of the active community
include their own favourites, it’s more likely that any
restaurant where I wish to have lunch with my friends will
have already been included. Thus, the more contents are
already included in the repository, the less incentive I will
have to join the ranks of content creators.


Put more broadly: network effects tend to increase at a
higher than proportional rate the percentage of passive
users as the value of the community and its service rises.
Or, put differently, the logic of incentives in Web 2.0
inevitably leads to the formation of relatively stable
participative oligarchies.


The bias that this may generate in a restaurant
repository need not be too dramatic. Maybe the
participative oligarchy in 11870 have a taste for nouvelle
cuisine or prefer menus including sushi, but this won't be
relevant for me or for most users, who are really just
looking for a geolocated address and telephone book.
But what happens when the service is an essentially
ideological one, when we are talking about the
hierarchisation of values and narratives – as in an
encyclopaedia – or about selecting the most important
daily news?


That’s where Web 2.0 utterly founders. Not only are
the public encouraged to accept a supposedly democratic
filter regardless of their own preferences, but what’s more
that filter will necessarily reflect the biases reflecting the
identity of the most influential small group of users, the
participative oligarchy that will irremediably appear as a
consequence of the logic inherent to the service. And
sooner or later, new users who try to include new contents
in the common repository will realise that they are de
facto being imposed an editorial line, and therefore a form
of ideological control.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf)

=More Information=

#[[Protocollary Power]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Participation]]