
'''* Article / Conference Paper: Participatory infrastructuring of community energy. By Andrea Capaccioli, Giacomo Poderi, Mela Bettega et al. Paper for the 14th Participatory Design Conference, 2016'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305727872_Participatory_infrastructuring_of_community_energy

=Abstract=

"Thanks to renewable energies the decentralized energy system model is becoming more relevant in the production and distribution of energy. The scenario is important in order to achieve a successful energy transition. This paper presents a reflection on the ongoing experience of infrastructuring a socio- technical system in which local communities can manage renewable energies as a Common Pool Resources. We explore how to create a space for citizens’ participation in a continuous process of design for energy management. Objectives of the paper are: i) to clarify how Participatory Design could support the sustainability and the effectiveness of an alternative, ii) to present an experimentation with renewable energy as CPR as an alternative model to the actual vision of the energy system. Preliminary results reported in this paper suggest that a Participatory Design process can be valuable for communities in order to establish new energy management models. "
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305727872_Participatory_infrastructuring_of_community_energy)


=Excerpts=

==[[Infrastructuring Energy as a Common]]==

By Andrea Capaccioli, Giacomo Poderi, Mela Bettega et al.

"With the  ongoing  energy  paradigm shift toward smart grids, we can also conceive energy, and renewable energies in particular, as a common good managed as Common Pool Resources (CPR). The  challenge  according  to Dietz  et  al.  is  to  design institutional  arrangements  to  help  set  the  required  conditions  or tackle  the  challenges  related  to  governance  where  the  ideal conditions  are not  present:  this  is  still  the  case  of enabling  the management  of renewable energies as  CPRs.  Thus,  within  this scenario there is the  need not only for an enabling technology  to be  imposed  (such as  in  the  dominant  technology-driven view toward  energy  transition),  but  a  socio-technical  approach  that
takes  into  account  the  communities  and  the  users  to  foster  the creation of social acceptance of this new system.  Nowadays, most  actors who support  the actual highly  centralized energy  system  (e.g.  energy  companies,  authorities  and regulations) do not  fit into  this  possible future community energy scenario, where  generation  is  distributed through  smaller renewable energy  plants and where the energy network  is becoming highly  decentralized  and  locally controlled.  Both  the institutional energy infrastructure and the  physical  one  have  been in place for decades and highly embedded in our lives. Smart-grid opens  up  the  possibility  of challenging  the  present  condition  in order  to  create  an  alternative  by  integrating the  existing  energy network with ICTs, generating  new information. The  electric grid becomes  an  information  infrastructure.  The  design  and  the implementation of such a thing define the power relations  among the  actors:  citizens with a  more  decentralized network  can  have the  possibility  of  sharing more control in  terms  of managing  the energy source. That is why the involvement of communities plays a central role  in the  concrete design of the needed technologies to foster new  sustainable  practices. The  focus  on  the  community level  of  management  is  also  seen  as  a  way  to  increase  the possibilities  of  reaching the  critical  mass  that  would have  an impact on the energy transition goals [10]. The transition toward a community  based  energy  paradigm, where  distributed  renewable energies are  managed as CPRs, can be  supported and encouraged by the PD community by  enabling and  fostering the “commoning practices”. It becomes central to the role of the design process that needs to take place at  a community-based level, as a process: for, with and by communities themselves."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305727872_Participatory_infrastructuring_of_community_energy)


==Conclusion=

"Energy is  a  key factor for  societies, and its abundance  in  the last centuries  is  one  of  the  factors  that  led  to  the  impressive development of our society since the industrial revolution, but it is also  a  factor for  all the  major  environmental downsides  that  we are now  facing.  The infrastructuring of collective actions for energy  management,  as  explored  and  presented  by  experiences described in this paper, has provided an example for imagining an alternative  future  going  “beyond  capital”.  The  communities participating are  fully aware of the  impact  of  climate change and they want  to  take  a  stand  with concrete  actions.  They are  helped by the  cooperative  values,  which  are  embedded  in the  history  of the  consortia  and  widely  spread  among  the  members  and  their communities. They  can  base  their participation in  the  community energy  management  upon  an  existing  socio-technical  context already  based  on  different  values  rather  than  only  an economic 
one.  The existent electric infrastructure, which is already in place and hardly modifiable without hard intervention, can be modelled and  adapted  to  the  local  social  context  by  the  means  of  ICTs, opening  new  possibilities.  The  PD  community  can  help experiences like these to  design a  sustainable alternative, creating new relationships among the actors involved. This creates a space for  citizens’ participation  in  a  continuous  process  of  design  for energy  management.  An  important  question  that  emerged  from the activities  described  in  the paper  was  how  to  make this  space sustainable in the future for citizens and communities who want to control their  energy. The deployment  phase and the evaluation of the  process  at  the  end  of  the  project  could bring  more  insights about  the  issues of  sustainability  and  appropriation  of energy  as CPR. So, the answers will arrive from the citizens participating in imagining their own possible future."  
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/305727872_Participatory_infrastructuring_of_community_energy)

=References=


Byrne,  J.,  Martinez,  C.  and  Ruggero,  C.  2009.  Relocating Energy  in  the  Social  Commons:  Ideas  for  a  Sustainable Energy Utility. Bulletin of  Science, Technology &  Society. 29, 2 (Apr. 2009), 81–94. 

Karnouskos,  S.  2011.  Communityware  smartgrid.  21st International  Conference  and  Exhibition  on  Electricity Distribution  (CIRED  2011),  Frankfurt,  Germany (2011), 6–9.  

LeDantec,  C.A.L.  and  DiSalvo,  C.  2013.  Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design. Social Studies of Science. 43, 2 (Apr. 2013), 241–264.  

Marttila,  S.,  Botero,  A.  and  Saad-Sulonen,  J.  2014. Towards  Commons  Design  in  Participatory  Design. Proceedings of the 13th  Participatory Design Conference: Short  Papers,  Industry  Cases,  Workshop  Descriptions, Doctoral  Consortium  Papers,  and  Keynote  Abstracts  - Volume 2 (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 9–12.  

Wolsink,  M.  2012.  The  research  agenda  on  social acceptance  of  distributed  generation  in  smart  grids: Renewable  as  common  pool  resources.  Renewable  and Sustainable Energy Reviews. 16, 1 (Jan. 2012), 822–835. 



[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Articles]]