

From The [[Role of Participation Architecture in Growing Sponsored Open Source Communities]]. By Joel West and Siobhán O’Mahony at http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf


=Definition=

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We define a
participation architecture as the socio-technical
framework that extends opportunities to external
participants and integrates their contributions.

A participation architecture guides interactions
and exchange in an online community and
encompasses the social, legal, and technical
capabilities offered to community members.
While sponsored communities were by some
measures less open than most autonomous
communities, in all cases, the decision to create
an open source community was inherently a
more open approach than a proprietary software
development approach.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Characteristics=

'''West and O'Mahony look at how transparency and accessibility are expressed in 3 dimensions of organizational design: i.e. 1) the organization of production; 2) community governance and 3) intellectual property.'''

==Transparency vs. Accessibility==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“Transparency meant that the
code was publicly available, that most of the
software production process was discussed on
public mailing lists or discussion boards, and
that the software release cycle and goals were
also provided on the community website.”


“The second type of openness
sponsors considered when designing a sponsored
community was the degree of accessibility —
the amount of control sponsors would relinquish
to the community. An accessible community not
only provides visibility, but allows some
outsiders to gain access to either the project’s
code repository, community planning processes,
or strategic decision-making.

Sponsors explicitly recognized that granting accessibility
triggered the loss of some corporate control in a
way that a purely transparent model did not —
particularly when external participants were
from other (possibly competing) companies.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)



==Openness in the Organization of Production==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We identified three design parameters
that provided contributors with transparency and
accessibility to production processes:


1. Live code access provides transparency
by offering the community the chance to review
the most recent “live” version of source code on
the community website — which is more likely
to have bugs than a finished product. Nearly all
of the sponsored communities (10/12) allowed
external participants to anonymously access the
most current source code, subject to the
sponsor’s license terms. External contributors
were thus able to follow the community’s
development cycle and contribute bug reports if
they were so inclined.


2. Public commit process refers to the
opportunity for community members to become
directly involved in the production process by
earning (through demonstrated technical
proficiency) the right to directly commit
software changes to the community repository.

While all of the autonomous communities
provide such accessibility, only some (5/12) of
the sponsored communities did so. Seven of the
sponsored communities did not publicly explain
how one could go about acquiring commit rights
to their projects, but most of them (6/7)
encouraged people to send code patches via
email.

The lack of information about gaining
committer rights is not necessarily an inhibitor
for participation but it limits the status and
influence that a contributor can achieve. As one
community member explained, “people can be
phenomenally valuable contributors without
having access for a long time. Somebody else
can check their code, but people don’t like it. It
is seen as a mark of belonging.” Sponsors that
did not provide commit rights recognized such
rights would increase participation but were
unwilling to relinquish that much control over
their code.

3. Subproject creation is a mechanism by
which a community based on the sponsor’s
original code can grow to assume new
functionality or new directions. We defined
subprojects as new “start-up” projects that were
allowed to govern themselves and address unmet
needs independent of the larger community;
allowing creation of such subprojects provides
accessibility by decentralizing control over
growth and innovation in the community. While
all of the autonomous projects allowed
community members to autonomously propose
subprojects based on their own initiative, only 5
of the 17 sponsored communities did so.


Source code access
offers potential external community participants
transparency into the development process
which can help them learn how the code is
developed. Without awareness of the
community’s production process, the learning
curve to make a meaningful contribution and
thus gain membership or access within the
community will be limited. The ability to create
subprojects offers access to external parties by
providing them opportunities to shape the future
direction of the project. This type of access
sends a powerful signal as to the ease with
which external contributors can get new ideas
proposed and accepted. Allowing individuals the
right to earn commit rights offers the ultimate
degree of accessibility – the ability to make
direct contributions to the code.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)



==Openness in Governance==

West and O’Mahony:
 
“We define openness in open source
governance as the amount of decision-making
control that sponsors relinquished to the
community.”

To provide both leadership and legitimacy, some
communities have a formal concept of
membership, vesting members with key
governance decisions, and are thus more
accessible to participants. For other
communities, de facto control remains with
founding individuals (due to superior legitimacy
or technical knowledge) or with founding firms
(that provide the bulk of ongoing resources).
The design levers available for managing
openness in governance include:

1. Nonprofit foundations. All five
individually founded communities and two
sponsor-founded communities created a formal,
legal, non-profit foundation to help manage
community governance and assets; however, for
historical reasons, the Linux foundation plays a
more limited role than the others. As O’Mahony
(2003, 2005) identifies, such foundations
provide institutional permanence independent of
any one individual, as well as legal status to
negotiate with external entities (largely for the
provision of resources). Because the creation of
a non-profit foundation requires a board of
directors and regular meetings, the introduction
of such organizations also increased the
transparency of control of the community assets.

2. Membership. Four out of five of the
individually founded open source communities
have formal processes by which an individual is
recognized as a member; one community
recognized both individuals and firms as
separate classes of members. Only one sponsor
founded community project created a nonprofit
foundation with a membership base, while two
others were under development at the time of
our study. After offering external contributors
membership rights, this sponsor experienced
unprecedented growth in participation.
Communities with a membership base provide
members with some voice in formal governance
matters (typically through annual elections and
the right to vote on project wide decisions such
as license or name changes), while nonmembership
communities remain either fully
sponsor-controlled or retain ad hoc governances
mechanisms.

3. Membership fee. Two communities (one
individually founded and one sponsor founded)
obtain funds from interested firms by selling
memberships at a range of prices. In general,
membership fees were not adopted by sponsors
trying to create communities, but by those
sponsors trying to create commercial
ecosystems.

4. Release authority. The ultimate test of an
online production community is who makes the
final production decisions. For an open source
community, this decision occurs when software
is released. This authority may vest in the
members, the affiliated foundation or remain
with the sponsor or individual founder. Again
there is a dramatic differences in openness
between autonomous and sponsored projects: the
community holds authority in all but one
autonomous community (Linux), but only in two
of the 12 sponsored communities. Such limited
accessibility appears to reflect the sponsor’s
desire to align the features, quality and schedule
of open source releases to its commercial goals.”

In conclusion:

“By creating a
membership organization and the opportunity to
elect leaders, a few sponsors offered potential
contributors the ability to develop a sense of
belonging and become more vested in the
community’s future. The ability to gain
“membership status” was viewed as a
motivational and recruitment tool. Sponsors who
adopted these community design features did so
with the belief that divesting some control was
necessary in order to attract talented
contributors. However, most sponsors did not
create an independent form of governance,
retained exclusive release authority, and final
say on all key community decisions.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


==Openness in the Governance of Intellectual Property==

West and O’Mahony:

Parameters of openness:

“1. Content ownership. Most communities
that created an affiliated foundation also vest
ownership in the foundation (Linux an
exception), as did two sponsored communities.
For the other sponsored communities, ownership
remains with the sponsor. Ownership of the
content by a foundation provides a credible
assurance to community participants that the
code will remain available to participants in
perpetuity (O’Mahony 2005). The direct
ownership of the code by sponsors in most of
the communities was a clear direct and symbolic
measure of their design to maintain ongoing
control over the terms by which outside
participants access the code.

2. Subproject ownership. For the projects
that allowed creation of new subprojects, the
conditions of access were not necessarily the
same as for the core code. For the five sponsored
projects that allowed subproject creation, in four
cases, ownership of the subproject output was
the same as for the core project (two owned by
the sponsor, two owned by the foundation); for
one sponsored project, the output was owned by
the contributing community members.

3. Software license. 10 of the 12 sponsored
communities use one of the more than 50
licenses approved by the Open Source Initiative.
As Lerner and Tirole (2005) and others have
noted, the most popular open source license is
the GNU General Public License (GPL). This
widespread use and popularity among potential
participants influenced the decisions of two
sponsors — Mozilla and Helix — to offer their
product under both their own license and the
GPL, while other sponsors mentioned the
importance of using a license deemed
compatible with the GPL or the Lesser GPL
(LGPL). Two sponsors used licenses that are as
yet unapproved by the OSI. One community
(Sendmail) was founded using an approved
license (BSD) but the sponsor subsequently
chose to release a major update under a nonapproved
license that discriminates against forprofit
users. The last (Sugar) created its own
license (adapted from the Mozilla Public
License) that required publicity for their
technology when used by service providers.4

4. License type. Open source licenses such
as the BSD or Apache license allow recipients to
use the code largely without restriction, while
“free software” licenses (notably the GPL)
compel recipients to return any modifications or
changes (West, 2003). Rosen (2004) classifies
these two types as “permissive” and
“reciprocal”; a few licenses (such as the LGPL)
impose reciprocal obligations on part but not all
of the code. Four of the sponsored communities
in our sample use a dual license strategy to
implement price discrimination, with non-profit
users selecting the free reciprocal license (i.e.
the GPL) and for-profit users customarily paying
to use the software without the reciprocal
obligations (cf. Välimäki, 2003).


In conclusion:

The ownership of code
was the most dramatic difference between
autonomous and sponsored projects, in that the
sponsor in nearly all cases retained ownership of
the core (if not subproject) code. A subset of the
sponsors used the objectionable restrictions of
the reciprocal license to provide revenues
through a dual license policy, but otherwise the
sponsored and autonomous communities followed similar license policies, either using
standard or their own open source licenses.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)


=Source=

Article: The [[Role of Participation Architecture in Growing Sponsored Open Source Communities]]. By Joel West (San Jose State University College of Business) and Siobhán O’Mahony (UC Davis Graduate School of Management)
February 6, 2008 preprint version of  Industry and Innovation, Special Issue on “Managing Open Innovation Through Online Communities”

URL = http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf



=More Information=

==Bibliography==


Baldwin, Carliss Y. and Kim B. Clark, 2005, “The
architecture of cooperation: Does code
architecture mitigate free riding in the open
source development model? Harvard
Business School Working


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]