
= “Farmers have developed seed varieties by experimenting over centuries and sharing the improved varieties with others. . . . Participatory plant breeding tries to mix the best in modern science with the wisdom of farmers". - K. Ravi Srinivas [http://ssrn.com/abstract=1390273]


=Discussion=

 
Keith Aoki:

"Janet Hope argues that “participatory plant breeding” may hold some of
the answer. “Participatory plant breeding” consists of a set of
approaches that seek to “create more relevant technology and more
equitable access to technology in order to improve the service and delivery
of crop improvement research to the poorest and most marginalised people
and areas.” K. Ravi Srinivas and Margaret Kipp have referred to
such approaches as “[[BioLinux]].”

First, the concepts of plant breeders’ rights and utility-patented
germplasm may be seen as analogous to copyrighted software.” The open
source software movement was a response to expansive intellectual
property claims that programmers like Richard Stallman felt encroached on
the freedom of computer programmers and users to develop, create, or use
software through use of the GPL to ensure that “free” (meaning freely
accessible) software stays “free.” In the PGR context, “farmers’ rights”
groups make a similar claim with regard to plant varieties protected by
utility patents or PVP certificates as well as related agricultural
biotechnology.

Open access to PGRs potentially underwritten by open source licenses is
an idea that responds to the pervasive colonization of germplasm by
intellectual property rights regimes and the ways that these regimes
encroach on farmers’ freedom to save seeds. Seed saving has been one of
the cornerstones of traditional selective breeding. However, with PGRs, the
web of proprietary rights spawned over the past two decades continues
expanding, and there has not yet been a PGR equivalent of the GPL for
software.

Second, the open source software movement and the various farmers’
rights groups in the respective areas of software and PGRs have emerged as
international movements with the congruent aims of “ensuring open access
to a segment of society that has been heavily commoditized under the guise
of intellectual property protection.”132 However, multilateral agreements
like TRIPS, the CBD, and the ITPGR send conflicting signals as to what is
and what is not proprietary with respect to PGRs.

The CBD characterizes PGRs as “sovereign national property.”

TRIPS mandates that member nations maintain “minimum levels” of
intellectual property protection, including some form of proprietary rights
in PGRs. While the ITPGR categorizes sixty-four crops and forages (stored
ex situ in seed banks)134 as existing in some type of intellectual property
“public domain,” the implication is that all other PGRs not so listed are the
property of the nations where they are located, and are subject to
intellectual propertization.

Third, farmers’ rights advocates have the potential to evolve into what
the open source software movement has become, i.e., a commons-based
peer-production network that facilitates the sharing of plant genetic
information and biotechnological tools.135 This is where adaptation of GPL
from the software context into the PGR context may be useful. As in the
software context, opposition to proprietary moves regarding PGRs has been
coalescing. One of the most active of these groups is the Philippines-based
MASIPAG,136 an organization that brings together farmers, scientists, and
NGOs to engage in agricultural research.137 To illustrate parallels between
trying to ensure free access to PGRs and software source code, consider the
following comparisons between MASIPAG’s version of farmers’ rights and
the GNU/Linux software model.138 In the context of MASIPAG, Boru
Douthwaite writes about
parallels with the open-source software movement that created Linux.


For software read seed. Some farmers are seed “hackers.” Although their
source code—the DNA coding—is closed to them, nature itself or human
intervention generates new “hacks” by crosses and mutation, and farmers
select hacks that they judge beneficial. The tantalising prospect opens up
that [participatory plant breeding] might be able to capture the power of
the “bazaar” development model in the same way that the open-source
software movement has. . . . If [participatory plant breeding] can harness
the creativity of farmer “hackers,” wouldn’t this be a better and safer way
of trying to double rice production in the next twenty years than relying
on Big Science to pull off a second Green Revolution?

An open source PGR model would be based on the idea that farmers are
both users and developers of different types of information technology.

Such a model might be applied not only to the development of plant
varieties via selective breeding, genomics, and genetic manipulation of
PGRs, but also to the development of related machinery/technology and the
sharing of agricultural information, knowledge, and other agricultural
know-how.

New plant varieties and related technology developed and created using
this participatory process could then be made available to farmers and plant
breeders with a GPL-styled license with the same “viral” effect—any
subsequent modifications must be openly accessible under the GPL
terms.142 Plant varieties subject to a GPL-like license would be covered
under a license that explicitly conditions the receipt of the plant materials
on a contractual promise that there would be no downstream restrictions on
the rights of others to experiment, innovate, share, or exchange the
PGRs.

An application of the open source software model, or a variant of it, may
be a viable option in the PGR context. Historically, farmers have been
selecting seeds and selectively breeding crops for centuries in order to
create new varieties. However, while farming practices developed around
the globe and over millennia, plant breeding as an organized industry has
only been in existence for a little over a century. Intellectual property
protection for PGRs then, is an even newer phenomenon. Diamond v.
Chakrabarty served as a watershed moment when the U.S. Supreme
Court opened the door to patenting living organisms. In light of this
history, it makes sense to carve out some particular niche, exception, or
regulation pertaining to PGRs for food and agriculture.

Application of an open source PGR model could also yield positive
developments, in that it may lead to increased understanding about PGRs.

An application of the model would entail creating, maintaining, and
growing an inclusive user community of farmers, plant breeders, and
researchers through which information and technology may be exchanged
freely via decentralized commons-based peer-production networks. Such
networks would increase the understanding of plant germplasm among
individual farmers and researchers, thus leading to increased capacity
building, rather than as passive consumers of technologically advanced but
legally inaccessible crop technology systems. Also, like software
programmers, farmers have varying criteria they employ when evaluating
seeds, depending on locale, the size of their holdings, etc.

An open source PGR model thus would help ensure that farmers in
particular local situations would be able to develop and cultivate plant
varieties adapted to local climate, soil, and other conditions. This is a much
different result than the situation where multinational agrochemical
corporations heavily promote “crop technology systems” that attempt to
adapt local conditions to accommodate their seeds via expensive chemical
inputs, rather than adapting a seed to local conditions. Additionally, such
corporations are reluctant to invest in any field where the market size is too
small or the profitability of the venture is not readily apparent.148
Another plus point is that an open source PGR model would help prevent
further erosion of genetic diversity accelerated by the increasing intellectual
propertization of PGRs. The open source model could lead to plant quality
improvements because, by analogy in the open source software context,
“given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow.” An open source PGR
model would contribute to increased availability and genetic diversity of
PGRs by making germplasm less vulnerable to crop diseases that would be
able to wipe out a monoculture crop and to the manipulative moves of an
increasingly oligopolistic small number of powerful firms.

“[L]ike software, seed production is a process which has a large fixed
cost but which produces a product that can be cheaply distributed [or
copied].”150 With software, duplication is digital, whereas with seeds,
duplication is the result of the self-replicating nature of the seed itself.

Moreover, the costs of contribution to an already existing and openly
accessible plant variety (as would be a computer program in the software
context) is low compared to the cost of starting from scratch if permission
cannot be secured to work with materials protected by intellectual property
rights.

As mentioned above, an open source PGR model would also serve as a
means of spreading risk and sharing costs among farmers, “farmers’ rights”
groups, and other smaller entities involved in the agricultural sector. Under
an open source PGR model that promoted participatory open source
breeding projects, smaller seed companies would be able to compete with
larger companies by lowering research and development costs, and farmers
would be able to participate in creating new varieties suited to local
environments, promoting in situ PGR conservation.

In situ conservation, as opposed to ex situ storage in seed banks, is
significant because it encourages preservation of traditional farmer knowhow
as well as promoting genetic diversity.153 Additionally, the
motivations for using an open source model in the PGR context are
arguably more profound than in the software area—namely, farmers’
survival, PGR preservation, and feeding regional and global populations.

While an open source model for PGRs has attractive aspects, such a
model also presents potential problems that need careful consideration. In
the open source software context, the creation and management of a user
community is critical.155 The role of the project leader includes the
provision of the basic intellectual content and the addition of new
contributions. Other tasks also include the setup and maintenance of
effective community structures to maximize users’ motivations to
contribute and the keeping up of morale within the user/contributor
community."
( http://ssrn.com/abstract=1390273)



=More Information=

* [[Farmer-Scientist Partnership for Agricultural Development]]

* Free Seeds, Not Free Beer: [[Participatory Plant Breeding]], [[Open Source Seeds]], and Acknowledging [[User Innovation in Agriculture]]  Jack Kloppenburg in The Journal of Agrarian Change [http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1390273]

* Almekinders, C. and J. Hardon, eds, 2006. Bringing Farmers Back into Breeding: Experiences with
Participatory Breeding and Challenges for Institutionalization. Agromisa Special 5. Wageningen:
Agromisa Foundation.

See also:

* Free Seeds, Free Software and Free Beer  Patrick on Bifurcatedcarrots.eu [http://bifurcatedcarrots.eu/2006/09/free-seeds-free-software-and-free-beer/]

* [[Farmers Rights and Open Source Licensing]] Ryann Beck The Arizona Journal of Environmental Law [http://www.ajelp.com/articles/farmers-rights-and-open-source-licensing/]

* The first explicitly [[Open Source Seed Bank]]  [https://sites.google.com/site/ossbank/]

* [[Participatory Plant Breeding Toolkit]]  of the Organic seed alliance [http://www.seedalliance.org/Publications/publication-download-forms/download-form-11/]


==On BioLinux==

* Srinivas, Biolinuxes, 

* Felipe Montoya, Linux and Seeds, Geeks and Farmers—A Spiritual Link, A42, Aug. 9, 2003,
http://www.a42.com/node/343; 

* Tom Michaels, General Public Release for Plant Germplasm: A Proposal by Tom Michaels, Professor of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, v.1 (Feb. 1999) (unpublished manuscript).

* Larry Ayers, A Somewhat Far Fetched Analogy, LINUX GAZETTE, July 27, 1998, http://linuxgazette.net/issue31/ayers2.html.


[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:IP]]