
Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_FLi39tttQ&feature=youtu.be


=Description=

"[[Pat Conaty]] is a pioneer in the field of community economic development, and is the co-author of The Resilience Imperative. In his talk, Pat explores the potential for transition in the areas of food, housing, energy and finance, showing how a range of innovative mechanisms have been developed to create jobs, reduce household debt and make communities more resilient.

Pat is a Fellow of the new economics foundation and a Research Associate of Co-ops UK. He has played a key role in the development of debt advice, social investment, community land trusts and renewable energy, at both a policy and a practical level.

This talk was given at Schumacher College, where Pat was teaching on the course "Enterprising Futures: Exploring Enterprise Models for the 21st Century"


=Discussion=

[[Pat Conaty]] says:

"I am working to compile this as a report on an integrated Fair Trade Money and Banking system. This BALTA report for the Canadians should be published early next year. I gave a public lecture on the elements of this at Schumacher College in Devon last March. This was an Earth Talk and co-sponsored by Transition Towns UK.

I am working on ways that seek to reposition co-operative finance onto its original foundations that most people forget sought ways to lend without interest. If you check the analysis out, you will see that I am advocating no one single solution but the idea of TAPAS or 'there are plenty of alternative solutions'. It is this creative coupling of different public banking and co-operative money models that could reframe a new Fair Trade Banking infrastructure and link up with a radical policy superstructure and the arguments that P2P and the Commons Strategies Group is advancing. Think of the insights of Robert Owen and Keynes with a mixture of Gesell, Marx and Schumacher and a tasty cocktail of solutions could be dispersed to enable a Jubilee release from debt slavery."


=More Information=

For more information on Schumacher College, please visit http://www.schumachercollege.org.uk


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]