

=The Tool=

URL = https://github.com/ssbc/patchwork#install

Tara Vancil:

"a peer-to-peer social media application with a rich community. It’s built on top of Secure Scuttlebutt, and acts as a standalone desktop application. It’s a little rough around the edges in terms of UI and performance, but the community is really great."

(https://taravancil.com/blog/women-boycott-twitter/)


=The Political Concept=

Venture Capital Status:

'''"Curtis Yarvin, who in his book Patchwork: A Political System for the 21st century, published 2008''', refers to “the democratic past”, stating “Leftism is cancer” and that “On theoretical grounds alone—the feat has never really been achieved, at least never for good—the only cure for leftism is complete and permanent excision”. 

“The basic idea of Patchwork is that, as the crappy governments we inherited from history are smashed, they should be replaced by a global spiderweb of tens, even hundreds, of thousands of sovereign and independent mini-countries, each governed by its own joint-stock corporation without regard to the residents’ opinions. If residents don’t like their government, they can and should move. The design is all ‘exit,’ no ‘voice.’”

 

Yarvin states: “let’s just say that if anyone can build anything like Patchwork, even a tiny, crude, Third World ripoff of Patchwork, it is all over for the democratic regimes.”

Importantly, Yarvin states that the “patchworks” are to be run by corporate owners, serving as the government and serving as the “authoritarian, omnipotent and omniscient sovereign”: 

“'''A patchwork is any network consisting of a large number of small but independent states'''. To be precise, each state’s real estate is its patch; the sovereign corporate owner, i.e., government, of the patch is its realm.”

“A Patchwork realm is a business—a corporation. Its capital is the patch it is sovereign over. The realm profits by making its real estate as valuable as possible—whether it is Manhattan or some ranch in Oklahoma. Even the oceans can and should be divided into patches; a naval realm is sovereign over, and profits by taxing, all economic activities within a patch of ocean. But how should realms be administered? The answer is simple: a realm is a corporation. A sovereign corporation, granted, but a corporation nonetheless.”

(https://www.vcinfodocs.com/venture-capital-extremism)


=The Book=

'''* Book: Patchwork: A Political System for the 21st century. Curtis Yarvin, 2008.'''


[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Network Nations]]

[[Category:Free_Software]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]