'''Patent Lens is an independent, public-good global resource for increasing patent transparency.'''

URL = http://www.patentlens.net/

An initiative of [[Cambia]]


=Description=

Richard Jefferson:

'''1.'''

"With funding from the Rockefeller Foundation, in 1999 CAMBIA began to develop
an integrated, full-text database of patents in the agricultural sciences. Under
the initial guidance of Dr. Carol Nottenburg, then CAMBIA’s Director of
Intellectual Property, the CAMBIA IP Resource became a prominent web-based
data tool to investigate patents in this field. Over the years, both the ambitions and
the capabilities of the CAMBIA Patent Lens team grew,14 and PatentLens has now
become one of the world’s foremost cost-free resources for full-text searching and
understanding patents in many jurisdictions and in all classifications. Patent Lens
(www.patentlens.net) harmonizes, parses and presents worldwide patent and technology
data in a full-text searchable and highly integrated manner.

However, it is much more than a patent database. PatentLens is an integrated
response to the massive complexity and opacity of the world of patents. It is
intended as a public platform to enable many actors to investigate and share analysis
of relevant IP issues, and to foster community involvement in overseeing and
guiding the patent system.

The patent system has grown so rapidly and become so complex and opaque
that even the most privileged and skilled clergy of patent law can only parse a tiny
area of specialized knowledge, and that tiny area changes daily. This fragmentation
has made it almost impossible to thoughtfully and factually assess the consequences
of action and inaction: How can the consequences of policy be modeled
or validated when patents are treated as fungibles? How can efficient progress in
sectors critical to social progress, such as health, environment, and agriculture, be
secured when the rights are tangled in a skein of patents?

The goal of the Patent Lens is to use the power of informatics and community
to harmonize and make transparent the world of patents, so that thoughtful
individuals, institutions and agencies can guide thoughtful and humane reform of
the innovation system and to spur efficient and socially relevant innovation. This
is an essential platform if we are to make use of the patent system itself to expand
and protect a technology commons, and to collectively target breakthrough inventions,
work-arounds and “work-beyonds”15 and to make thoughtful and informed
partnerships."
(http://freedomofscience.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/07/innovations-open-source-biotech-models.pdf)


'''2.'''

"CAMBIA’s Patent Lens includes one of the world’s most comprehensive fulltext
searchable databases of patents; cost-free and available to anyone, it has a
seven-year history of continued growth in features and power. It incorporates
the full text of applications and granted patents from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCV) database, European and
Australian jurisdictions, and their status and family relationships in many
dozens of countries. Its fast and user-friendly search engine has a nuanced
interface and presents common and harmonized data structures so that these
jurisdictions can be searched simultaneously.

The Patent Lens is becoming an increasingly important resource as the feerequiring
“value-added” patent data providers continue to consolidate. Because
no national patent office has taken on the task of harmonizing collections over
many jurisdictions, the role of the “patent clergy’ remains central, and the gatekeeper
functions of the information providers remain onerous. National and
regional patent offices provide quite variable free patent searching; some are
appallingly primitive while others, like the European Patent Office, are quite
sophisticated. Patent offices, however, have complex relationships with commercial
providers such as Thomson, which actually provide the patent offices
with integrated searching functions for their own in-house use. To further
complicate the situation, commercial providers have been calling for a reduction
in the role of national patent offices as “value added” providers. The need
for a public good provider has never been greater.

Patent Lens focuses on user-adaptability, integration, annotation capability
and availability to the world community for free; these key features render it
particularly helpful in efforts to restore public good and transparency as the
raison d’etre of intellectual property systems."
(http://freedomofscience.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/07/innovations-open-source-biotech-models.pdf)


=More Information=

#See our entries on [[Open Source Biotechnology]] and [[Biological Open Source]]


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Science]]