
'''=  a nonprofit, international, multilingual, free venue for patients and caregivers of any disease to share their innovations.'''

URL = http://www.patient-innovation.com


=Description=

"Patients of chronic diseases have to deal with long-lasting conditions and everyday challenges. They frequently develop valuable solutions to improve their quality of life and even treat their own disease, sometimes saving their own lives! What if they could end up saving the lives of others?

These innovations usually occur behind closed doors and might never be known or used by anyone else. however, if successful innovations and knowledge were shared with other patients with similar needs, it could improve the lives of many others.

In innovation research we see it over and over again: Users create their own solutions when they do not find an answer to their needs on the market. An area where this is of special importance is healthcare: Many patients invent solutions for their disease – let it be a special diet, an app that reminds you of your treatment or an everyday help.

This platform is an attempt to provide a venue for patients to share the valuable information about their solutions and experiences, and engage in productive discussions to learn from each other and fight back their diseases together.

This project is sponsored by Catolica-Lisbon School of Business and Economics, The Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation, Carnegie Mellon Portugal, MIT Portugal, IMM, and Peter Pribila Foundation. The app is designed and implemented by innosabi, an open innovation company."

=More Information=

* info@patient-innovation.com

* Video intro to the Patient Innovation Platform, http://vimeo.com/71650884

[[Category:Health]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]