=Description=

'''1. Tara Van Dijk:'''

"Patriarchy — as a way of organizing reproduction—emerged with the transition from small hunter-gatherer bands to settled agrarian life, and with it, the development of villages, towns, and cities. It wasn’t handed down from the heavens or dreamt up in a male conspiracy room. Patriarchy arose as a reproductive order—not from ideology, but from material conditions: the need to manage paternity, inheritance, and social stability in increasingly complex, sedentary societies.

The patriarchal mode of organized and institutionalized breeding was emergent, adaptive, and geographically variable. And—trigger warning—it objectively served female reproductive interests as much, if not more, than male ones."

(https://morbidsymptom.substack.com/p/feminisms-harlequin-patriarchy-romance)


'''2. Dale Carrico:'''

"Patriarchy names in the first place those sociocultural systems in history in which authority and control over property, and especially the generational transmission of property -- and therefore authority -- from fathers to sons, requires that women be owned as property as well to ensure male control over female reproductive capacity.

Patriarchy names in the second place a whole system of norms and institutions that preferentially benefit men in respect to women, both to facilitate the control of women by men that is patriarchy in its primary sense, but also those norms and institutions that tend to arise as results, expressions, or symptoms of this ongoing control. It is crucial to grasp that vestiges of these norms and institutions will tend to linger on, denigrating and disabling women in respect to men, or denigrating and disabling that which is associated with what is construed as "femininity" in respect to what is construed as "masculinity," even in societies and cultures that have overcome some or even most of the violence and injustice represented by patriarchy in its primary sense.

Patriarchy names in the third place those discursive operations through which bodies and lifeways are imagined and attended to and so produced as "sexed" and "gendered" in ways that are only legibly taken up and valued and hierarchized by sociocultural formations that are patriarchal in the first and second senses above. It is crucial to grasp that patriarchal sex-gender vocabularies not only prepare and facilitate bodily experience and desire for the denigration and disablement of women in respect to men, and femininity in respect to masculinity, in patriarchy's second sense above, but that the patriarchal in its third sense generates possibilities as well for still-circumscribed resistances to these denigrations and disabilities, contingent valorizations, ambivalent celebrations of femininity and womanhood within patriarchy's sex-gender terms. It is no less crucial to grasp that patriarchal sex-gender vocabularies open the way for new denigrations and disabilities of bodies and lifeways than those highlighted by patriarchy's first and second senses as when, for example, an intersex body is surgically policed into conformity with a normative sexual dimorphism whatever injurious consequences may follow from this operation, or when a wanted transsexual lifeway premised on the pleasures of the transitional itself rather than on a primary aversion to the legibly sexed "pre-operative" body or an ideal identification with the legibly sexed "post-operative body" is pathologized, criminalized, or otherwise dehumanized. In these cases the patriarchal assignment of facts and values functions not so much to denigrate women in respect to men, or femininity in respect to masculinity, so-called, but to denigrate and disable any body, experience, desire, or lifeway that is not legibly male or female, legibly masculine or feminine, or legibly reprosexual, beyond but still in service to the damage the patriarchal goes on to do to the bodies, experiences, desires, and lifeways that are legible in its terms according to patriarchy's first and second senses."

(http://amormundi.blogspot.com/2012/12/what-is-patriarchy.html)


=Discussion=

Tara van Dijk:

"From a psychoanalytic perspective, the subject (our sense of self) is shaped by lack—an unavoidable sense of something missing, a gap that defines who we are and what we desire. There is no fully formed, complete self to start with. The self is this gap or negativity (alienation, frustration, doubt, and thus desire). What feminists call the Patriarchy is just one narrative to make sense of this, to give it structure and meaning. In other words, it is a symptom of feminism.

Hegel argued that we only discover the essence of something through its contradictions and failures. So the Patriarchy isn’t some original force oppressing women but an incomplete, myth-like story to explain why certain deadlocks, like dissatisfaction and conflict between the sexes, appear and persist.

Via Žižek, who reads Hegel avec Lacan, feminism’s struggle against patriarchy is a death drive, a compulsion to repeat. The feminist subject doesn’t just struggle with its symptom—they enjoy it. This is what Lacan calls jouissance, a kind of painful satisfaction. The Patriarchy fantasy is how feminism stages its dissatisfaction and repeats the plot endlessly."

(https://morbidsymptom.substack.com/p/what-came-first-the-patriarchy-or)


==Nina Power on why Patriarchy currently is a myth==

"There is something ironic in attributing our social ills to an excess of paternal authority. According to the US Census Bureau, 1 in 4 children live without a father of any kind (biological, step, or adoptive), a situation the National Fatherhood Initiative suggests is a factor in “nearly all social ills.” Fathers, where they are depicted in mainstream culture, veer between inept and pathetic at one end, unable to solve basic household tasks, and, at the other, violent, alcoholic, and abusive, consumed by impotent rage, railing against the universe and harming women and children.

Despite claims to the contrary, we do not live in a patriarchy. A patriarchy would require men taking responsibility for their families and for society at large. Instead, we live in an infantilized culture in which men and women are more like brother and sister, contending against each other in a condition of perverse equality. Two crucial texts for understanding this predicament are Alexander Mitscherlich's 1963 book, Society Without the Father, and Juliet Flower MacCannell’s The Regime of the Brother: After the Patriarchy, from 1991."

(https://compactmag.com/article/why-we-need-the-patriarchy)


==A Critique of the Intersectional Theory of Patriarchy==

Patrick Anderson:

"The interesting thing is that this theory of patriarchy, this idea that all men have power over all women, was invented by white women in the 1950s to claim that they were just as oppressed as Black men in a society run by white supremacy. In books and essays including Alva Myrdal’s “A Parallel to the Negro Problem” (1944), Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex (1949), and Helen Hacker’s “Women as a Minority Group” (1955), white women scholars observed the conditions of Black men under western colonialism and racism and said: white women should think of themselves as a similarly oppressed group. Before the essays, white women were seen primarily as members of the dominant race, even by white women themselves. In fact, even white feminists saw themselves in this way, as historian Louise Michelle Newman demonstrates in her book White Women Rights. Yet in the 1950s, white women began to claim that they were oppressed in a manner analogous to Black men.

For the idea that “women” as such constituted an oppressed class subjected to “men” as such to become the dominant paradigm, feminists needed to discard the kinship theory of patriarchy.

Even into the 1970s and 1980s, feminist anthropologists and sociologists adopted the classical social science view that patriarchy had a familial and generational aspect to it. However, while this kinship view was compatible with the earlier theories that saw white women as part of the dominant racial group, it was incompatible with the idea that women constitute a singular coherent class of oppressed people. Why? Because if patriarchy depends on family relations, and Black people (especially Black men) are prohibited from joining the family relations of whites, then Black men cannot be members of a generally patriarchal class of “men.” The paradigm text where this argument is made is Sylvia Walby’s Theorizing Patriarchy (1990), which was published in the very same intellectual milieu and shared the same assumptions as MacKinnon’s male dominance theory.

As Curry summarizes, “the white woman used the body and experience of the Negro, specifically the Black man, as the template by which she created the idea that she was in fact a minority group despite the power and violence she imparted on racial and ethnic groups such as Blacks and Jews.” Curry adds that “the definition of patriarchy that emerged from these debates were driven by the need white feminists had in constructing themselves as a class external to—and victimized by—white patriarchy. The feminist definition of patriarchy was constructed to protect feminist ideology, not to explain the oppression of various groups throughout history.”

Thus, Crenshaw’s theory of intersectionality relies on a paradigm of feminist ideology that constructed by white women to minimize attention to their racial power and amplify attention to their sexual vulnerability. And to construct this view of patriarchy, they had to throw out decades of social scientific scholarship even though there was no empirical evidence that debunked that former scholarship.

As if this were not enough to question intersectionality, there are more problems with Crenshaw’s formulation of this now-popular theory. Like MacKinnon, Crenshaw argued that when power is based on biological sex, the sex in power—males—use sexual violence as a means of social control. To put it in no uncertain terms, men rape women as a means of perpetuating their control over women.

In her 1991 essay, Crenshaw states that “the use of rape to legitimize efforts to control and discipline the Black community is well established in historical literature on rape and race.” Though she claims this fact is well established, she cites only Joyce Williams and Karen Holmes’ 1981 work The Second Assault: Rape and Public Attitudes. As with MacKinnon’s theory of patriarchy, however, we can trace the history of Williams and Holmes’ work back to fundamentally racist origins.

In their 1967 book The Subculture of Violence, Martin Wolfgang and Franco Ferracuti introduced the “subculture of violence” theory, which argues that subordinated groups, such as Black people in Amerika, had a distinct culture separate from mainstream white culture, and that this Black subculture was the cause of Black men and women’s supposed pathologically self-destructive behavior. Anyone familiar with right wing politics in the United States today should find this argument familiar, for the subculture of violence theory is the basis for all right-wing apologetics regarding police murders of Black people (“They are killing each other” etc.).

In 1971, Wolfgang’s student Menachem Amir expanded the subculture of violence theory in his book Patterns of Forcible Rape. According to Amir, Black men become rapists because “Negro culture” was pathological and the Black family structure was improper. Because Black fathers were absent, because Black mothers were unfit parents, and because Black culture prioritized sensual pleasures over civilized ones, Amir claimed that Black men developed a psychological need to overcompensate for their feminized self-image. Thus, they became rapists. If this also sounds like a contemporary right wing racist view, it’s because it is.

“White feminists adopted Amir’s view of Black masculinity throughout their texts,” Curry explains. In Against Our Will (1975), Susan Brownmiller insisted that “The single most important contribution of Amir's Philadelphia study was to place the rapist squarely within the subculture of violence.” This book is considered a classic and still-relevant feminist text today.

Interestingly, Amir rejected the 19th and early 20th century view that Black men primarily raped white women. Yet he replaced that view with a new theory which claimed that Black men primarily raped Black women. This transition from view Black men as inter-racial rapists to viewing them as intra-racial rapists is a key development in this racist history. Yet one more transformation in this feminist ideology was necessary.

In the mid-1970s, Lynn Curtis published several works, including the book Violence, Rape, and Culture, transforming the subculture of violence theory into a theory of Black male pathology. Unlike Amir, who argued that Black male rapists were the product of the savagery of Black culture, Curtis argued that Black male’s became rapists because in their quest for masculinity, the emulated white male patriarchy and the sexual violence such patriarchy relies upon. Unlike Amir’s theory, in which Black women play a role in transmitting the supposedly deficient values of Black culture, Curtis’ theory positions Black women as neutral or innocent bystanders to the brutality of pathological Black males trying desperately to join the patriarchy they have been excluded from. On this view, white male patriarchy is more sophisticated and Black male attempts at patriarchy are more savage—but they are fundamentally the same.

When Williams and Holmes wrote The Second Assault, they cited the work of Curtis and developed it further. In their own articulation, Williams and Holmes states that Black men became rapists not because Black culture is savage but because Black men imitate the patterns of white male patriarchy. The supposed sameness of Black males and white males (a male body) was thought to be the grounds for such imitative behavior, and the supposed sameness of Black women and white women (a female body) was thought to be the grounds for their respective vulnerability to sexual violence. Interestingly, The Second Assault was poorly received by scholars, with one reviewer noting that the quantitative data presented in the book did not support—nay, contradicted!—the conclusions presented.

Thus, when Crenshaw cites Williams and Holmes to claim that “the use of rape to legitimize efforts to control and discipline the Black community is well established in historical literature on rape and race,” she is relying on a book that not only emerges directly out of white supremacist theories of Black life (perpetuating the myth the Black male rapist in a new form) but a book that presents conclusions in contradiction with its evidence.

Again, Crenshaw’s “gender” analysis is not revolutionary, nor progressive—it is barley liberal. It is based in racist scholarship that was motivated by the political needs of elite white women rather than historical and sociological evidence. And it is only a few degrees away from the racist bile spewed by contemporary anti-Black right-wing pundits.

The racist, colonialist mentality embedded in Crenshaw’s intersectionality should not surprise us. Remember what she said in 1988: People can demand change only in ways that reflect the logic of the institutions they are challenging. Because intersectionality was created to make change within racist and colonialist institutions, it is only fitting that intersectionality reflect that racist and colonialist logic. This is where idealist versions of CRT take us."

(https://www.blackagendareport.com/theory-intersectionality-emerges-out-racist-colonialist-ideology-not-radical-politics-rethinking)


==Feminism, the Woman Question and the Patriarchy==

Tara van Dijk:

"The first iteration of the Woman Question, on the role of women in society, emerged alongside industrial capitalism, bourgeois liberalism, and the early expansion of the public sphere in the early 19th century. It touched multiple interrelated domains—legal, political, economic, educational, moral, and sexual. The very emergence of this question—alongside others like the Jewish Question and the “Negro” Question—revealed the contradictions and growing anxieties constitutive of modernity.1

Since the Enlightenment—and increasingly compounded by the shifting forces of industrial capitalism and empire—entire groups have been reframed as questions whenever their otherness, both real and imagined, disrupts the fantasy of social coherence. To be turned into a Question is to be rendered a mix of threat, nuisance, deviance, fascination, and opportunity. The group becomes a site of anxiety, enchantment, or perceived aberrance—one that must be studied, regulated, homogenised, and even eliminated. This gesture serves an ideological function: it displaces the structural contradictions of capitalist modernity onto scapegoated groups, allowing bourgeois society to imagine itself as a rational whole by projecting disorder elsewhere.

The best-case scenario for groups turned into questions is to be answered through reform, tolerance, or inclusion. In the worst, they are answered with elimination—via exclusion, incarceration, sterilisation, or extermination. Mediators—those who speak for, organise, or manage the group in question—often emerge from within it. Typically drawn from the more educated, middle- or upper-class strata, these figures attempt to define the desires, norms, and future of the collective. They both represent and discipline while conterminously modelling proper conduct and gatekeeping “relations” with other groups and the state. This positioning allows them to accrue both influence and income. Historically, these insiders-turned-arbiters have included the Talented Tenth2 for Black Americans and secular (often atheist) Zionists for Jews—each seeking to reshape their group in their own image in terms of conduct and aspirations.

Feminism, far from disrupting this ideological structure, follows the same pattern by amending the Woman Question with its own: the Patriarchy Question. The Woman Question has produced its own version of the Talented Tenth and Zionism—feminism. Feminists maintain their monopoly over the category “woman” by invoking The Patriarchy Question. The Patriarchy functions as adversary, alibi, and defence—especially against the Class Question.

Rather than liberate women from being a problem to be solved, feminism internalises the gesture and turns it inward: the ideal feminist becomes the standard against which all other women are measured—and found wanting. Feminist non-conforming women are re-cast as problems to be corrected, saved, or denounced in order to protect all women from The Patriarchy. The feminist desire ostensibly to liberate women has always doubled as a desire to change women—and feminists do not typically respond well when women resist their narratives, prohibitions, or instruction. All this from a movement that has long claimed to be born of from the ground up, highlighted as “grass-roots” for much of its history, while maintaining absolutely no accountability regarding who has created this internal political ethos of mandatory membership, much less why.

Similar to the groups that promote gender ideology and “trans rights,” the women’s movement and feminism have never been grassroots in origin. Each phase or wave of feminism has been led by a coterie of women—often backed by powerful benefactors—issuing population-level judgements about the sexes and projecting their own, typically bourgeois, experiences, neuroses, and desires onto “woman” as such.3

To liberate is to change—not only society, but also the group being freed from some constraint or barrier to entry. Liberation necessitates its opposite: a new regime, a new superego, a new normativity. The feminist project, to be successful, involves inculcating a new disciplinary regime of the self. The flip side of feminists’ Patriarchy fantasy is the fantasy of the “free woman”—the feminist ego-ideal.4

Feminists elevated their personal into the political, their biographical into cultural destiny. This translation is not itself illegitimate—that’s politics. The problem arises when those attempting to hegemonise the field of sexual politics and the category of “woman” behave as if they are not doing politics at all, but merely stating moral fact or correcting obvious injustice. This elevation of the feminist worldview to universal truth licenses them to dismiss or demean dissenters as deluded, damaged, or traitorous. And to those who fall outside the sacrosanct category of woman: guilty at birth. Feminists reinvented the Bible by repeating the very paradigm they claim to dismantle—and this is precisely where feminism’s despotism rears its head most powerfully.

Look slightly askance at the celebrated practice of “consciousness-raising”—later amplified and monetised by pop culture, political parties, and the media platforming feminist leaders or icons—and feminist politics begins to resemble a hybrid of proselytising and gaslighting. It didn’t merely offer critique; it installed an ideology and a new set of sanctioned desires. The Patriarchy was cast not only as an external structure of oppression, but as an internal contaminant of “misbehaving” women as well. What Betty Friedan diagnosed as the “feminine mystique,” bolstered by Simone de Beauvoir’s “second sex” syndrome, needed to be expunged from the female psyche. The claim was not just that society oppressed women, but that women mistook what The Patriarchy wanted from them as their own desires."

(https://savageminds.substack.com/p/feminisms-woman-problem)


==Porn vs the Patriarchy==

Tara Van Dijk:

"Patriarchy was about binding men to women—securing sex, reproduction, and social order through marriage and family. It required male investment in women as wives and mothers, creating the pair-bond as the foundation of society. Men gained power through women—by securing heirs, social status, and legacy. Porn is about getting off. That’s it. No bonds. No investment. No future. Just orgasm, pixels, and exit.

Porn doesn’t reinforce male power—it rewards male solitude and alienation. It thrives on bachelorhood, parasocial fantasies, AI girlfriends, cam girls—anything but marriage, family, or reproductive responsibility.

Patriarchy relied on the symbolic Father—the figure of Law, restraint, order. Porn is pure superegoic enjoyment. No law, no limit, no Father—just endless demands to enjoy. The Father said No. Porn only says Enjoy More!

If this is patriarchy, why are more men opting out of the marriage market entirely? Why is the dominant female complaint today not about being trapped or controlled, but about the lack of husband or father material?

Sperm banks don’t scream “patriarchy”! They flag male exit from reproduction.

This sector of the fertility industry exists because of less men willing—or needed—to play the paternal role. The sperm is alienated, commodified, and sold on the market.

Patriarchy—whatever its faults—was reproductive. Porn is anti-reproductive."

(https://morbidsymptom.substack.com/p/the-porn-industry-and-sperm-banks)

[[Category:Gender]]
[[Category:P2P_Class_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]