=Typology=

== Modes of Property Table - By Paul Cockshott ==

This typology is proposed by Paul Cockshott.

"Who owns what is the basic question which must be answered by any system of prop-
erty law. The atoms of property relations are owners and the things they own;
systems of property are like molecules built up of these atoms. The simplest
property relationship is ‘A owns B’. But at diﬀerent times and in diﬀerent places
this right of ownership amounts to diﬀerent things. To a peasant farmer with
property in land and a commodity dealer with property in wheat futures, own-
ership has a diﬀerent practical signiﬁcance. Let us consider
ownership as being made up of four components: the right to use, the right
to buy, the right to sell and the right to inherit. In the previous example the
peasant is more interested in the right to use and to inherit; to the commodity
dealer the rights to buy and sell are everything. (By the right to inherit we
include acquisitions by means of marriage.)
We can order the component rights as follows: use, sale, purchase, inheri-
tance. These rights can be treated as logical predicates. In logic a set of ordered
pairs (A,B) for which some predicate holds is termed a relation. For instance,
the relation of usufruct is the set of all pairs (A,B) such that A uses B.
We thus have four distinct relations that deﬁne property rights. These derive
from four predicates: the relation Usufruct from the predicate (A uses B), the
relation Sale from (A can sell B), Purchase from (A can buy B) and Inheritance
from the predicate (A can inherit B).

A given pair of entities, for instance a trader on the wheat futures market
(A) and a shipment of wheat (B), may be members of more than one of these
sets. In this case the pair (wheat futures trader, wheat shipment) would be
included in the relations Sale and Purchase. This is because the Sale relation
includes all pairings of potential sellers with all that they can potentially sell,
and similarly for Purchase.

A property right between a class of owners P and a class of owned things Q
can therefore be characterised by the set of property relations that pairs (p,q)
can belong to, there p is an instance of P and q of Q. A property right between
classes of entities is therefore a set of between 0 and 4 relations.

Since any predicate is a Boolean relation, we can thus encode property rights
in terms of 4 boolean values, giving a total of 16 different forms of property
right."


{|cellpadding="20" cellspacing="0" border="1"
|A uses B 
| A can sell B 
| A can buy B 
| A can inherit B 
| examples 
|-
| no     
| no       
| no    
| no 
|(slave, American law)
|-
| yes    
| no       
| no    
| no 
| (collective farm and land)
|-
| no     
| yes      
| no    
| no 
|(hired worker and labour)
|-
| yes    
| yes      
| no    
| no
| (??)
|-
| no    
| no      
| yes  
| no
| ?
|-
| yes    
| no      
| yes  
| no  
| (consumer and electricity) 
|- 
| no     
| yes      
| yes   
| no 
| (commodity trader and commodity)
|-
| yes    
| yes      
| yes   
| no 
| (capitalist ﬁrm/factory)
|-
| no     
| no       
| no   
| yes
| ??
|-
| yes    
| no       
| no    
| yes 
| (traditional peasant and land)
|-
| no    
| yes      
| no    
| yes
| ??
|-
| yes   
| yes      
| no    
| yes
| ??
|-
| no    
| no       
| yes   
| yes
| ??
|-
| yes   
| no      
| yes  
| yes
| ??
|-
| no    
| yes      
| yes   
| yes
| ??
|-
| yes   
| yes      
| yes   
| yes 
| (full bourgeois right)
|-
|}


=More information=

* [[Property]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]