
Video part 1 at http://peakmoment.tv/videos/local-communities-dismantling-corporate-rule-part-1-258/; [http://peakmoment.tv/videos/local-communities-dismantling-corporate-rule-part-2-259/ part 2]


=Description=

Part 1:

"Community Rights educator Paul Cienfuegos explains how “We The People” are exercising the authority to govern ourselves and fight corporate rule. When small farmers in rural Pennsylvania wanted to say “no” to a corporate factory farm coming into their community, they learned they couldn’t, because it would violate the corporation’s “rights” and state pre-emption laws. So they did something technically illegal — their town passed an innovative ordinance banning corporate factory farming. It worked! The corporation left town. Pittsburgh upshifted the approach: Rather than define what we don’t want, define what we DO want. Their “Right to Water” stopped natural gas fracking in the city. Ordinances like this have been passed in over 150 communities in 9 states."
(http://peakmoment.tv/videos/local-communities-dismantling-corporate-rule-part-1-258/)


Part 2:

“I’m not aware of any other social movement going on in the US today that has the power to challenge and win against corporate rule, push back and dismantle corporate rights, and enshrine rights for actual human beings,” asserts Community Rights educator and organizer Paul Cienfuegos. Local Community Rights ordinances are not only stripping “rights” from corporations, but asserting that nature has rights. Two Oregon counties have submitted a “Right to Local Food Systems” ordinance which forbids genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and protects heritage seeds. Even more, it asserts the right to fully-functioning natural communities, even requiring a corporation to restore whatever it has disrupted. Are these ordinances being challenged? Yes they are, but Paul explains how corporation leaders who want to sue are forced to do so on the community’s terms—a brilliant strategy."
(http://peakmoment.tv/videos/local-communities-dismantling-corporate-rule-part-2-259/)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Rights]]