
= journalist and author of the book: [[PostCapitalism]]


=Bio=

Adapted from the Wikipedia [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Mason_(journalist)]:

"Paul Mason (born 23 January 1960) is a British journalist and broadcaster. He was Culture and Digital Editor of Channel 4 News, becoming the programme's Economics Editor on 1 June 2014, a post he formerly held on BBC2's Newsnight programme. He is the author of several books, and a visiting professor at the University of Wolverhampton.

In August 2001, Mason joined the BBC Two television programme Newsnight as Business Editor. His first live appearance on Newsnight was on the day of the September 11 attacks in 2001.

In May 2007, Mason's book Live Working or Die Fighting: How the Working Class Went Global was published by Harvill Secker. The book was longlisted for the Guardian First Book Award on 24 August 2007. In June 2007, Mason presented Spinning Yarns, a four-part series on the history of the cotton industry for BBC Radio Four. Mason appeared as the key talent in a new five-part BBC series Credit Crash Britain, first broadcast on BBC Two on 30 October 2008.

In January 2012, Mason's book Why It's Kicking Off Everywhere: The New Global Revolutions was published in paperback by Verso.

In August 2013 it was announced that Mason would join Channel 4 News as its culture and digital editor. In May 2014, it was announced that he would become the programme's Economics Editor at the beginning of the following month."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Mason_(journalist))


=Books=

#Mason, Paul (2007). Live Working or Die Fighting: How the Working Class Went Global. London: Harvill Secker. ISBN 0-436-20615-3.
#Mason, Paul (2009). Meltdown: The End of the Age of Greed. London: Verso. ISBN 978-1-84467-396-4.
#Mason, Paul (2012). Why It's Kicking Off Everywhere: The New Global Revolutions. London: Verso. ISBN 978-1-84467-851-8.
#Mason, Paul (2012). Rare Earth. Harpenden: No Exit. ISBN 1-84243-846-8.
#Mason, Paul (2015). [[PostCapitalism]]: A Guide to our Future. Allen Lane. ISBN 9781846147388.


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:UK]]