=Discussion=

On 10/20/10 5:41 PM, Kevin Carson wrote:

 The Internet has opened up the possibility for little guys like me
 producing for the small end of the Long Tail, to make a few thousand
 $$ a year in revenue and add some much needed FU money to our bank
 accounts, who would have remained "mute inglorious Miltons" our entire
 lives in the old days of gatekeepers.  And guess what?  Every book
 I've ever written is available on torrent sites, with no discernable
 loss of revenue.

This is not specifically directed at your publications, because you have put
much (or all?) under a Creative Commons license. And certainly there is a
value in "convenience" as well as "generosity" and "reciprocity" where some
people will pay (or donate) towards something for some reasons, even if they
can either legally or illegally get it for "free". There is always the
argument that the people who will copy something are not the people who
would have paid for it anyway (although, I think that is not totally true in
our society depending on the situation, the person, and the product).

But in general, a lot of artists, writers, musicians, programmers, etc. may
think, "Well, if I create [[artificial scarcity]] of my works by putting them
under restrictive proprietary licenses, then I'll pull in US$1000 a year or
whatever, so that's a great thing." But this ignore the consequences that if
everyone does this, it makes it harder to build mashups, or improve on what
others are doing (collaborating in a no-direct-communications indirect
stigmergic way). So, the cost of that US$1000 for the 99% of writers,
artists, etc. who will never make it big (not because of lack of talent, but
just because our society would never support more than a few thousand or
whatever the number highly paid artists and writers like JK Rowling etc.) is
that all artists have less to draw from, and that, overall, costs go up for
everyone, and overall, the cultural climate gets a chill (compared to, say,
the Jazz age of people copying each other with changes).

Google's Doodle today is [http://www.google.com/search?q=Dizzy+Gillespie Dizzy Gillespie], btw:
 "Together with Charlie Parker, he was a major figure in the development of
 bebop and modern jazz. He taught and influenced many other musicians,
 including trumpeters Miles Davis, Fats Navarro, Clifford Brown, Arturo
 Sandoval, Lee Morgan, Jon Faddis[2] and Chuck Mangione.[3]"

Could Jazz have happened the way it did with today's copyrights and culture
surrounding that?

Further, and I'm being somewhat speculative here, the less that 1% of
artists who do charge for their work but have enough capital for extensive
marketing (like an alliance with a deep pockets publisher) have a huge
competitive advantage. For most of the people buying licenses to content, if
you are going to pay, say, US$1 for a song, would you rather spend that
money on an established highly marketed artist (with lots of radio airplay,
etc.) where you know what you are getting, or would you rather take a chance
on an unknown? Sure, some people will take a chance, but overall, the cost
of making that decision is an extra cost in time and worry above and beyond
whatever your actually pay in dollars (or whatever). So, in a way, charging
for stuff empowers the richest 1% by affirming their behavior.

So, focusing on the [[money]] changes the cultural climate for the 99% of
writers and artists etc. in a negative way, IMHO. Programming has been
moving beyond that with free and open source software. Engineers are
starting to move beyond that too.

There remains the issue of how to support people who just want to give stuff
away. I think a "[[basic income]]" is a simple solution to that (as are better
3D printers, more robotics, and so on).

With that said, I currently have an [http://www.artificialscarcity.com/ "artificially scarce" application out related to music composition] for the Android, and I feel very conflicted
about it. :-) Essentially, what is most [[scarcity|scarce]] about it (as far as what
bothers me most right now) is that others can't help improve it if the
wanted to. Although it is scarce in other ways too.

Still, on the other hand, from a "life support" point of view, pouring a lot
of time into it would make the most sense if it had a ready return on that
time. But I think the problem here is what is discussed in "The Seven Laws
of Money" by Michael Philips, where he says:
 "Do it! Money will come when you are doing the right thing."
 But he also has as a corollary, "Don't expect the world owes you a living."
 meaning, you may need to find another means of life support while you do
 your project. <ref>[http://www.chebucto.ns.ca/Commerce/RATNA/june2.html "The Seven Laws of Money" by Michael Philips]</ref>

The problem is, that when that book was written back in 1977, it was more
feasible for the average person (especially in Western Europe, but still in
the USA) to have a decent life doing fairly unskilled stuff. But now, with
robotics and other automation, better design, voluntary social networks, and
limited demand, and the relative erosion of the value of the minimum wage
and 30 years of essentially flat wages for most jobs, the value of most
unskilled labor is plummeting. So, it is harder to say, be a writer or
musician in the evenings and have a day job, when the fact is, there aren't
as many day jobs and the ones out there pay less and less and have worse and
worse working conditions. And, as with NFL Football as the (totally
unrealistic) career aspiration for so many children, it is easy to look
around and say that musician or artist or writer is pulling in the big
bucks, so why can't I? I predict this, following Marshall Brain's Manna
ideas, is only going to get worse, as more and more things become "the
information economy". There may still be jobs doing unskilled things, but
they will pay even worse. And there may still be high skill jobs, but the
requirements will keep rising for what you need to do (right now, you need a
combination of connections, technical skill, and domain knowledge to land
some good paying work, and the bar may keep going up).

Still, as in the book by Alice Plotnik, "[http://www.amazon.com/Honk-Youre-Writer-Unadulterated-Inspiration/dp/0671778137/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1287822736&sr=8-1 Honk if you're a writer]"
there is value in good writing that can be applied in all sorts of contexts
other than the next Great American Novel (or whatever). The same is true for
creativity in general, musical talent, and so on -- such can be useful in
many contexts.

Although in the issue of an economy transitioning to more freedom and
individual decisions about how to spend time, using talents to support some
repressive corporate infrastructure or scarcity-based paradigm is its own
sets of ethical concerns.

So, I won't say there are easy answers, but I can say that in twenty to
thirty years, one way or another, I expect the economy of industrialized
countries to look very different than it does today (even without a
technological "singularity") just based on the unrealized potential of what
machines and better design can do now. It may take a decade or more for the
implications to percolate through society related to new technology or knew
knowledge, like the implications of what self-driving cars mean for
eliminating a whole range of jobs, what vitamin D and
vegetables/fruits/legumes and understanding the pleasure trap mean to
eliminating a whole bunch of sick care jobs, what bloggers on the internet
means to eliminating a whole bunch of newspaper jobs, etc.).

The sad thing about this is that we could probably make a paradigm
transition now, but it may well be a decade or two of suffering and
repression (including perhaps copyright police and long jail sentences)
before our society as a whole transitions to an abundance paradigm. I think
the paradigm shift is inevitable -- IMHO it is either choose to change our
socioeconomic paradigm or choose to blow ourselves up fighting over
(mis)perceived scarcity with the tools of abundance. But, even if we choose
"survival with style", the big issue is how to surf that wave of change
without getting drowned by it? And I won't say there are any general answers
for all people, since a lot of it is carving out specific niches related to
what our society is willing to support.

So, if you are over 65 in the USA, you can live frugally on Social Security.
If you're of college age, you might spend twenty years is school waiting it
out. If you have some government job, you might try to hold on to it. If you
have some hands-on service niche, you might try to keep doing that, etc.
even as one by one some profitable niches will fall by the wayside as the
for-pay economy implodes like Bob Black predicted in "The Abolition of Work".

An important aspect is to see what is going on at the meta-level above, to
create a sort of "quorum sensing" ability, so that as the economy continues
to shift, a paradigm shift can happen when enough people realize it is time.

 "Quorum sensing is a type of decision-making process used by decentralized
 groups to coordinate behavior. Many species of bacteria use quorum sensing
 to coordinate their gene expression according to the local density of their
 population. Similarly, some social insects use quorum sensing to make
 collective decisions about where to nest. In addition to its function in
 biological systems, quorum sensing has several useful applications for
 computing and robotics. Quorum sensing can function as a decision-making
 process in any decentralized system, as long as individual components have
 (a) a means of assessing the number of other components they interact with
 and (b) a standard response once a threshold number of components is detected." <ref>[[wikipedia: Quorum sensing]]</ref>

So, open manufacturing is part of all that. Every new project moves us a bit
closer to the point where, overall, our society is going to sense that some
new level has been reached of social potential. And, at that point,
hopefully there will be a non-violent peaceful shift (hoping) including some
marathon sessions in Congress where the laws just get changed about a lot of
things. [http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/change/science_nonviolence.html]

That really assumes (like in James P. Hogan's Voyage from Yesteryear) that
most of the people defending the status quo realize change is inevitable at
some point (like when their children are printing out all their own toys),
and decide there is not point slagging and plaguing and terrorizing the
planet just to make their economic religion of artificial scarcity true
again. For a parallel, it is perhaps the same as when women in the USA got
the right to vote again (again, since they had it centuries before with
various Native tribes) with whatever social dynamics was operating there to
get people who had no vote the right to vote. Of course, back then, women
were an essential part of the unpaid economy, so they had vast amounts of
unrealized economic power. I can wonder what real power legions of the
unemployed would have (other than riots which would just justify more
repression and more scarcity-thinking)? It would have to be a more subtle
power, something about sympathy, or family, or friendship, or creativity, or
something like that -- for example, if the world is running on free
software, and on open designs, then the people making that software and
those designs, like the unpaid women in the 1910s, still have a lot of say
in how the society is running in practice. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women%27s_suffrage#United_States]

We need someone to make the open manufacturing equivalent of this video (for
engineers/artists/writers/musicians/programmers/etc. :-) sometime around
2040. :-)

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dPF0SGh_PQ "School House Rock - Sufferin' Till Suffrage"]

For example, made up just now, a something to put here: :-)

"""
Amendment 29
# The twenty-eight article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States regarding indefinite imprisonment and torture of anyone suspected of violating copyright or advocating for free software or alternative economics is hereby repealed.
# All copyrights and patents are hereby declared null and void and all international treaties regarding such are hereby considered to be withdrawn.
# All citizens shall henceforth be given a monthly sum of fiat dollars as a basic income equivalent to one-half the previous year's GDP divided by the numbers of citizens to be funded by income taxes, property taxes, rents of public resources, fees, and other means; subtracted from this sum shall be a fee to supply universal health care to every citizen and visitor to the USA; this monthly payment shall replace all government support payments such as Social Security and all public school funding, and compulsory schooling is hereby outlawed in any State, Territory, or possession of the United States.
# All government decision making and communications will henceforth be done formally and in the open using publicly accessible information processing tools including structured arguments and version control.
# The population of the US House of Representatives is hereby set at one representative per 50,000 citizens (elected using paper ballots or by lot), who shall in turn annually select a President by random lot of those willing to serve in that capacity. The US Senate is hereby disbanded.
# All corporations are deemed not to be persons and not to have any rights that persons have (especially all corporations henceforth have no right to privacy in any of their operations); all owners of limited-liability for-profit organizations hereby are deemed to be fully liable for all the actions of such for-profit organizations.
# US citizenship shall be deemed to cover anyone on the planet Earth formally declaring at a US embassy that they are now a US citizen and subject to the rights and responsibilities of a citizen.
# Any running computer program able to pass the Advanced Turing test and displaying consistent behavior in adherence with emergent social norms and asking for citizenship shall hereby also be deemed to be a citizen.
# The US military is hereby directed to emphasize intrinsic security and mutual security in all its strategic doctrines; a Department of Peace and Abundance is hereby created with the mission to help create joy, abundance, health, education, and intrinsic/mutual security for all who wish it.
# etc. :-)
""" <ref>http://www.usconstitution.net/const.html</ref>

--Paul Fernhout 
<ref>From an Open Manufacturing message: [http://groups.google.com/group/openmanufacturing/msg/20c83ff49e777b5d - Your time is up, publishers. Book piracy is about to arrive on a massive scale – Telegraph Blogs]</ref>

=References=
<references/>