
'''Nonprofits of the Future'''

URL = http://www.siconversations.org/shows/detail1215.html


=Description=


"Technology is changing the game for organizations in the social space. In this interview with John Powers, nonprofit technology consultant Paul Lamb explores how the web is already transforming nonprofits and NGOs, and looks ahead to the potential that ubiquitous, mobile computing, virtual worlds, user generated content, and social networking have to up-end traditional constraints and open new doors. Although the pace of change can be daunting, venturing into the tech frontier can increase effectiveness and help smaller nonprofits take their destiny into their own hands.

In the mid-1990s, most nonprofits were not on the internet or using email. By now, these basic tools are taken for granted, and the next wave of technological creativity is spilling over to the social sector. Many new resources for connecting organizations to each other and to their constituents have come on line. Blogging has already gone mainstream in just a few short years, followed closely by related trends such as audio/video podcasts and wikis. Virtual worlds, most notably Second Life, have developed into interesting educational and collaborative spaces. Lamb invites us to imagine a time where people with similar passions for their cause can be instantaneously connected through a web of colleagues and resources, taking advantage of SMS and GIS-enabled mobile devices in a rich, social network.

Technology also promises to increase the transparency of organizations and help equalize access. With easier ways to track and share data, better accountability and rapid feedback will become expected. Powerful, direct connections between people and organizations are dis-intermediating the walled gardens of the past, giving individuals and smaller groups a new voice. Lamb closes with some thoughts on the challenges which organizations face in deploying new technologies, but overall he exudes the optimism and excitement and gives a great deal of practical guidance for anyone looking to stay ahead of the curve."
(http://www.siconversations.org/shows/detail1215.html)


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Movements]]