

etcgroup:

=Description=

"Eighty-five percent of the world’s food is grown and
consumed – if not within the “100 mile diet” – within national
borders and/or the same eco-regional zone. Most of this
food is grown from peasant-bred seed without the industrial
chain’s synthetic fertilizers. Peasants breed and nurture 40
livestock species and almost 8000 breeds. Peasants also
breed 5000 domesticated crops and have donated more
than 1.9 million plant varieties to the world’s gene banks.
Peasant fishers harvest and protect more than 15,000
freshwater species. The work of peasants and pastoralists
maintaining soil fertility is 18 times more valuable than the
synthetic fertilizers provided by the seven largest
corporations.

Peasants have not consolidated – but they have organized.
There are 1.5 billion on 380 million farms; 800 million more
growing urban gardens; 410 million gathering the hidden
harvest of our forests and savannas; 190 million pastoralists
and well over 100 million peasant fishers. At least 370
million of these are also indigenous peoples. Together these
peasants make up almost half the world’s peoples and they
grow at least 70% of the world’s food. Better than anyone
else, they feed the hungry. If we are to eat in 2050 we will
need all of them and all of their diversity."
(http://www.etcgroup.org/upload/publication/pdf_file/ETC_Who_Will_Feed_Us.pdf)

=Discussion=

Food chain or food web? The
industrial agricultural model talks
about a food “chain” with Monsanto
at one end and Wal-Mart at the other
– a linked chain of agricultural input
companies (seed, fertilizer, pesticides,
machinery) at the start that is
attached to traders, processors and
retailers. In fact, most of the world’s
food doesn’t follow a chain; food
moves within a web: peasants are
also consumers who exchange with
one another; urban consumers are
also peasant producers growing and
exchanging food; farmers are often
fishers and foragers and their lands
exist within an ecosystem with multiple
functions. 85% of the food that is
grown is consumed within the same
eco-region or (at least) within national
borders and most of it is grown beyond
the reach of the multinational
chain.

The World Bank and many bilateral
development agencies have bought
into the urban legend that agricultural
development can pick and choose
the links in the food chain they like.
This is naïve. The reason Monsanto,
DuPont and Syngenta (which control
half the proprietary commercial seed
supply and about the same share
of global pesticides) are focused on
breeding crops like maize, soybeans,
wheat and (now) rice is because the
big processors like Nestlé, Unilever,
Kraft and ConAgra can manipulate
these cheap carbohydrate fillers (the
four crops account for two-thirds
of U.S. consumer calories) into
thousands of food (and non-food)
products that can “bulk up” more
expensive goods. The processors,
in turn, are scrambling to meet the
exigencies of consumer-attuned
retailers like Wal-Mart, Tesco, Carrefour,
and Metro that demand cheap,
uniform and predictable products on
their shelves and show no hesitation
to reach back down the food chain to
dictate how farmers (and which farmers)
will produce food.

Through a shared corporate culture
and shared markets, different parts
of the food chain have developed
strong informal bonds: there are close
links between Syngenta and Archer
Daniels Midland, for example, and
between Monsanto and Cargill and
between DuPont and Bunge. The
industrial model comes with chains
attached. Buying into any part of it
means buying into all of it.

...

The 712 million
rural hungry are significantly less
cash-dependent than their urban
counterparts and have greater access
to land and livestock and to
the fish and forest products that can
be crucial to adequate calories and
reasonable nutrition. Meanwhile, the
238 million urban hungry are spending
between 60-80% of their income
on food – about one-third more than
people in rural areas – and getting
fewer calories to boot. But, a surprising
proportion of the urban hungry
also manage roof top/back gardens
and livestock pens, where they grow
a critical share of their own food and
sell to local markets. The UNDP conservatively
estimates that some 800
million people are actively engaged in
urban food production. Nevertheless,
when food prices start to climb, urban
peasants often begin trekking back to
the countryside.

Peasants currently manage over half
of the world’s arable land.9 (See annex.)
From regional data, it is fair to
estimate: 17 million peasant farms in
Latin America grow between a half to
two-thirds of staple foods; Africa’s 33
million peasant farms (mostly femaleled)
account for 80% of farms and
most of the domestic food consumption;
Asia’s 200 million peasant rice
farms produce most of its harvest.10
Although their well-being fluctuates
sometimes tragically, and they survive
under harsh conditions with little
external support, the 1,520 million
peasant farm family members mostly
feed themselves. The 712 million
rural hungry (who can’t afford to buy
much of their food in the industrial
food chain’s markets) likely depend
on peasants for whatever food they
have. There are another 1.1 billion
in the rural South who may not be
hungry but also have limited access
to the industrial chain and who are
also likely to rely heavily on peasant
surpluses as well as their own hunting,
gathering and gardening.

Peasants are also the ones who feed
the hungry. Rural peasant production
is closest to the 712 million rural
people who make up three-quarters
of the world’s hungry. These people
are not only rural but also remote and
impoverished or, in other words, of
little interest to the industrial chain
that prefers middle-class urban markets.
Meanwhile, urban peasants
grow at least a quarter of the food
in the South’s cities – the food that
is most accessible to the 238 million
hungry people who can’t afford high
food prices. By these estimates, at
least 70% of the world’s population is
fed by peasants.

Policymakers must re-examine the
common fallacy that, even when
properly-supported, the world’s peasant
food network lacks the bounty,
efficiency and resilience to confront
the food and climate crises. At the
same time, policymakers must deconstruct
the mythology surrounding
the effectiveness of the industrial food
system. The reality is that the world’s
3 billion or so indigenous and peasant
producers rural and urban, fishers
and pastoralists not only feed a majority
of the world’s people and most
of the world’s malnourished, they create
and conserve most of the world’s
biodiversity and are humanity’s best
defense against climate change.

As we prepare for 2050, then, logic
suggests the need for policies that
will make it possible for rural people
to remain rural and for urbanites to
grow as much of their own food as
possible."


==Hidden harvest==

"So-called underutilized
lands are the “commons” from
which rural and peri-urban peasants
collect and manage medicinal plants,
fuel, as well as fish, game, uncultivated
vegetables, nuts, fruit, and fungi.

The “hidden harvest” not only provides
irreplaceable nutrients in their
diet, it is also essential for food security.

Collection of “wild” and uncultivated
materials takes place throughout
the year but can become critical
for survival in the weeks or months
leading up to harvest when family
food stocks are lowest. In some areas
of Africa, wild resources cover up to
80% of household food needs during
staple crop shortages. Even when
the annual proportion of the hidden
harvest seems low, its availability can
mean the difference between life and
death. Turning the commons into a
global link in the industrial food or fuel
chain could massively increase food
insecurity.

For example, peasant communities in
Borneo routinely gather nourishment
from 800 different plants and more
than 100 species of ground fauna
along with hundreds of bird species.

Only a third of their diet comes
from cultivated crops.26 During the
rainy season in one region of Kenya,
women draw 35% of their plant material
(for food, fibre and medicines)
from so-called “marginal” lands. Other
peasants in Kenya draw a quarter
of their annual food supply from the
‘wild’ but their dependence rises to
almost half during the dry months.
Peasant women in Uttar Pradesh,
India, derive almost half their income
from forest species. Even middleclass
women in the same region
obtain a third of their income from the
same source. In one semi-arid region
in India where common lands have
declined between a third and a half
since the 1960s, peasants still derive
14–23% of their nourishment from
‘wild’ plants and animals. In drought
years, this vital harvest can rise to
half of their food intake. The Mende
of Sierra Leone take more than half
their food from forests, streams and
fallow fields. In sum, it is safe to estimate
that no less than 15% of the
annual food supply of rural peasants
in the global South comes from lands
and life that the peasants nurture
– but don’t cultivate and that economists
don’t calculate.27 But the most
important reality for rural peoples and
policymakers is that the absence of
this 15% of the food supply in the
weeks before crop harvests could
mean mass starvation."


==Urban harvest==

"Urban peasant food
production may be even more substantial.
According to one estimate
cited by Canada’s International Development
Research Centre (IDRC),
25% of the entire global food output
is grown in cities.28 Undertaken before
the recent food crisis, it is likely
that this figure significantly underestimates
the current level of urban food
production. History shows that urban
agriculture production rises with
food prices. Some years ago, UNDP
estimated that at least 800 million
urbanites produce some of their own
food, including at least 200 million
urban families that sell some of their
produce in local markets.29 Again,
these figures are probably much
higher today. Almost 18% of the land
in downtown Hanoi is used to grow
food.30 In Quito, about 35% of urban
land is used for agriculture and in the
Argentinan city of Rosario, 80% of
the land grows some food. In Abomey
and Bohicon, two cities in Benin, half
of the population in the peri-urban
area is growing food as their primary
activity.

Urban food production is a second
“hidden harvest” that is usually overlooked
or opposed by city and national
administrations but is vital to local
food security. As multinational hypermarket
chains spread throughout the
cities and towns of Latin America,
Asia, and now Africa, urban production
is seen as competition and the
city water and sanitation regulations
are sometimes employed to destroy
the competitors. Yet, in the middle of
a food crisis and with climate change
all around, every effort must be made
to strengthen city farming. Urban gardening
and livestock keeping would
benefit from policies that promote
sound farming practices and safeguard
water and soil quality.

The industrial food chain seems to
be unaware that not less than 15%
of the food critical to the rural hungry
and perhaps 25% of the food critical
to the urban hungry lies outside
the conventional agricultural system.
This being the case, how can they
protect food security? How is it that
the industrial chain can deny the importance
of these unconventional food
webs? And, most importantly, how
can policy-makers – at a time of food
and climate crisis – safeguard and
strengthen this web?"


==Peasant breeding system==

The bottom line critique of industrial
plant and livestock breeding is that
it focuses on too few species, the
wrong species and the wrong breeding
goals. It is also too slow, too
expensive, and its dependence on
intellectual property forces the development
of varieties that exacerbate
climate vulnerability.

The peasant breeding system creates
vastly more varieties of many
more species that has as its primary
goal ecosystem adaptability and
yield reliability. However, this in no
way means that the peasant web
will manage climate change without
consequences. Peasants, too, will
experience growing conditions they
have never seen before and they will
need to work with novel species and
breeding material in order to survive.


How is it possible
to work with peasants? To do so
will require a social re-organization of
scientific research. However, peasant
organizations have never been better
prepared to meet these challenges.
Communications technologies make
it vastly easier to maintain a constant
exchange of research information
between all the concerned parties.
Conventional public researchers and
peasant breeders could and should
be able to work together.
Today’s climate change emergency
should also encourage policymakers
to consider a “tried-and-true” participatory
breeding strategy that brought
tremendous plant diversity to a range
of new ecosystems in one country.

Between the 1860s and 1920s, the
U.S. Department of Agriculture annually
mailed millions of small packets
of experimental seeds to farmers
throughout the United States.56
Farmers in much of the country were
breaking sod for the first time and
there were few certainties about growing
conditions. The initiative was highly
successful. Tens of thousands of
farmers/plant breeders produced their
own varieties, exchanged seed with
their neighbors, and turned their country
into a breadbasket. Today, national
and international gene banks should
follow USDA’s example, multiply appropriate
seed stocks57, and – working
with peasant organizations – send
small packets of experimental seed to
producers around the world."

==Peasant research==

There is growing
recognition and support for peasant
farmers and their role in confronting
the food and climate crisis. The first ever
independent global assessment
of agricultural science and technology,
the International Assessment
of Agricultural Knowledge, Science
& Technology (IAASTD), sponsored
by the World Bank, the Food & Agriculture
Organization and other U.N.
agencies, warns that the world can’t
rely on technological fixes – such as
transgenic crops – to solve systemic
problems of persistent hunger, poverty
and environmental crises, and
affirms the crucial role of small-scale
farmers and low-impact farming.

UNEP’s February 2009 report, The
Environmental Food Crisis, calls for a
global micro-financing fund to boost
small-scale farmer productivity and
the development of diversified and
resilient eco-agriculture systems that
provide critical ecosystem services,
as well as adequate food to meet
local needs. The Córdoba Call for
Coherence and Action on Food Security
and Climate Change asserts that
the interests of peasant producers
must be at the center of the food and
climate debate and that “excessive
reliance on market-based approaches
is a mistake.”87 The authors of the
Call are food and agriculture specialists
and include the first and current
UN Special Rapporteurs on the Right
to Food.

Peasants must take the lead in
developing strategies – including
technological strategies – to meet the
food and climate crises. This doesn’t
mean abandoning the potential for
conventional science. The Western
model of science and technology has
developed micro-techniques that can
have macro applications – high-tech
advances that are often widely deployed.

By contrast, peasant research
often develops macro-technologies
for micro-environments – that is,
wide-tech and complex, integrated
strategies that are location specific.

Over the last hundred years – since
the rediscovery of Mendel’s law –
these two scientific solitudes have
rarely been integrated. These strategies
can only be brought together
appropriately when leadership comes
from the peasant organizations that
are both closest to the land and closest
to the hungry. Food sovereignty
– the right of nations and peoples to
democratically determine their own
food systems – is paramount."
(http://www.etcgroup.org/upload/publication/pdf_file/ETC_Who_Will_Feed_Us.pdf)

[[Category:Agrifood]]