
=Bibliography=

Via Ron Eglash [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice]:

* “hybrid economy”  (Lessig,  2009);    
* “polycentric  governance”  (Ostrom,  2010),  
* “peer  mutualism” (Benkler,  2013),  
* “collaborative  economy”  (Kostakis  and  Bauwens  2014);  
* “solidarity  economy”  (Kawano et  al.,  2010;  Penn  and  Shear  2015),  
* “community  economy”  (Gibson-Graham,  2006;  Miller,  2013),  
* “sharing  economy”  (Hamari et  al.,  2015),  
* “real  utopias” (Wright, 2013), 

#LESSIG, L. (2009). Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. New York: Penguin Books.
#OSTROM, E. (2010). "Beyond markets and states: polycentric governance of complex economic systems". American Economic Review (American Economic Association) 100 (3): 641–672.
#BENKLER,  Y.  (2013).  “Practical  Anarchism:  Peer  Mutualism,  Market  Power,  and  the  Fallible State.” Politics and Society 4(2), 213-251.
#KOSTAKIS, V.  & BAUWENS  M.  (2014). [[Network Society and Future Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy]]. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
#KAWANO,  E.  M.  & TELLER-ELLSBERG,  J.  (Eds.).  (2010). Solidarity  Economy  I:  Building  Alternatives  for  People  and  Planet.  Amherst,  MA: Center  for  Popular Economics.  2010. “Building a Solidarity Economy from Real World Practices.”
#GIBSON-GRAHAM, J. K. (2006). A Postcapitalist Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
#HAMARI, J., MIMMI S.  & UKKONEN, A. (2015). “The Sharing Economy: Why People Participate in  Collaborative  Consumption.” SSRN  Scholarly  Paper.  Rochester,  NY:  Social  Science Research Network. Retreived from:<http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2271971>
#WRIGHT,  E.  (2013). “Transforming Capitalism  through Real  Utopias.” American Sociological Review. 78(1):1-25.


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]