

=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Peer learning is an educational practice in which students interact with other students to attain educational goals." In this context, it can be compared to the practices that go by the name cooperative learning. However, other contemporary views on peer learning relax the constraints, and position peer or peer-to-peer learning as a mode of "learning for everyone, by everyone, about almost anything."[2] In either formulation, peer learning is seen to manifest aspects of self-organization that are mostly absent from pedagogical models of teaching and learning."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer_learning)

=More Information=

==Bibliography==


* Godbee, B. 2005. A (Re)cognition of Peerness as Friendship. Writing Lab Newsletter, Vol. 29,
No. 6, pp. 13‒15.

* Heikkinen, H. L. T., Jokinen, H. & Tynjälä, P. 2012. Teacher education and development as
lifelong and lifewide learning. In H. L. T. Heikkinen, H. Jokinen & P. Tynjälä (Eds.), PeerGroup Mentoring for Teacher Development. New York: Routledge, pp. 3‒30.

* Käyhkö, K. 2015a. The Conceptual and Theoretical Aspects of Adult Peerness. Conference
paper. 22nd International Conference on Learning, 9‒11.7.2015, Madrid, Spain.

* Käyhkö, K. 2015b. Vertaisuus vapaassa sivistystyössä. [Peerness in liberal adult education]
Research paper. Vapaan sivistystyön avoin tutkimustyöpaja, 27‒28.08.2015, Joensuu.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E.. 2008 [1991]. Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. 19th printing. New York: Cambridge University Press.

* Lundberg, C. A. 2003. The Influence of Time-Limitations, Faculty, and Peer Relationships on
Adult Student Learning: A Causal Model. The Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 74, No. 6,
pp. 665‒688.

* Murphey, T. & Arao, H. 2001. Reported Belief Changes through Near Peer Role Modeling. The
Electronic Journal for English as a Second Language. Vol 5, No. 3. http://www.teslej.org/wordpress/issues/volume5/ej19/ej19a1/
(read 02.05.2015).

* Murphey, T. l996. Near peer role models. Teachers Talking To Teachers: JALT Teacher
Education SIG Newsletter, 4 (3), pp. 21‒22.

* Shiner, M. 1999. Defining peer education. Journal of Adolescence, Vol 22, pp. 555‒566.
Simpson, R. M. 2013. Epistemic peerhood and the epistemology of disagreement. Philosophical
Studies, vol. 164, pp. 561–577.

* Stitz, T. 2013. Improving Engagement by Creating a Peer Environment. Ubiquitous Learning: An
International Journal, Vol. 5, pp. 15‒24.

* SunWolf. 2008. Peer Groups. Expanding our study of small group communication. SAGE.
London.

* Topping, K. J. 2005. Trends in Peer Learning. Educational Psychology 25:6, 631–645.

* Townsend, R. 2009. Australian adult education and its impact on diversity, social inclusion and social capital. Magis, Revista Internacional de Investigación en Educación, 2, 307‒317.
Townsend, R. 2014. Perspectives on Peer Learning as Adult Education in Diverse Communities.
The International Journal of Adult, Community and Professional Learning, Vol 20, Issue 2,
45‒58.

* Townsend, R. 2015. Peer Learning and Tertiary Education: A Focus on Australia. Conference
presentation. The 22nd International Conference on Learning, 9-11 July 2015, Madrid,
Spain.

* Trimbur, John. 1987. “Peer Tutoring: A Contradiction in Terms?” Writing Center Journal 7.2, pp. 21‒28.

* Vanderpool N. M. & Brown, W. E. 1994. Implications of a Peer Telephone Network On Adult
Learner GPA and Retention. Journal of College Student Development, Vol 35, pp. 125‒
128.


[[Category:Education]]