
=Bibliography=

Sources used in the PhD thesis [[Managing the Bazaar]] that are also available online:

* Aigrain, P. (2002). 'A Framework for Understanding the Impact of GPL Copylefting vs.
non Copylefting Licenses.' Online paper available at:
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/aigrain2, last accessed 07/08/04.

* Baldwin, C. and K. Clark (2004). 'The Architecture of Cooperation: How Code
Architecture Mitigates Free Riding in the Open Source Development Model.'
Available at http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/baldwinclark.pdf, last accessed on
23/07/2003.

* Barbrook, R. (1998). 'The High-Tech Gift Economy.' First Monday:
http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue3_12/barbrook, 3, no 12, last accessed
12/12/2005

* Bauer, A. and M. Pizka (2003). 'The Contribution of Free software to Software Evolution.'
Online paper available at: http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/bauerpizka.pdf, last
accessed 09/08/04.

* Bezroukov, N. (1999a). 'A Second Look at the Cathedral and the Bazaar.' First Monday:
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue4_12/bezroukov/index.html 4, no. 12, last accessed
22/02/05.

* Bezroukov, N. (1999b). 'Open Source Software as a Special Type of Academic Research (Critique of
Vulgar Raymondism).' First Monday:
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue4_10/bezroukov/index.html 14, no. 1o, last accessed
22/02/05.

* Bonaccorsi, A. and C. Rossi (2004). 'Altruistic Individuals, Selfish Firms? The structure of
motivation in Open Source Software.' First Monday:
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue9_1/bonaccorsi/ , last accessed 7/06/04 1, no. 9.

* Crowston, K. and J. Howison (2005). 'The Social Structure of Free and Open Source
Software Development.' First Monday:
http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue10_2/crowston/ , 10, no2, last accessed
05/04/07.

* Dafermos, G. N. (2001). 'Management and Virtual Decentralised Networks: The Linux
Project.' First Monday:
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue6_11/dafermos/index.html#author, 6 no 11,
last accessed 26/06/04.

* Dahlander, L. (2004). 'Appropriating the Commons: Firms in Open Source Software.'
Online paper available at http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/dahlander2.pdf, last
accessed 22/02/07.

* David, P., A. Waterman and S. Arora. (2003). FLOSS-US/ The Free/Libre/Open Source
Developer Software Survey for 2003: A First Report.
http://www.stanford.edu/group/floss-us/report/FLOSS-US-Report.pdf. last accessed
5/5/04.


* Divitini, M., L. Jaccheri, E. Monteiro and H. Traetteberg (2003). 'Open source Processes:
No place for politics?' 3rd Workshop on Open Source Software Engineering-ICSE'03
International Conference on Software Engineering
http://opensource.ucc.ie/icse2003/3rd-WS-on-OSS-Engineering.pdf ,last accessed 5/5/04:
pp.39-44.


* Elliot, M. S. and W. Scacchi (2003b). Free Software: a Case Study of Sofware Development in a Virtual Organization
Culture. Working Paper, Institute for Software Research, UC Irvine, April 2003,
available at: http://www.ics.uci.edu/%7Ewscacchi/Papers/New/Elliott-Scacchi-
GNUe-Study-Report.pdf (accessed 6/06/04).


* Freeman, S. and J. Siltala. (2004). Freedom and Profit: How suits and hackers are working
it out on the desktop. Working paper presented in 4/EASST Joint Meeting, Paris
26/08/04 http://personal.inet.fi/koti/jsiltala/juha/floss/freedom-profit-paper.pdf last
accessed 19/01/06.


* Friedman, N. and M. Icaza (2005). 'Mechanics of Open Source: Growing and Harvesting
Your Project ' Talk to the Massachussets Software Council, June 2005 available at
http://www.nat.org/2005/june/MassSoftware.pdf, last accessed 22/09/06.

* Garcia, M. J. and E. W. Steinmueller (2003a). 'Applying the Open Source Model to
Knowledge Work.' INK Open Source Research Working Paper No. 2, SPRUScience
and Technology Policy Research, University of Sussex,
http://siepr.stanford.edu/programs/OpenSoftware_David/OSR02_abstract.html last
accessed 14/06/04.

* Garcia, M. J. and E. W. Steinmueller(2003b). 'The Open Source Way of Working: A New Paradigm for the Division of
Labour in Software Development?' INK Open Source Research Working Paper
No.92, SPRU-Science and Technology Policy Research, University of Sussex
available at
http://siepr.stanford.edu/programs/OpenSoftware_David/NSFOSF_Publications.html.

* German, D. M. (2002). 'The Evolution of the Gnome Project.' Workshop Proceeding
presented in 'Meeting Challenges and Surviving Success: the 2nd Workshop on Open
Source Software Engineering' (May 19-25)
http://opensource.ucc.ie/icse2002/German.pdf last accessed 5/5/04.

* Ghosh, R. A. and P. A. David (2003). 'The Nature and Composition of the Linux Kernel
Developer Community: A dynamic analysis.' SIEPR-Project NOSTRA Working
Paper, draft version 5, http://dxm.org/papers/licks1/licksresults.pdf
last accessed 12/06/04.

* Hann, I.-H., J. Roberts, S. Slaughter and R. T. Fielding (2004). 'An Empirical Analysis of
Economic Returns to Open Source Participation.' Unpublished Working Paper,
Carnegie-Mellon University, available at:
http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/jroberts/Paper1.pdf , last accessed 12/2006.

* Hemetsberger, A. (2004). 'Fostering Cooperation on the Internet: Social Exchange
Processes in Innovative Virtual Consumer Communities.' Paper presented at the
annual ACR (Association for Consumer Research) conference 2001 in Austin, Texas,
also available online at: http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/hemetsberger2.pdf.

* Krishmamurti, S. (2002). 'Cave or Community? An Empirical Examination of 100 Mature Open Source
Projects.' First Monday
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue7_6/krishnamurthy/index.html last accessed
5/5/04 6, no. 7.

* Lakhani, K. and B. Wolf. (2002). The Boston Consulting Group/OSDN Hacker Survey.
OSDN-Open Source Development network, http://www.osdn.com/bcg last accessed
3/04/04.

* Lancashire, D. (2001). 'Code, Culture and Cash: The Fading Altruism of Open Source
Development.' First Monday, peer-reviewed journal on the Internet
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue6_12/lancashire/index.html, 6, no. 12, last accessed
22/02/2007.

* Lerner, J. and J. Tirole (2002b). 'The Scope of Open Source Licensing.' NBER Working Paper No. W9363.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=359303.

* Madanmohan, T. R. and S. Navelkar (2002). 'Roles and Knowledge Management in Online
Technology Communities: An Ethnographic Study.' Online paper available at
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/madanmohan2.pdf, last accessed 23/07/2003.

* Michlmayr, M. and M. B. Hill (2003). 'Quality and Reliance on Individuals in Open Source
Projects.' in 3rd Workshop on Open Source Software Engineering-ICSE'03
International Conference on Software Engineering. Available at:
http://opensource.ucc.ie/icse2003/3rd-WS-on-OSS-Engineering.pdf, last accessed 5/5/04

* Newmarch, J. (2001). 'Lessons from Open Source: Intellectual Property and Software.'
FirstMonday: http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue6_6/newmarch/index.html, no.
6, 6, last accessed 26/06/04.


* Raymond, E. (2000a). 'Homesteading the Noosphere.' version 3.0 available at
http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/homesteading.
---. (2000b). The Cathedral and the Bazaar. http://tuxedo.org/~esr/writings/cathedralbazaar/,
last acccessed 22/02/2003.

* Samer, F. and M. Wasko McLure (2002). 'The Web of knowledge: An investigation of
Knowledge Exchange in Networks of Practice.' Online paper available at
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/Farajwasko.pdf, last accessed on 23/07/2003.

* Schmidt, K. M. and M. Schnitzer (2002). 'Public Subsidies for Open Source? Some
Economic Policy Issues for the Software Market.' Available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=31908 last accessed 01/05/2004.

* Shah, S. (2003). 'Understanding the Nature of Participation & Coordination in Open and
Gated Source Software Development Communities.' Dissertation Chapter,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Available at:
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/shah3.pdf , last accessed 10/-7/04.

* Stalder, F. and J. Hirsh (2002). 'Open Source Intelligence.' First Monday:
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue7_6/index.html, no 6, last accessed 7/06/04.

* Stewart, D. (2004). 'Status Inertia: The Speed Imperative in the Attainment of
Community Status.' Online paper available at:
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/stewart2.pdf, last accessed on 2/06/04.

* Veale, J. K. (2005). 'Internet Gift Economies: Voluntary Payment Schemes as Tangible
Reciprocity.' First Monday: http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue8_12/veale/, last
accessed 02/03/2006 8, no. 12.

*Weber, S. (2000). The Political Economy of Open Source. Working Paper Series 1011,
UCAIS Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy, UC Berkeley
225 ; 
http://repositories.cdlib.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1011&context=brie, last
accessed 23/09/05.

* West, J. and C. S. O'Mahony. (2004). Contrasting Community Building in Sponsored and
Community Founded Open Source Projects.
http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/westomahony.pdf, last accessed 25/07/04.


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Governance]]