

=Description=

Jennifer Windh:

'P2P payments are primarily defined by their counterparties. Counterparties are the individuals 
or entities sending and receiving payment. The counterparties to P2P payments are consumers 
and small businesses. Within the payments industry there is some disagreement about the types 
of payments that are called P2P. For the purposes of this paper, we define a P2P payment as a 
Person 1: Sender
Access
channel
Funds load
instrument
Clearing &
settlement
network
Funds
receipt
instrument
Person 2:
Recipient
•Consumer •Face‐to‐face
•Mail
•Agent/ branch
•Kiosk / ATM
•Online
•Mobile
•Cash
•Bank account
•Check
•Debit card
•Account and
routing numbers
•Credit card
•Prepaid account
•Check
•ACH
•Wire
•EFT network
•Book transfer
•Consumer
•Small business
•Cash
•Bank account
•Check
•Debit card
•Account and
routing numbers
•Credit card
•Prepaid account3
payment made by one consumer to another consumer or to a small business. The sender of the 
payment is always a consumer. The recipient may be either a consumer or a small business. This 
definition is appropriate because one of the dominant uses of newer electronic P2P payment 
products is to make bill payments to small businesses. When the recipient business is a sole 
proprietorship, payments are made to the individual owner (e.g., a piano teacher, maintenance 
person, or nanny), the payment shares many characteristics with a consumer-to-consumer 
transaction. For this reason, researchers have sometimes found it can be quite difficult to 
distinguish between consumer-to-consumer and consumer-to-small business payments.
business’s payments to consumers and other businesses are not P2P payments under this 
definition, and are qualitatively different from P2P payments. A business-to-consumer payment 
is typically an income payment of a recurring nature, and is excluded from this definition."
(http://www.frbatlanta.org/documents/rprf/rprf_pubs/110815_wp.pdf)


=Paper=

* Article: Peer-to-peer payments:  Surveying a rapidly changing landscape. By Jennifer Windh. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 15, 2011 

URL = http://www.frbatlanta.org/documents/rprf/rprf_pubs/110815_wp.pdf


==Introduction==

Jennifer Windh:

'Peer-to-peer (P2P) payment products are some of the most innovative developments from the 
payments industry in the past decade. Much ink has been spilled covering the cutting-edge 
opportunities for banks and other payments providers in P2P payments. Consumers have never 
had so many payment choices. Alongside a host of recent entrants like PayPal and CashEdge, 
longstanding industry players like Fiserv, Visa, and MasterCard all offer P2P products. 
Additionally, three major banks just announced a collaborative P2P initiative called 
ClearXchange. 

Despite this range of innovative offerings, however, the industry lacks a standard understanding 
of how the various P2P payments in the market work. Further, consumers and businesses 
frequently lack an understanding of relevant risks associated with P2P payments and that lack of 
understanding may also be a source of the inertia that keeps consumers relying on cash and 
checks for most P2P payments, despite a growing number of alternatives. This paper offers a 
framework to organize a discussion of P2P payments and evaluate the associated risks. This 
paper describes P2P transactions throughout the transaction life cycle, following the payment 
from sender to recipient and through all intermediate steps. The framework categorizes 
transactions by counterparties, access channel, funds load and receipt instruments, and settlement 
network. Any P2P payment can be mapped across this life cycle in categories that are mutually 
exclusive and comprehensively exhaustive. The output of this mapping details the nature of the 
counterparties and intermediaries involved in the payment, which dictate the individual 
transaction’s risk profile."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]