=Bibliography=

Excerpted from the [ YouTube Bibliography] maintained by Michael Strangelove:


==General==


* Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. Online Video and Participatory Culture. London: Polity Press. Forthcoming April 2009.


* Lovink, Geert, and Sabine Niederer, eds. Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008. Relevant articles from this collection are listed here under ‘Scholarly Articles and Significant Scholarly Blog Postings.’ 

Freely available online at http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publications/inc-readers/videovortex/

-- Burgess, Jean. ‘“Is Your Chocolate Rain Are Belong to Us”?: Viral Video, YouTube and the Dynamics of Participatory Culture.’ In Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer, eds., Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube, 101–9. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.


* Noam, Eli M., and Lorenzo Maria Pupillo, eds. Peer-to-Peer Video: The Economic, Policy, and Culture of Today’s New Mass Medium. New York: Springer, 2008. Not quite focused on YouTube but does contain two articles on YouTube


* Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. ‘Agency and Controversy in the YouTube Community.’ Paper presented at Internet Research 9.0: Rethinking Community, Rethinking Place, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 15 October 2008.


* Cha, Meeyoung, Haewoon Kwak, Pablo Rodriguez, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Sue Moon. ‘I Tube, You Tube, Everybody Tubes: Analyzing the World’s Largest User Generated Content Video System.’ In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement, San Diego, CA, 24–26 October 2007.


* Cheng, Xu, Cameron Dale, and Jiangchuan Liu. ‘Understanding the Characteristics of Internet Short Video Sharing: YouTube as a Case Study.’ arXiv.org, Cornell University Library, 25 July 2007.

-- ‘Statistics and Social Network of YouTube Videos.’ Quality of Service, (2008): 229–38


* Madden, Mary. ‘Online Video.’ Pew Internet & American Life Project, Washington, 25 July 2007


* Van Dijck, José. ‘Television 2.0: YouTube and the Emergence of Homecasting.’ Paper presented to the Creativity, Ownership and Collaboration in the Digital Age, Cambridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 27–29 April 2007.


==Business==


* Noam, Eli M. ‘The Economics of User Generated Content and Peer-to-Peer: The Commons as the Enabler of Commerce.’ In Noam and Lorenzo Maria Pupillo, eds. Peer-to-Peer Video: The Economic, Policy, and Culture of Today’s New Mass Medium, 3–13. New York: Springer, 2008.



==Education==

* Duffy, Peter. ‘Engaging the YouTube Google-Eyed Generation: Strategies for Using Web 2.0 in Teaching and Learning.’ In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on E-learning, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark, 4–5 October 2007.


* Freitas, D., Buckenmeyer, J. and Hixon, E. ‘YouTube.com for Teachers: A Useful Resource or Just More Hijinks?’ In Proceedings of Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education International Conference, Chesapeake, VA, 2008.


* Hartley, John. ‘YouTube, Digital Literacy and the Growth of Knowledge.’ Paper present at the Media@Lse Fifth Anniversary Conference, London, September 2008.


* Juhasz, Alex. Jusasz, Alexandra. ‘Why Not (to) Teach on YouTube.’ In Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer, eds., Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube, 133–9. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.


* Snelson, Chareen. ‘YouTube and Beyond: Integrating Web-Based Video into Online Education.’ In Proceedings of Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education International Conference, (2008): 732–37.


==Politics and Government==


* Losh, Elizabeth. ‘Government YouTube: Bureaucracy, Surveillance, and Legalism in State-Sanctioned Online Video Channels.’ In Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer, eds. Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube, 111–23. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.


* Naim, Moises. ‘The YouTube Effect: How a Technology for Teenagers Became a Force for Political and Economic Change.’ Foreign Policy, 1 January 2007.


* Smith, Aaron, and Lee Rainie. ‘The Internet and the 2008 Election.’ Pew Internet & American Life Project, Pew Research Center, Washington, 15 June 2008.


* Turkheimer, Margot. ‘A YouTube Moment in Politics: An Analysis of the First Three Months of the 2008 Presidential Election.’ Urban and Environmental Policy Institute, Occidental College, 2007.


* Wallsten, Kevin. ‘“Yes We Can”: How Online Viewership, Blog Discussion and Mainstream Media Coverage Produced a Viral Video Phenomenon.’ Presented to the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Boston, MA, 2008.


==Technology==


* Lee, Jin. ‘Locality Aware Peer Assisted Delivery: The Way to Scale Internet Video to the World.’ Paper presented at Packet Video 2007, Lausanne, Switzerland, 12–13 November 2007.



[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Research]]