
'''= PeerTracks is a talent discovery and music retail website that sits on top of the [[Bitshares Music Blockchain]].''' [http://peertracks.com/faq.html]

URL = http://peertracks.com/


=Description=

"PeerTracks is a talent discovery and music retail website that sits on top of the Bitshares Music blockchain. Using this state of the art technology allows artists to engage their fans in ways that were never before possible. Reducing costs here, removing middlemen there and providing incentives for everyone, fans and artists, to thrive together.

Why use PeerTracks over other crowdfunding sites like Kickstarter?

No fees! Crowdfunding platforms need to charge a 3% to 5% fee for their service. Added to that are credit card fees that must also be paid for every single pledge. PeerTracks bypasses the need for credit cards and allows you to fund any artist, big or small, without us or the credit card company taking a huge cut. This opens the door to micro-payments. You can only afford the equivalent of 40 cents of an artist’s coin? Go ahead! There is no minimum. Anyone can put in any amount."
(http://peertracks.com/faq.html)

=Discussion=

==Why use PeerTracks over other music sites?==

"With the reduction of fees and middlemen, there is more wiggle room for prices to come down. 


Compared to other music retail options, the artist can either:

* sell at the same price as before but now actually receive all the income

* lower his price and still make the same amount per song. Although keep in mind lower prices can mean more sales. So in this scenario the artist ends up with more total income.

A combination of both A and B. So he could still be cheaper on PeerTrackss than most other sites and yet still make more per song.


Also:

As an artist, you get to take control of your music career. PeerTracks empowers you by harnessing the power of your fans, the internet, cutting edge peer to peer technology and taking your career to another level.
By using the new Blockchain technology, PeerTracks cuts out many middlemen. No more credit card or paypal fees taking up 30% of each song sale!

When you upload your music to your profile and sell it for the price of your choosing, you actually get to keep all the revenue (minus the small network fee).

And here is where it gets interesting.

You, the artist, get to create your own coin and sell it to your fans. Not only does this generate capital for you to invest in your artistic career but it also incentivizes your fans to promote your music all over the world. Your coin is what ties your fans to your music like nothing ever could before. The more popular your music gets, the more sales you make on PeerTracks, the more each coin will be worth. Your fans now benefit financially by sharing your music on all the social media networks, blogs, forums etc. If a song goes viral thanks to your fans, you all benefit together.

As a listener, not only do you help talent get discovered and rise to the top but you’ll actually benefit financially for finding talent early. Think you know what song is going to be the next big hit? Why not profit from it by helping out that artist? But before sharing this new song on the internet, buy some coins for yourself! The mere act of buying a coin (demand) can contribute to it’s rise in price, making it go up in the charts, causing others to notice this new artist (talent discovery!). Of course you can also simply play the markets. Keep the coins that keep going up in value and sell the others on the trading platform. 

And finally, with PeerTracks, you know your funds are going directly from your wallet, to the artist’s pocket. No more middlemen! All made possible by the peer to peer network that is Bitshares Music."
(http://peertracks.com/faq.html)

[[Category:Music]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:Business Models]]