'''How do we get from a capitalist society to a peer to peer society based on participation based on a Commons?'''



=Theories=

==The [[Germ Form Theory]] of Oekonux==


See the entry on the [[Germ Form Theory]]


==The [[Counter-Economics]] strategy of the left libertarians==


See our entry on [[Counter-Economics]]


==Miguel Benasayag on De-centered Political Strategies==


See our entry on [[De-centered Political Strategies - Miguel Benasayag]]


==The strategy of [[Exodus]] or [[Desertion]]==

See our entry on [[Desertion]]

The strategy of Exodus is explained by Tony Negri and Michael Hardt in their book Empire.

==Paolo Virno on the dominance of the social==

Virno is one of the new generation of 'Italian radical thinkers' that seems to have replaced the earlier dominance of 'French thought', and he is often associated with the group of people, who are, together with Negri and Hardt, putting forward the strategy of the 'multitudes'. In this article, he argues that for the contemporary social movement, social and political aims change places. First, new social realities have to be established, after political structures will have to be adapted. The last thing to be wished for, he says, is the establishment of a hyperstate, a world government for a world people.

“la lutte contre le travail salarié, à la différence de celui contre la tyrannie ou contre l’indigence, n’est plus corellée à l’emphatique perspective de la « prise du pouvoir ». Précisément en vertu de ses caractères très avancés, se profile comme une transformation entièrement sociale, qui se confronte de près au pouvoir, mais sans rêver une organisation alternative de l’Etat, visant au contraire à réduire et à éteindre toute forme de dirigisme sur l’activité des femmes et des hommes et donc sur l’Etat tout court. On pourrait dire : alors que la « révolution politique » était considérée comme un préalable inévitable pour changer les rapports sociaux, maintenant, c’est ce butin à venir qui devient le passage préliminaire. La lutte peut développer son caractère destructif, seulement si elle porte haut une autre façon de vivre, de communiquer, et même de produire. En bref, seulement s’il y a autre chose à perdre que ses propres chaînes. Que se passe-t-il lorsque l’on considère la forme actuelle de l’Etat comme l’ultime possible, méritant de se corroder et de tomber en ruine, mais certainement pas d’être remplacé par un hyper Etat « de tout le peuple »
(http://multitudes.samizdat.net/article.php3?id_article=1806)


==Bruno Theret on Civil Socialism==

Bruno Theret argues that we have to connect with the traditions of civil socialism, as opposed to the traditions of state socialism (both in its social democratic and stalinist forms).

Theret refers to three historical traditions necessary to develop these ideas further: 1) the pre-marxist socialism of Pierre Leroux, very strong in the revolutions of 1848; 2) the federal or guild socialism of Karl Polanly, author of the landmark Great Transformation; 3) the contemporary neo-communautarian of Michael Walzer.

The essay by Bruno Theret is at http://fr.pekea-fr.org/?p=11&c=2-3-Theret.html



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Relational]]