'''* Master Thesis: Learning in Indigenous Mountain Forest Communities. Case studies in Northern Thailand: White Hmong (Miao), Sheleh Ladhulsi (Lahu), and Pgak'nyau (Karen) Peoples. by Marcus Kit Petz. University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna. Master Thesis for the degree of Mountain Forestry MSc. 2017'''

URL = http://permalink.obvsg.at/bok/AC13739283


=Abstract=

"The Hmong, Lahu and Karen people of Thailand are traditionally forest peoples and foragers. Their
traditions and country skills have developed in concert with how they modified the landscape around
them. Swidden agroforestry is a disappearing practice as their societies transition to more settled
agricultural existences. The cultural legacy in how they live, material culture and framing of forest
dependency are still found in their approach to learning for natural resource management. Their
knowledge, know-how and wisdom can serve both them and the wider world. Once marginalized, they
are becoming more integrated into mainstream Thai and global society. They want to share their skills
and knowledge with others.

This research uses an exploratory research approach with co-performative witnessing to engage with the
context in the area around Chiang Mai, Thailand. Semi-structured interviews, field visits, conversations
and analysis of audio-visual material of the indigenous people are used to generate data around the topic
of learning within a case study approach. Artistic Research Methods (ARM) were used as a way to engage
with research subjects, communities and experts and thus explore the ecology of learning connected with
indigenous communities. Data was analysed with the design science methodology of pattern research
within the tradition of Christopher Alexander.

Notable was the finding of Hmong Forest Walks, as a foraging practice applicable for ethno-medicinal
and herbology usage. '''Hmong Forest Gardens, learning buildings for natural resource management, and
the Thai earth building movement are described. Encountered learning fora, which contain pedagogical
approaches transferrable to other locations, were The Karen Lazy Man School and the Lahu Learning
Circle'''."


=Contents=

Only the parts describing the projects are copied here:

Chapter 4: Results .............................................................................................................................. 82

* 4.1 Material culture of buildings and cultivated areas .................................................... 83

#4.1.1 The Thai earth building movement .................................................................... 83
#4.1.2 Daveyo Bamboo School in a Lahu community ................................................. 86
#4.1.3 Spirit houses ..................................................................................................... 103
#4.1.4 Nursery and Education Centre ......................................................................... 106
#4.1.5 Home ................................................................................................................. 113
#4.1.6 Home gardens and the garden in the forest ....................................................... 119
#4.1.7 Hmong portable material culture ..................................................................... 126

* 4.2 Sources of learning .................................................................................................. 129

#4.2.1 Family .............................................................................................................. 129
#4.2.2 Indigenous experts ........................................................................................... 137
#4.2.3 Outside experts who are not indigenous in-group members ............................ 147
#4.2.4 Learning directly from nature .......................................................................... 152

* 4.3 Learning fora ........................................................................................................... 157

#4.3.1 Learning circle (Lahu) ..................................................................................... 157
#4.3.2 Lazy Man School (Karen) ................................................................................ 158
#4.3.3 From the spirits and religion ............................................................................ 168
#4.3.4 Forest walk (Hmong) ....................................................................................... 173
#4.3.5 Self learning, the self and society as a learning space ..................................... 175
#4.3.6 Social media and devices ................................................................................. 177
#4.3.7 Action-based research: Indigenous Peoples Forest Wiki ................................. 179

* 4.4 Learning techniques ................................................................................................ 180

#4.4.1 Print media ....................................................................................................... 180
#4.4.2 Practical workshops ......................................................................................... 185
#4.4.3 Learning on the job .......................................................................................... 190
#4.4.4 Plant specimens ................................................................................................ 191
#4.4.5 Religious rituals ............................................................................................... 192
#4.4.6 Peer-to-peer learning ........................................................................................ 193


Chapter 5: Discussion ...................................................................................................................... 194

* 5.1 What is knowledge, know-how and wisdom? ......................................................... 196

* 5.2 Practical learning ..................................................................................................... 200

* 5.3 Community led learning in South East Asia ........................................................... 202

#5.3.1 Learning for children and youth....................................................................... 203
#5.3.2 Life-long learning ............................................................................................ 205
#5.3.3 Learning for natural resource management ..................................................... 207

* 5.4 Culture specific learning ......................................................................................... 209

#5.4.1 Culture specific learning: Karen, Lahu and Hmong ........................................ 209
#5.4.2 Learning for oral cultures ................................................................................. 212
#5.4.3 The use of modern technology in learning ....................................................... 214
#5.4.4 Global learning resources................................................................................. 215


=Excerpts=

==Major findings of this research==

Marcus Petz:

"While there are results which add to the knowledge of what exists around learning, some results
have a direct practical use now. These are given here in brief and why I think they are
significant. This is of course my selective view of the research being purposeful.
Hmong garden in the forest (cf. 4.1.6) seem important as they gives a way that people and forest
management can interact in a sustainable way. The dynamic of nature protection, excluding
people who live in an area, is not a wise one where there is great pressure from a local
population to use those resources. It makes an expensive policing requirement, instead of a
supportive rôle incumbent on the forest administration. There is a difficulty, in restoring
degraded and deforested areas of Thailand and other places. Yet the forest garden brings with
it; an intimate knowledge of what is growing, and mechanisms for encouraging useful plant
biodiversity.

The Hmong garden in the forest is readily transferable to other locations by using local people
who are educated about the plants and plant interactions with each other and the community of
users. While it comes from one ethnic group, the Hmong, I believe it could be repurposed for
any kind of woods and ethnic group if sufficient knowledge were available, much in the way 
that the Adopt a Monument scheme has done for different cultures and histories around the
historical landscape.

The Hmong forest walk (cf. 4.3.4) is the forum where I encountered the Hmong garden in the
forest. Here is a way that following a known trail by an expert connected to the place can make
what is there practical and useful. It is a way to keep foraging and herbology traditions alive.
As a practical location for doing that, many similar trails and walks happened in other cultures
so it seems that the pattern is readily transferable to different settings and groups. The distinctive
aspects of being expert led, themed and embedded in a culture allowed both embedded and
embodied knowledge to be transferred. This learning aspect makes it more valuable than a trail
with signs that do not connect with specific plants at specific locations.

Rather like psychogeographic walks it is immediate in the here and now and makes use of a
wide range of different learning styles. It is prescient to some extent with regular walks over
the wheel of the year allowing ecological dynamics to be absorbed, which is useful for food,
medicine and general health and planning. It would allow an area that is being restored or even
a virgin forest to be monitored by amateur naturalists. This citizen science is useful for spotting
climate change signs or other things of alarm in threatening local biodiversity. It could be easily
linked in with new media applications such as blogging, photojournalism and these aggregated
for big data analyses. On an individual level, such curation and linkages can really grow
knowledge and share it more widely between participants of such walks, such as through
foraging and herbology networks.

The Hmong herbology garden (cf. 4.1.6) is a novel form of garden design, which I think can be
adopted in other places. This is mostly of value as an aesthetic choice, but the practical aspect
could provide a counter argument to modern civilization being the only answer for medicinal
treatments. Traditionally we have kept herbal gardens, but often the ornamental or food aspects
without the physic one are considered.

There has been considerable debate over golden rice and its supposed health benefits.
Opponents have pointed out that for good nutritional health home gardens, growing a variety
of vegetables are better for achieving a balanced diet rather than the magic bullet of the rice,
which appears to entrench an over dependence on one food source. So it is with the Hmong
herbology garden, which can provide in all communities, not just vulnerable, liminal or
indigenous ones, a home apothecary.

Along with the growing of the plants come the herb lore and a care for health and nutrition.
There is a large amount of malnutrition, in the world, which is due to ignorance over the food
we consume. We consume meals around 5 times a day in many cultures, for example the West,
yet many people leave formal schooling of over 10 years unable to make a balanced meal or
cook tasty, nutritious food for a group of people. A reconnection via the Hmong herbology
garden could help to heal that discontinuity.

The Lazy Man School (cf. 4.3.2) has many features found in other pedagogies, and popular
education. It is important, as a practical way of carrying out horizontal education. This wider
remit takes a co-learning paradigm, where learning is practical, personally- and community
relevant and captures all the important features of good learning practice. The approach can
extend to other settings and work inter-generationally, inter-ethnically, which it does already,
with learners at different levels and experiences.

The pacing, autodidactic aspect and flexibility allow repurposing and redirecting as needed.
Although I think these are great things and a pedagogical pattern could be made about the Lazy
Man School, the praxis was weak in some respects. The lack of written curricula makes
assessment and validation hard (Bjornavold et al., 2015). Portability of learning and
qualifications can be a useful thing and here the informal and non-formal learning has not yet
found its way to be accredited and demonstrated to others.

However, just as language-speaking competence can develop without writing, and later
language testing can certificate what has been learnt so too can other learning. In many ways
what is being learnt are life-skills or rural crafts for a life in that existence and so external
validation is not needed; validation is provided by getting a house to live in that does not fall
down, or feeding yourself, and that the land or forest are not depleted.

Pattern language research findings, are dependent on accepting pattern languages (cf. 3.2) are
a useful addition to our way of understanding the world. If that is so then I think that that the
Pattern Language for a learning building for natural resource management (cf. Appx. V) is a
useful find. A dedicated building that seems to epitomize the pattern language, from an ethnic
perspective, was a major find. I suspect that such a building will be quite rare and protecting or
at least recording it is important. That this learning building is functioning means that social
patterns and pedagogical patterns can be found around it. More research around this functioning
would be useful.

The Daveyo Bamboo School has certain features and individuals that to my mind make it
function in a way that contains a dynamism that gyroscopically stabilizes the unstable. It is
unstable as it lacks formalized rigid systems, the Lahu people culturally predisposed to
voluntarily cooperate and be told what to do, the ideas are flexible and in a state of flux. Yet it
functions. Capturing this mutability is hard, but recognizing it is there is a first step, which more
research can explore and then apply to other locations and contexts."


==Methodological Learnings==

Marcus Petz:

"Practical tools for pattern language research were created during my writing-up phase. These
include a methodology for writing a pattern language, which can be seen in Appx. III; a pattern
language template, in Appx. IV; and a property matching sheet template, in Appx. II. While my
exploration focused on learning buildings, these tools can be used for others in the wide range
of pattern applications. I consider these as valuable contributions to the literature, even if others
develop better or different tools. That few people have made or explored or even developed
these kind of guides are big limitations on spreading the ideas of patterns.

The pattern tools being developed are mainly focused on applications for computer related
purposes, principally software, although some hardware architecture design exists. To make
pattern research relevant and accessible to a wider audience this kind of development is needed
in other areas like natural resource management, food technology, or social patterns. Similar
limitations exist for peer-to-peer or sharing economy approaches. My tools are offered as a
contribution to making the more desirable purposes, which enrich our lives and reduce
ecological or financial costs, more possible."


=More Information=

Request copy from author at ravenwyn at gmail dot com though there should be a free to download pdf from the libray at 
http://permalink.obvsg.at/bok/AC13739283

[[Category:Neotraditional]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Thailand]]
[[Category:Education]]