

'''* Article: Foresight in a network era: peer-producing alternative futures. By Jose Ramos, Tim Mansfield, and Gareth Priday. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012, 17(1): 71-90.'''

URL = http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/17-1/A05.pdf

Part of the special edition of the Journal of Futures Studies on the Communication of Foresight.

==Abstract==

"The advent of the network form has ushered in new practices and possibilities for
participation and collaboration based on emerging on-line technologies. It is no surprise that
new approaches to futures / foresight research and engagement are being developed in the
context of these technologies and emerging practices. In dwelling within this juxtaposition
between participatory futures and the maturing network era, we ask what the implications are
for foresight / futures studies, and how this can help us re-imagine Anticipatory Democracy in
the 21st century. A developmental narrative for the emergence of the network form in futures
studies provides context for our understanding of new pathways. Within this we identify key
emerging issues with implications for Anticipatory Democracy: instantiation, replication,
openness and control. Explicated, these emerging issues provide a rich picture of the
challenges and possibilities for building Anticipatory Democracy in the network era."

==Excerpts==

[[Jose Ramos]] et al.:

===Introduction and Methodology===

"What is the future of public participation in the exploration and articulation
of probable, possible, preferred and alternative futures? Can network-foresight
strategies lead to real anticipatory democracy, policy development and social
change? What are the dynamics and implications of the network form applied
to anticipatory democracy? To answer these questions we begin by providing a
theoretical framework for the emergence of the network form, which can inform
a normative focus on building Anticipatory Democracy (AD). We then narrate the
emergence of the network form within the futures studies field, drawing out some
of the key lines of development that have particular relevance to Anticipatory
Democracy. We then focus in on some of the key emerging network form dynamics
at play in the futures studies field, offering some analysis. Finally we draw some
insights from the analysis by exploring the latent potentials and pitfalls of online
/ participatory networked foresight approaches, and re-assess the prospects for
anticipatory democracy in the 21st century.

This article discusses several contemporary efforts at conducting foresight
projects in a networked, collaborative mode, a style of project which is currently
attracting a lot of positive attention in the futures community. Is this simply a
stylish fad driven by our enchantment with social media? We intend to argue rather
that these projects prefigure a style of global, collaborative, post-statist policy
development ideal for addressing wicked problems. Far from being a pointless fad,
these efforts form the early stages of a kind of anticipatory, collective intelligence
which can potentially motivate action from multiple stakeholders acting from
multiple directions in coherent and powerful ways. We believe it is important to
understand these early efforts, learn from their successes and failures and continue to
innovate, as a community, new, even more effective approaches. This section briefly
suggests why.

Rittel and Webber (1973) first named the class of “wicked problems”, problems
which are each novel and unique, for which the problem is not understood until after
the formulation of a solution, for which the solution is not right or wrong and so on.
Most of the pressing threats to global civilization fall into this class of problems:
climate change, terror networks and global crime, extreme poverty, child slavery
are commonly cited examples. Roberts (2000) surveys some common approaches
to wicked problems: authoritarian, competitive and collaborative, and concludes
that collaborative approaches are significantly more effective at addressing wicked
problems.

[[Anticipatory Democracy]] was coined by Alvin Toffler as his prescription for
Future Shock in his book by that name (Toffler 1970). Clem Bezold, working with
Toffler, then edited a book of examples (1976) as a vision for a state of affairs in
which citizenry were engaged in considering, imagining and influencing society.

Toffler defined Anticipatory Democracy as:
"The simplest definition of anticipatory democracy ... is that it is a process
for combining citizen participation with future consciousness" (Bezold,
1978 in Bezold, 2010).

Functioning on a state government scale, AD makes a strong case that social
policy to address wicked problems in a democratic society is perhaps best developed
using large-scale futures methods which consult with a broad base of citizens to
discover a shared vision for a preferred future. The experience of large-scale projects
like “Alternatives For Washington” (reviewed in Bezold (2006)) demonstrate the
strengths of the approach at this scale. Bezold’s approach with AD is to inform the
policy of the state institution by drawing on the knowledge, ideas and passions of
the populace and the approach has been successfully used at the local and state level
in the USA. Could a similar approach work for global wicked problems?

In a theoretical project ranging over more than a decade, David Ronfeldt (1996,
2005, 2007) has argued that all societies are composed of admixtures of four, and
only four, pure organizational forms: kinship tribes (T), hierarchical institutions
(I), competitive markets (M) and collaborative networks (N). These four forms
have emerged in human collectives sequentially through time and, as human
societies have become more complex and successive communications technologies
have emerged, each form has risen to its strength. Each form solves its own core
problems, brings its own form of coordination and governance and promotes certain
values, ways of belonging and so on.

As each form arises, the society must accommodate this new kind of complexity
and the contradictions between new and old forms. Each new form subverts the
older order, disrupting prior forms, then brings additive effects which lead to a new
order in which the older forms are limited but strengthened. T societies become
T+I societies, which become T+I+M societies – prior forms are not lost, but they
are restructured, recontextualised and placed in new relationships to the whole of
society.

In Ronfeldt’s TIMN work, the rise of global communication networks of
increasing sophistication has led to the gradual emergence and strengthening of the
network form. This emergence is widely narrated, but the strength of Ronfeldt’s
analysis is that it provides a way of seeing how the network form disrupts, but does
not replace prior forms. TIMN allows us to focus on the strengths of the network
form without becoming ideologically intoxicated by it. What are those strengths?

In relation to the argument we are making, Ronfeldt’s network form is global, it
is horizontal – rather than hierarchical, it cuts across markets, institutions and tribes
connecting individuals regardless how they affiliate with prior forms (we note that
this disruptive capacity resonates well with Deleuze and Guattari’s (1980) idea of the
“rhizome”) and its form of coordination is collaborative. This is not a shatteringly
original insight, but these are the characteristics we have foreshadowed above as
necessary for solving global wicked problems. Ronfeldt (2006) notes,
“... this form is suited to enabling people to address modern, complex policy
issues that may require efforts from many directions at the same time...”
(Ronfeldt, 2006, p22)

Anticipatory Democracy suggests the sustained transformational power that
can be mustered by a motivated society – legislature, government apparatus and
citizenry – engaged in a mutual vision of a desired, achievable future. We argue that
the networked, participatory foresight which the projects in this paper exemplify
are the initial stages of a global successor to AD, addressing wicked problems in
a global, T+I+M+N society that encompasses the T+I+M societies that formed
the original stage for AD. Far from being a stylish fad, these approaches and the
Anticipatory Action Networks they prefigure offer a compelling, essential and
hopeful way to address the most serious and threatening wicked problems our planet
faces."

===The transformation of participatory foresight===

Current global processes, for example social stratification under capitalist
globalization and the production of ecological risk within post-industrial
development, create greater conditions for the politicization of foresight projects.
New approaches to foresight which twine physical embodiment with virtual
networks may augur new types of emergent foresight action networks. These
action networks may emerge to contest short-term political decision-making, or be
deliberative 'town halls on-the-move'. We may also imagine a ‘foresight swarm’,
which would be a locally instantiated action-network which could emerge rapidly
to promote, contest, or develop a future(s), consistent with Arguilla and Ronfeldt’s
original conception of the network as a locale of netwar, which noted the ability
of networks to act as a ‘swarm’ attacking a particular target from many angles and
in many ways (Arquilla, 1999; Hardt, 2004). ‘Foresight swarms’ would be actors
countering institutional or market short termism and extending social foresight aims.

As discussed earlier, localized replication can include the franchise or the
rhizome–mode. Both offer great potential for foresight. A franchise can enable
locales to draw on powerful foresight platforms, such as IFTF’s Foresight Engine.
Alternatively, via mobile networking, publically open foresight approaches, which
engage local populations in discrete events or on-going inquiry, could become
rhizomatic. The potential for localization can be latent until particular strategies
are adopted and conditions met. For examples an organizing template can help to
spread the franchise, while a vision, target or telos can form the basis of rhizomatic
expression. This points us towards adapting existing, and building new, methods
which integrate the physical and virtual via foresight methodologies, while allowing
localized permutations, diversity and openness.

The dynamic shift toward transparency / sousveillance may lead to opening
foresight-informed policy development to the public. Government accountability
to the public would thus extend to how it links futures thinking and research with
policy. This type of ‘foresight in public’ or ‘naked foresight’, where the aim is not to
involve the public in actively participating (as in the IFTF and other examples), but
rather to allow the public to engage in the observation of public foresight projects,
providing an educational role and the capacity for citizen oversight, where the
public is able to see a project evolve and develop, which portends to be an ascendant
feature of foresight projects. This may be considered a healthy expression of the
conjunction of Institutional and Network forms of foresight.

In the network era ownership and control of knowledge has become a central
issue and point of contestation. From the hyper-commercialization of personal online
data via Facebook, to the commons-based orientation of Wikipedia, the network era
augurs a new frontier in the control of intellectual property. This applies to efforts at
crowd sourcing and peer producing foresight / futures. In the examples in this paper,
we see hybrid, commons-based and proprietary strategies. Increasingly, however, we
expect two factors to contribute to a push for a foresight commons: the increasing
scale of global risk which requires greater sharing / participation and coordination,
and the emerging popular desire for public contributions to be established as
public domain. This idea has high profile advocates: Carol Dumain argues for
the construction of a “global foresight commons”, which would pool resources
into a global sharing platform (Dumain, 2010). As the value of peer produced
collective intelligence efforts emerges, harnessing the deep well of potential, indeed
the inspiration, within the global population, will require ways of valuing these
exchanges – in particular personal to structural enfranchisement in the ownership of
networked foresight efforts.

===Conclusion===

We began this article as an inquiry into the participation by publics in the
exploration and articulation of probable, possible, preferred and alternative futures.
We asked whether network-foresight strategies lead to real anticipatory democracy,
policy development and social change and what the dynamics and implications of
the network form applied to anticipatory democracy might be.

Set against the backdrop of: an increasingly complex world beset by wicked
problems, the emergence of the Network organizational form and emerging from a
long history of global, participatory projects in the field of Future Studies, we have
described a set of five key network-based, participatory foresight efforts amongst an
emerging field of related endeavours. We analysed a number of these efforts.

We have argued that, far from being a social media fad, these efforts prefigure
a style of global, collaborative, post-statist policy development ideal for addressing
wicked problems – in effect a network-centric, peer-to-peer Anticipatory Democracy.

This movement is post-statist, not in the sense that it replaces or removes the need
to affect government policy, but in the sense that, in the style of Ronfeldt’s Network
form, it interpenetrates and recontextualises communities, governments and
corporations.

We believe the projects and systems we have discussed prefigure this
development and the eight dynamics describe a design space which can guide
further efforts, but this work is far from complete. In closing, we are left with further
questions.

Democratizing futures means that many people, diverse people, have a say in
defining the terms by which future(s) are understood, studied and communicated.
In this regard the participatory turn, enabled by ICT, can and should be harnessed
to 1) make futures / anticipatory thinking a popular process, and 2) allow futures /
anticipatory thinking to reflect the needs of the vast majority of people, rather than
the interests of the few.

In 1999, Sardar proclaimed that “the future has been colonized” (Sardar, 1999,
p.9). He argued that special interests had already defined the socially preferred,
acceptable future, and the terms by which we conceive of what is possible. Yet,
after a decade of worsening ecological indicators, crisis-capitalism, and social
stratification, and with the recent “hashtag uprisings”, this façade may be lifting.
Can network-foresight strategies be used to de-colonize futures, and provide an
ascendant civic sphere a new capacity to explore and articulate alternative visions?

And can network-foresight strategies facilitate a global scales process of
building common ground toward shared visions of sustainable futures? 


As Bezold writes:

“The evolution of anticipatory democracy, and the advances and setbacks it
has faced over three decades, reinforces the importance of developing shared
vision. The more effectively efforts have developed shared vision, particularly
across diverse communities, the more successful these efforts have been.”
(Bezold, 2010, p.167)


This begs an important question: what new social foresight technologies and
strategies are needed for collaboration and coherence building with the scale-complexity
shift inherent in the network era? Addressing the 21st century’s wicked
challenges will require us to invent new socio-technical platforms, fully reinventing
Anticipatory Democracy for a network era."

==More Information==

* Another excerpt: The [[Network Form in the Futures Studies Field]]

* [[Open Foresight]]:  A New Model for Public Futurism. By Venessa Miemis, John Smart, Alvis Brigis. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012

* Evolutionary Guidance Media: an integral framework for foresight communication. By [[Dana Klisanin]]. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012

* [[Crowd-Sourced Collective Intelligence Platform for Participatory Scenarios and Foresight]]. By Noah Raford. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012

* [[Massively Multi-Player Futuring]]:  IftF's Foresight Engine. By Jake Dunagan. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012

* The Singularity is Boring: An Open, Collaborative 'Mock-up'. By Justin Pickard, Noah Raford, Wendy Schultz, Jake Dunagan, Scott Smith, and uncounted others. Journal of Futures Studies, September 2012


[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Futures]]