
'''* Article: Katarzyna Gajewska. ''New paradigm in producing general interest services in basic income and post-employment system: scenario of peer production of the public health and a happier society''. Paper for conference « Rethinking The Future of Work. Competing perspective and Methodological Challenges » in Bucharest, on 27-28 April 2018'''

URL =

=Abstract=

Technological unemployment together with growing ratio of elderly in the societies of developed countries is a challenge for maintaining wellbeing in the population. While UBI promises some positive outcomes, there is no guarantee that cash transfers will result in improving public health. This paper will argue that a basic income (the version of a UBI that allows a decent living) would enable creating additional health measures and services to complement the existing ones. I will explore health (care) outside of the institutionalized domain of state or private medical services or professional alternative and complementary medicine. Instead of focusing on reforming these sectors, I will propose additional measures, namely peer production of nonprofessional services outside of state or market provision. UBI can free energy to engage in preventive approach to health and thus a better use of resources. The paper will be an invitation to imagine new organizational structures to promote health. The major part of this paper will focus on the reasons to introduce additional platforms to produce health. The rest will imagine some examples of such nonprofessional services and outline a research agenda to advance this scenario. Such a paradigm change in organizing public health may require new way of thinking in public administration and inspire grassroots' organizing. While employment contributes to stress and health loss, other conditions of life also have a detrimental influence on our health: poor food quality, addiction to screens and substances, and loneliness are serious health issues to be addressed in post-employment society."



=More information=

* via author at k.gajewska_comm[at]zoho.com


[[Category:Health]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]