

'''= held in London, 7 December 2012'''

URL = http://thefinancelab.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/P2P-Summit-Summary1.pdf

=Description=

"The Peer-to-Peer Finance Policy Summit explored the 
role of regulation in the growth of non-bank finance 
for consumers and small businesses. Over 80 people 
attended, including the chief executives of more than 
15 peer-to-peer finance platforms, as well as trade 
body representatives, academics, policy-makers and 
regulatory officials.

The summit was held in partnership with Keystone 
Law, a leading law firm specialising in peer-topeer finance, and Nesta, the independent charity 
promoting social innovation. It was part of a wider 
Finance Innovation Lab project on disruptive finance 
policy, supported by the Calouste Gulbenkian 
Foundation.

The Treasury added its emphasis to the summit by 
announcing there will be a consultation in January 
2013 on how the new Financial Conduct Authority 
should regulate peer-to-peer loans and other forms 
of credit under the Financial Services Bill from April 
2014. This confirmed an earlier commitment made 
by Lord Sassoon during the reading of the Financial 
Services Bill in the House of Lords.

The opening panel, chaired by BBC Economics Editor 
Stephanie Flanders, focused on “the role for peer-topeer finance in our economic recovery”. Stephanie 
was joined by Baroness Kramer (the Liberal Democrat 
spokesperson on the Financial Services Bill and 
banking reform), Graeme Fisher (the Head of Policy 
from the Federation of Small Businesses), Giles 
Andrews (Chair of the P2P Finance Association) and 
Darren Westlake (CEO of Crowdcube, the crowdinvesting platform).

The remarks of the panel members were recorded and 
are available on our website. Simon Deane-Johns, a 
lawyer who co-organised the summit, then explained 
how P2P platforms work, as well as common 
operational risks and controls and regulatory barriers. 
His presentation is also available on our website.

Participants then formed a series of smaller groups 
to consider how to remove the regulatory barriers to 
the responsible growth of the three main types of 
regulated peer-to-peer finance. Some groups took 
the perspective of peer-to-peer lending, while others 
looked at crowd-investing in shares or debt securities. 
Each group considered the different perspectives 
of the saver/investor, the platform operator, or the 
person or business trying to raise finance. Over 100 
comments were generated in the course of these 
discussions, as briefly summarised under four main 
themes below.

Nesta CEO Geoff Mulgan put the most common 
suggestions to a closing panel of officials from 
the European Commission, Business Innovation 
and Skills, the Treasury and the Financial 
Services Authority. The panel operated under the 
Chatham House Rule. However, while no concrete 
commitments were made beyond the earlier Treasury 
announcement, it was clear that officials welcomed 
the innovation and competition that peer-to-peer 
finance platforms bring to the retail financial services 
market. There is clearly a willingness to consider 
the various issues and potential solutions that were 
identified."
(http://thefinancelab.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/P2P-Summit-Summary1.pdf)


[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Policy]]