
A vision and project by Steven Vedro, author of [[Digital Dharma]]

URL = http://myblessingcircle.blogspot.com/


=Description=

"For the last decade or so I have been "tuning in" and giving soul blessings to my dear friends on special occasions such as their birthdays, for healing, and as part of group ritual. I believe that this is part of my service on the planet, and now that I have turned 60, "giving blessings" should become even more part of my daily life. I have created a blog to share with the world those blessings I have created for my friends as special gifts at important times of their lives or as part of special rituals and celebrations. If you would like to receive a personal blessing, check out my blog and send me an email request with a 25-40 word description of yourself, and I will respond to the first 50 requests for free.


While I am starting with a simple service of offering blessings to my friends (and thus could do this via a MySpace page), my real vision is to create a sharing community where those who need a blessing can receive one from those who feel they have the calling (and skill) to tune into someone and offer them a bit of soul-based encouragement. 

The "basic" service will be free and peer-to-peer regulated. One would simply register and then receive and give an anonymous blessing once a week.

A low-fee subscription version would provide more frequent and more focused blessings, the option of phone calls in addition to email or text-messages, and a way to score the blessings you receive, providing feedback to those "blessers" with real psychic abilities. Those "givers" with high scores would be encouraged to offer more than they receive, and would be rewarded with a portion of the site's revenues and the opportunity to promote their workshops, books, etc."
(http://srvedro.com/blessings.aspx)

[[Category:Spirituality]]