
'''* Book: Peer-to-Peer Leadership: Why the Network Is the Leader. By Mila Baker.  Berrett-Koehler, 2013'''

URL = http://www.bkconnection.com/static/Peer_To_Peer_Leadership_EXCERPT.pdf

=Description=

From the publisher:

"Mila Baker believes  that most of today's leadership  theories are old wines in new skins and still rely on the leader-follower hierarchy. Yet hierarchy is breaking down everywhere in society, from politics to religion to social relationships -- and most particularly in computers and networking. 

Baker's inspiration is the peer-to-peer model of computing, which is also mirrored in social networking technologies where a network with "equipotent" nodes of power -- think peer leaders -- is infinitely more powerful than a "client-server" (i.e., leader-follower) network. By creating organizations with leaders at all levels, architects of peer-to-peer organizations can build flexibility, resiliency, and accountability."


2.

"* Shows that a radically decentralized approach can revolutionize leadership just as it has revolutionized computer networking

* Turns leadership on its head—the job of the leader is not to tell followers what to do but to create, enable, and facilitate a network of peer leaders

* Features examples of what some organizations are doing and what all organizations can do to implement and benefit from this new approach


Our leadership models are still stuck in a top-down, command-and-control, Industrial Age mentality. But our globalized, data-drenched, 24/7 world is just too complex, with too much information coming from too many different directions, for any single person or group of people to stay on top of it. The idea of hierarchy is breaking down everywhere, from politics to religion to social relationships—why should leadership be any different?

Mila Baker’s inspiration for a new way to lead is the peer-to-peer model of computing, which is also mirrored in social networking and crowdsource technologies. She shows that a network with “equipotent” nodes of power—think peer leaders—is infinitely more powerful than a “client-server” (leader-follower) network.

In organizations of equipotent nodes, leadership isn’t fixed or siloed — it shifts based on the particular strengths of individuals and the particular needs of a situation. Rather than being guided into narrow predetermined channels, information flows freely so those who need it can find it easily and are empowered to act on it immediately. Constant change is built into the very structure of these organizations, and giving feedback is no longer a separate (and often dreaded and ineffective) process but becomes an organic part of the workflow, enabling rapid course corrections.

Baker still advocates the need for top-level executives and senior leaders, but their job is to optimize the health of the network rather than issue commands. Companies such as Gore and Herman Miller practice these principles and have achieved long-term success—Baker provides a structure for this approach that any organization can adapt to build flexibility, resiliency, and accountability."
([http://www.bkconnection.com/ProdDetails.asp?ID=9781609947477&MLC=BKP.EN121913&utm_source=%2B%2B%2B%2B%2B%2B%2BJS+Decem+19%2C+2013%2C+Newsletter&utm_campaign=12%2F19%2F13+communique&utm_medium=email])


=Contents=


==Summary==

Mila Baker:

"This book uses the analogy of peer-to-peer information 
technology architecture to demonstrate how technological 
advances can help guide our thinking about a new paradigm 
for leadership and organizational design. It does not view 
technology as a barrier or a threat, but rather sees it as 
an enabler of greater understanding about the integral 
connections between individuals in organizations and how 
work can be organized for optimal success. It introduces 
a new way to define, measure, and express leadership in a 
world that is now hyper-digitally connected and brings the 
challenges that prevent us from altering the way we think 
about leadership to the surface.

Peer to peer (P2P) IT architecture is a radical, 
architectural shift that has transformed the computing 
industry and influenced how society uses computer 
technology. Beyond that, it has ignited an interest in 
examining many social peer-to-peer processes and 
relationships where interaction—especially in large 
organizations—traditionally occurs in accordance with 
the model of command-and-control leadership. With P2P, 
it becomes possible for leaders to relinquish some of that 
command and control, and for individuals to be equals.
The book itself is organized around two important 
concepts—leadership and organization design. 


There are  three elements and patterns: 

(1) node communities, 

(2) equipotency, and 

(3) relational dynamics. 

Like the colors 
and patterns in a kaleidoscope, these themes weave a new 
tapestry for leadership and for organization design. Their 
interplay forms a somewhat abstract but integrated look at 
the whole organization. 


While the first chapter takes a look at the current state of 
leadership, the language of leadership, and the language of 
the peer-to-peer architecture (P2P), chapters two through 
four each deal with a particularly important piece of P2P 
architecture: nodes and node communities, equipotency, and 
relational dynamics, respectively. Chapters five through 
eight provide guidance and background for understanding 
the importance of and need for a fundamental shift, as 
well as examples of people and organizations that have put 
P2P leadership and organizational structure into practice. 
Chapters nine and ten outline the P2P implications for 
leadership, for organization design, and for how P2P can 
be practiced in the twenty-first-century organization. I 
talk about how decisions in organizations are influenced 
by their leadership practices and their organizational 
design, about possibilities and a vision for the future 
of leadership, and about the mindset, perspective, and 
behaviors needed to realize a new vision. The book also 
highlights a few companies that are already on the P2P path 
and authors who are outlining new behaviors consistent 
with P2P network communities. In addition to presenting 
ideas, the book provides examples of what we could do 
differently to build momentum toward the vision of P2P 
leadership. To that end, the book is more about ideas than 
practices and frameworks. It is an invitation for you to put 
yourself in a new scenario and a new reality—one that is 
almost undeniably imminent, whether our organizations 
are ready for it or not. It is intended to provoke thought,
spark questions, and conjure images of possibilities that 
can be tested and tried in the arenas of leadership and 
organizational design. 

This book is for doers, thinkers, and helpers. It is for 
those who must take action, those who enjoy thinking and 
inquiry, and those who are committed to helping others. It 
is not for pessimists, for those who are comfortable with the 
outcomes of current practices, or for those who think the 
state of leadership is well and will continue to flourish as it 
is. Regardless of organizational position or status, it is for 
and will benefit those who think and feel passionately that 
we can and must improve the quality of leadership actions, 
research, teaching, and consulting, as well as the overall 
design of organizations and leadership programs. 

The book is not a review of theories or a book of facts. It is 
not a scholarly treatise on leadership. Rather, it is a journey 
on a new road—a road not taken before. There is a quote 
carved on a bench in front of my children’s upper school that 
reads: “I believe in the sun even when it rains.” To this day, 
this quote is the first that comes to mind when 
I think about moving forward by embracing the opportunity 
presented at the moment. In that spirit, I invite you to join 
me on a new road."
(http://www.bkconnection.com/static/Peer_To_Peer_Leadership_EXCERPT.pdf)

==Chapter 1: The Language of Leadership==

Leadership and the Tech Revolution 4
Individuality and Equality 7
What Is Peer-to-Peer Computing Technology 
and How Is It Related to Leadership? 8
The Difference between a New Theory 
and a Paradigm Shift 12
Summary 14


==Chapter 2: Node Community==

What Is a Node Community? 20
The Power of Node Communities: 
Instant Information Sharing 23
Power to Create Change 
and the Dangers of Misinformation 24
Disruption of Traditional Communication Models 26
On the P2P Path: Giant Hydra 26
The Value of Node Communities in Organizations 27
Efficient and Effective Flow of Information 28
The Expertise of the Whole Community 28
Nimbleness and Response to Change 29
Real-Time Feedback and Dialogue 30
Summary 30


==Chapter 3: Organizational Equipotency==

The Power of Equipotency in Organizations 36
All Nodes Are Created Equal: Everyone Leads 
and Everyone Follows 37
Driven by Communication (Nodes) 38
The Value of Equipotency in Organizations 39xii Contents 
Serving as an Enabler 40
Driving Commitment 40
Engendering Positive Intent 40
Motivating Everyone to Give Their Best 41
Implications for Organization Design 41
On the P2P Path: BMW Designworks 42
Implications for a New Leadership Paradigm 43
Summary 44


==Chapter 4: Relational Dynamics==

On the P2P Path: Google 50
Relational Dynamics 52
On the P2P Path: Stiletto Network 53
The Value of Relational Dynamics 54
People, Information, and Connections 55
Organizational Anarchy 55
Shared Decision Making and Governance 56
Implications for a New Leadership Paradigm 57
Summary 59


==Chapter 5: From Survival of the Fittest to Survival of the Connected==

Darwin Misinterpreted 66
Adaptation and Mitigation 67
Protective Processes 68
Solving Problem Solving 70
Summary 72


==Chapter 6: The Flow of Information==

Traditional Barriers to Communication 79
Day-to-Day Sharing: Network as Communication 
Infrastructure 81
Benefits of the Open Transfer of Information 82
Summary 84


==Chapter 7: Nimbleness and Change==

P2P and Drivers for Change 90
The Space and Time for Change 93
The Evolutionary Model 94 Contents xiii 
The Dialectical Model 94
The Teleological Model 95
The Life Cycle and Cultural Models 95
A Case for P2P Architecture: Herman Miller 96
Summary 97


==Chapter 8: Real-Time Feedback and Dialogue==

Starbucks: Two Observations, Two Outcomes 105
On the P2P Path: NYU—A Global Network University 107
A Better Way 109
Summary 113


==Chapter 9: Implications for Organization Design==

Why is P2P Architecture Important? 120
The Work Experience 122
On the P2P Path: Hot Spots Movement 123
The Work Environment 125
Summary 128
Chapter 10: Implications for Leadership 131
Organization Formation 135
On the P2P Path: ROWE 139
Human Resources and Organization Development 140
Questioning Traditional Leadership 142
Leadership as a Dyad Exchange Structure 145
Summary 146
Moving Forward 149
On the P2P Path: Paul Polman at Unilever 153

=Excerpts=

==From the Preface==

See: http://www.bkconnection.com/static/Peer_To_Peer_Leadership_EXCERPT.pdf

Mila Baker:

"The journey to write this book started as I completed 
work on a major merger project assignment at one of the 
largest pharmaceutical companies in the world. After going 
through phases of personal leadership and experiencing 
the continued futility of trying to fit our existing leadership 
theories, models, and language into a new world reality, 
it became clear to me what people mean when they 
say insanity is doing the same things over and over and 
expecting different results. This became clear in three 
phases of my learning curve about leadership: invisible 
leadership, leadership theory shopping, and bold, new ways 
of thinking about leadership and organization design—
leadership through community.

The invisible leadership phase started with my first 
experience as a new manager and leader. I recognized that 
as a newly minted PhD I had a lot of theoretical knowledge, 
but little practical knowledge and experience. I wanted to 
apply the knowledge I had learned in graduate school, but I 
also wanted to experiment with and test new ideas. I wanted 
to let others learn how to achieve results and personal 
success on their own. There were many people I worked with 
who were more experienced than I was, and while I wanted 
to learn from them, I didn’t necessarily want to follow 
exactly in their footsteps.
 
I focused on asking others what they thought before 
I expressed my point of view or perspective. I quickly
learned that some individuals who reported to me were 
uncomfortable with being asked their thoughts. They were 
confused, looked for me to provide more direction, and 
perceived their jobs as solely following orders and doing 
what the manager wanted them to do. Others expressed 
different points of view, and I was tentative and unclear in 
my response. It was not until months later that one person 
on my staff told me how uncomfortable everyone was with 
being asked their thoughts; no manager had ever asked 
them what they thought, and they were intimidated when 
asked to share their thoughts because they were afraid they 
would not say what I wanted. 

At the same time, my manager did not think I was taking 
control as a manager and thought that I relied too heavily 
on consensus of the group. He wanted me to be direct and 
tell those working for me what he wanted and what he 
had directed us to do. Demonstrating through my actions 
how I expected my reports to behave and make decisions 
turned out to be too subtle an approach and did not provide 
enough guidance and direction. It did not take long to 
realize that invisible and silent leadership translated as no 
leadership to many. 

From the invisible leadership phase, I moved to a phase 
of leadership theory shopping—a phase where I tried on 
different leadership styles to see what seemed to work best 
in different contexts or situations. As an academic, I was 
well versed in all the current theories and regularly tried 
most of them to see how others would respond. I tried to 
absorb and use not only the leadership theories I had been 
introduced to as a doctoral student, but also all the new 
theories that arrived on bookshelves daily. Keeping up with 
new trends and practices felt like taking an intense crash 
course every few months. Every conference, seminar, and
learned that some individuals who reported to me were 
uncomfortable with being asked their thoughts. They were 
confused, looked for me to provide more direction, and 
perceived their jobs as solely following orders and doing 
what the manager wanted them to do. Others expressed 
different points of view, and I was tentative and unclear in 
my response. It was not until months later that one person 
on my staff told me how uncomfortable everyone was with 
being asked their thoughts; no manager had ever asked 
them what they thought, and they were intimidated when 
asked to share their thoughts because they were afraid they 
would not say what I wanted. 

At the same time, my manager did not think I was taking 
control as a manager and thought that I relied too heavily 
on consensus of the group. He wanted me to be direct and 
tell those working for me what he wanted and what he 
had directed us to do. Demonstrating through my actions 
how I expected my reports to behave and make decisions 
turned out to be too subtle an approach and did not provide 
enough guidance and direction. It did not take long to 
realize that invisible and silent leadership translated as no 
leadership to many. 

From the invisible leadership phase, I moved to a phase 
of leadership theory shopping—a phase where I tried on 
different leadership styles to see what seemed to work best 
in different contexts or situations. As an academic, I was 
well versed in all the current theories and regularly tried 
most of them to see how others would respond. I tried to 
absorb and use not only the leadership theories I had been 
introduced to as a doctoral student, but also all the new 
theories that arrived on bookshelves daily. Keeping up with 
new trends and practices felt like taking an intense crash 
course every few months. Every conference, seminar, and
A brief period of reflection followed my work on the 
pharmaceutical companies’ merger. This pause allowed me 
to recognize that something else was needed, not only in 
the way I worked, but also in the way I helped others. The 
status quo was no longer sufficient, and neither were the 
theoretical models currently in use. In one sense, it was 
somewhat disturbing that I had not appreciated the value 
of deep reflection before, since that is a core of the work of a 
practitioner and scholar of strategic change and leadership. 
But I was gratified and energized that I was now embarking 
on a period of reflection that would lead to a new level of 
thought and introspection on the work I was so passionate 
about. I felt confident that it would inform and direct me 
going forward—that it would become the footprint for the 
next phase of my professional life.

Fueled by the merger experience (and a re-reading 
of Meg Wheatley’s bestselling book, Leadership and the 
New Science), I began a journey to explore a bold, new 
paradigm for leadership and organizational design. I never 
thought that the theories in use were useless and should be 
discarded. On the contrary, I thought about them in terms of 
the fairy tale of the emperor and his clothes. In this instance, 
it was not that the emperor was not wearing any clothes so 
much as that he had an outdated wardrobe—a somewhat 
restrictive wardrobe not suited for the conditions of the 
twenty-first century. 

Seeing the emperor dressed so poorly, I saw the need 
to figure out what type of wardrobe best suits leaders 
and organizations in the twenty-first century. Rather 
than construct new architectural forms and structures, 
my approach was to look for ways to create form and 
structure from natural order—similar to Frank Lloyd 
Wright’s architectural approach. I wanted to explore ways
consistent with natural order and chaos. I did not want 
to impress one more theory upon the natural order of the 
time, but hoped to harness some of the power inherent in 
that order. For our time, that order is the architecture of 
the peer-to-peer network."
(http://www.bkconnection.com/static/Peer_To_Peer_Leadership_EXCERPT.pdf)

==Five Lessons on Peer-to-Peer leadership from Peer-to-Peer Computer Networks==

Mila Baker:

'''1. P2P networks are not restrained by geographical proximity or boundaries.'''

P2P networks can function in various environments including ones so small that the only people in it are the individuals in one particular building, all the way to global networks in several continents -- as a result of which, such networks are always "on" and "live."

Lesson for Business: As even small companies go global, the inefficacy of having a central command in one place that others have to follow regardless of where they are located grows more impractical. A global leadership network is not a failing but rather a strength because it ensures accountability at all times in all places rather than only during business hours at HQ.


'''2. P2P networks are self-sustaining.'''

On the Internet, peer to peer networks handle a very high volume of file sharing traffic by distributing the load across many computers. Because they do not rely exclusively on central servers, P2P networks both scale better and are more resilient than client-server networks in case of failures or traffic bottlenecks.

Lesson for Business: Traditional leadership networks generate bottlenecks where everything has to go through a select conduit. With more more people reporting to less, a logjam is inevitable. Such logjams are circumvented when there are more conduits in a more expansive network.



'''3. P2P networks rarely crash.'''

Because the work and transfer of data is handled through so many nodes, nothing happens if one or more of those nodes crash or break as there are still others who can shoulder the work and keep the network running.

Lesson for Business: This is an obvious one. When all work is orchestrated or approved by a select number or hierarchy, any disruption of that hierarchy means that the whole organization falters or breaks down. Having a network of leaders means that if one or more are unable to perform for any reason, others can still step in and keep things running.


 
'''4. P2P networks can be configured in different ways to suit particular purposes.'''

Not all P2P networks are the same. Technically, many P2P networks (including the original Napster) are not pure peer networks but rather hybrid designs as they utilize some nodes for some functions such as search. Depending on the network's needs, certain nodes can serve particular purposes at one time and serve more general connection purposes at another.

Lesson for Business: The whole idea of a single person having a single role is not just inefficient but outdated. One of the great strengths of a peer network is an aligned group that can do a variety of things -- and, most importantly, have the collective brainpower to be able to advise one another on different matters and therefore have more skills across more disciplines. 


'''5. P2P networks do not restrict the free-flow of information.'''

There are some networks that have tiers of access, but the most popular peer networks have open access where each person decides what information or material they wish to share but that information, once posted, is accessible to everyone on the network.

Lesson for Business: The sharing of information is one of the most crucial aspects of business communications but that can often be negatively impacted by selective sharing where not everyone has access to the same information resulting in misunderstandings and false assumptions. A transparent approach that makes all information available to everyone ensures a more informed, coordinated, and empowered group."
(http://bklists.blogspot.com/2013/10/five-lessons-on-peer-to-peer-leadership.html)




[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Labor]]