'''* Report: Peer Participation and Software: What Mozilla Has to Teach Government. by David R. Booth. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports on
Digital Media and Learning, MIT Press 2010.'''



=Description=

"Firefox is a unique example of peer production
both for its vast scale and for its combination of
structured, hierarchical management with open, collaborative
volunteer participation.

The purpose of this report is to address how and why the
Mozilla Foundation is successful at organizing large-scale participation
in the development of its software. What motivates
Mozilla to solicit the expertise of anyone who wishes to provide
her time and knowledge to the Mozilla enterprise? What motivates
volunteers to participate?

In examining the answers to these questions, the goal is to
explore what aspects of Mozilla’s open source approach to software
development are transferable to government and civil society."


=Summary=


"This report is divided into five sections. 

The first, Open
Source, introduces the Mozilla Foundation, beginning with its
inception as Netscape Communications and culminating with
its present open-source business model. This brief history helps
to define open source by explaining Mozilla’s place in the open
source community.


The second section, Open Source at Mozilla, summarizes the
unique mix of hierarchical management with peer-produced,
volunteer labor that enables Mozilla to operate at scale in the
development of the Firefox browser. To understand how volunteer
contributions of code are evaluated and incorporated into
ongoing projects, open source participants are identified on the
basis of their roles in a system of distributed peer review.


The third section, Licensing, discusses the rules under which
open source developers maintain and improve the Firefox
browser. The role of licensing in open-source software development
and distribution is examined with an eye toward the freedom
and limitations granted the licensee: What protocols do
volunteer developers follow in participating in projects at
Mozilla? How does the Mozilla Foundation govern the redistribution
of its source code? What role does licensing play in helping
to bring about volunteer participation? How does an open
source license actually legislate the freedom that makes large-scale
participation possible? How does licensing create incentives
to form communities?

In section four, Beyond Software, we explain how Mozilla
takes the modular nature of code writing and applies these same
techniques to a range of nontechnical activities. The utilization
of an international community of volunteers in the strategic
marketing of software is unique to the Mozilla Foundation and
suggests the most parallels with civic engagement.


We begin the last and longest section of the report, What
Software Has to Teach Government, with two questions: 

(1) Why is Mozilla successful? and 

(2) Is the Mozilla methodology repeatable? 

We apply the answers to these questions to several
contemporary examples of participatory governance in the United
States. We then examine the Obama administration’s efforts to
solicit public participation both during the election campaign
and in the early days of the new presidency. In concluding this
report with recommendations for further research on participatory
governance, we address possible shortcomings in the
Mozilla methodology as applied to the work of government."


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]