


=Description=

Georg Vogt:

"P2P market platforms enable prosumers to sell their renewable electricity in a local market to a nearby final customer, ideally in the same low-voltage grid. This can include the provision of electricity but also local ancillary services. If the overall travel distance of electrons were to be reduced and easily declared to be "green", lower grid fees etc are sometimes possible. Market operation and clearing are often linked to blockchain technology which can be a public ledger (e.g. blockchain) but can just as well remain inaccessible to participants.

The platform operator effectively acts as kind of a broker which allows for new revenues streams such as arbitrage, fees, flat-rates, insurances for over/under-consumption, cross-selling, facilitation of energy citizens projects and For instance, the locality enables local suppliers to sell electricity together with other energy services related services (e.g. auditing) or hardware (e.g. battery, insulation). Re-inventing the business model with P2P is of particular interest for small, still bundled, electricity companies (e.g. German Stadtwerke) and large suppliers of energy relying on fossil fuels."
(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/p2p-electricity-market-platforms-georg-vogt/)


=Example=

"Conjoule by innogy and Tokyo Electric is located in Essen and Mühlheim. Prosumers select their consumers. Currently a public school and one of the largest water utilities are customers for regionally produced electricity. The website advertises that lower grid fees apply creating an incentive for prosumers to sell via the platform."
(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/p2p-electricity-market-platforms-georg-vogt/)


=Directory=

* directory page maintained by Georg Vogt at https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/p2p-electricity-market-platforms-georg-vogt/

"The list focuses on open P2P markets and platforms, the size of which can vary but should be able to enable local trades."

Summary:

* Germany: Tal.markt, Conjoule, enerchain/NEW4.0, LO3/enera, Share&Charge; 

* Europe: PylonNetwork, Sunchain, Daisee, WePower, Powerpeers, SunContract, Jouliette, Eemnes; 

* USA: BrooklynMicrogrid, Grid+; Anybody: I-Nuk (CO2) 

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Europe]]