'''* Book: Leigh Phillips and Michal Rozworski. The People's Republic of Walmart: How the World's Biggest Corporations are Laying the Foundation for Socialism. Verso (Jacobin), .'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Peoples-Republic-Walmart-Corporations-Foundation-ebook/dp/B075HY7DWZ/ ebook]

=Description=

From the publisher:

Since the demise of the USSR, the mantle of the largest planned economies in the world has been taken up by the likes of Walmart, Amazon and other multinational corporations

For the left and the right, major multinational companies are held up as the ultimate expressions of free-market capitalism. Their remarkable success appears to vindicate the old idea that modern society is too complex to be subjected to a plan. And yet, as Leigh Phillips and Michal Rozworski argue, much of the economy of the West is centrally planned at present. Not only is planning on vast scales possible, we already have it and it works. The real question is whether planning can be democratic. Can it be transformed to work for us?

An engaging, polemical romp through economic theory, computational complexity, and the history of planning, The People’s Republic of Walmart revives the conversation about how society can extend democratic decision-making to all economic matters. With the advances in information technology in recent decades and the emergence of globe-straddling collective enterprises, democratic planning in the interest of all humanity is more important and closer to attainment than ever before."


=Contents=

Ridhiman Balaji:

"Chapter 2 does a good job of summarizing the “socialist 
calculation debate,” polemics between various Austrian and Marxist 
economists in the early 20th century. 

Chapter 3 examines how con- 
temporary neoclassical economic theories conceal hierarchical social 
relationships and delegate decision-making authority to wealthy 
owners and bosses. Since their interests do not coincide with those 
of workers, bosses have a vested interest in implementing policies 
that increase firms’ operational efficiency without taking into con-sideration the physical and mental well-being of their workers. Te 
authors also discuss an odd conception of “freedom” promulgated 
by Hayek, arguing that he is not so much after freedom, but rather 
“freedom for information and money” – two central lubricants of 
market activity. For the authors, Hayek plays a central ideological 
role in debates about the feasibility of economic planning. 

Chapter 4’s focus is on Amazon; the authors examine its use 
of complex math and computer science to carry out its operations 
all around the world. Due to its sheer scale, Amazon integrates its 
supply chains with those of other producers to ensure that sufficient 
quantities are produced and arrive to stores as needed. As a result, 
it is compelled to use complicated algorithms in its planning process in order to solve “optimization problems,” allowing Amazon 
to determine how much of a given product it should produce in 
order to supply its entire distribution network. 

Chapter 5 looks at how capitalist enterprises rely heavily on a 
financial system that is thoroughly integrated with central banks. 

The government uses monetary policy to “ration investment” in 
order to manage expectations and diminish uncertainty with respect 
to the business environment, and plays a major role as the entrepreneurial agent carrying out investments in risky circumstances. 
Nationalization alone is insufficient. 

Using the case of the British 
National Health Services, Chapter 6 argues that public institutions 
can plan and prioritize public interests and overcome the desires 
of capitalists to derive profits from every economic opportunity. 
Despite numerous attacks the NHS has faced from conservative 
administrations, chronic underfunding, and the imposition of 
market reforms, the authors argue that a more systematic reform 
of capitalist society can occur by embedding institutions such as 
the NHS with democratic decision-making processes. 


In Chapter 7, the authors challenge the conventional claim that 
the Soviet Union was socialist. “While the replacement of the market 
with planning is a necessary condition for an egalitarian society,
it is not a sufficient condition. Planning must be democratic.” A 
deeply authoritarian state like the Soviet Union never aspired to 
a more egalitarian society, and the Bolsheviks never implemented 
workers’ control, on either a workplace or societal level. 

Chapter 8 is perhaps the most problematic. The authors discuss 
how Soviet economists planned the economy using first material 
balance sheets, and then Input-Output analysis. Their attribution 
of the method of Input-Output analysis to Marx is problematic. 

Chapter 9 builds on this, exploring the feld of “cybernetics,” the 
use of computer science to develop decentralized economic planning. The authors discuss Project Cybersyn, initially conceived by 
Chile’s Allende in the early ’70s. However, the project was never 
resumed after his overthrow in 1973. 

In Chapter 10, the authors discuss how democratic decentralized economic planning can be applied to tackle problems 
pertaining to the environment. From decarbonizing agriculture to 
integrating renewables, they argue that democratic planning could 
be extremely useful for implementing system-wide reforms and 
addressing underlying biological problems. They end their book by 
writing that planning works, is already ubiquitous in our society, 
and that sophisticated algorithms are already used by large-scale 
firms like Walmart and Amazon to increase productivity. However, 
the authors stress that democracy is paramount for their proposal 
to implement decentralized economic planning."

(https://www.academia.edu/43327957/Economic_Planning_as_a_Reconfiguration_of_Capitalism)


=Review=

'''1. Cory Doctorow:'''

"Phillips and his co-author, Canadian labour organiser Michal Rozworski, have outdone themselves with this volume.

The two are addressing themselves to the socialist calculation debate, which raged through Austrian economic circles a century ago, with market-focused economists like Ludwig von Mises arguing that it was technically impossible to calculate an efficient allocation of goods in a large, industrial society, and that markets alone -- as a kind of distributed calculation engine -- could solve the problem of getting goods to the people who could make best use of them.

Von Mises won the argument in the 1920s, but a funny thing happened on the way to the 2020s: we are now surrounded by companies and organisations that within the same order of magnitude as the Soviet economy at its apex, which undertake breathtakingly efficient allocations of goods and resources, and all without markets, running as command economies.

You've heard of these comparable-to-the-Soviet-Union command economies: Amazon. Walmart. The Pentagon. There are many more. Each one is an existence-proof of the idea that markets are not needed for mass-scale allocation. What's more, the counterexamples, like Sears -- which implemented internal markets at the insistence of an ideology-blinded libertarian CEO -- show that markets are much worse at allocating resources than the computational command economies used in other enterprises.

The upshot of this is that to the extent that the Soviet Union was crippled by inefficient allocation, that is no longer the problem it once was. It's that we can imagine something as efficient and convenient as Walmart or Amazon without CEOs, shareholders or exploited workers, bringing all the bounties of late-stage capitalism without its pathologies.

The upshot is that fully automated luxury communism isn't just science fiction: it's a going concern with real evidence on the ground.

Market purists argue that we must tolerate all the evils of markets -- exploitation, inequality, the endangering of our biosphere -- because markets are the only conceivable force that can accomplish efficient allocation in our highly technical world. Deep greens take them at their word and say, fine, let's get rid of technology and return to a kind of agrarian feudalism.

Both of them are buying into Thatcher's maxim that "there is no alternative." But Phillips and Rozworksi are proposing an alternative: bright green, high-tech societies where markets are useful tools for solving the odd problem, but where allocation is primarily accomplished by the preferred means of Jeff Bezos and Sam Walton, but to the benefit of the many, not the few."

(https://boingboing.net/2019/03/05/walmart-without-capitalism.html?)


'''2. Ridhiman Balaji:'''

"The People’s Republic of Walmart asks whether Walmart is an 
institution which progressives can use to build a more egalitarian 
society. Major multinationals like Walmart and Amazon have 
become increasingly technically sophisticated, employing complex computer algorithms to solve “optimization problems.” Can 
this technology be appropriated by progressives to build a more 
emancipatory and liberatory society? For the authors, the answer 
is yes, however, their arguments suffer from numerous drawbacks. 

The authors note that their goal is not to celebrate Walmart, 
but rather to capture its operational efficiency and use it to build 
an egalitarian and liberatory society. Tey argue that the defining 
characteristic of existing capitalist societies is the free market. 

Something profitable using the free market, they note, is not necessarily socially useful. They cite the absence of a universal public 
healthcare system in the U.S. as an example: “Healthcare for all 
would be wonderfully useful. But because it is not profitable, it 
is not produced.” 

Phillips and Rozworski point to democratic planning as an alternative, arguing that a more democratic version of central planning 
could help allocate resources more efficiently. Economic planning 
has a long history, dating back to the ancient Mesopotamians, 
whose complex economic record-keeping might be described as 
an early, rudimentary version of economic planning. The authors 
argue that despite the fact that “ancient planning was at the service 
of an economic system created for the benefit of a small coterie of 
elites who were motivated to maintain their wealth and power,” 
there are many lessons which we can learn from the failings of the 
ancients. Ultimately, for Phillips and Rozworski, centrally planned 
economies are not desirable because they are not democratic."

(https://www.academia.edu/43327957/Economic_Planning_as_a_Reconfiguration_of_Capitalism)


=Discussion=

==The [[Left and Big Data]]==

James Meadway:

"The case for democratic planning has recently been restated by Leigh Philips and Michal Rozworski in their very readable The People’s Republic of Walmart. Their argument hinges on the presence of ‘islands of planning’ in a sea of market competition in the form of the vast operations of corporations. The possibilities of using the technologies and organisation mobilised by the likes of Walmart for more obviously human ends than is the animating thread of their book – just as was observing the prodigious efforts of capitalist states planning production for total war for earlier generations of socialists.

In particular, fast computers and cheap digital sensors open up the prospect of continuous, real-time planning of the economy in ways that have never been feasible before. The ‘socialist calculation problem’ of old – that society was too complex to plan everything – appears solved. Yet this may not be an entirely desirable solution. In the World Review of Political Economy, Bibin Yang and Xiaoyan Li have recently proposed the implementation of a planned economy using real-time Big Data to allow immediate adjustments to plans, creating a hybrid ‘market-based, plan-driven’ system. Like Philips and Rozworksi, they suggest that major corporations – particularly the platform companies like Alibaba and Amazon – already operate on such a model. All that is needed, they suggest, is for the state to replicate such functions and expand its sphere of planning. Jack Ma, founder of Alibaba, has suggested that his company is a stepping stone to a planned economy: ‘with access to all kinds of data, we may be able to find the invisible hand of the market.’

There are two important points here. The first is that ‘finding the invisible hand’, whilst a striking metaphor, is very much in line with conventional economics thinking on the relationship between planning and the market. The ‘ideal’, welfare-maximising distribution of societies’ resources, as selected by a perfectly benevolent planner, is identical to the ‘ideal’, welfare-maximising distribution of societies’ resources as selected by an entirely free market, in the standard proof of the desirability of a market society. The presence of Big Data turns this hypothetical social planner into a real possibility, overcoming the standard free market criticism of planning, exemplified in the work of Von Hayek – that the information needed to perform the task, in any reasonably complex society, is too great to be performed. We have not stepped outside the boundaries that neoclassical economics usually establishes for the problems it seeks to address.

Second, if we do look beyond those boundaries, we are back in the world of a state-capital fusion. ‘All kinds of data’ has deep implications: it could include, for instance, social credit scoring, as applied in China (and of which the recently-departed Dominic Cummings was something of an enthusiast). It is not obvious that this should be acceptable. Francis Spufford’s semi-fictional account of the development of Soviet planning, Red Plenty, makes exactly this point: that even with faster computers and more data, the demands of a (presumed) benevolent planner might well be rejected by those expected to follow its edicts. (In the book, changes in the prices of food, intended to produce a fairer distribution according to the plan, provoke riots.) We would have to exhibit a very high degree of trust in the planner to simply allow for its diktat to set the course of our lives.

Arguably, via the mass data-collection empires of Big Tech, we do display that sort of trust, happily handing over to them unimaginable volumes of information about ourselves and our relationships. We might read this as a challenge to Graeber’s vision of reciprocity: that a version of free exchange – even a gift relationship – can be established with an entirely faceless bureaucracy subject to no obvious legal or democratic or even, if we are not careful, human restraints. The latter point is particularly important with AI that can teach itself and devise new rules for us, as is already occurring. We are implicitly offering our consent to a process that is running ahead of us – and one which, under Covid-19, has accelerated markedly.

There are two profound side-effects to the presence of mass data that the Left has not yet got its collective head around. The first is the gradual disappearance of consumer-facing markets from our lives. Facebook is, as it says on the homepage, ‘Free, and it always will be.’ No exchange of money takes place between the Facebook consumer and the Facebook company, as in a more conventional market operation. Instead, Facebook monetises the data it gathers and sells it elsewhere. But this is a challenge to how we conventionally think about capitalism, and certainly how we conventionally try to register its activities. Constructing GDP becomes harder when there is less being obviously traded, and the location of where ‘value’ is realised becomes harder to pin down. This is a process of capital-led decommodification, at least for its end-products; but the corollary recommodification of data is also still poorly understood. Katharine Pistor has recently explored some of the implications. In ‘Rule by Data: The End of Markets?’, she speculates persuasively that the data will likely displace markets and law as the dominant organising principle of human societies. We are already seeing the displacement of markets; law is further down the line. This process runs counter to the neoclassical expectation that the improvement of markets would lessen the dependence on law and reduce the role of firms in the economy. In fact, Pistor suggests, we have seen the reduction of transactions costs to bare minima via digitisation, but, alongside and as a direct consequence of this, the massive growth of ‘corporate behemoths’ in the form of the data giants. Law is being bent towards their will, directly in the sense that they are very powerful lobbyists for specific legal structures, and indirectly (and ultimately more consequential) in that their actions create new structures enjoying a form of legality in advance of any formal lawmaking.

There are three sets of responses to this. One is to attempt to reassert market rule, as with the various anti-trust efforts against Big Data. A second is to reassert law, as in the various attempts to regulate and control data. Both of these look doomed to fail, at least on their initial terms: the former looks set to, at best, reproduce multiple versions of problematic institutions; the second merely hands over more control to a central authority. Both ‘market sovereignty’ and ‘state sovereignty’ fail when set against the need to bring data under human control. This will not stop their political protagonists arguing for either: a reassertion of neoliberal politics lies in one direction, and potentially ugly nationalism in the other. An anti-egalitarian political right can exist on the basis of either (or, quite possibly, some combination of both at once).

Pistor favours a third option: a reassertion of the fundamental reciprocity – the ‘primitive communism’ – in allowing smaller collectivities of data users and producers to form, then seeking their protection through the use of ‘data trusts’. These would be a mixed form of institution – potentially (if the trustees wished it) operating in a market, enjoying a legal protection, but constituted on the basis of a collective interest. (I have recently discussed such trusts in Creating a Digital Commons.)

The pandemic has shown us how a collective interest can run far ahead of the state: judging by transport usage statistics, the ‘lockdown from below’ was beginning well ahead of the laggardly government response. The range of new governmental powers have not in general been directly used, because the wider social determination of a shared interest in maintaining social distancing, wearing a mask, and so on, has been very solid. The moves towards authoritarian control under Covid-19 – despite the hysterics from the pro-virus right – have occurred out of sight, in the collection, management and analysis of data."

(https://salvage.zone/articles/acting-as-if-one-is-already-free-david-graebers-political-economy-and-the-strategic-impasse-of-the-left/?)



==Democratic Planning is Not Enough==

Ridhiman Balaji:

"The main drawback of The People’s Republic of Walmart is the authors’ 
claim that their democratic planning proposal is fundamentally “not 
capitalist.” In their conclusion, they write, “Without a thorough 
democratization of any postcapitalist planning apparatus, we risk 
creating new unfreedoms.” While this is certainly true, democratic 
planning simply appears to be a different configuration of capitalism, one that leaves capitalist property relations and the separation 
between manual labor and planning intact. Tis would not do 
anything to restrict the ruling class from using the state to crush 
working-class opposition. 

While the term “capitalism” has not always been explicitly 
defined, it is loose enough that countries like the former Soviet 
Union and China can be described, rightly so, as “capitalist.” In 
Chapter 51 of Capital (vol. 3), Marx provides a useful criteria for 
distinguishing capitalist modes of production from non-capitalist 
modes. For Marx, there are two defining features of the capitalist 
mode of production: production of commodities to satisfy human wants, and the production of surplus value. Te frst is that 
it produces commodities, products “outside us,” which are sold to 
satisfy human wants. The second is that “production of surplus-value [is] the direct aim and determining motive of production.” 
Certainly economic planning, especially if it is carried out 
democratically, might have its own benefits. However, transforming our society into one that is democratically planned would not 
alter these defining features of the capitalist mode of production 
or eliminate the exploitative arrangement between capitalists and 
workers with respect to private property. Classhood, who gets to 
be in what class, is a function of one’s relationship to labor-power. 

Capitalists have the exclusive right to derive use-value from labor 
power, workers cannot do the same by virtue of their class position. 
Democratic planning does not eliminate the Capitalist-Worker 
class distinction, a defining feature of capitalism. 

The proposal to transform market economies into democratically 
planned economies does not address the various ways in which 
capitalists rely heavily on the coercive instruments of the state. 
Under capitalism, exploitation occurs in part because capitalists are 
able to use police protection and the threat of violence to prevent 
workers from seizing control of the workplace.

Te authors want something “between state and markets,” 
something to replace capitalism, but also something that runs its 
operations as efficiently as Amazon and Walmart. However, it’s not 
clear why Walmart’s operational efficiency is intrinsically desirable; 
operational efficiency (as the primary determinant of social value) 
is a characteristic of psychopaths. 

Tis analysis ignores the hardships of work life under maximally efficient, highly monitored, automated surveillance systems. 
It seems quite unlikely that workers would voluntarily choose to 
subject themselves to such a regimented workplace, absent coercive 
mechanisms. But since the authors would retain the state to carry 
out administrative work, enforce laws, and make sure the plan is 
abided by, the instruments of coercion would be close at hand 
should workers refuse to follow the plan. 

Economic planning in combination with markets could be very 
useful in ameliorating the worst aspects of capitalism. But this is 
not the same thing as eliminating capitalism. The authors would 
maintain commodity production, alienated labor and exploitation. For them, socialism is more about fnding an alternative to 
distribution of goods through markets, rather than alienation of 
workers under capitalism or self-management. 

Workers simply cannot seize the means of production and 
operate the frm themselves as long as there exists a coercive security apparatus which capitalists can use to subjugate their workers. 

Economic planning, even in a more “democratic” form, shifts the 
decision-making process to state officials, thereby disempowering 
workers. State officials cannot support the workers and capitalists 
simultaneously, as the interests of capitalists are antithetical to 
those of the workers. Thus, despite the authors’ intentions, their 
democratic planning scheme is likely to bolster state centralism 
and preserve authoritarian social relationships. 

Building an alternative to capitalism requires workers to develop 
autonomous, non-state institutions, based on mutual cooperation. 

Developing such institutions, which operate outside of the purview 
of the state, will reduce the capacity of the ruling class to use its 
violent security apparatus to crush working-class mobilization. 

People’s Republic of Walmart is a serious book that asks important 
questions about alternative ways to organize and allocate resources. 
However, a close inspection reveals numerous problems. What the 
authors present as a “postcapitalist” alternative to existing market 
economies is merely a rearrangement which preserves capitalist 
institutions. Under this system, individuals would still satisfy their 
human wants and needs by consuming and producing commodities. 

Te project of converting market economies into democratically 
planned, decentralized economies does not in itself abolish the 
exploitative arrangement between capitalists and workers. As long 
as capitalists retain their ability to control and profit from labor 
power, exploitation and the theft of surplus value will continue, 
and work will continue to be a sphere of alienation."

(https://www.academia.edu/43327957/Economic_Planning_as_a_Reconfiguration_of_Capitalism)


=More information=

* Podcast: [[Leigh Phillips and Michal Rozworski on the People’s Republic of Walmart]]

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Books]]