
Concept developed by Philippe Van Nedervelde:

'''People's P2P Panopticon, the -- Abbreviated as "PP2PP" and a.k.a. the 4 P's.''' 

The People's P2P Panopticon is an  "Earth's citizens' anti-armed-conflict Smart Dust Open sousveillance [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Sousveillance] transparency initiative", proposed by Philippe Van Nedervelde. 

A P2P Community project aimed at technologically realizing "Peace-through-Transparency" openness. The project calls for the development by the P2P community of an open-source sousveillance technology platform funded, developed and stewarded by the global P2P community... to be implemented and given as a peace-gift to humanity. The PP2PP project intends to act as an informational/intelligence counterweight to counterbalance the anticipated development and deployment by governmental intelligence agencies of 'closed' extremely fine-grained intelligence gathering capabilities presumed to be in the form of nanotech-based so-called "Smart Dust" localizers. (See AetherWire, Inc. [http://www.aetherwire.com/], Dust Networks, Inc. [http://www.dustnetworks.com] and Panoptic Systems, Inc. [http://www.panopticsystems.com/])  Invented, proposed and initiated by Philippe Van Nedervelde [http://www.foresight.org/about/VanNedervelde.html], the PP2PP project is an integrating part of his vision / doctrine for the prevention of armed conflict through MAPPS[link]: Multi-laterally Assured Pervasive Permanent Sur-/Sous-veillance. The core concept / assumption is that if Everybody has Eyes & Ears Everywhere [link], then everyone is effectively stripped of the opportunity to plan and deploy any large-scale, organized armed aggressions against anyone else. Also see Participatory Panopticon [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Participatory_Panopticon].

'''Related Concepts:'''

'''Four E's''' -- '''Everybody has Eyes & Ears Everywhere''' [link]. Sousveillance-favoring mnemonic coined by Philippe Van Nedervelde [http://www.foresight.org/about/VanNedervelde.html] to succinctly describe the MAPPS [link] -doctrine of Multi-laterally Assured Pervasive Permanent Sur-/Sous-veillance.  Sousveillance [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Sousveillance] is the deliberate gathering of intelligence -observation and monitoring of identified states and events- from below, by independent -typically non-governmental civilian- participants; surveillance is the same, but from the top down, typically by governmental or state-sanctioned agents.

'''Everybody has Eyes & Ears Everywhere''' -- A.k.a. the "Four E's" [link]. Sousveillance-favoring mnemonic coined by Philippe Van Nedervelde [link] to succinctly describe the MAPPS [link] -doctrine of Multi-laterally Assured Pervasive Permanent Sur-/Sous-veillance. Sousveillance [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Sousveillance] is the deliberate gathering of intelligence -observation and monitoring of identified states and events- from below, by independent -typically non-governmental civilian- participants; surveillance is the same, but from the top down, typically by governmental or state-sanctioned agents.

'''Four P's -- PP2PP''', or the People's P2P Panopticon in full. The 4 P's are an actual implementation of the 4 E's [link] concept. See entry on People's P2P Panopticon [link] This concept is directly related to the concept of sousveillance [Sousveillance [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Sousveillance] is the deliberate gathering of intelligence (observation and monitoring of identified states and events) from below, by independent -typically civilian and non-governmental- participants; surveillance is the same, but from the top down, typically by governmental or state-sanctioned agents.] as well as closely linked to Michel Bauwens' [link] concept of the Participatory Panopticon [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Participatory_Panopticon].

'''PP2PP''' -- The People's P2P Panopticon, a.k.a. the "Four P's". The 4 P's are an actual implementation of the 4 E's [link] concept. See entry on People's P2P Panopticon [link]
This concept is directly related to the concept of sousveillance [Sousveillance [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Sousveillance] is the deliberate gathering of intelligence (observation and monitoring of identified states and events) from below, by independent -typically civilian and non-governmental- participants; surveillance is the same, but from the top down, typically by governmental or state-sanctioned agents.] as well as closely linked to Michel Bauwens' [link] concept of the Participatory Panopticon [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Participatory_Panopticon].


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]