
'''* Report: How	Informed	are	Americans	about	Race	and	Policing? McCaffree,	K.	&	Saide,	A.	Research Report: Sceptic Research Center, CUPES-007 | February 20, 2021'''

URL = https://www.skeptic.com/research-center/reports/Research-Report-CUPES-007.pdf

Data Source: Civil Unrest and Presidential Election Study (“CUPES,” collected in September/October 2020)


=Description=

"This is the seventh report from the Civil Unrest and Presidential Election Study (CUPES). In this report, we investigate a complex and
defining issue of 2020 (and, no doubt, many years ahead): race and policing. Amidst calls to “defund” and reform police agencies,
informed understandings of police-citizen interactions are crucial. So, here we ask the question: across the political spectrum, how
knowledgeable are people when it comes to the available data on fatal police shootings of Black Americans?"

(https://www.skeptic.com/research-center/reports/Research-Report-CUPES-007.pdf)


=Findings=

"The available data on police shootings of unarmed Black men is
incomplete; however, existing data indicate that somewhere
between 13-27 unarmed black men were killed by police in
2019. Adjusted for the number of law enforcement agencies that
have yet to provide data, this number may be higher, perhaps
between 60-100.

• Yet, over half (53.5%) of those reporting “very liberal”
political views estimated that 1,000 or more unarmed Black
men were killed, a likely error of at least an order of
magnitude.

2. The available data suggest that 24.9% of people killed by police
in 2019 were Black. However, across the political spectrum,
survey participants overestimated this number.

• Those who reported being “liberal” or “very liberal” were
particularly inaccurate, estimating the proportion to be 56%
and 60%, respectively.


'''Take-home Messages'''

1. Our overall findings indicate that people are uninformed
regarding the available data on fatal police shootings in the US.

2. Specifically, we found that the more people reported being
“liberal” or “very liberal” on social and fiscal matters, the
greater the discrepancy between the available data and their
estimations."

(https://www.skeptic.com/research-center/reports/Research-Report-CUPES-007.pdf)

=More information=

* Have an interpretation of this you want to share? Email it to research@skeptic.com

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Statistics]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Race]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Statistics]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Race]]