
=Discussion=

==Trinomizations==

Leonid E. Grinin and Andrey V. Korotayev:

"'''There are quite a few periodizations of the history of globalization.''' 

The most widespread type is represented by ''trinomial periodizations'' that appear to be the most logical (and, e.g., Gellner [1988] believes that three periods is the optimum number for a periodization). 


An example looks as follows (Hopkins 2003, e.g., pp. 3–7; see also Bayly 2004): 

(1) Archaic globalization; 

(2) Early modern globalization; 

(3) Modern globalization. 


Trinomial periodizations are also used by those who start the globalization with the period of the Great Geographic Discoveries. 


For example, '''Thomas L. Friedman''' (2005) divides the history of globalization into three periods: 

#Globalization 1 (1492–1800), 
#Globalization 2 (1800–2000) and 
#Globalization 3 (2000 – present). 


He states that Globalization 1 involved the globalization of countries, Globalization 2 involved the globalization of companies and Globalization 3 involves the globalization of individuals. 


However, an apparent convenience of trinomial periodizations does not necessarily mean that they are more relevant. We believe that the number of periods within the given periodization should be rather determined by the contents of the process in question. 


==Evolution Based on Depth of Linkage==

"There are periodizations constructed on other grounds – for example, the one developed by '''Chumakov''' (2011: 166–167) who worked out the periodization of the evolution of global links on the basis of their scale (which reflects rather logically the general trend toward the growth of this scale): 

1) ‘Period of Fragmentary Events’ (till 5000 BP); 

2) ‘Period of Regional Events’ (till the 15th century CE); 

3) ‘Period of Global Events’ (till the mid20th century). 

4) The 4th period (‘Period of Cosmic Expansion’) in this periodization starts in 1957. 


This periodization looks interesting, but a few points here need serious clarifications and re-interpretations. 

First of all, as will be demonstrated below, already starting with the second half of the 1st millennium BCE, many events did not only overgrow regional levels, but had continental and transcontinental scales. Already in the previous period some events had regional-continental scales."

(http://www.sociostudies.org/books/files/globalistics_and_globalization_studies_2/008-035.pdf)


===Table:  Growth of globalization level in historical process===

Type of spatial links (globalization level)  vs Period 

Local links                         1) Till the 7th – 6th millennium BCE 

Regional links                      2) From the 7th – 6th millennium till the second half of the 4th millennium BCE 

Regional-continental links          3) From the second half of the 4th millennium BCE to the first half of the 1st millennium BCE 

Transcontinental links              4) From the second half of the 1st millennium BCE to the late 15th century CE 

Oceanic (intercontinental) links    5) From the late 15th century to the early 19th century 

Global links                        6) From the early 19th century to the 1960s and 1970s 

Planetary links                     7) From the last third of the 20th century to the mid21st century

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]