

=Discussion=

David de Ugarte et al.:

“Since Schultz and Hill started to theorise on PT life, dozens of books and
manuals on how to develop this lifestyle have been written. Since the 1989
publication of PT: A Coherent Plan for a Stress-Free, Healthy and Prosperous Life
Without Government Interference, Taxes or Coercion, Bill Hill has written various
books series on how to keep secret bank accounts, how to obtain a second
passport, or how to do business in tax havens.

These manuals are complemented by a series of monographies on how to
set up business in tax havens or semi-havens (Gibraltar, Monaco, Andorra, the
Channel Islands, Malta, Switzerland, or Lichtenstein). The use of tax havens to do
business and keep capital is not exclusive to Neo-Nomads, as it is currently
estimated that a fourth of private fortunes in the world are deposited in these ministates.
Even though the PT uses tax havens and lives travelling around, he is not a
member of any Mafia clan that wishes to dodge taxes or launder money.

Nor is the PT stateless, an exile fleeing his home country due to persecution
or for political reasons. The PT is generally a libertarian, a firm individualist who
either has made a significant amount of money, or has a number of international
businesses which provide a stable income regardless of the country in which he or
she resides. The PT believes that if he or she keeps his or her earnings in locations
which offer privacy and security and far from the control of the great States, he or
she will be able to enjoy a comfortable, playful life.


Even though it is hard to quantify the number of PTs, it is estimated that
almost a million people are currently living as permanent tourists all over the world.
The mass establishment of technological innovations has simplified global
business, and due to this it is nowadays easier to live as a PT than in previous
decades.


Due to the large number of Neo-Nomads in the world, there are also a
number of consultancies for this public. Companies such as PT Club, PT
Shamrock's Guide60 or Expat World61 offer their customers legal advice and
management of the paperwork to open accounts abroad, change their legal
residence, obtain passports from other countries, or have mail forwarded from their
business headquarters to their physical location.


The PT's life requires the use of updated information on legislation, border
requirements, capital movements, investment opportunities, ways of avoiding
international mafias, etc. This is why the PT networks created around these
consultancies and clubs reinforce the Neo-Nomadic way of life.


However, despite the advantages that being a PT offers libertarians and
people fleeing state control, it is not easy to lead this kind of life. Having to reside in
three or more countries and accepting the loss of contacts, roots, and security of
the territory of origin, privacy and freedom can quickly turn into loneliness, the
need for recognition and belonging, and even a loss of fraternity.


That's why there are also many cases of Neo-Nomads who end up
withdrawing from the diaspora in order to return their country of origin and subject
themselves once again to the strict State laws. However, unlike the pioneers,
contemporary PTs have some tools which can help them to secure social and
business spaces which are sufficiently broad and stable.”

(http://deugarte.com/gomi/Nations.pdf)


=More Information=

See also:

#[[Libertarian Neonomadism]]

And:

# http://www.ptclub.com
# http://www.ptshamrock.com
#http://www.expatworld.com


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Governance]]