
=Description=

Impact Investor:

"A Personal ESG Score evaluates an individual’s performance and impact based on three main factors: environmental, social, and governance (ESG). As ESG criteria assess businesses’ sustainability and ethics, a personal ESG score offers insight into a person’s commitment to sustainable practices and responsible decision-making.

The purpose behind personal ESG scores involves promoting more mindful behaviors towards the environment and society. By holding individuals accountable for their actions, these scores encourage better choices and habits, leading to a positive change on a larger scale.

Since this is still a relatively new concept, the current level of transparency is a bit murky. In many cases, people are generally unaware that they even have an ESG score.

For example, consumers who have accounts with Merrill Lynch will be able to view their score, whatever that may be. Lenders will use this system to choose who they extend services or credit. The main reason is that companies, including lenders, are graded according to the ESG standards.

Their business and prosperity depend directly on their hiring practices, gender diversity, social and environmental impact, and other ESG factors. As they must prove their case, they must also show that their clients meet the standards they are being graded."

(https://theimpactinvestor.com/calculate-individual-esg-score/)

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]