
More at: [[Personal Manufacturing]]

=Tools Overview=

See: [[Personal Manufacturing Tools]]

"Personal-scale manufacturing tools enable people that
have no special training in woodworking, metalsmithing, or
embroidery to manufacture their own complex, one-of-a-kind artisan-style objects."

See: [[Personal Manufacturing Machines]]


==Typology of Personal Manufacturing Machines '''(Hardware)'''==

===[[Desktop 3D Printers]]===

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

'''1.'''

"3D printers use as an additive
process, meaning they make objects by systematically depositing a chosen raw
material in layers. Somewhat similar in concept to that of an inkjet printer that
orchestrates different colored print cartridges to form an image onto paper, the most
common household 3D printing process involves a “print head” that works with any
material that can be extruded, or squirted through a nozzle. Another common type of
3D printer uses a laser beam or glue to selectively fuse powdered plastic, metal, or
ceramic raw material in layers."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at [[Desktop 3D Printers]]


'''2.'''


Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Today’s lowest cost 3D printers have their roots in university research projects. The two
leading consumer-level 3D printer platforms originated from university research labs at Bath
University in England, and Cornell University in the United States. The University of Bath’s 3D
printer is called [[RepRap]] and Cornell’s is called [[Fab@Home]].

'''Perhaps because of their university origins, the machine blueprints for both RepRap and Fab@Home are freely available to anyone who wants to build their own machine, or to improve upon the existing designs.''' 

Not only do Cornell and the University of Bath openly
publish their machine design blueprints, they permit commercial companies to develop and sell
their own versions based off of the designs of the original university machines.

In contrast, commercial-scale 3D printers are developed commercially and their product designs are proprietary and not shared publicly."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at [[Open Source Desktop 3D Printers]]

More at [[Desktop 3D Printers]]

===[[Desktop CNC Routing and Milling Machines]]===

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"more established than 3D printers are desktop-sized
numerically controlled (CNC) routing and milling machines. These machines use a
physical blade to cut and carve precise designs into a broad range of materials.
Under the guidance of an electronic design blueprint, a rotating mill bit, sometimes
called a cutter, is spun along by a motor called a router or spindle. As the electronic
blueprint guides the cutter along x, y and z coordinates, the cutting tool makes
multiple passes over the
material to create perfectly
carved engravings or shapes."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at: [[Desktop CNC Routing and Milling Machines]]


===[[Desktop Laser Cutters and Engravers]]===

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:


"laser cutters and engravers use
intense, focused beams of light to
cut out shapes and engrave images
onto a wide variety of materials.
Laser machines can produce
images, text or designs in an
amazing level of detail and
precision. Laser cutters are
versatile and can cut a range of
materials from wood to plastics to
leather, and can etch or engrave
metals, glass and ceramics. Their
versatility, speed and precision
make them ideal machines for
small businesses to create design
prototypes and customized consumer products. Beyond engraving, one of the most
common uses of home-scale laser cutters is to precisely cut parts out of a sheet of
acrylic or wood. These parts can be assembled by hand into complex, 3D products."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at: [[Desktop Laser Cutters and Engravers]]



===[[Desktop Sewing and Embroidering Machines]]===

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Automated, personal-scale
embroidery machines are
already available in mainstream stores
such as JoAnn Fabrics."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


More at: [[Desktop Sewing and Embroidering Machines]]



===[[Desktop Circuit Makers]]===

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"PERSONAL CIRCUIT MAKERS FABRICATE MULTILAYER
PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARDS ON YOUR DESKTOP, WITHOUT
THE TRADITIONAL CHEMICAL-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES, EITHER BY MILLING OR SPRAYING CONDUCTIVE
TRACES.

at-home manufacture of circuit boards is a rapidly
emerging application for
hobbyists and electronic designers. 

Desktop circuit makers offer a clean
alternative to traditional chemical-based processes, making them an appropriate tool
for the classroom, lab or home."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



More at: [[Desktop Circuit Makers]]



==[[Computer-Aided Design Software]]==


Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

'''1.'''

"Hardware is not useful without software. The adoption of personal-scale
manufacturing machines comes hand-in-hand with the emergence of cheaper, and
increasingly accessible computer aided design software (CAD).

Industrial designers and engineers have used CAD software for decades. However,
CAD software has been slow to reach the consumer market and remains one of the
last bastions of software still targeted to, and controlled primarily by high-end
industrial users. CAD software is expensive, requires a computer with an excellent
monitor and lots of memory, and perhaps most importantly, has a long learning curve
that deters casual users. In industry, CAD software long ago replaced drafting tables
and paper blueprints. However, due to its cost and complexity, CAD software has
remained the tool of trained specialists and professional designers, not home users.


Industrial designers use CAD software mainly to design detailed 3D models or 2D
drawings of components or floor plans. Process diagrams are another popular
application.

The cost of CAD software is dropping and software companies are working hard to make it more user-friendly. In
2008, Google entered the CAD game with a no-cost version of 3D modeling software
called SketchUp. Currently, SketchUp is offered in a “Pro” version that costs about
$500 (at the time of this writing), alongside a free version."


'''2.'''

"Realistically, though CAD software
continues to drop in price and complexity,
it’s still nowhere near as user-friendly as
today’s mainstream office applications.

Another barrier is that even the low-end
CAD software described above was not
created with personal fabrication
applications in mind. Instead, today’s CAD
software reflects its industrial legacy and is
intended primarily for modeling and
visualization applications rather than
designing consumer goods and machine parts.

Ideally, to accelerate the adoption
of CAD software aimed at the personal
manufacturing market, design software
would need to be easier to use and
optimized for the unique constraints and
capabilities of the physical manufacturing
process."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


See also: [[CAD for Personal Manufacturing]]

===CAD Tools===

    
*  In 2008, Google entered the CAD game with a no-cost version of 3D modeling software  called SketchUp. Currently, SketchUp is offered in a “Pro” version that costs about $500 (at the time of this writing), alongside a free version."

    
* Rhino offers Windowsbased 3D design software from $95 to $1000. http://www.rhino3d.com/ .

    
* A company called Silo offers Windows and Mac based design software for $99 and $159.  http://www.nevercenter.com/silo/

=More Information=

#[[Personal Manufacturing]]
#[[Personal Manufacturing Industry]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]