


=Description=

Peter Vander Auwera:

'''= distributed nodes of personal data content talking to each other''' 

"Based on “event-signals": It does not ask for something, it just says “something’s happened”, and any entity in the network can subscribe to the event and decide itself to do something with it.

...

For those who remember, in the past we had silo-d email systems. AOL, Compuserve, etc. They did not interoperate. We got rid of those silos when there was a standard protocol, allowing competing commercial and open source servers to talk to each other in SMTP.

We now see the same with data, personal data, social graphs. We have data-silos (Facebook, Google, Bank systems, Health systems, Government systems, etc). What we need is a “Data-Server” and a “Protocol” that allows these data servers to be interoperable.

Start thinking about your “Personal Data Locker” become a “Personal Event Cloud”: your personal data-server in the cloud that can talk and do things on your behalf, can make decisions, interpret rules, etc…

And it can talk to any entity, any node in the web (or at least nodes in any discoverable namespace). In real-time. In multiplexing mode (meaning the node can be both a server and a client).

It suddenly dawned to me that over the last years we have been hyping “The Programmable WEB”, and that if we are serious about customer centric identity or “customer centric” or “personal” whatever, we may wish to start with the “me”.

The  Programmable Me”: “Me” is becoming a node in the grid. We are all nodes in the grid, sending and receiving signals. Like neurons passing an electrical or chemical signal to another cell. And start thinking “synapses” when you talk about the API’s of your Programmable Me.
The APIs of your “Programmable Me”, of your Personal Event Cloud are indeed the means to make all these nodes interoperable." [http://www.dialogueonline.info/blogs/peter-vander-auwera/programmable-me-we-are-all-nodes-grid-0]



=More Information=

# "a rich ecosystem of start-ups that are building something very similar", http://pde.cc/startup-circle/ ([[Personal Data Ecosystem Consortium]]


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]