

See: [[Personal Manufacturing]]


=Typology of Personal Manufacturing Machines=

==[[Desktop 3D Printers]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"3D printers use as an additive
process, meaning they make objects by systematically depositing a chosen raw
material in layers. Somewhat similar in concept to that of an inkjet printer that
orchestrates different colored print cartridges to form an image onto paper, the most
common household 3D printing process involves a “print head” that works with any
material that can be extruded, or squirted through a nozzle. Another common type of
3D printer uses a laser beam or glue to selectively fuse powdered plastic, metal, or
ceramic raw material in layers."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at [[Desktop 3D Printers]]


==[[Desktop CNC Routing and Milling Machines]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"more established than 3D printers are desktop-sized
numerically controlled (CNC) routing and milling machines. These machines use a
physical blade to cut and carve precise designs into a broad range of materials.
Under the guidance of an electronic design blueprint, a rotating mill bit, sometimes
called a cutter, is spun along by a motor called a router or spindle. As the electronic
blueprint guides the cutter along x, y and z coordinates, the cutting tool makes
multiple passes over the
material to create perfectly
carved engravings or shapes."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at: [[Desktop CNC Routing and Milling Machines]]


==[[Desktop Laser Cutters and Engravers]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:


"laser cutters and engravers use
intense, focused beams of light to
cut out shapes and engrave images
onto a wide variety of materials.
Laser machines can produce
images, text or designs in an
amazing level of detail and
precision. Laser cutters are
versatile and can cut a range of
materials from wood to plastics to
leather, and can etch or engrave
metals, glass and ceramics. Their
versatility, speed and precision
make them ideal machines for
small businesses to create design
prototypes and customized consumer products. Beyond engraving, one of the most
common uses of home-scale laser cutters is to precisely cut parts out of a sheet of
acrylic or wood. These parts can be assembled by hand into complex, 3D products."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

More at: [[Desktop Laser Cutters and Engravers]]



==[[Desktop Sewing and Embroidering Machines]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Automated, personal-scale
embroidery machines are
already available in mainstream stores
such as JoAnn Fabrics."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


More at: [[Desktop Sewing and Embroidering Machines]]



==[[Desktop Circuit Makers]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"PERSONAL CIRCUIT MAKERS FABRICATE MULTILAYER
PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARDS ON YOUR DESKTOP, WITHOUT
THE TRADITIONAL CHEMICAL-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES, EITHER BY MILLING OR SPRAYING CONDUCTIVE
TRACES.

at-home manufacture of circuit boards is a rapidly
emerging application for
hobbyists and electronic designers. 

Desktop circuit makers offer a clean
alternative to traditional chemical-based processes, making them an appropriate tool
for the classroom, lab or home."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



More at: [[Desktop Circuit Makers]]


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]