
'''= machine builders that focus exclusively on the sale of personal-scale manufacturing machines.'''

* [[MakerBot]]: 

URL = http://www.makerbot.com

Location: New York, New York. 

"MakerBot makes and sells affordable 3D
printers that print plastics. Their leading 3D printer is called CupCake CNC which was
has its technological roots in an open source hardware design for a model of 3D
printer called RepRap that was invented at the University of Bath. Machine blueprints
for CupCake can be freely downloaded. The CupCake is unique in that it can replicate
its own parts. Users purchase machine kits online and assemble them at home. It
takes two skilled people about two days to assemble a CupCake. MakerBot sales are
strong. It began to sell kits in April, 2009. In March, 2010, 11 months later, the
company reported it had sold 695 kits."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


* [[Lumenlab Micro CNC]]. 

URL = http://lumenlab.com

Location: The United Kingdom. 

'''[[LumenLab]] sells [[Multipurpose Machines]], meaning their personal-scale machines have the ability to use a number of different toolings, including 3D printing, 3D milling, and precision-engraving.'''

"LumenLab’s two machine models are
the micro v3 that’s about 10 by 12
inches in size and costs $1294, and the
larger m2 for $1799, which is about 19 inches square."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


* [[Bits From Bytes]], Ltc. 

URL = http://www.bitsfrombytes.com

Location: United Kingcom. 

Bits From Bytes sells kits for 3D
printers for home, classroom and small business use. Bits From Bytes was recently
acquired by a larger 3D manufacturing machine company called 3D Systems. Bits
From Bytes plans to continue to sell their low-end 3D printers. Their BFB300 sells for
2000 euro and can print a number of different materials. Their 3D printers are also
based on the RapRap Darwin open source machine created by researchers at Bath
University in England. As of March, 2010, Bits from Bytes was shipping about 200
kits a month."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]]


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Companies]]