


=Players=


==[[Personal Manufacturing Machine Makers]]==

see also above under Tools

'''= machine builders that focus exclusively on the sale of personal-scale manufacturing machines.'''

* [[MakerBot]]: 

URL = http://www.makerbot.com

Location: New York, New York. 

"MakerBot makes and sells affordable 3D
printers that print plastics. Their leading 3D printer is called CupCake CNC which was
has its technological roots in an open source hardware design for a model of 3D
printer called RepRap that was invented at the University of Bath. Machine blueprints
for CupCake can be freely downloaded. The CupCake is unique in that it can replicate
its own parts. Users purchase machine kits online and assemble them at home. It
takes two skilled people about two days to assemble a CupCake. MakerBot sales are
strong. It began to sell kits in April, 2009. In March, 2010, 11 months later, the
company reported it had sold 695 kits."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


* [[Lumenlab Micro CNC]]. 

URL = http://lumenlab.com

Location: The United Kingdom. 

'''[[LumenLab]] sells [[Multipurpose Machines]], meaning their personal-scale machines have the ability to use a number of different toolings, including 3D printing, 3D milling, and precision-engraving.'''

"LumenLab’s two machine models are
the micro v3 that’s about 10 by 12
inches in size and costs $1294, and the
larger m2 for $1799, which is about 19 inches square."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


* [[Bits From Bytes]], Ltc. 

URL = http://www.bitsfrombytes.com

Location: United Kingcom. 

Bits From Bytes sells kits for 3D
printers for home, classroom and small business use. Bits From Bytes was recently
acquired by a larger 3D manufacturing machine company called 3D Systems. Bits
From Bytes plans to continue to sell their low-end 3D printers. Their BFB300 sells for
2000 euro and can print a number of different materials. Their 3D printers are also
based on the RapRap Darwin open source machine created by researchers at Bath
University in England. As of March, 2010, Bits from Bytes was shipping about 200
kits a month."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)

==[[Personal Manufacturing Companies]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"A new breed of ... personal manufacturing companies, sometimes called “makers” ... is emerging.

* [[eMachineShop]] 

URL = http://www.emachineshop.com/

provides easy, convenient and low-cost fabrication of custom parts via the web. 

"Customers can design whatever part they need using
emachineshop’s CAD tools. Once the electronic blueprint is complete, users get an
instant quote and can order the part to be made in the material of their choice. Users
have ordered toys, car parts, electronic devices, games and more. Industrial machine
parts are sold at eMachineshop."


* [[Big Blue Saw]]. 

URL = http://www.bigbluesaw.com

Like eMachineShop, Big Blue Saw offers users its own CAD tools so they
can design wood, fabric, metal or plastic parts for prototypes and small project. Their
web site describes the process as: 1) Create a design using the Big Blue Saw Designer
or your favorite design software. 2) Upload your design to our website to get an
instant price quote and to order. 3) We will ship you your custom metal, plastic,
wood, or fabric object, typically within 3 business days.


* [[Materialise]]

URL = http://www.materialise-mgx.com

a Belgium-based company that designs and manufactures high end art,
housewares, jewelry and other luxury items in-house. Materialise hires professional
designers to create blueprints of stunning usable objects that users purchase from
their web site; if customization is desired, customers work with the professional
designer to alter basic design parameters such as the size or color of the object.

i.materialise [http://i-materialise.com] is an experimental spin-off from Materialise. 

i.materialise is an on-line
service that offers 3D printing services of custom designs made by consumers.
Consumers first manufacture their own designs using Google Sketchup. They get an
account on i.materialise follow a series of simple steps to turn their electronic
blueprints into reality using the site’s easy pull-down menu selection of surface
textures, colors and other design features. After customers select their design,
i.materialise manufactures their design using 3D printers.


* Print23D – Pennsylvania, US. 

URL = http://www.printo3d.com

Print23D offers 3D printing services for Fortune 500
companies to regular people who have CAD designs they’d like to try out. A small
print job costs about $50 while a five or six inch square object may cost about $400 to
3D print. Print23D’s focus is on industrial and machine parts, not consumers and
product designs.


==[[Electronic Design Blueprint Aggregators]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"Aggregators are companies that host online catalogs of electronic design blueprints
for available products, machine parts and other objects. Like amazon.com or eBay,
aggregators offer storefronts for third party merchants such as designers. Some
aggregators like shapeways.com also offer fabrication services, while others offer
small-scale manufacturing services, while others, such as Ponoko, act as brokers
between consumers, designers and makers.

Two of the pioneering companies are Shapeways and Ponoko.

* [[Ponoko]] 

– Location: New Zealand. 

"On Ponoko’s web site, consumers, designers,
makers and materials suppliers register for accounts and come together online.
Consumers can design their own product using Ponoko’s starter kit design software
and fabricate their chosen product themselves, on their own fabber. Or, consumers
can download free and purchasable software design blueprints, and if they don’t have
access to their own home manufacturing machine, can post a request via an online
form to tap into Ponoko’s “making hubs” to have a nearby maker nearby do the
fabrication. Ponoko’s materials suppliers sell paper, fabric, metal, rubber and wood
alongside sophisticated hardware components such as accelerometers, sensors, GPS
and wireless antennas."


* [[Shapeways]]

– Location: The Netherlands and New York. 

Shapeways is the leading
aggregator with a large online collection of sophisticated designs that range from toys
to art to machine parts. Shapeways has a manufacturing space that contains several
3D printers that fabricate customer designs. Products are sold via a number of
different storefronts that each feature a different designer. Consumers select a design
from a designer who runs their own online storefront or consumers can make their
own design using Shapeway’s proprietary design tools. Shapeways employees offer
user support and design advice, if needed. Consumers and designers interact directly
if the user has a special request. The more active designers on Shapeways earn
several thousand euro a month from selling their designs."


==[[Personal Manufacturing Electronic Blueprint Designers]]==

Hod Lipson and Melba Kurman:

"designers create electronic
blueprints for all types of personal
fabrication technologies (i.e. CNC
routers, laser cutters, sewing
machines), the majority of designers
focus on 3D printed objects."


'''* Unfold design studios.''' 

Location: Belgium. 

Unfold studios was
founded in 2002 by Claire Warnier
and Dries Verbruggen. They design
and sell a wide variety of
contemporary custom-designed and
made furniture, household goods
and jewelry.


'''* Nervous System.''' 

URL = http://n-e-r-v-o-u-s.com

Location: Massachusetts, United States. 

Nervous System was
founded in 2007 by Jessica Rosenkrantz and Jesse Louis-Rosenberg. Nervous System
3D prints computer generated designs to produce affordable art, jewelry, and housewares.



'''* Bathsheba:''' 

URL = http://www.bathsheba.com

Location: California, United States. 

Bathsheba Grossman is one of the
world’s leading 3D printing designers. She creates sculptures and math models, what
she calls “ handheld geometry” out of 3D printed metal."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



==[[Personal Manufacturing Consortia]]==


===[[100K Garages]]===

"100KGarages is a
partnership between Ponoko, a New Zealand-based aggregator of custom blueprint
designs and a North Carolina-based company ShopBot Tools, a company that makes
and sells both small scale and industrial CNC routing manufacturing machines.
100KGarages.com is an online, decentralized community of consumers, small
manufacturers (makers) and designers. Once they register for an account on the
100Kgarages web site, makers (or manufacturers), designers and consumers become
part of a sprawling, unregulated, global, virtual design and production ecosystem.
The makers (makers must own a ShopBot to participate on the site) post a profile
about their workshop’s unique
manufacturing capabilities. The
designers post their design ideas
online in the form of electronic
blueprints, or CAD designs. The
consumers post descriptions of the
objects they would like to have
manufactured, including their ideal
purchase price, delivery date and
product specs. Consumers browse
designs online and when they find
an object they’d like to have
custom-made, the action turns to
the online Job Site. On the online
Job Site, consumers invite bids and
negotiate directly with the maker
on project details, design issues,
cost and so on. When a deal
between a customer and maker is
struck, the customer sends
payment to the maker for labor
and materials, production begins,
and the item is shipped to the
consumer when finished. Quality control is consumer reviews of their experience
with various makers and designers."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)



=More Information=

#[[Personal Manufacturing]]
#[[Personal Manufacturing Tools]]



[[Category:Manufacturing]]