=Description=

[[George Siemens]]:

"[[Stephen Downes]], Dave Cormier, and I will be offering an open course on Personal Learning Environments, Networks, and Knowledge, starting September 13. The course is jointly sponsored by the Technology Enhanced Knowledge Research Institute (TEKRI) at Athabasca University and NRC. From our perspective at TEKRI, this course fits under our new Public Knowledge Initiative. From NRC’s perspective, this course follows the successful Critical Literacies Course.

If you’re interested, you can sign up here

More information on the course:

In the last five years, the twin concepts of the personal learning environment (PLE) and personal learning network (PLN) have been offered as alternatives to more traditional environments such as the learning management system (LMS) and institutionally-based courses.

During that time, a substantial body of research has been produced by thinkers, technologists and practitioners in the field. Dozens of studies, reviews, conference presentations, concept papers and diagrams are now available. 

The purpose of this course will be to clarify and substantiate, from the context of this new research, the concepts of personal learning environments and networks. Course facilitators and participants will analyze the research literature and evaluate it against their own experience with the intent of developing a comprehensive understanding of personal learning environments and networks."
(http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2010/08/12/announcing-open-course-personal-learning-environments-networks-and-knowledge/)

[[Category:Courses]]
[[Category:Education]]