

=Typology=

Eugene Thacker:

"You write that there are two kinds of pessimism: "the end is near" and "will this never end?" Is one more valuable than the other?I would say that neither is more valuable than the other. Neither will help us or console us or tell us how to live. Maybe the old existential worries about mortality and the fear of death are giving way to a new set of concerns: the dread of life. Maybe we don't live; life lives us. Human beings are an "outbreak of life" on the planet. I confess sometimes I feel that much of philosophy is simply a game that we play according to rules that we agree to forget that we made up in the first place. So, when someone comes along and says, "the best of all possible worlds," my response is disbelief. Really? Says who? Then there’s the Principle of Sufficient Reason: Are you joking? It can have the effect of calling bluff on the whole charade, and then the entire edifice starts shaking. But that's exactly the point at which "philosophy" becomes interesting. For me "pessimism" has something to do with thought reaching its own limits, the moment when the thought of futility becomes the futility of thought, the humility of being human . . . and yes, with gloomy ruminations on suffering and the fragile contours of human-centrism. Somewhere between a philosophy and a bad attitude, somewhere between the axiom and the sigh."

(https://www.cairn-int.info/dossiers-2020-9-page-1.htm  [https://www.cairn-int.info/article-E_MULT_051_0099--antimediation.htm])

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Relational]]