
URL = http://ecommmedia.com/2008/downloads/audio/2008-01-04-peter-saint-andre.mp3

=Description=

Lee Dryburgh:

"the main question of emerging presence is working out how to communicate how we are interacting with the world both online and offline and how that can be routed to the right people; how that sharing can act as a catalyst and prompt for communications and interaction, for discovering others Etc. Peter spoke about how we are moving offline aspects of oneself online and moving online aspects of oneself offline as well as how the Internet has given us the ability to share personal states (such as "mood") outside of our small home circle.

I cast up notions of presence resolution and granularity (i.e. share geolocation attribute 'California' with some contacts but finer grained 'San Francisco' with others). I also cast the notion that contact identifiers are part of that real-time identity which Peter spoke. I think Peter did well rolling with these off script very difficult questions being flung at him! Peter was pushing (as ever) open standards angle wherever possible so I had to be a bit mean and ask him if SIMPLE was an open standard also. We also touched on manually setting fine presence states (i.e. "grooming") and the automatic computation of presence states.

If I had to conclude my impression of the chat, I'd say that we are heading into an era of super connectedness between people, people and machines, and across the offline and online worlds. Evolved presence and lifestreams will be very much the plumbing to build that highly-wooven fabric."
(http://www.ecommmedia.com/blog/2008/01/peter-saint-andre-on-presence.html)


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]