

=Bio=

"Peter Levine has written extensively on the [[Civic Commons]] (Levine 2002a&b,
2003, 2007a&b; Gastil and Levine 2005). A very interesting and useful text for business
managers was put out by the Institute for the Future in 2005 (Saveri et al.). The authors
explore emerging fields of knowledge and practice, looking for ways to think about two
key business questions: “How can new insights about the dynamics of cooperation help
us identify new and lucrative models for organizing production and wealth creation that
leverage win–win dynamics; and How can organizations enhance their creativity and
grow potential innovation with cooperation-based strategic models?” The authors draw
heavily from the commons and collective action literature of Ostrom and colleagues."
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1356835)


==Bibliography:==

Levine, Peter. 2001. "Civic Renewal and the Commons of Cyberspace." National Civic Review
90(3):205-212. http://www.ncl.org/publications/ncr/90-3/chapter1.pdf

Levine, Peter. 2002a. “Building the Electronic Commons: A Project of the Democratic
Collaborative.” (Report) http://www.democracycollaborative.org/programs/public/BuildingElectronicCommons.pdf

Levine, Peter. 2002b. “Can the Internet Rescue Democracy? Toward an On-Line Commons.” In
Democracy’s Moment: Reforming the American Political System for the 21st Century. R.
Hayduk and K. Mattson, eds. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Levine, Peter. 2003. “A Movement for the Commons?” Responsive Community 13(4):28-39.
http://www.peterlevine.ws/responsivecommunity.pdf

Levine, Peter. 2007a. “Collective Action, Civic Engagement, and the Knowledge Commons.” In
Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice. C. Hess and E.
Ostrom, eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Levine, Peter. 2007b. The Future of Democracy: Developing the Next Generation of Citizens.
Lebanon, NH: Tufts University Press and University Press of New England.


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Politics]]