'''Essay: The Petroleum Commons. George Caffentzis.'''

URL = http://www.radicalpolytics.org/caffentzis/14-petroleum_commons.pdf


=Description=


"the “struggle over oil” has been largely seen as a struggle between oil
companies and governments, since its beginnings in the mid-nineteenth century.
However, over the last fifteen years, there has been a major shift in the
physiognomy of the protagonists of the oil struggle. National governments and huge
energy conglomerates no longer dominate the scene. The new protagonists include:
“peoples” like the Ijaws, the Ogoni, the Chiapanecos, the U’wa, the Cofan, the
Secoyas, the Huaorani, the people of Ache (Sumatra); border-transcending social
movements under the star of Islam and subscribing to “Islamic economics”; elements
of the UN system like the World Bank, claiming to provide the “global governance” of
the “global commons.” These peoples, movements and global entities have entered
the struggle for the control of oil production, legitimizing themselves with a new (and
at the same time quite archaic) conception of property: common property.

'''Why is the notion of a petroleum common emerging now, and what are its consequences for the oil industry?'''

There are three levels of claims to petroleum as a common property, correlating
with three kinds of allied communities that are now taking shape, for there is no
common property without a community that regulates its use:

• First, some local communities most directly affected by the extraction of
petroleum claim to own and regulate the petroleum under their territory as a
common.

• Second, Islamic economists claim for the Islamic community of believers, from
Morocco to Indonesia, and its representative, the 21st century Caliphate in
formation, ownership of and the right to regulate the huge petroleum fields
beneath the vast territory corresponding to the countries of the ummah.

• Third, UN officials claim for the “coming global community” the right to
regulate the so-called global commons: air, water, land, minerals (including
petroleum) and “nous” (knowledge and information). This imagined global
community is to be represented by the dizzying array of “angels” that make up
the UN system, from NGO activists to UN environmentalist bureaucrats to
World Bank “green” advisors.

All these claims and their legitimizing discourse are displacing, with different results,
the monopoly hold of governments and corporations over the ownership and
regulation of the planet’s petroleum. There is much that is shared by these different
conceptions of the petroleum commons, but they are also often in conflict."
(http://www.radicalpolytics.org/caffentzis/14-petroleum_commons.pdf)


=Source=

The above is  also the 14th chapter of:

* '''No Blood For Oil! Energy, Class Struggle, and War, 1998-2004'''

This is an ebook containing many of George Caffentzis' recent writings on capitalism, oil, class struggle, and war. 

All chapters via http://www.radicalpolytics.org/

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Commons]]