

=Directory=

Source: Pharma embraces open source models. Stephen Strauss. Nature Biotechnology Volume: 28, Pages: 631–634 (2010) . Table 1: Selected open source collaborations involving pharma. [http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v28/n7/fig_tab/nbt0710-631_T1.html]

#Merck Oncology Collaborative Trials Network: The research sites will lead the design and conduct of phase 0 to 2a clinical studies of Merck's investigational oncology candidates. Every year, the network will enroll ~1,200 patients in 30–40 clinical trials.
#European Bioinformatics Institute ChEMBL Neglected Tropical Diseases (ChEMBL-NTD): A repository for open access primary screening and medicinal chemistry data directed at neglected diseases—endemic tropical diseases of the developing regions of Africa, Asia, and the Americas. (GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis Genomics Institute, St. Jude Hospital)
#The Coalition Against Major Diseases (CAMD) – through the Critical Path Institute: A new shared and standardized database that currently contains information from ~4,000 Alzheimer's subjects from eleven industry-sponsored clinical trials. They ultimately define clinical data standards and establish a pooled database of the control groups of pharmaceutical clinical trials in order to develop quantitative disease progression models for both Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. 
#Lilly Phenotypic Drug Discovery Initiative (PD2): Phenotypic drug discovery directly interrogates complex biological systems composed of multiple or unknown biochemical components and/or pathways. Phenotypic drug discovery or chemical genomics enables the discovery of compounds that modulate biology in a target and mechanism-agnostic manner.
(http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v28/n7/fig_tab/nbt0710-631_T1.html)



[[Category:Health]]

[[Category:Science]]