
'''* Report: Giving Unchained — Philanthropy and the Blockchain. Charities Aid Foundation, 2015'''

URL = https://www.cafonline.org/about-us/publications/2015-publications/giving-a-bitcoin

=Description=

Ameer Rosic:

"The Charities Aid Foundation, recently released a 20-page report ... which examines how blockchain technology will affect the way charities raise money and operate. Is this the future of Charities?

The report claims that blockchain technology could change the way people contribute to charities and the way charities address social problems.

THE REPORT ASKS THE FOLLOWING:

* Can digital colored coins that represent assets create a way to make donations of intangible assets like intellectual property?
* Can self-governing contracts provide new opportunities for businesses to embed philanthropy as well as new ways for charities to raise funds and address social problems?
* Can the blockchain offer a “radical transparency” to overcome the lack of public trust?
* Will the “Internet Of Things” supported by blockchain technology deliver an environment in which smart machines become a “hyper-rational” donor class?

The report goes into extensive detail on each of the above four topics.

As more appliances go online, they could become part of the blockchain, adding their processing power in exchange for money."
(https://decentralize.today/the-death-of-charities-bitcoin-blockchain-technology-to-replace-them-5b8174744d0b)

=Examples=

Ameer Rosic:

"The BitGive Foundation, which describes itself as the world’s first Bitcoin nonprofit.

The organization partners with nonprofits like Save The Children and The Water Project, explains founder and executive director, Connie Gallippi, and harnesses Bitcoin’s benefits — namely cheaper, faster and more secure transactions — in order to raise charitable funds.

In March, BitGive unveiled a water well at a girls’ school in Western Kenya funded entirely with $11,000 in Bitcoin donations culled from members of the Bitcoin community.

The well serves 500 Kenyans who wouldn’t otherwise have access to water, says Gallippi, ork City. “It has made a huge impact.”
(https://decentralize.today/the-death-of-charities-bitcoin-blockchain-technology-to-replace-them-5b8174744d0b)

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]