
'''* Book: The Philosophy Of Software. Code and Mediation in the Digital Age. By David M Berry. Palgrave Macmillan, 2011'''

URL = http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2011/04/new-book-philosophy-of-software-code.html


=Review=

Rob Myers:

""The Philosophy Of Software" is an ambitious book by David Berry, who has turned his attention from the social relations and ideology of software (in "Rip, Mix, Burn", 2008) to the question of what software means in itself. The philosophy that he has in mind isn't the mindless political libertarianism attributed to hackers or the twentieth-century foundational mathematics that is the basis for the structure of many programming languages. It is a serious and literate philosophical reading of software and its production.

Software is an important feature of contemporary society that is rarely considered as a phenomena in its own right by philosophers. Software permeates contemporary society, Berry gives the examples of Google's profits and the "financialisation" of the economy through software as examples of software's importance in this respect. In reading this review on a screen you have used maybe a dozen computers, each containing multiple programs and libraries of software directly involved in serving up this page. Digital art and cyberculture often use and discuss software and philosophy (or at least Theory), but usually to illustrate a point about something other than software. The software itself is rarely the subject.

Rather than devote each chapter to a different philosopher's views on software or adopting a pre-existing description of software Berry develops a novel and insightful philosophical approach to understanding and considering software. After providing an introduction to the foundational ideas and culture of software (Turing, Manovich, Cyberpunk), Berry presents a way of thinking through different aspect of software. The source code, the comments, the compiled program. Each stage and product of the lifecycle of software is given a philosophical context."
(http://www.furtherfield.org/features/reviews/philosophy-software)



[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Books]]