=History=

Robert Hanna et al. :

"By  the  early  1980s,  the  philosophical  Great  Divide  between  post-classical Analytic philosophy and Continental philosophy was fully in place; and Richard Rorty   and   others   more   or   less   systematically   fused   post-structuralism, deconstructionism,   and   what   was   left   of   Deweyan   pragmatism,   into philosophical post-modernism,63 aka Po-Mo, which also began to dominate in the applied   and   fine   arts,   and   in   Comparative   Literature   and   Humanities   Departments at colleges and universities worldwide, by vigorously rejecting and replacing modernism in all its forms, but especially high modernism. Po-Mo also gradually  fused  with  what  was  left  of  1970s  New  Left  and  emerging  identity  politics  in  the  USA,  creating,  inside  the  American  professional  academy,  the  social-institutional powerhouse of multiculturalism by the mid-90s,64 then becoming a juggernaut by the turn of the millennium, and finally a hegemonic ideology in the Marxian  sense  by  the  end  of  first  two  decades  of  the  21st  century.

...

In 1996, all these bandwagons ran headlong into The Sokal Hoax. Alan Sokal, a  physics  professor  at  NYU,  submitted  a  deliberately  nonsensical  article  to  the  cultural studies journal Social Text, which was then accepted and duly published. The article “argued” that quantum gravity was a linguistic and social construct. Three weeks later, Sokal revealed that the article was a hoax, and that the entire setup was to test the intellectual integrity and rigor of the emerging postmodernist elite.68Professional  academic  Continental  philosophers  were,  thereby,  publicly  shamed  and  scandalized  by  The  Hoax.  An  anticipation  of  this  public  shaming  and  scandalizing  had  already  been  delivered  in  the  1970s  and  80s  by  the  post-classical Analytic philosopher John Searle, via his extended vituperative debate with Jacques Derrida in the pages of various journals and books. Leaving aside its, at times, risibly impenetrable jargon and rhetoric, however, in a deeper sense and indeed fundamentally, Po-Mo is alienating, anti-rationalistic, and  culturally  nihilistic.  Its  program  can  best  be  described  as  “diversified modernism,”70  or  alternatively  as  “a  philosophy  of  suspicion.”  Just  as  humanity was not the center of the universe after Galileo’s discovery, and just as Darwin had dethroned the human species from the top of the animal hierarchy, so too Freud had argued that hidden, unconscious drives steer and direct the supposedly rational human being, and so too Nietzsche had declared a war on a universal, God-guaranteed  morality.  Po-Mo’s  final  steps  in  dismantling  the  modernist  world-picture were intended to stress that all grand societal visions are nothing more  than  grand  narratives  or  grand  récits  (Lyotard),  that  meaning  is  endlessly  postponed in the play of signs (Derrida), or that reality is inaccessible and merely a hyperreality (Baudrillard). Or, alternatively, by demonstrating that every social institution  is  nothing  but  an  instrument  for  coercively  forming  individuals  according to covert, oppressive, preconceived ideals (Foucault). As  a  consequence  of  The  Sokal  Hoax  together  with  the  fundamental  alienation/anti-rationalism/cultural nihilism of Po-Mo itself, from the turn of the new  millennium  forwards,  in  another  twist  of  “internalizing  the  oppressor,” leading Continental philosophers began to compete with, and mirror, Analytic metaphysics and   scientific   naturalism."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/865/1597)

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Cosmobiological]]