

=Description=

From http://opinion.inquirer.net/inquireropinion/columns/view_article.php?article_id=80293 :

"The Biron bill seeks to impose price
controls on medicines, while the Roxas bill seeks to amend the
Intellectual Property Code.

In a separate interview, Roxas outlined the provisions of his bill:

"1. Disallow another patent for new uses of an existing substance
(already patented) so that drug manufacturers can immediately copy
off-patent products without fear of lawsuit.

"2. Allow parallel importation and international exhaustion of
intellectual property rights for patents. Parallel importation refers
to the importation, without the consent of the patent holder, of a
patented product that is marketed in another country. International
exhaustion refers to the regime where the supply and price of a
product is moderated by competition. Both would allow the Philippines
to shop around for a quality product with a better price.

"3. Allow the 'early working doctrine' to enable generic drug
companies to experiment and test generic versions of patented drugs
before their patents expire. It will also allow them to produce and
sell generic versions of patented drugs upon their patents'
expiration.

"4. Restructure provisions of government use. At present, the
government is required to apply for a license before it can use
patented medicines or processes for manufacture. The bill does away
with this compulsory licensing, making it easier and quicker to
respond to public health threats without fear of law suits."


=Legal Background=

From http://opinion.inquirer.net/inquireropinion/columns/view_article.php?article_id=80293 :

"The Philippines is clearly in the grip of a cartel or oligopoly. The
medicine market is controlled by foreign companies who have their own
association with plenty of money for propaganda and lobbying. Their
products are manufactured here by one or two companies, also
foreign-owned. They are distributed by only one foreign company and
retailed by two drugstore chains, one of them (Watson's)
foreign-owned.

The Constitution mandates the government to prevent restraints in
trade, such as cartels and monopolies, but lawyers say it is difficult
to prove the existence of a cartel, hence government exerts no effort
to enforce the ban although we have cartels not only in the
pharmaceutical industry but also in cement, petroleum products and the
power sector. What is obvious to the layman – cartels -- the legal
profession refuses to see.

The government has tried to fight back with legislation. The first was
the Generics Law wherein doctors are mandated to write the generic
names of the medicines they prescribe and the drugstores to carry
generic equivalents of branded ones. But many doctors still forget to
write the generic names, and the drug companies have mounted a subtle
campaign to make people believe that generics are less effective than
the branded, and expensive, medicines. On parallel importations, they
have a campaign painting imported medicines as "counterfeit," even if
these imported products are genuine ones manufactured by their sister
companies.

Congress is counterattacking with two bills, one in the Senate and the
other in the House. The Senate passed its version before the 13th
Congress adjourned, but the House failed to pass its version for lack
of quorum. The bills have been refiled in the present Congress. Their
main authors are Sen. Mar Roxas for the Senate bill, and Rep. Ferjenel
Biron for the House version.

Kapihan sa Manila invited the two lawmakers to explain the differences
between the two bills. Biron was there but Roxas only sent his legal
counsel Blas Viterbo. Former Health Secretary Quasi Romualdez and
former PITC chief Obet Pagdanganan were also there."


=Political Background=

From http://opinion.inquirer.net/inquireropinion/columns/view_article.php?article_id=80293 :

"A few days ago, a front-page story in the
Philippine Daily Inquirer reported that foreign pharmaceutical
companies in the Philippines have put together a P1-billion lobby fund
to kill the cheap medicines bills. I am inclined to believe this
report. The local pharmaceutical market, after all, is worth P100
billion a year, 70 percent to 80 percent of it controlled by the
foreign drug companies. What's P1 billion to kill a bill that would
drastically reduce their profits?

Look at these facts:

The Philippines ranked second to Japan as having the highest medicine
prices in Asia. Filipinos spent for medicines the equivalent of $1
billion a year, from 1997 to 2001, the highest in Asean,
notwithstanding that half of the Philippines' 80 million population
have no access to essential medicines. The cost of medicines here is
40 percent to 70 percent higher than in other Asean countries. For
Filipinos who have access to medicines, their budget for total
health-related expenses (not just medicines) is a measly P2,000 per
person per year.

The government has tried to provide the people with cheaper medicines
by importing them, through the Philippine International Trading Corp.
(PITC). The efforts of the PITC, however, are puny and doesn't even
make a dent on local drug prices. In a P100-billion market, the PITC's
yearly import budget is only P300 million. What's more, it has few
outlets for its drugs. The two biggest drugstore chains in the
country, Mercury Drug and Watson's, refuse to sell medicines imported
by the PITC.

How can the multinational drug companies get away with such
profiteering? Mainly because of the law on patents and the
Intellectual Property Code. These two laws allow pharmaceutical
companies exclusive rights to manufacture and sell products they have
developed. The multinationals have taken advantage of these laws by
pricing their medicines for as much as the market can bear. They can
price their products at any level because there is no competition. Any
medicine importer, including the government, can be sued by the
multinationals that do not like imported drugs to compete with their
products."


=Source=

AS I SEE IT. Cheap medicines bills explained. By Neal Cruz, Inquirer, 08/03/2007

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Policy]]