

=Discussion=

Roberto Verzola:

"Within the Philippine Greens, we have developed a critical analysis of
the emerging global information economy and have formulated what we
believe is an appropriate set of responses to the entry into our
country of the Internet and various other information and
communications technologies (ICTs). This set of responses contains
many of the elements discussed above, as well as other policies which,
we hope, represent a well-rounded policy framework for the information
sector.

These information policies include:

1. The right to know. It is the government's duty to inform its
citizens about matters that directly affect them, their families or
their communities. Citizens have the right to access these
information. Neither the State nor private corporations may use
"national security", "confidentiality of commercial transactions", or
"trade secret" as reasons to curtail this right.

2. The right to privacy. The government must not probe the private
life of its citizens. Citizens have the right to access information
about themselves which have been collected by government agencies. The
government must not centralize these separate databases by building a
central database or by adopting a unified access key to the separate
databases. Nobody should be forced against their will to reveal any
information they do not want to make public.

3. No patenting of life. The following, whether or not modified by
human intervention, may not be patented: life forms, biological and
microbiological materials, biological and microbiological processes,
genetic information.

4. The moral rights of intellectuals. Those who actually create an
intellectual work or originate an idea have the right to be recognized
that they did so. Nobody may claim authorship of works or ideas they
did not originate. No one can be forced to release or modify a work or
idea if he or she is not willing to do so. These and other moral
rights of intellectuals will be respected and protected.

5. The freedom to share. The freedom to share and exchange information
and knowledge must be recognized and protected. This freedom must take
precedence over information monopolies such as intellectual property
rights (IPR) that the State grants to intellectuals.

6. Universal access. The government will facilitate universal access
by its citizens to the world's storehouse of knowledge. Every
community needs access to books, cassettes, videos, tapes, radio and
TV programs, software, etc. The government will set up a wide range of
training and educational facilities to enable community members to
continually expand their know-how and knowledge.

7. Compulsory licensing. Universal access to information content is
best achieved through compulsory licensing. Under this
internationally-practiced mechanism, the government itself licenses
others to copy patented or copyrighted material for sale to the
public, but compels the licensees to pay the patent or copyright
holder a government- set royalty fee. This mechanism is a transition
step towards non-monopolistic payments for intellectual activity.

8. Public stations. Universal access to information infrastructure is
best achieved through public access stations, charging subsidized
rates. These can include well-stocked public libraries; public
telephone booths; community facilities for listening to or viewing
training videos, documentaries, and the classics; public facilities
for telegraph and electronic mail; educational radio and TV programs;
and public stations for accessing computer networks.

9. The best lessons of our era. While all knowledge and culture should
be preserved and stored for posterity, we also need to distil the best
lessons of our era, to be taught -- not sold -- to the next
generations. There should be a socially- guided, diversity-conscious
selection, undertaken with the greatest sensitivity and wisdom. It is
not something that can be left to a profit-oriented education system,
to circulation- or ratings-driven media, or to consumption-pushing
advertising.

The information economy is growing at a phenomenal rate, often
independently of the capacity of communities to absorb it, or of
governments to control it. This growth is driven mostly by global
forces external to our own society but very much present within it.

Left by themselves, these global forces will simply treat our country
and our communities as fodder for their relentless drive in search of
profit and growth. On the other hand, we want the balanced development
and interaction of our agricultural, industrial and information
sectors in a way that enhances the overall quality of life in our
communities. These are often orthogonal, if not opposite directions.

To be able to attain that dynamic balance between these sectors so
that they enhance each other and contribute to the overall health and
sustainability of our communities -- this is the challenge of the
information sector."
(http://mailman.apnic.net/mailing-lists/s-asia-it/archive/1999/10/msg00043.html)


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Philippines]]