'''Phishing is a method of identity theft that uses fake e-mails and bogus websites to entice unwary consumers to disclose financial information.'''


=Definition=

From the Wikipedia:

"phishing is an attempt to criminally and fraudulently acquire sensitive information, such as usernames, passwords and credit card details, by masquerading as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication. eBay, PayPal and online banks are common targets. Phishing is typically carried out by email or instant messaging,[1] and often directs users to enter details at a website, although phone contact has also been used."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phishing)


=Description=


Phishing Networks explained at
http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2005/11/global_guerrill.html

"Christopher Abad, a research scientist at Cloudmark (a spam filtering company) has done some amazing analysis on the phishing marketplace. Phishing is a method of identity theft that uses fake e-mails and bogus websites to entice unwary consumers to disclose financial information (account details, credit card numbers, personal data). This data is captured and used in financial fraud. It is a big business. To deconstruct a phishing network Christopher used an automated data collection system that monitored chat rooms and activity on compromised servers. He found that the network consisted of loosely affiliated groups with lots of horizontal specialization rather than vertically integrated gangs. The 21st Century criminal economies like the phishing economy seen above demonstrate the same degree of decentralized self-organization we see in the market for IED (improvised explosive devices) manufacture/deployment in Iraq. Both markets aren't controlled by any single gang, or even a collection of gangs. Instead, they consist a large network of individuals that trade, sell, share, and collaborate to make money and generate desired effects."

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]


[[Category:Technology]]