
=Discussion=

 
Jean-Claude Guédon: '''Towards ‘Phonemic’ Individualism'''

"Whereas division of labour is seen by Smith as the result of a top-down, managerial intent, as a
production masterplan that sets everyone in a well-defined role, Benkler, when he deals with the
‘green’ world, sees the division of labour as an emergent phenomenon stemming from interactions
between individuals: out of the constant dialogues, discussions and debates fluid roles arise. Like
eddies in a stream, these roles enjoy relative, but only relative, stability. Individuality, in this
perspective, sums up the possible role shifts one person may live through.

In the ‘Green’ world, individuals are found positioning themselves temporarily in one role or
another according to the relations they develop with other individuals. In other words, in the green
world, individuality is no longer built like an atom, in full self-sufficiency. It is no longer an
individual simply endowed with ‘properties’ – the whole polysemic wealth of the term is needed
here – but rather an individual whose very essence, paradoxically, depends on his/her relations
with other individuals. More precisely, existence depends on distinguishing oneself from others.[14]
A form of individuality that necessarily rests on the individuality of others calls for a general
interpretative scheme that goes beyond what earlier theories of society have contributed. It goes
beyond an ‘emanation’ or holistic theory of individuals, based on divinities and their human
proxies, leading to a feudal vision of society. It cannot limit itself to the self-sufficient atom-like
individual that stands as the foundation of the liberal age (where ‘liberal’ here means adherence to
the tenets of classical economics). We must therefore reach beyond emanation and atom-like
individuals to reach for a third kind of individuality. Let us call this third way the ‘phonemic’
approach. Although as powerful in its reach as the holistic or atomistic approaches, it has not been
used nearly as much until now.

What is a ‘phonemic’ approach’? It is based on the concept of phoneme, of course. Here, it is
adduced as, in a sense, a synthesis of the holistic and atomistic explanatory modes: '''imagine a universe where every existing entity would have the appearance of an atom, but, simultaneously, would appear to emanate from a number of these other apparent atoms.''' Let us add that the
emanation is not a transitive, transparent process: the link between two phonemic entities is not
guided by some form of analogy, but, on the contrary, by some distinctive characteristic. The total
result could be described as '''a ‘peer-to-peer emanation system’.''' Phonemes, in the field of
phonology, behave precisely in this manner. They exist only by being distinct from other
phonemes. The existence of one entity depends on the existence of all, and it also depends on
maintaining a distinctive uniqueness with respect to all of the other entities. Their existence marks
the fact that their difference makes a difference – precisely the definition of information according
to Gregory Bateson. They offer, therefore, a powerful metaphor to think beyond atomistic or
emanation-based individualism.

What Yochai Benkler is founding with his important book is not only a revision of the market
concept, or of the division of labour that accompanies it. What Yochai Benkler is really inviting us
to do is to revisit our understanding of markets and division of labour in terms of a new form of
individuality that cannot be thought within the atom category, or denied on account of a divine
hierarchy out of which everything emanates (and to which it must return).

What remains difficult to apprehend with social phenomena such as the free software
movement, Wikipedia and other peer-to-peer processes that seem to fly in the face of longaccepted
notions of ‘human nature’ becomes far more comprehensible if we begin to look at
human beings behaving like phonemes. If we remember that phonemes relate to language and that
human beings do speak, the metaphor appears far less contrived. On the other hand, the reasons
why human beings should be apprehended as emanation of some wholeness can only be based on
faith. And if human beings chose to apprehend themselves as the similes of as atoms, it may simply
have been a reaction to that faith. Neither emanation nor atoms need language incidentally, but
human beings distinguish themselves through language. And the full deployment of language
requires the existence of phonemic individuals. The wealth of networks, therefore, lies in
phonemic individuality. Any other approach to human beings will simply be sub-optimal and that
is the fundamental thesis of Yochai Benkler’s crucial work."


=Source=

*  Article: [[Symposium on the Wealth of Networks]]. Policy Futures in Education Volume 6 Number 2 2008 

URL = http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/pfie.2008.6.2.152

Also reproduced as chapter 11 of the book: [[Education in the Creative Economy]]

Note: possibly name of author is: Jean-Claude Guenon

[[Category:Relational]]