
* Article: Fuchs, Christian. 2014. Thomas Piketty?s Book "Capital in the Twenty-First Century", Karl Marx and the Political Economy of the Internet. tripleC: Communication, Capitalism & Critique 12 (1): 413-430.

URL = http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/575

=Abstract=

"Thomas Piketty's book Capital in the Twenty-First Century has resulted
in a sustained political and academic debate about capitalism in the
21st century. This article discusses the relevance of the book in the
context of Karl Marx?s works and the political economy of the Internet.

It identifies 3 common reactions to Piketty's book: 

1) dignification; 

2) denigration of the work's integrity; 

3) the denial of any parallel to Marx. 

I argue that all three reactions do not help the task of creating
a New Left that is urgently needed in the situation of sustained
capitalist crisis. Marxists will certainly view Piketty's analysis of
capitalism and political suggestions critically. I argue that they
should however not dismiss them, but like Marx and Engels aim to
radicalise reform suggestions. In relation to the Internet, this paper
discusses especially how insights from Piketty's book can inform the
discussion of tax avoidance by transnational Internet companies such as
Google, Facebook and Amazon. For establishing an alternative,
non-commercial, non-capitalist Internet one can draw insights about
institutional reforms and progressive capital taxation from Piketty that
can be radicalised in order to ground radical-reformist Internet politics."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Politics]]