
* Book in progress: Piracy Effect. Edited by Roberto Braga and Giovanni Caruso.

CFP URL = http://www.cinergie.it/?p=1142


=Description=

"Digital piracy is a very unpredictable phenomenon. It’s quite hard to keep its power under control and to identify its legal, technological and social implications and repercussions.

After Napster success, P2P traffic has grown exponentially up to recent years when it has shown a constant decrease compared to total Internet traffic. This reduction is related to the large market penetration of real time entertainment services, cyberlockers and to the steady and pervasive strengthening of legal distribution platforms.

Economic literature on piracy effects doesn’t have a shared and clear interpretation of the phenomenon and of  its effects on cultural industries. Furthermore, the recent shut down of Library.nu and Megaupload has superficially affected illegal download and streaming, but, as a result, it has fed the conflict between media industries lobbies and large amount of Internet users and consumers.

Digital piracy has changed deeply after the wide diffusion of video-sharing platform like YouTube, implying new forms of violation of copyright. In this multifaceted scenario users have deeply transformed their media consumption behaviors, new forms of entertainment have raised and distribution platforms and the related business models are continuously reinventing themselves .

The main aim of the book Piracy Effect is to investigate the complexity of digital piracy focusing on its impact on the changing relationship between production, distribution and consumption of cultural products."
(http://www.cinergie.it/?p=1142)


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Books]]