
'''= Legal pirating of creative commons, crowd funded media and movie projects'''

URL = http://piratemyfilm.com/

=Description=

"All projects on PirateMyfilm are CreativeCommons licensed unless otherwise stipulated by project owners. Dividends are distributed to shareholders by project owners at their discretion. 

Getting started: Click on 'Need Money' list a project during any stage of development, specifying the funds needed and various details. The system automatically creates enough shares to meet the funding request and then makes these shares available for reservation to all members. All shares are priced at $5. All shareholders receive a credit on the finished project and are eligible for cash dividends distributed by project owners at their discretion. 

PMF 'Yellow Lights' a project when reservations have reached close to 100% of a project's funding requirement. When the Yellow Light goes on, owners of projects can no longer make changes to their projects and members cannot cancel reservations, but members may initiate or increase share reservations (per member restrictions). 

24 hours later, the project automatically gets a 'Green Light' and no more share reservations are accepted. A 'payment window' is opened, and an email is sent to shareholders telling them how to pay for their shares. 

Members have 2 days to pay for their shares. After 2 days the first payment window closes while a second payment window is automatically opened (and a new email is sent out). Any members who did not pay for their shares during the first window have another chance to pay. 

This process is repeated 2 days later when a third payment window is opened. After which, if there are still shares unaccounted for, the PMF Fund may step in and buy them."
(http://piratemyfilm.com/static/how_it_works)


[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]