=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"A '''planetary civilization or global civilization is a civilization of Type I on the [[Kardashev Scale]]'''. This type of civilization is likely to be reliant on renewable energy sources such as stellar power, as well as powerful non-renewable sources such as nuclear fusion. A Type I civilization's energy consumption level is roughly equivalent to the solar insolation on Earth (between 1016 and 1017 watts) ─ around 3 orders of magnitude higher than that of contemporary humanity (around 2×1013 as of 2020)."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_civilization)


==The [[Planetary Phase of Civilization]]==

From the Wikipedia:

"The '''planetary phase of civilizatio'''n is a term created by the Global Scenario Group (GSG) to describe the contemporary era in which increasing global interdependence and risks are binding the world into a unitary socio-ecological system. Characteristics of this phase include economic globalization, biospheric destabilization, mass migration, new global institutions, the Internet, new forms of transboundary conflict, and shifts in culture and consciousness.

The notion of the planetary phase of civilization derives from the work of the Global Scenario Group, an international and interdisciplinary body convened in 1995 to examine alternative long-range futures. The GSG synthesized its findings for a non-technical audience in the essay Great Transition: The Promise and Lure of the Times Ahead.

According to the GSG, the planetary phase of civilization is the third significant transition in civilization, following the shift from Stone Age culture to Early Civilization, and from Early Civilization to the Modern Era. The planetary phase sees social organization, the economy, and communications move to the global level. Some argue that it constitutes a new geologic era, the Anthropocene, in which human activity becomes the dominant driver of changes to the Earth system.

The GSG argued that historical transitions have been accelerating. Thus, the duration of the Stone Age was on the order of 100,000 years; Early Civilization, 10,000; and Modernity, 1,000. If the planetary phase takes shape over 100 years, the pattern would continue.

The GSG groups the possibilities for how the planetary phase could unfold into three broad scenario types: Conventional Worlds, Barbarization, and Great Transitions. Conventional Worlds assume the persistence of currently dominant institutions and cultural values, and Barbarization scenarios are marked by social devolution. Great Transition futures, by contrast, incorporate new institutions rooted in the ascendance of a new suite of values – solidarity, ecological stewardship, well-being – powered by the emergence of a global citizens movement as a potential actor to counter the power of transnational corporations, state governments, and mainstream values."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_phase_of_civilization)


=Books=

'''* The [[Planetary]]. Edited by Nils Gilman. Berggruen Press, 2024'''

URL = 

"Complement the Berggruen Institute’s Planetary Summit at Palazzo Diedo in Venice, Italy. At the summit, ideas from this inaugural book were discussed by a wide range of participants from across the globe. The collection of essays explores the paradigm shift from thinking of the world through the lens of the nation-state and globalization to its re-conceptualization as one self-organizing Earth organism — the planet."

(https://www.noemamag.com/announcing-the-berggruen-press/)


See also: [[Planetarity]]: "Next up is a collection of the winning essays from the 2024 Berggruen Prize Essay Competition, also on the topic of “planetarity.” Each essay will be translated into both English and Chinese and presented in the tête-bêche style by the design team at the Press." [https://www.noemamag.com/announcing-the-berggruen-press/]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_Futures]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]