=Description=

Brad Degraaf:

"By combining safe proof of humanity identifiers and expansion by invitation, we can span planetary solidarity networks that are: a. resistant to surveillance, b. fully accountable, c. very large, and d. capable of forms of emergent coordination as yet unseen."

(https://braddegraf.substack.com/p/recipe-for-a-planetary-immune-response)


=Characteristics=

Brad Degraaf:

"Planetary citizen identifier - aka pseudonymous proof of humanity. The critical first element is a way of representing ourselves online that meets two requirements:

One human / one identifier - Like a Social Security Number, any human should be able to get one and only one

Zero-knowledge - You need to be able to use it without revealing who you are. For instance, sign up anonymously for a direct action that can have confidence you’re not a mole or a bot.

Expansion by invitation - You invite the people you have solidarity with. By requiring invitation, every participant is accountable to the chain of people who invited them. This creates a …

Personal solidarity graph - The people who invited you, and whom you invited, form your personal graph, kept in self-sovereign personal storage. You decide in what contexts to share that information. So it’s not crawlable by bad actors. With you at the hub, you become a ‘logic gate’ that can control, with help from software, what messages pass through."

(https://braddegraf.substack.com/p/recipe-for-a-planetary-immune-response)


=Status=

Brad Degraaf:

"The planetary citizen identifier is about two months from readiness. It is currently working in a centralized form, and will be decentralized very soon.

The expansion by invitation also works in prototype, centralized form. The self-sovereign version of it and the resulting personal solidarity graph is about two months away.

We have a highly scaleable deployment of ArangoDB graph database that can hold custodial versions of self-sovereign storage in a centralized database that can function as needed until the decentralized version is ready."

(https://braddegraf.substack.com/p/recipe-for-a-planetary-immune-response)

[[Category:Crypto_Technology]]
[[Category:Global_Governance]]