
= Planned Obsolescence was the name given by businessmen in the early twentieth century to the deliberate shortening of product life spans in order to guarantee consumer demand. [http://www.takeoneaction.org.uk/calendar/details/514/]

=Discussion=

Jenny Koho:

"Nylon stockings have the same destiny as well. They were designed to be too
durable and they didn’t sell too well. Inferior quality of the stockings was the answer to the problem. In 21st century there are examples of technological appliances
that are designed to fail. For example in some printers there is a microchip,
a counter chip, which is placed inside the printer. When certain amount
of prints gets full, the printer stops working. A Russian IT-specialist has developed
user friendly software to zero the counter to make the printer work again.

Apple got negative publicity because its i-Pods were clearly designed planned
obsolescence in mind. The batteries died within a year, and couldn’t be replaced
with new ones. A group complaint was made and Apple had to act on it.

To prevent recession like the one that shook the economy in the 1930s, a man
called Bernard London proposed that planned obsolescence should be entered
into legislation. The aim was to define short life spans for products so that consumers
would keep on buying them and thus employment would be safeguarded.

It never happened, but instead in the 1950s planned obsolescence
was made desirable with the help of advertising. Industrial designer Brook Stevens’
propaganda on the behalf of planned obsolescence made the concept the
gospel of the time. Design and marketing seduced consumers to desire always
the latest models which were more beautiful and advanced than the ones they
already owned."
(https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/40960/Koho_Jenni.pdf)

=Example=

==The Light Bulb Conspiracy==

Jenny Koho:

"[[Planned Obsolescence]] dates back till 1920s when industry started to shorten
the life spans of products to increase consumer demand. An influential advertisement
magazine warned companies that an article that refuses to wear out is
tragedy of business.

The first example of planned obsolescence is the story of light bulbs. Initially
manufacturers strived for producing long life span for their light bulbs, they
lasted even 2500 hours. The light bulb of Livermore fire station in California has
been burning continuously since 1901. In 1924 a group of businessmen gathered
together and founded the Phoebus cartel to lower the life span of the
bulbs to 1000 hours to control markets and customers worldwide. In 1925 a
board named 1000 hour life committee was found. It forced companies to design
light bulbs with the burning time of maximum 1000 hours. If companies exceeded
the burning time of their bulbs noticeably, they were fined. By the 1940s
the cartel had reached its goal: 1000 hours had become the standard life span
of light bulbs. If you still have some conventional light bulbs left in your closet,
check out how many hours they will burn, you will be surprised."
(https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/40960/Koho_Jenni.pdf)


=More Information=

See the documentary: The [[Lightbulb Conspiracy]]


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]