=Description=

"a Research group of the Research Centre on Social Innovations and Transformations at Saint Paul University, Ottawa, Canada. This group takes part in a field of research in resurgence over the decade: '''postcapitalist political economy studies'''. This field concerns all research on the political and economic functioning of a society that deliberately evolves outside the institutions of capitalism."

(https://innovationsocialeusp.ca/en/crits/blogue/call-for-papers-planning-democracy-and-postcapitalism?)


=Research=

Research domains:

==The format of [[Democratic Economic Planning]] proposals==

"addresses the question of the form of post-capitalist proposals. For several decades, the usual form of proposals has been the coherent political-economic abstract model: a structure of interrelated economic and political institutions that responds to the major needs of collective life. Should we move beyond this form to a more agile and adaptable proposal, like the modules’ approach currently in discussion?

==The role of prices and money after capitalism==

aims to tackle the difficult question of the role of prices. Models from the 1990s use some form of indicative prices. Two severe criticisms of this choice have emerged. The first considers that reducing decision-making to a single indicator is a serious problem from an ecological point of view and that multifactor accounting should be at the heart of decision-making. The second considers that any price, any use of money itself, will destroy the bonds of solidarity on which a post-capitalist approach must be based.


==Democratic economic planning and respecting planetary boundaries==

seeks to answer the question: how can we conceive of planetary boundaries and build an economic and political system that fully integrates them? Democratic planning models devised in the 1990s often reduce the environment to its impact on human communities or leave the issue to open political debate to be resolved on a case-by-case basis. Can we overcome this dichotomy and improve the integration of self-limitation within these models?



==Social reproduction and post-capitalism==

aims to resolve a contradiction confronted by postcapitalist thought. Should we think of a political and economic organization specific to social reproduction, at the risk of exceptionalizing it? Or should we try to integrate these tasks as closely as possible with other economic responsibilities, at the risk of forgetting their particularities?



==Prefiguration, community economics and democratic planning==

aims to think about the place from which post-capitalism is envisioned. Instead of being rooted in theoretical debate, we’ll be looking at how the experiences of communities trying to live here and now in resistance to globalized capitalism can inspire us to build a society that will go beyond this system."

(https://innovationsocialeusp.ca/en/crits/blogue/call-for-papers-planning-democracy-and-postcapitalism?)


=More information=

==Bibliography==

Bibliography

Adaman, Fikret, and Pat Devine. 2022a. ‘Revisiting the Calculation Debate: A Call for a Multiscale Approach’. Rethinking Marxism34 (2): 162–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2022.2051374.

Adaman, Fikret, and Pat Devine. 2022b. ‘Clarifications on Democracy and Economic Planning: An Engagement with Robin Hahnel’. Studies in Political Economy 103 (2): 173‑81. https://doi.org/10.1080/07078552.2022.2096778.

Alexander, Samuel and Brendan Gleeson. 2022. ‘Collective Sufficiency: Degrowth as a Political Project’. In Post-Capitalist Futures, directed by Samuel Alexander, Sangeetha Chandrashekeran, and Brendan Gleeson, 53–64. Alternatives and Futures: Cultures, Practices, Activism and Utopias. Singapore: Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-6530-1_5.

Archambault, Hannah, and Luke Pretz. 2022. ‘Racial Capitalism, Imperialism, and Negotiated Coordination’. Rethinking Marxism34 (2): 205–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2022.2051376.

Bauhardt, Christine. 2022. ‘Ecofeminist Political Economy: Critical Reflections on the Green New Deal’. In Post-Capitalist Futures, édité par Samuel Alexander, Sangeetha Chandrashekeran, and Brendan Gleeson, 87–95. Alternatives and Futures: Cultures, Practices, Activism and Utopias. Singapore: Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-6530-1_8.

Benanav, Aaron. 2022. ‘Socialist Investment, Dynamic Planning, and the Politics of Human Need’. Rethinking Marxism 34 (2): 193–204. https://doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2022.2051375.

Burczak, Theodore. 2022. ‘Economic Democracy, Democratic Planning, and Human Autonomy: A Comment on Adaman and Devine’. Rethinking Marxism 34 (2): 212–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/08935696.2022.2051377.

Cockshott, Paul, Jan Philipp Dapprich, and Allin Cottrell. 2022. Economic planning in an age of climate crisis. Independently published. https://www.amazon.co.uk/ECONOMIC-PLANNING-AGE-CLIMATE-CRISIS/dp/B0BKHZMVQC#detailBullets_feature_div.

Dapprich, Jan Philipp. 2022. ‘Tokens Make the World Go Round: Socialist Tokens as an Alternative to Money’. Review of Evolutionary Political Economy. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43253-022-00091-6.

Foster, John Bellamy. 2023. ‘Planned Degrowth: Ecosocialism and Sustainable Human Development’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 1–29. https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_1.

Gmeiner, Robert, et Mario Harper. 2022. ‘Artificial Intelligence and Economic Planning’. AI & SOCIETY, July.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01523-x.

Groos, Jan. 2021. ‘Distributed Planned Economies in the Age of Their Technical Feasibility’. Behemoth 14 (2): 75–87.https://doi.org/10.6094/BEHEMOTH.2021.14.2.1061.

Grünberg, Max. 2023. ‘The Planning Daemon: Future Desire and Communal Production’. Historical Materialism 1 (aop): 1–45.https://doi.org/10.1163/1569206x-bja10001.

Hahnel, Robin. 2021. Democratic Economic Planning. Routledge Frontiers of Political Economy. London: Routledge.

Harnecker, Marta, and José Bartolomé. 2019. Planning from below: A Decentralized Participatory Planning Proposal. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Hart-Landsberg, Martin. 2023. ‘Planning an Ecologically Sustainable and Democratic Economy: Challenges and Tasks’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 114–25. https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_8.

Hickel, Jason. 2023. ‘On Technology and Degrowth’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 44–50.https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_3.

Hickel, Jason and Dylan Sullivan. 2023. ‘Capitalism, Global Poverty, and the Case for Democratic Socialism’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 99–113. https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_7.

Işikara, Güney and Özgür Narin. 2022. ‘The Potentials and Limits of Computing Technologies for Socialist Planning’. Science & Society 86 (2): 269–90. https://doi.org/10.1521/siso.2022.86.2.269.

Işikara, Güney and Özgür Narin. 2023. ‘Degrowth and Socialism: Notes on Some Critical Junctures’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 30–43. https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_2.

Laibman, David. 2015. ‘Multilevel Democratic Iterative Coordination: An Entry in the “Envisioning Socialism” Models Competition’. 마르크스주의연구 12 (1): 307–45. https://doi.org/10.26587/MARX.12.1.201502.011.

Laibman, David. 2022. ‘Systemic Socialism: A Model of the Models’. Science & Society 86 (2): 225–47.https://doi.org/10.1521/siso.2022.86.2.225.

Pałka, Przemysław. 2020. ‘Algorithmic Central Planning: Between Efficiency and Freedom’. Law and Contemporary Problems 83 (2): 125–49.

Phillips, Leigh and Michal Rozworski. 2019. The People’s Republic of Walmart: How the World’s Biggest Corporations Are Laying the Foundation for Socialism. London ; New York: Verso. 

Quick, Paddy. 2022. ‘Household Production, Household Activity, and Human Development’. Science & Society 86 (2): 248–68.https://doi.org/10.1521/siso.2022.86.2.248.

Saito, Kohei. 2023. Marx in the Anthropocene: Towards the Idea of Degrowth Communism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Saito, Kohei. 2024. Slow Down: The Degrowth Manifesto. London: Penguin Random House.

Samothrakis, Spyridon. 2021. ‘Artificial Intelligence Inspired Methods for the Allocation of Common Goods and Services.’ PLoS ONE 16 (9): e0257399–e0257399. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0257399.

Samothrakis, Spyridon. 2024. « Artificial Intelligence and Modern Planned Economies: A Discussion on Methods and Institutions ». AI & SOCIETY. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-023-01826-7.

Sandström, Anders. 2020. Anarchist Accounting: Accounting Principles for a Democratic Economy. 1e édition. New York: Routledge.

Saros, Daniel Earl. 2014. Information Technology and Socialist Construction: The End of Capital and the Transition to Socialism. Routledge Frontiers of Political Economy 184. London: Routledge.

Schmelzer, Matthias and Elena Hofferberth. 2023. ‘Democratic Planning for Degrowth’. Monthly Review: An Independent Socialist Magazine 75 (3): 142–53. https://doi.org/10.14452/MR-075-03-2023-07_10.

Sorg, Christoph. 2023. ‘Failing to Plan Is Planning to Fail: Toward an Expanded Notion of Democratically Planned Postcapitalism’. Critical Sociology 49 (3): 475–93. https://doi.org/10.1177/08969205221081058.

Sutterlütti, Simon and Stefan Meretz. 2023. Make Capitalism History: A Practical Framework for Utopia and the Transformation of Society. Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-14645-9.

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Canada]]