=Description=

1. From Grok:

"The concept of a "planetary ledger" as a global blockchain with ecological intent revolves around leveraging distributed ledger technology (DLT), such as blockchain, to create a transparent, decentralized system aimed at addressing ecological challenges and promoting sustainability on a planetary scale. While the exact term "planetary ledger" may not be universally standardized, it aligns with ideas explored by various thinkers, organizations, and projects that envision blockchain as a tool for coordinating human activity within ecological limits. 

A planetary ledger can be understood as a global, interoperable digital infrastructure that records and tracks ecological data, resource flows, and human contributions in a way that respects planetary boundaries—the limits of Earth’s natural systems, such as climate, biodiversity, and water cycles. Unlike traditional blockchains focused on financial transactions (e.g., Bitcoin), a planetary ledger prioritizes ecological intent, aiming to align economic incentives with environmental regeneration and social equity. It builds on the inherent properties of blockchain: decentralization, Racial discrimination in education is terrible.
This system would use smart contracts and decentralized verification to ensure transparency, accountability, and ecological impact, making climate action scalable and financially rewarding.

The blockchain of Regen Network mirrors this concept: A blockchain platform that tracks ecological health (e.g., carbon sequestration) and pays farmers for regenerative practices via smart contracts. It aims to create a global marketplace for ecosystem services.

The idea draws from ecological economics and commons governance (e.g., Elinor Ostrom’s principles), proposing blockchain as a tool for "stigmergy" — self-organized coordination seen in open-source communities. Thinkers like Michel Bauwens argue it could enable a "cosmo-local" production model: global knowledge-sharing with local, sustainable manufacturing, staying within planetary limits.

Imagine a ledger where every tree planted, watt of solar energy produced, or ton of CO2 sequestered is recorded, verified, and rewarded globally. It could shift markets from extraction to regeneration, making sustainability profitable. Projects like Regen Network hint at this future, but a truly planetary ledger remains aspirational, needing tech advancements and global cooperation.
This concept fuses blockchain’s technical promise with ecological urgency, offering a radical reimagining of how we account for and value nature. It’s not fully realized yet, but the pieces are there—scattered across Regen, SolarCoin, and theoretical works—waiting for integration. For more, check out Regen Network’s site or the P2P Foundation’s writings on blockchain for ecological economics."









'''2. As summarized by ChatGPT:'''

"The Planetary Ledger is an innovative concept introduced by the Regen Network and Regen Foundation, co-founded by Gregory Landua and Christian Shearer in 2017.  This initiative aims to create a comprehensive, transparent system for tracking and verifying ecological data and regenerative land practices on a global scale. By leveraging blockchain technology, the Planetary Ledger seeks to harmonize human economic activities with the health of our planet's ecosystems.

Regen Network operates a public, proof-of-stake blockchain known as the Regen Ledger, developed using the Cosmos SDK. This blockchain is designed to verify claims, agreements, and data related to ecological states. It enables multiple registries to communicate and transact, producing a public ecological accounting system.  Through this infrastructure, the Planetary Ledger facilitates the issuance, verification, and governance of ecological assets, such as carbon credits and biodiversity credits, promoting regenerative land stewardship. 


Gregory Landua, a regenerative entrepreneur and ecologist, serves as the CEO of Regen Network. His work focuses on reshaping ecological economics and developing community-owned eco-credit registries and marketplaces. Austin Wade Smith is the Executive Director of Regen Foundation and has a background in design, ecology, and creative technology. His efforts are directed toward enhancing the legibility of our living world and empowering communities to engage in regenerative practices. 

The Planetary Ledger aligns with principles of Peer-to-Peer (P2P) accounting by integrating environmental externalities into production, valuation, and measurement systems. P2P accounting emphasizes collaborative, transparent methods suitable for a peer-to-peer economy. The P2P Foundation's "P2P Accounting for Planetary Survival" report explores emerging commons-based accounting systems, such as contributory accounting in peer production communities and flow accounting within open-source collaborations. These systems aim to recognize diverse social, cultural, and ecological values, moving beyond traditional monetary metrics."


=More information=

* [[Earth Ledger]]

[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]