URL = http://platformdesign.org/


=Description=

"We are a bunch of designer/buSinessmen/artist/engineers that are both vocal and passionate about getting more uniqueness and diversity in design. We want to make it easy to create both ethically and technically.

Platform Design is an emerging subset of design. Both closely related to the innovation craze of the past few years and overall global awareness of design as a medium. We want to support this trend as much as possible. Both by participating in and facilitating the dialog.

Many different aspects to customization have become popular in the past few months. Concepts like downloadable design are a good example of how influential this approach to making products will be in the future. All of these concepts fall in one way or another under mass customization and or personal fabricating machines. '''Platform design weighs in on the side of a designer and or people that want to design for themselves but don’t have the skill or wallets to do everything from scratch.'''

Industry Has been doing platform based design and development for most of the industrial 20th century, we want to help them learn how to transfer this knowledge so that designers can learn from this history and bridge this divide and deliver platform designed products for mass customization. Platformdesign.org is our way of nurturing this new and unique industry.

For platform design to fulfill it’s goal it has to be made available to the public, not just to buy or use, but to create, to be a voice. We want to help anyone with a desire to do platform design to get their message out there and get seen. It doesn’t matter if it’s clothes or flatware or cars or toys or furniture. We want to help!"
(http://platformdesign.org/about/)


=More Information=

Contact platformdesign.org

Send e-mail to pd /at/ platformdesign /dot/ org


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Movements]]