'''* Book: PLATFORM COOPERATIVISM. Challenging the Corporate Sharing Economy. By Trebor Scholz. Editors:  Stefanie Ehmsen and Albert Scharenberg. ROSA LUXEMBURG STIFTUNG NEW YORK OFFICE, 2016'''

URL = http://www.rosalux-nyc.org/platform-cooperativism-2/

PDF = http://www.rosalux-nyc.org/wp-content/files_mf/scholz_platformcoop_5.9.2016.pdf

See also the entry on the concept and the event: [[Platform Cooperativism]]

==Contents==


{|
|-
|colspan=2| Building a Digital Economy We Own. By the Editors||1
|-
|colspan=2| The Sharing Economy Stops||4
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Every Uber has an unter||4
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|New Dependencies and New Command||5
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Generating Profits for the Few||6
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Illegality as a Method||7
|-
|colspan=2| Amazon is Joining the Sharing Economy||8
|-
|colspan=2| The Rise of Platform Cooperativism||10
|-
|colspan=2| Toward a Typology of Platform Co-ops||14
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Cooperatively Owned Online Labor Brokerages and Market Places||15
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|City-Owned Platform Cooperatives||15
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Produser-owned Platforms||16
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Union-Backed Labor Platforms||17
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|Co-operatives from Within||17
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|The Platform as Protocol||17
|-
|
|style="text-align:right"|10 Principles for Platform Cooperativism||18
|-
|colspan=2| The Cooperative Eco System||21
|-
|colspan=2| For All People||26
|}

==Excerpts==

From the editors introduction, by Stefanie Ehmsen and Albert Scharenberg:

Building a Digital Economy We Own

"The “sharing economy” wasn’t supposed to be this way. Aided by the tiny computers most of us carry
with us all day, every day, we would be free from the burdens of ownership and making money in our
spare time by renting out our unused possessions. The vison was — or at least appeared to be — an
idealistic one. Even before they enter kindergarten, every child learns the value of sharing, and here
were the beneficent forces of Silicon Valley bringing us innovative new tools to strengthen our communities,
disrupt outdated ways of doing business, and maybe even reduce our carbon footprints.

The reality turned out to be a little different. Sure, Uber and its ilk offer remarkable convenience
and a nearly magical user experience, but their innovation lies just as much in evading regulations
as in developing new technology. Behind the apps lies an army of contract workers without the protections
offered to ordinary employees, much less the backing of a union. This new economy is not
really about sharing at all. Rather, as Trebor Scholz argues in this study, it is an on-demand service
economy that is spreading market relations deeper into our lives.

With these new middlemen sucking profits out of previously un-monetized interactions, creating
new forms of hyper-exploitation, and spreading precarity throughout the workforce, what can we
do? Scholz insists that we need not just resistance but a positive alternative. He calls this alternative
“platform cooperativism,” which encompasses new ownership models for the Internet. Platform
cooperativism insists that we’ll only be able to address the myriad ills of the sharing economy—that
is to say platform capitalism—by changing ownership, establishing democratic governance, and reinvigorating
solidarity. In this paper, Scholz breathes life into this idea by describing both actually
existing and possible examples of platform co-ops, outlining basic principles for fairly operating
labor platforms on the Internet, and suggesting next steps.

Trebor Scholz has lived and worked in co-ops for over a decade. The author of The Internet as Playground
and Factory (2013) and Uberworked and Underpaid: How Workers Are Disrupting the Digital Economy
(2016, forthcoming), Scholz is an associate professor at The New School, where he teaches
courses on Internet and society. Together with Nathan Schneider, he has been focused on creating
a campaign to challenge the system of value extraction that fuels the “sharing economy.” In November
2015, The New School hosted “Platform Cooperativism: The Internet, Ownership, Democracy,”
which brought together more than one thousand people to plant the seeds for a new kind of online
economy. The results of this conference are reflected in this study.

Platform cooperativism is possible, and it is necessary, but it is by no means inevitable. The current
owners of online platforms are willing to offer us seemingly everything except ownership. It is time
for us to instead create an online economy based in democracy and solidarity."<br />
(http://www.rosalux-nyc.org/wp-content/files_mf/scholz_platformcooperativism_2016.pdf?)

==More Information==
* [[Trebor Scholz]]
* https://www.resilience.org/resources/platform-cooperativism-challenging-the-corporate-sharing-economy/
* https://open.coop/2016/01/15/platform-cooperativism-challenging-the-corporate-sharing-economy/

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Post-Corporate]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]