=Description=

Sam Rose:

""Plausible" comes to me as a language construct from Richard Slaughter
of Swinburne Foresight Institute. Slaughter recommended that when we
talk about alternative futures, that we (eventually) narrow down to
what is plausible.

See: http://www.amazon.com/Futures-Beyond-Dystopia-Foresight-Education/dp/0415302706
 
Plausible meaning likely to happen based on everything we know about
what is happening now, plus what we can reasonably project is emerging
or will emerge. An implausible future is one that is envisioned and
worked towards while ignoring the fact that billions of other people
are already working towards a different envisioned future.

If you are interested in actually seeing change happen, (as opposed to
just talking about what theoretical changes to systems would work
theoretically work best) then I propose that what is most important is
not having the strongest theoretical argument. Instead, what is most
important is to work towards the future that is plausible for you to
actually turn into reality."
(email: August 2009)


=Discussion=

Sam Rose:

"What I am really talking about is creating the
conditions for emergence. There are conditions that you can foment,
implement and nurture that will create transition, and increase the
likelihood of transformation. This is not coercive, and does require
social negotiation, relationship and network building, and choosing
where to spend energies and time based on what you think is most
likely to succeed first, next etc

So, you can "seed" transitional entities, and nurture them in
conjunction with people who are genuinely interested. And/or you can
find and align with like-minded entities that are emerging around the
world, and think about how to work together in useful ways. This is
political, but there are processes which people may agree to use, to
create commons, collaborative, and cooperation based systems that can
sustain themselves over time. Have a look at everything we've
synthesized from different areas of human thinking at
http://cooperationcommons.com/summaries

One of those areas of thinking is complex systems, a science which
shows that most transformation/change tends to begin on local scales.
So, if you think about human driven processes, which are partly
political, and resepective of environment, respective of the flow of
energy on many scales, you can see that there are processes which
people as individuals can apply to begin to change how they exist on
local scales. There are many, many, many examples of this. I would say
that it is easier to change locally *without* politics. However, it is
more difficult to sustain such a change without a system of voluntary
co-governance of commons that are created by way of the changes that I
am suggesting.

One empty acre within the city of Cleveland could be a great example.
You can quickly clear out and begin to produce food on that acre, and
create technologies from discarded materials that capture rainwater,
re-use plant refuse as fertilizer, etc etc. You can gain more by
involving more people, and inviting them to contribute to the
development of the acre. Maybe you would invite schools in to teach
students how to start their own businesses, etc. But as you involve
more people, you run the risk of exceeding the carrying capacity of
the commons you have started. You have to create rules, and people
have to be willing to live by those rules. You need a system of
co-governance. Plus, you need a way to meet existing laws in regards
to food safety, quality, etc. On top of all of that, as Ryan suggests,
you can get far by pressuring for real political change (as the people
of Cleveland have done, by pressuring government to allow them to have
bees and chikens within the city, which increases the options for
people involved in small scale food production).

There is a real life example of this here:
http://localfoodsystems.org/story-10-blue-pike-farm That is a farm on
one acre of land in Cleveland, that produces a sizeable income, and
offers resources to multiple people in the local community (schools,
research universities, etc)"


[[Category:Politics]]