
URL = http://www.plugcomputer.org/


=Description=

"A plug computer is a small form factor server, intended to provide network-based services within the home. Built on a Marvell system-on-chip, the Marvell plug computer enables high-performance, always-on, always-connected, and environmentally-friendly computing that is readily available for developers. Unlike other embedded devices in the home it contains a gigahertz- class processor designed to offer PC-class performance.

The plug computer is suitable for file sharing, running a media server, back-up services, and remote access functions. It can be used as a bridge between home computing devices and Internet-based services. Plug computing is quickly expanding—delivering new devices, services, value-added applications, and advanced network connectivity to users."
(http://www.plugcomputer.org/about/)


=More Information=

* "Plugcomputer.org is the premier web resource for the plug computer development community. The available forums, wikis, and software downloads facilitate software development on the plug platform and the free and open exchange of ideas and software. In addition, the site provides information on what plug computers are currently available and where to purchase them."

* "GuruPlug is a compact and low power Linux Plug computer. It is intended to be a device that could act as a web server, a printing server or any other network service. It has local storage in NAND Flash, but also offers USB ports and a Serial ATA port to connect external disks." [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GuruPlug]


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]