
URL = http://www.plugintv.net/

'''Australian collective of participatory documentary makers'''


=Description=


Plug in TV is an association of film makers, animators, social
activists, photographers, web developers, musicians, artists and
countless others coming together in the belief that a better world is
possible..

Everyone has different skills and experiences but share the same
goals: to create awareness about important social issues and their
causes, and to exchange ideas..

Plug In TV promotes the learning of skills, responsibilities and
methods to empower each other to communicate what needs to be
communicated for a better world.

Plug in TV Charter. This charter forms the constitution of Plug in TV,
including the principles that guide its development, its core mission
and purpose, its vision for itself and the world, the values which
inform its practices, its organisational structure, decision making,
financial decisions and matters pertaining to intellectual property.
Principles

Plug in TV is an association of video documentary journalists.

Plug in TV is open to membership from the public, of all citizens of
the world, regardless of race, nationality, gender, ability, age and
other differences. It is diversity which makes Plug in TV dynamic.

Plug in TV accepts the work and contributions of all its members so
long as they adhere to the charter of principles. Work and
contributions that are not coherent with Plug in TV's charter of
principles, mission and values cannot use the Plug in TV name.

Plug in producers and members must ensure that every story/episode
that is distributed or screened reflects this charter of principles,
the Plug in TV mission and core values. Plug in TV, as a network of
video journalists, must adhere to the core principle of good
journalism: to respect the truth, show a plurality of viewpoints and
conduct reporting which acknowledges the biases that inform stories.

Plug in TV does not pretend to be a neutral voice in video journalism,
and is an alternative voice to mainstream media, which too often
reflect the interests of corporations, states and the powerful.

Plug in TV is an association of people who choose to work together for
the common good, and should never become an in-group that works for
its own personal interests.

Plug In TV is a place where members are able to network with fellow
video journalists and exchange ideas. As such it is a networked
production house, it is BOTH a network of people who work autonomously
and a production house where people work as a team. The one is not
irreducible to the other.

Plug in TV is a network and association of people with different
skills and experiences but with the same goals: to create awareness
about important social issues and their causes. Plug in TV  is a
collective that fosters skill sharing, and promotes the learning of
skills, responsibilities and methods to empower each other to
communicate what needs to be communicated for a better world.

Plug in TV is situated in social networks and associations, which
constitute its community and through this community its viability.
Therefore Plug in TV  takes its relationships and associations
seriously, and strives to create mutually beneficial relationships
within it and between it and the community.

Plug in TV is a place where its members learn to take roles and
responsibilities for producing media that has a positive impact in the
world. It is a space for members to learn the organisational,
practical and business skills and knowledge needed to make grassroots
film production viable for themselves and others.

Plug in TV as a networked production house focuses on the integrity of
content which is produced with the Plug in TV name, and is not able to
monitor and take responsibility for the production process as it
unfolds with each and every member. While Plug in TV  encourages
members to be responsible artists and comply with legal and ethical
standards, it cannot monitor, and hence be liable for breeches of
legal and ethical standards of its members in the production process.

Plug in TV aims to re-democratise the television medium. Over the
course of the 20th century the television medium increasingly became
patronising in terms of educating, controlling and entertaining  the
'masses'.

Plug in TV represents the capacity of all citizens to produce
television shows, documentaries, and stories themselves. Plug in TV
asserts that the production of film through the digital medium is a
new, common literacy, not the sole privilege of experts.

Plug in TV aims to de-mystify the film production process so that
everyone can achieve this new literacy.

Plug in TV aims to raise awareness about issues that the mainstream
media turns a blind eye to or is ignorant of.  Plug in TV is a place
where members are able to challenge certain social issues, question
others and articulate opinions through the creative medium of digital
video.


=Mission=


1. Plug in TV focuses on issues related to social justice and
environmental sustainability, in particular highlighting examples
where people are making a difference in the community through new
projects, initiatives and everyday acts of heroism and sacrifice for
the benefit of humankind and the sustainability of the planet.

2. Plug in TV is an outlet for stories on alternative living, social
justice, ecological sustainability,  of under-represented groups, such
as youth or political minorities, on indigenous rights and
reconciliation, migrant issues, education, health, culture, arts and
dissent, as well as the many alternatives and initiatives being
developed by the many progressive groups in the community.

=Values=


1. Plug in TV originated because of the lack of mainstream media
genuineness to facilitate the truth of the conditions of the world.
With the amount of poverty and lack of education around social issues
in the world,  Plug in TV emerged to  bring some of these issues
closer to Australia society, so that we can become informed and maybe,
proactive regarding issues that affect us all.

2. Plug in TV challenges the means and content through which many
multi national corporations influence people, in particular through
advertising and the social construction of consumer culture, which
creates never-ending false needs and wants, dissatisfactions, envy and
a sense of lack, running counter to our capacity to sustain ourselves
on a planet of finite resources and ever more fragile ecosystems, and
which can be considered a general debasement of culture.

3. Because of corporate-state collusion, there are many social and
environmental injustices occurring in our community. There are
however, many people that challenge the system and dedicate a lot of
time, energy and passion to poking and patching the gaping holes in
the fabric of our society. Due to media control we hear very few of
their stories. Plug in TV should give exposure to these community
based organizations and individuals that are working for social
change.



Plug in TV also aims to give exposure to local and international
social and political activists, and those who  confront companies and
individuals that operate with a  counter-community ethic. Plug in TV
celebrates the power and initiative that exists in the community to
address important social issues.


4. Plug in TV is pro progressive businesses and pro progressive
government: those that explicitly consider and incorporate positive
social and ecological impacts and goods in there operation.



Plug in TV is NOT anti-business or anti-government. Plug in TV,
however, does respond to political and business community failures to
do what is right for people and the environment. This necessitates
media initiatives to highlight and communicate the actions, solutions
and alternatives being developed by the community of global citizens
to address issues of social justice and environment. This also means,
however, that Plug in TV also needs to acknowledge when state and
business take initiative to create positive social and ecological
outcomes.


=Vision=


1. Plug in TV embodies the idea that Another Media is Possible.

2. Plug in TV is part of a global movement to create global cognitive
justice – such that multi national media corporations will no longer
be able to conceal or distort the true conditions of the world,  and
people will have access and be nurtured by media which reflects the
experiences, conditions and truths of the majority world and the
planetary ecosystems which we all depend on.

3. Plug in TV aims to marry the boldest aesthetic with the most
advanced technology with the highest human values.

4. Plug in TV aims to create bold documentaries, stories that really
push the "limit" and push the viewers to be active in helping to
create positive social change.

5. Plug in TV will one day have enough resources,  human, financial
and relational,  to be in a position to help develop independent media
centres in countries in need of alternative media around the world.


[[Category:Webcasts]]