
'''= "a global community of environmentally conscious entrepreneurs looking to bring fresh, affordable, organic food to backyards and local communities throughout the world".'''

URL = http://www.podnet.is/


=Description=

"PODpioneers is a global community of environmentally conscious entrepreneurs looking to bring fresh, affordable, organic food to backyards and local communities throughout the world.   We build the lifePOD for the home and school, and the agriPOD systems that help create and restore healthy communities.  Anyone can become a PODpioneer.   If you're looking to to bring fresh, affordable, organic food to your backyard or local community, we'd love to have you!  Simply sign up for our newsletter and join the PODpioneers Facebook Group to be a part of this inspiring global movement.

We are now looking for "early adopters" - these are individuals and teams that have the pioneering spirit and who can collaborate with us during the development phase, when costs and risks are higher. However, with many pioneers working together and sharing results, the COOP can progress more rapidly with feedback and input from multiple POD Pioneers.

Yes, we might save some money by waiting on the results from the POD Prototype and a first POD Kit project, but if we can mobilize a number of POD Pioneers and establish several Beta testing locations that provide simultaneous data and feedback from various climate zones and with a variety of operational configuration and growing options we will learn more quickly what is optimum for the POD Kit standardization. 

The slightly higher cost of each of these early stage projects can be equalized down the road, since the COOP can provide at a later stage a payment to the Pioneers that will equalize the cost of the POD Kit now with the future mass production cost. Additionally, many of the POD Pioneers will also be commissioned by the COOP to establish a POD Works enterprise and this activity will more than return the investment in a POD during the development phase.

Also, the best cost will be possible for POD Pioneers if we use a common design and building concept that can be replicated easily and will result in a good and reasonable cost of local production and construction/assembly labor. At this stage we would like to establish contracts for the POD Pioneers who are prepared to establish the basic POD Works enterprise activities, including sales and technical support, including construction services. 

When we form the COOP and start accepting COOP Members, we invite any member(s) to register as POD Pioneers and to provide their proposal to establish a POD Works enterprise. We will commission probably one such development in each State and each of these sites will become a hub for further outreach and localization within the State. This process is envisioned as an organic growth and is intended support a rapid, exponential expansion of the COOP that will also seed a Sola Roof Enterprise Network (SE Net) that will flourish in pace with the COOP development, including the formation of the COOP Chapters."
(http://www.podnet.is/become-a-food-pioneer)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]