
A text from Jakob Rigi.

=Text=

"Factually and historically automation has been the means of enslavement of working class. 

1-

Marx showed that with machinery and its automatic system the transformation of formal subsumption of labour by capital to real subsumption was completed. Although already in craft-based manufacture system the technical division of labour has made the worker a detailed worker and thereby the worker had lost her grasp over the whole of labour process the worker still controlled the tools and materials of labour. With machinery and its automatic system the worker became an appendage of the machine. While in crafts the tool was an extension of the worker body in machinery and its automatic system the worker body became an extension of the machine and a cog in a monstrous material process which was independent of her will. Chaplin’s   Modern Times captures this best. Now, machinery allowed and facilitated further technical division of labour. This processes is s masterfully described by Harry Braverman in his Labour and Monopoly Capital. Automation and deskilling of labour not only alienated the worker from tools and labour but also gave the capital a huge new leverage against her. Since the unskilled labour was easily replicable and disposable. The capital using the competition between workers cut their wages and increased their labour time. People like Antonio Negri and the proponents of post-Fordist theory claim that in our era of information technology the technical division of labour and its corresponding despotism have ceased to exist. Ursula Huws, among others, has shown that this is a wrong claim. If anything the digital technology has created new possibilities for and new forms of  enslavement of labour.  


2- 
As machines relatively replaced workers this lead to the creation of labour army of unemployed constantly in search for jobs, having temporary jobs here and there. So precarious labour is by no means a new phenomenon, but has been always an inherent element of the industrial reserve army. Now, given that unskilled labour could be very easily replaced, capitalists blackmailed the employed workers, keeping their wages low and increasing their labour time, by using this army against them. It is important to note that capital must increase the absolute labour-time, since labour time alone is the source of value and surplus value. Paradoxically, capital increases the total absolute labour-time by making a section of working class unemployed and using them to force the employed sections to work longer. This is also absolutely true of our digital era. The pension age has increased from 60 to 65. People are forced to work longer in order to get involved in consumerism, pay their rents, and pay for the education of their children.  So the distinction between employed and unemployed, and labour-time and non-labour time are essential for capitalism.


3- 

Automation has been a powerful instrument in the hand of neo-liberalism to defeat the working class in the West, particularly in the USA. In the period 1950-1970s the industrial workers’ unions particularly those of car industry had a huge leverage against capital. Automation, among other factors, increasing the number of unemployed, undermined their power.


4- 

All these were not at all inevitable if the working class had the required consciousness and the correct politics, meaning it had the following demands and fought tooth and nail for them.

a-      Automate all boring and dangerous jobs whenever this is technically possible.

b-      Cut the labour-time in the same rate as automation expands.

c-      Give a job to anyone who wants to work. Reduce the labour time in a way that everyone can get a job.

d-     Provide a descent income for those who for whatever reason are unemployed.     

Of course this will endanger the profitability. Capital threatens to move elsewhere and often does so. The counter strategy is that these should be the demands of working class everywhere in world, in the USA as well in Bangladesh and Pakistan.  This requires that the workers of the world unite. The unification of the world working class and imposing these demands on capital are quite possible, though very difficult.  On the other hand the efforts of a single union, isolated from the rest of working class, trying to hamper automation are often doomed to failure. If the world working class will succeed in exacting these concession from capital this will reduce the general rate of profit and contribute to crisis. We should not fear such crisis but use it as an opportunity to abolish capitalism and establish communism. That this did not happen in the recent crisis all depends on politics an nothing else. By politics I mean the absence of revolutionary politics and not parliamentary one.


5- 

Communist society will delegate most jobs to machines. Human contribution to production will be voluntary and basically in the realms of knowledge, care, and education. Human will do things that machines are not able to do and things that can be delegated to machines but people enjoy doing them. In this society the use of social product is not conditioned upon the contribution to social production. Thus forced labour will vanish. Wage labour is a form of forced labour.  There, real wealth is not material things but time, but not idle time but time as pleasurable and creative activity. Activity i.e. life becomes it’s own goal.  This is what both Marx and Hegel called self-consciousness.


6-   

To conclude the path of automation has always been, and is, a matter of politics. That automation has been so harmful to the working class and humanity in general is because it has been a capitalist automation (this was also true of automation in the USSR). We cannot blame capitalists for this, since they pursue their own interests. It is upon us to put automation on a different track and the only means for this is class struggle, worldwide unification of the working class and a clear vision of an alternative society   and a very determined will for abolishing capitalism and establishing this alternative society.
Technology has never been neutral, to the date it has been stamped by politics and interests of capitalists, now it is time that we put our stamp on it.   
 
Note, by working class I mean the multitude."

(email, Networked Labour list, November 2015)


=Discussion=

==Automation and the worker==

Source: REVOLUTION AND CULTURE: The Bogdanov-Lenin Controversy by ZENOVIA A. SOCHOR, from 1988 

an intriguing analysis touching upon today's intensifying exchanges on calculation, cybernetics, networked labour, automation, and postcapitalism:

"Nevertheless, automation by itself could not produce a complete transformation of either the work situation or the worker. Bogdanov advanced several reasons for this shortcoming. First, he believed that under capitalism, automation was introduced only to the degree that it proved profitable to the capitalist. (The sole exception, according to Bogdanov, was the war industry, where cost considerations and profit played a secondary role; hence, the military alone employed the latest technology.)

Second, Bogdanov perceived a considerable, and continuing, dis- crepancy between the occupation of an "ordinary worker" and that of an engineer: "The former [is] only technically conscious while the latter has a scientific character; the former requires ... a general understand- ing of mechanics, disciplined attention, and intelligence; the latter a refined, precise, scientific-technical knowledge."38 Only under full au- tomation, thought Bogdanov, would the level of skill and knowledge of the "ordinary worker" be raised sufficiently to transcend the division between worker and engineer. The role of the engineer as a leader over a group of workers would remain, but it would no longer be qualitatively different from that of a worker. In fact, the content of all labor would become similar, involving mostly the regulation and control of highly specialized machines. The result, argued Bogdanov, would be a change in attitude toward work: "The worker who is at once organizer and executor ... cannot but regard his labor positively-that is, ... as an in- dispensable, natural, normal, and, to some extent, agreeable part of his existence. 

Third, Bogdanov assumed that the merging of the organizational and executive functions could be achieved once labor relatipns were based on collectivism rather than on authoritarianism. Under capitalism, workers formed a "comradely collective of executors," not of orga- nizers; they did not participate in organizational decisions. This re- striction, a serious one, could be removed only by a change "in the whole system of economic relations," thereby promoting full participation.

In short, Bogdanov forecast a postcapitalist system that differed sig- nificantly from its predecessor. The division of labor would be trans- formed and would lose its significance; in its place, labor mobility would predominate. By this statement, Bogdanov meant not only that the place of work would be changed but that "the function of 'organizer' [would be interchanged] with that of 'executor' and vice versa."41 This interchanging would allow for a narrowing of the gap between worker and manager, remove the psychological distinctions between them, and knit, from common experiences, a common culture. More importantly, avowed Bogdanov, the nature of authority relations would change; it would be based on competence rather than blind subordination to power.

Interestingly, a contemporary advocate of an alternative to the "ac- tually existing socialism," Rudolf Bahro, follows a similar line of rea- soning. He also uses as his point of departure a change in "the management structure of production." Under mature industrialism, writes Bahro, "the type of specialist who is concerned with ancillary functions in the management staff, e.g., with organization and data processing, is ever less distinguishable, sociologically and socio-psy- chologically, from the technician in the narrower sense." This analysis, of course, is a more modern, "computer-age" version of what Bogdanov predicted for the "postcapitalist stage." Starting with similar premises, Bahro also ends up with similar conclusions: that a cultural revolution is essential for social emancipation and that it should be carried out by an organization ("League of Communists") other than the party. This organization should embody "a higher moral-political authority than the [state] apparatus, by making possible and protecting the advance of integral modes of behaviour that foreshadow a new whole." Bahro goes so far as to recommend "dual supremacy" between the state and "a constructive but substantially transforming counterforce."42 Need- less to say, Bahro's League of Communists and Bogdanov's Proletkult bear a striking resemblance to each other.

Projecting still further into the future, Bogdanov drew a picture of a society heavily influenced by his systems thinking. A genuine socialist society was, to Bogdanov, a self-regulating an<;l harmonious one. Al- though the organizational function in a system would remain, it would be substantially altered once it was founded on a "general all-embracing organization of labor." That is, the regulating mechanism would be not the "old authoritarian centralism" but "scientific centralism." Most of the functions would be performed by a "gigantic statistical bureau based on exact calculation for the purpose of distributing labor power and instruments of labor."


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Politics]]