

=Discussion=

C. A. MALLMANN AND G. A. LEMARCHAND:

"The phase discontinuities that were found in our analysis of different societal
histories, are due to the conquest and domination of those societies, for time periods
of the order of one billow-length, by societies which have a different phase. Obviously,
the conqueror brings along with him his own social entelechy and tries to impose it on
the conquered society. 

Examples are Egypt when conquered by Alexander the Great,
and later by the Arabs; Latin America when conquered by the Spaniards; North America
when conquered by Great Britain; and the Chinese when conquered by the Manchurians, etc.

The same phenomenon is observed in the timing of the economic recurrences of 
the societies which have established strong economic interactions among them for a
long enough period of time.

As a consequence, the recurrences of all the societies which were conquered by
the same conqueror will have the same timing (angular phase). These societies were
called Historical Units by Julıan Marıas. We prefer to call them
Politically Synchronized Societies (PSS). They have a common order parameter, the
angular phase of their recurrences.

In the same way, we call Economically Synchronized Societies (ESS), those which
have the same economic recurrence timing. As we well know it was Wallerstein who assumed, for the ﬁrst time, that all societies of the world have the same timing of 
their economic recurrences, thus introducing the concept of the World Economic System.

This means that he assumes that all the societies of the world are economically synchronized. “

(https://www.academia.edu/13103863/Generational_Explanation_of_Long_Term_Billow_Like_Dynamics_of_Societal_Processes)

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]