'''* Book: Political Solidarity Economy. By Jorge Santiago.'''

URL = https://economiapoliticasolidaria.com/en/home/


=Review=

By Monica Carrillo Zegarra:

"Jorge’s book Political Solidarity Economy introduces the principles that form the basis of an economic alternative to the capitalist model of exploitation and plunder. It proposes implementing methodologies rooted in lived realities. Political Solidarity Economy is a search for solutions to the problems of unsustainable consumption and the unsustainable use of natural resources. 

In the first part of the book, Jorge introduces how the concept of political solidarity emerged in several countries, as well as the political processes and collaborative networks of solidarity that emerged simultaneously around the world. In chapters 2 and 3, the book addresses the importance of understanding the role of geography in the economic and political development of societies by exploring in detail the situation in Chiapas and the geopolitical role it plays in Latin America. In subsequent chapters, he delves into the events leading up to the Zapatista revolution and the Lacandona Declaration’s concrete proposal for transforming economic and political relations between Indigenous peoples and the Mexican government. Next, the book proposes a few strategies for building out solidarity economy practices, emphasizing the importance of knowing the essential elements of what make up a solidarity economy  through a case study of Chiapas. Chapter 8 is dedicated to analyzing the methodologies applied by the Zapatista movement, offering concrete examples and testimonies from members of the movement. The last part of the book provides a 40-year chronology of global and local political events that have influenced the emergence of alternatives to capitalism in Mexico and around the globe.

 
'''The collective production of goods and services creates new forms of governance and allows for multiple manifestations of economic and political power relations in pursuit of more just societie'''s. Political Solidarity Economy shares the values and principles that guide these models from a Latin American, and more specifically Chiapas, context. It also outlines the adjustment and transition that took place within the Zapatista movement after reflections on how power was exercised. This can be  seen in an excerpt from the Lacandona Declaration which is featured in chapter 4: “Since then, the EZLN leadership is no longer involved in giving orders in civil affairs, but has accompanied and supported the authorities democratically elected by the people. Furthermore, they ensured that the communities, as well as national and international civil society, were well informed about the support received and how it was administered.” 

In May 2021, the EZLN decided to send a delegation to begin a journey across five continents, starting in Europe, as a continuation of a strategy that involves exchanging with people from other continents. Though this is the first time they are leaving Mexico with this intention, for Jorge the main contribution of the Zapatista movement is the proposal for an alternative political vision of the economy and power relations based on values of solidarity and respect for Mother Earth. With this new political voyage the Zapatistas are continuing to share the lessons learned about the strategies, based on the principles of autonomy, agroecology, and solidarity economics, that they have implemented in their communities. 

Within the context of this multi-continental voyage, the English edition of the book Political Solidarity Economy aligns with a historical moment in which the  Zapatista’s visions of the world will have a greater chance of reaching new audiences. “After 37 years of work, the possibility of having a greater global reach and a more powerful voice to convene exists. This is an opportunity not only to strengthen local efforts, but also to contribute to a global transformation,” notes Jorge."

(https://thousandcurrents.org/reimagining-a-new-economy-with-jorge-santiago/)

[[Category:Solidarity Economy]]
[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Solidarity Economy]]
[[Category:Books]]