
=Discussion=

George Dafermos:

"In any case, the manner in which the concept of the Partner State has been theorized
since the early 2010s signals a shift of emphasis in the digital commons literature
towards the political. We should keep in mind that the Partner State strategy constitutes
a rather recent addition to the arsenal of commoners and peer producers. Prior to the
2010s, there was hardly any mention of the role of political struggle in the analysis by
which the theorists of the digital commons substantiated the argument that peer
production has the potential to transcend capitalism. Presumably, commoners did not
need to worry too much about politics, as, in the view of the theorists, the decisive
terrain of struggle was that of the economy (see e.g. Bauwens 2009: 135-137).
Of course, as one would expect, peer production theorists have been fiercely criticized
for downplaying the role of political struggle in the process of social transformation.
Indicatively, Kioupkiolis reproaches them for downplaying the importance of political
struggles by putting forward a technocratic vision of social change in which
technological, legal and entrepreneurial fixes are the main catalysts of historical
transformation (see Report 2. The Common). For political theorists such as Kioupkiolis,
the problem with the early work of peer production theorists rests on its affinity with
that well-known axiom of Marxism, which, by holding that the ‘superstructure’ of
political institutions is merely a reflection of the ‘economic base,’ has been construed as
implying that political struggles are insignificant in comparison to economic struggles. 

On their part, peer production theorists have tried to fend off that critique by arguing that
‘a critical mass of initiatives needs to be operating before political action can be
summoned and relevant institutions can be designed’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 64).
Be that as it may, the experience of the first decade of the 21st century convinced them
that it is not possible to ‘change society merely by producing open code and design’
(Bauwens & Kostakis 2015). Because obviously, if the economy was all that mattered,
then the phenomenal success of the Linux operating system, which has been established
for some time now as the undisputed market leader for operating systems, would have
resulted in the demise of capitalism in the software industry. On top of that, the rise of
new municipalist movements in the mid-2010s made them rethink their Partner State
strategy. As a result of that re-conceptualization of their strategy on the basis of the
experiences of Barcelona en Comú and the Bologna Regulation, the recent (post-2015)
work of peer production theorists is characterized by a rejection of crudely deterministic
theories of social change that downplay the centrality of political struggle in the
transition process to a new social order.

Quite simply, as Pazaitis and Drechsler (forthcoming) clarify, ‘a change of production
alone cannot really transform society...the relationship between economics and politics
is not linear, i.e. a radical change in the former is not necessarily followed by
corresponding ones in the latter.’ On the contrary, ‘things can go many ways’ (Pazaitis &
Drechsler, forthcoming). In fact, as Bauwens et al. (2019: 29) point out in their last
book, ‘there have been many historical opportunities for such a transition, but capitalism
has demonstrated high resilience as an economic system, adaptability as a cultural
framework, and brutal force as a political apparatus.’ Consequently, then, the struggle of
peer producers against the capitalists in the digital economy does not suffice to bring out
radical social change. In order to really transform society, there is no other way:
commoners must also struggle politically. For that reason, therefore, commoners should
not underestimate the potential role of ‘the state as the agent for social reform and
change’ (Pazaitis & Drechsler, forthcoming). That is precisely what gives the edge to the
Partner State strategy: it constitutes a form of struggle through which state power can be
put at the service of the commoners (Bauwens et al. 2019).

The re-appropriation of the State as an instrument of ‘revolutionary reforms’ is not an
easy task. It would be absurd to propose that commoners can achieve it by themselves.
Anyway, they do not need to. The Partner State is a form of struggle that presupposes the
formation of alliances and coalitions among different types of political actors. As we
underlined in our discussion of Barcelona en Comú, commons-oriented citizen platforms
have proven to be capable of integrating political actors as diverse as social movements
and traditional political parties. Their inherently pluralistic character consequently
implies that they could serve as mobilization strategies for ‘the emergence of
majoritarian coalitions in which the commons would be a binding element’ (Bauwens et
al. 2019: 66-67). As Bauwens et al. (2019: 66-67) believe, ‘the acceptance of a commons
agenda could be the basis for new progressive coalitions with already existing political 
forces’ like the Pirates, the Greens and the contemporary New Left. In parallel, it could
be the ‘substratum’ of commons-oriented municipal coalitions with social movements
and civil society actors.

In this way, by establishing an alliance between all these political forces through a
commons agenda, the commoners’ struggle takes on a pluralistic and mass character.
Fueled by the momentum of such an alliance, their struggle becomes more diffuse and
generalized, transcending thereby their hitherto particularistic interests. The escalation of
the commoners’ struggle, therefore, hinges on the formation of alliances with other
agents. At this point, the strength of the Partner State strategy becomes clearly visible:
its emphasis on the construction of alliances as a fundamental principle makes it a
hegemonic political strategy, which has the potential to unite a wide spectrum of social
agents in support of the commons.
At the same time, the Partner State approach does not simply establish an alliance
between heterogeneous political actors but modifies the very identity of the participants
in that alliance. Consequently, to the extent that the commonification of urban resources
becomes a binding element in a municipal coalition, the various political actors
engaging in it are effectively transformed into commoners. Even if they do not call
themselves by that name, the fact that the commons have become a core part of their
vision for the city speaks for itself. Of course, they are still Greens, municipalists or
whatever they called themselves upon entering the alliance. But as the alliance itself is
based on a commons agenda, the political identity of the actors engaged in it is infused
with the values and principles of the commons. Hence, the social agents who participate
in a commons-oriented municipal coalition, even if they do not identify themselves as
commoners, effectively act as agents of a commons transition.

Let us recapitulate the main points of the foregoing analysis. According to peer
production theorists, the struggle of commoners is not confined to the sphere of the
digital economy, but extends to the field of political institutions, both systemic and nonsystemic. More specifically, commoners build their own autonomous institutions of
governance, such as the Chambers and the Assemblies of the Commons. In this case,
they antagonize the status quo by developing alternatives to systemic institutions, which
allow them to organize themselves collectively (Bauwens & Kostakis 2015, Bauwens et
al. 2019, Kostakis & Bauwens 2014).

In addition to setting up their own autonomous institutions, commoners antagonize
systemic institutions from within. They organize themselves into citizen platforms such
as Barcelona en Comú, which run for public office with the aim of taking municipal
power into their own hands. Most importantly, in those cases where citizen platforms do
succeed in taking control of the administrative apparatus of the city, they proceed to
implement ‘revolutionary reforms,’ such as the commonification of urban resources. In
that way, therefore, we could say that commoners recuperate systemic institutions from
below. This strategy of re-appropriation of the State by the commoners is what peer 
production theorists call the Partner State (Bauwens et al. 2019, Pazaitis & Drechsler
forthcoming).

However, the significance of the Partner State strategy does not rest solely on repurposing the State into an instrument of commonification. What is actually at stake
here is the shape of the future. As peer production theorists underline, there is absolutely
no guarantee of radical social change (Bauwens et al. 2019, Benkler 2006: 17-18).
Hence, even if peer production becomes the dominant mode of production in the digital
economy, there is no certainty that it will trigger a commons transition across the whole
of society. But if ‘things can go many ways,’ as Pazaitis and Drechsler (forthcoming) put
it, political action is then obviously necessary. In order to transform society, commoners
must act politically. And that is precisely what they are trying to do through their
participation in commons-oriented citizen platforms like Barcelona en Comú (Bauwens
et al. 2019).

From one point of view, the Partner State strategy looks like a continuation of the
economic struggle of commoners with other means. But it is actually much more than
that, for the reason that the expansion of the scope of commoners’ struggle beyond the
economic field implies the opening-up of their struggle to the whole of civil society. To
put it another way, to the extent that the struggle of commoners remains confined to the
economic field, it is condemned to marginality. That much is certain, according to peer
production theorists. Quite simply, it is not possible to scale up peer production from the
‘micro-level’ to a ‘full social form’ without taking up the struggle in the terrain of
politics. At the end of the day, a commons transition rests on the possibility of taking
control of state power. As Bauwens et al. (2019: 42) tell us, ‘it is an illusion that such a
development of the commons forces can be done with a hostile state.’ In the context of
this struggle, institutions of municipal governance are of paramount importance. As ‘the
city context appears more mature for a commons transition’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 65),
the commoners organize themselves into citizen platforms like Barcelona en Comú with
the purpose of taking control of municipal power.

In walking this path, commoners are not alone. The strength of citizen platforms lies in
their capacity to mobilize a wide spectrum of actors in support of the commons. It is no
coincidence that citizen platforms are invariably constituted by a coalition of forces:
they do in fact constitute a strategy for organizing broad coalitions of social agents in the
urban metropolises of the world today. By definition, therefore, citizen platforms are
metropolitan alliances, which encompass actors as diverse as metropolitan movements
and left-leaning political parties. The diversity and broadness of their social and political
base constitute the real source of their strength. By virtue of uniting all these social
agents, citizen platforms can accomplish more things than any of them, acting on their
own, could. But aside from opening up the possibility of radical social change at the
local level, the pluralism that lies at the base of citizen platforms makes them an ideal
vehicle for a hegemonic strategy of the commoners’ movement. That is, above all, what
confers upon citizen platforms their enormous strategic significance in the context of the
commoners’ struggle: they are a prototype for the construction of a metropolitan alliance
that is capable of uniting a large part of civil society around a commons agenda.

That is, in short, how the commoners antagonize the status quo in the realm of political
institutions: they are engaged in setting up citizen platforms, which try to unite civil
society in support of a commons agenda. These commons-oriented citizen platforms run
for public office. Τheir plan is to take the apparatus of municipal governance into their
hands and then put it to work in the service of their agenda. By means of that hegemonic
strategy, as peer production theorists tell us, the ‘commoners could evolve to become the
new ruling class’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 53). That is to say, the commoners can become
the leading and dominant class to the extent that they succeed in setting up a structure of
alliances, which will allow them to mobilize a critical mass of metropolitan actors
against the injustices of neoliberal capitalism and the hierarchies of the bourgeois State.
In section 3.3, following up on our discussion in section 3.2 of how commoners
antagonize capital in the economic field, we looked at the form of their struggle on the
institutional level. At this point, therefore, we have a complete picture of how
commoners antagonize the status quo, according to peer production theorists. As we can
see, their economic and political struggles have a common denominator, which lies in
their strategy. Clearly, the commoners’ struggles, both economic and political, are based
on a strategy of alliances with other forces. In the context of their economic struggle, as
we discussed in section 3.2, their strategy is based primarily on the construction of a
strong alliance with the new cooperative movement and commons-friendly
entrepreneurs. Similarly, the strategy of their struggle in the institutional field is centered
on the development of an anti-capitalist alliance with new municipalist/metropolitan
movements and left-leaning political parties. In both cases, therefore, the creation of a
structure of alliances plays a decisive role. Ultimately, commoners’ struggle against
capitalism is inseparable from the practical implementation of that strategy of alliances."
(http://heteropolitics.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Digital-Commons.pdf)


==The [[Struggle of the Commoners in the Realm of the Economy]]

George Dafermos:

"We discussed the strategies that peer production theorists have
developed for the transition towards a commons-based economy. As we saw, they place
particular emphasis on the alliances that the commoners will have to build in order to be
able to antagonize capital. In fact, it would not be an exaggeration to say that these
alliances constitute the core of the commoners’ strategy against the status quo. In this
section we will examine the issues, that are practical as much as they are conceptual,
raised by that strategy of alliances and we will try to explore, from the perspective of
Heteropolitics, how it contributes to a re-conceptualization of the political and the
common in tandem.

To begin with, the strategy proposed by peer production theorists revolves around two
main axes. To put it simply, it is made up of two sub-strategies. One of them pertains to
the realm of the economy and the alliances that the commoners must engage in with
other economic agents in order to establish peer production as the dominant mode of
production. The other strategy (i.e. the ‘partner state’) focuses on the state, putting
weight on the alliances that the commoners must build with other social and political
forces in order to invade state institutions and then deeply transform them from within.
For the sake of clarity, let us look first at the issues raised by that strategy in the realm of
the economy.

'''Let us recall the key elements of the commoners’ strategy in the realm of the economy.'''

As we explained in section 3.2, the strategy puts much weight on the creation of a
structure of alliances with the new cooperative movement and commons-friendly
entrepreneurs. The rationale underlying that strategy -that is, the reason why alliances
are of such importance- comes down to the fact that the commons ecosystem depends on
the capitalist economy for its reproduction. To put it simply, peer producers have
livelihood needs, which under current conditions they cannot meet through the sphere of
the commons. Like all human beings, they too need food, clothing and shelter to sustain
themselves. In capitalist societies, however, these goods are not available through the
commons sphere. Τhey are commodities and as such, one needs money to procure them
through the capitalist market. In other words, the problem, as matters stand today, is that
peer producers ‘are not nourished by their own product’ (Victor 2003), that is, they
‘cannot live on their own produce’ (Seaman 2003). And so, insofar as they cannot meet
their (basic, at least) needs through the commons, they remain dependent on the
capitalists and their commodities. But that, of course, implies that they also need money,
since the capitalists do not usually give their products away for free.

The problem, in short, is that peer producers cannot sustain themselves through the
commons ecosystem. They need goods that are not available through the commons
sphere, which means that they need money in order to procure those goods through the
market. Under these circumstances, therefore, neither the commons (as an economic
ecosystem) nor the commoners (as individual producers) can be considered self-sustainable. But if the commoners are dependent on the capitalist system for their
sustainability, then how could they aspire to transcend it?

Undoubtedly, for as long as the commoners remain locked in this situation, it would be
absurd to harbor any hopes of transcending capitalism. That is, in the last instance, the
reason why the theorists of peer production have come up with a strategy that is
designed to expand the commons sphere as well as to strengthen the sustainability of the
commoners in the here and now. The strategy, as we have seen, proposes that peer
producer communities partner up with businesses that synergize with the digital
commons ecosystem and have therefore an economic interest in its sustainability. P2PF
theorists call these economic agents ‘generative entrepreneurs’ to highlight the fact that
they take from the commons, but they also give back to them. In specific, they 
reciprocate in three ways. They release their own products under free/open-source
licenses. Second, they provide funding to non-profit infrastructural organizations like the
Linux Foundation, which enable the infrastructure of collaboration underpinning peer
production. And, thirdly, they provide paid employment for peer producers. In this way,
these capitalist entrepreneurs make a key contribution to the commons. By distributing
their products under free/open licenses, they expand the commons sphere. At the same
time, by providing paid work for peer producers, they strengthen their economic
sustainability. That is basically the sense in which they constitute strategic allies of the
commoners movement: they contribute to the expansion of the commons sphere and
create livelihoods for peer producers, strengthening thereby their sustainability.

The limits of the above strategy are more than obvious. No matter what peer production
theorists call them, it does not change the fact that these entrepreneurs are nonetheless
capitalists. So, by relying on these businesses in order to sustain themselves, peer
producers remain in effect dependent on capitalist firms, which are in the hands of
others. That means they remain dependent on organizational entities which are not
controlled by them, but by corporate hierarchies of managers and other professional
experts. This strategy, then, though it strengthens their sustainability here and now, does
not really enhance their autonomy. Consequently, its main weakness is that it does not
help the commoners to organize themselves autonomously.

Peer production theorists are not blind to this problem. As they admit themselves, the
fact that peer producers can make ends meet by getting a job at a commons-friendly
company does not mean that they do not need to develop their own autonomous
organizations. On the contrary, a point that Bauwens et al. (2019: 18) emphasize time
and again is that peer producers must ‘build their [own] vehicles to create livelihoods
while producing the commons.’ In practical terms, they encourage peer producers to set
up their own jointly owned and democratically controlled organizations, that is, to
organize themselves into cooperatives. By following that course of action, as they write,
peer producers will enhance their autonomy: they will no longer depend on a capitalist
employer for putting food on the table. In parallel, they will be able to ‘reinvest the
surplus in the well-being of themselves and the overall commons system they coproduce’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 18). In a nutshell, the development of commons-oriented
cooperatives can ‘create the conditions for...commoners to emancipate themselves [from
wage labour] and earn their livelihood through their contributions’ to the commons
(Bauwens et al. 2019: 17).

Certainly, by organizing themselves into cooperatives, peer producers will enhance their
autonomy. That is for sure. Thanks to their collective ownership and control of the
enterprise of which they are working members, cooperators are by definition more
autonomous than wage workers vis-à-vis capital. This is all well and good, but does it
actually lead to a post-capitalist transition? Many doubt so. For Marxists such as Jakob
Rigi (2014), the development of commons-oriented cooperatives may be part of the
solution, but it is definitely not a panacea. In order to create the conditions for a postcapitalist transition process, a much ‘broader revolutionary peer produced movement
that aims at replacing capitalism with peer production’ is required (Rigi 2014: 402). Rigi 
agrees that commons-oriented cooperatives can play an important role in that
revolutionary movement, but only with the qualification that they ‘work against the
market and money and break with them’ (Rigi 2014: 397). From his point of view,
therefore, peer producers must do more than just organize themselves into cooperatives;
these ‘cooperatives must be revolutionary’ as well. This requires of them, as we said, to
‘reduce their relations to [the capitalist market] to an absolutely unavoidable necessary
minimum’ (Rigi 2014: 390). Ideally then, these cooperatives do not sell their products
and services as the capitalists do with their commodities. Rather, they make them
available to their local communities through commons-based, cooperative models. In the
opposite case, as Rigi (2014: 398) warns, ‘they must adopt the logic of capital or will go
bankrupt.’

The views of Rigi echo a well-known critique of cooperatives, which is as old as the
cooperative movement itself (see e.g. Webb & Webb 1921). According to that critique,
cooperatives are plagued by a host of constraints. A big part of the problem is that ‘over
time a democratic, worker-owned firm will tend to fall into decay’ (Cheney 1999: 17).
That happens presumably because, by operating under the pressure of the logic of the
market, cooperatives are destined to lose their social dynamism, degenerating thus into
business entities that are hardly distinguishable from capitalist firms.
P2PF theorists are well aware of that danger. In fact, they share the concern that
cooperatives run the risk of degenerating into conventional firms, given the tension
between the individualistic self-interest of the cooperatives and their political goals. As
they write, ‘cooperatives that work within the capitalist marketplace tend to gradually
adopt competitive mentalities, and even when they do not, they chiefly operate for the
benefit of their own members’ (Pazaitis et al. 2017a). In their opinion, however, these
problems can be mitigated by edging cooperatives onto the path of the commons. As
they argue, by becoming actively engaged in the production of the commons,
cooperatives become part of the commons ecosystem (Bauwens et al. 2019). At an
immediate and practical level therefore, their production process results in the expansion
of the commons sphere. And that is what sets them apart from traditional cooperatives
and capitalist firms alike. By producing commons rather than commodities, these
cooperatives strengthen here and now ‘the counter-hegemonic movement’ of commoners
and the development of ‘a commons-oriented counter-economy’ that could challenge the
hegemony of capital (Pazaitis et al. 2017a).

However, in contrast to the P2PF theorists who believe that this strategy is appropriate in
the context of a commons transition, its critics, such as Rigi (2014), find it still lacking.
The problem, they claim, is that regardless of whether they are commons-producing or
not, cooperatives whose sustainability depends on the capitalist market are bound to be
assimilated in the system. And that, in their opinion, is precisely the weakness of the
strategy proposed by P2PF theorists. As Rigi (2014: 402) comments, ‘Bauwens and
Kostakis’ cooperatives aim at defeating capitalism on its own ground, namely the
market.’ Inevitably, ‘therefore, in order to be profitable they must compete with other
similar enterprises, whether cooperatives or capitalist enterprises,’ which means that
‘they must adopt the logic of capital or go bankrupt’ (Rigi 2014: 398). On that basis, 
Rigi (2014: 398) concludes that ‘Bauwens and Kostakis’ project is not a road towards
subversion of capitalism and building an alternative economy but a way to access
capitalism.’ In short, that strategy ‘is doomed to failure’ (Rigi 2014: 402). Unless those
cooperatives find a way to cut themselves off from the capitalist market, sooner or later
they will be absorbed into it.

The issue of co-optation becomes all the more pressing once we take into account the
fact that we are not talking about something that is just likely to pop up in the future.
Co-optation is a problem that is rearing its ugly head in the bosom of peer producers’
community today. The case of the RepRap 3D printer is paradigmatic. The RepRap
project (http://reprap.org) was launched in 2005 by Dr. Adrian Bowyer, an academic at
Bath University in the UK, with the aim of developing an open-source 3D printer that
could replicate itself by reproducing its own components. Ultimately, though, by
creating a small-sized, affordable, home-brewed manufacturing device for most of the
objects people use in daily life, the real objective of the project was not technological,
but political. And that was none other than transcending capitalism. According to its
founder, RepRap would render capitalism superfluous by allowing ‘the revolutionary
ownership, by the proletariat, of the means of production’ (Bowyer 2004). And it would
do so ‘without all that messy and dangerous revolution stuff’ (Bowyer 2004). The spread
of RepRap technology would simply suffice to liberate ordinary people from their
dependency on the capitalist market. And so Bowyer envisioned that capitalism would
collapse under the weight of its own redundancy. Besides, as he stated in an interview
with The Guardian in 2006, ‘if people can make anything for themselves, what’s the
point in going to the shops?’ (Bowyer quoted in Randerson 2006).

In order to develop that subversive technology, Bowyer leveraged the Internet for
distributed collaboration. He open-sourced the design of the 3D printer and its technical
specifications so that others could experiment with it and improve it (Dafermos 2015).

That strategy proved quite successful, leading to the formation of a global community of
RepRap developers who shared modifications and improvements. Five years later, the
community had about five thousand members and was still growing fast (de Bruijn
2010). It did not take long until some of them took the initiative to launch their own
start-ups for selling RepRap 3D printers and plastic filament on the market. In the
beginning, that was not considered a problem at all. On the contrary, RepRap developers
thought that ‘their ideals had to be realised through the market, or not at
all...Paradoxically, the undoing of [capitalist] markets and firms’ would ‘come about
through a co-existence with the same’ (Söderberg 2014: 14). Using the market was
essentially their strategy for liberating end users. By bringing 3D printers to the homes
of ordinary Joes and Janes, it was hoped that these start-ups would set them free. In that
sense, the market constituted the gateway of liberation.
However, the contradictions of that strategy soon became obvious. ‘A turning point
came in 2012 when Makerbot Industries’ -a start-up launched by some of RepRap’s core
developers, including Bowyer himself- ‘announced that it no longer allowed the
community to access the design of its latest products’ (Söderberg 2014: 16). But it was
not just Makerbot. The ‘ecosystem’ of those start-ups as a whole adopted a modus
operandi that clashed with the original norms of the RepRap developer community. In
order to strategically position themselves on the market as ‘an obligatory passage point
for hobbyists wanting to build a RepRap 3D printer’ (Söderberg 2014: 14), these startups ended up using methods that are indistinguishable from those employed by cognitive
capitalists. Characteristically, one of them is the enclosure of plastic filament, which has
been strategically adopted by RepRap start-ups to lock-in customers, obliging them to
buy their plastic filament from official vendors (Söderberg 2014: 14). Naturally, the
effect that this ‘degeneration’ of business practices had on the original principles and
values of the RepRap community was detrimental. As is documented by Johan
Söderberg (2014: 16) in his study of RepRap, tensions in the community grew ‘in
proportion to the growth of a consumer market in 3D printers.’ And so, within a few
years, the original vision of the project was replaced by ‘a norm of free-for-all, enrichez-vous’ (Söderberg 2014: 16). As a result of that change in attitude, the RepRap
community eventually broke down. More precisely, it splintered into factions. It goes
without saying that its rhetoric changed as well. No one in the community talks anymore
about bringing down capitalism (Söderberg 2014).

What lessons can be drawn from the experience of the RepRap community? As we saw,
the members of the community set up their own start-ups, which, however, soon
degenerated into conventional companies. To put it in terms of peer production theory,
this is a case in which a peer producer community developed its own commons-friendly,
generative enterprises in order to pursue its political goals. But apparently, that was not
enough. Despite their original aims, these start-ups detached themselves from the
commons-producing community in which they were initially embedded. They
succumbed to the individualistic self-interest of the enterprise, that is, the profit-motive,
which eventually clashed with the political goals of the community surrounding them. In
a word, they were co-opted. And realistically speaking, there is no reason to assume that
things would have turned out differently if ceteris paribus they had been legally set up
as cooperatives. At the end of the day, the danger of cooptation is indeed so great that, as
Rigi (2014: 402) warns, commoners’ strategy of organizing themselves into commonsfriendly cooperatives is inevitably going to be ‘hazardous, unstable, ridden with
problems and riven by contradictions.’ Granted, but what is the alternative for the
commoners and peer producers? Are their organizations doomed to degenerate into
conventional businesses insofar as they have dealings with the market?

Obviously, in the ideal case, the associated peer producers would not need to have any
dealings at all with the capitalist market. That would not be necessary because they
would satisfy their needs through the cooperative economy and the commons sphere.
But if that was indeed possible, the situation at hand, from the perspective of the
commoners and peer producers, would be entirely different. Unfortunately, though, this
possibility does not exist at present. The fact of the matter is that they need things which
they cannot procure from the cooperative ecosystem or through the commons. And that,
in the last instance, compels them to have dealings with the market. It is obvious,
therefore, that their ‘unplugging’ from the matrix of the capitalist economy presupposes
the strengthening of the existing cooperative economy and the expansion of the range of
goods that are available through it as well as through the commons sphere. In parallel,
however, with the implementation of that strategic effort, it is reasonable that peer
producers are still going to have needs that they cannot meet through the commons
sphere or the cooperative economy. Consequently, they will still be needing to transact
with capitalist firms. It should be taken for granted, therefore, that they will continue to
have dealings with the market, at least for some time. In consideration of this fact, the
issue of decisive importance, according to the theorists of peer production, is whether
the entrepreneurial action of the associated peer producers, despite all the issues raised
by their incorporation into the capitalist market economy, has the effect of expanding the
commons sphere and the counter-economy. Under the given conditions, this is, they
claim, the most one can realistically aim for.

From the point of view of peer production theorists such as Bauwens and Kostakis,
insofar as the operation of peer producer cooperatives results in the expansion of the
commons sphere and the cooperative economy, they are a step in the right direction.
That is, they argue, a realistic perspective on the contribution that commons-oriented
cooperatives can make to the economic struggle of peer producers against capital here
and now. The setting-up of commons-producing cooperatives, as they write, is ‘not
based on utopian desires,’ but on a ‘realistic picture…of transition strategies that
strengthen the commons sphere in a hostile environment’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 69). In
other words, the development of these cooperatives is a ‘struggle, in which commoners 
develop their strategies to gain strength within capitalism...for a subsequent rearrangement of power, leading to system change’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 68).
The above strategy is not foreign to activists and theorists engaged in the anti-capitalist
struggle. The idea itself of developing cooperatives in the mid-19th century was a
strategy of struggle for increasing the power of the workers within capitalism ‘for a
subsequent re-arrangement of power, leading to system change’ (Bauwens et al. 2019:
68). However, the strategy of cooperative organization proposed by peer production
theorists is deemed insufficient by militants and thinkers who favor a more
‘maximalistic’ program. As in the past, the strategies that captivate the imagination of
revolutionaries today tend to be those that demand radical change here and now, that is,
strategies that do not accept the compromises that dealing with the capitalist market
entails. The common ground of those strategies, as Gibson-Graham (2003) point out, is
the conception of the economy as a monolithic, homogeneous field, as a territory that is
controlled and dominated fully by the logic of capital. In other words, the economy is
considered a realm in which there is nothing worth salvaging. However, that way of
looking at things is not necessarily correct. According to Gibson-Graham (2003: 157), it
is ‘blinded by a vision of the economy as singular and capitalist. If we see the economy
as always and already diverse, then the project of replacement is transformed into a
project of strengthening already existing non-capitalist economic processes and building
new non-capitalist enterprises.’

We could not agree more with Gibson-Graham (2003). There is without a doubt more
than just one economy; capitalism is not the only game in town. In consideration of the
fact that the ecosystem of cooperative business organizations constitutes an existing
alternative economy, it is obvious that its expansion, by ‘strengthening already existing
non-capitalist economic processes and building new non-capitalist enterprises’ (GibsonGraham 2003: 157), represents a realistic strategy for what can be done under present
circumstances. Undoubtedly, to be on the market will seem as a ‘pact with the devil’ to
some. But as De Angelis (2017: 370) writes, this is actually ‘the starting point of
commons in contemporary capitalism,’ whether one likes it or not. In order to be able to
sustain themselves and engage in the production of the commons, peer producers have
‘to deal with several aspects of existing...markets and the circuits they reproduce:’ they
‘need them to various extents, and fight against them on other occasions’ (De Angelis
2017: 312). From one point of view, it looks as if the commoners and peer producers
‘both struggle against capital and then make pacts with it’ (De Angelis 2017: 336). That
way of acting might seem contradictory at first glance, but as De Angelis (2017: 336)
underlines, in this way the commons ecosystem tries to ‘construct its force to fool
capitalism.’ Consequently, the key issue for the commoners’ movement is how to make
their interactions with the market the basis upon which the commons can develop further
(De Angelis 2017: 274). The expansion of the commons sphere is a goal that the strategy
of setting up commons-producing cooperatives seems to be capable of accomplishing
here and now. To the extent that, by organizing themselves into such cooperatives, peer
producers set into motion a ‘process of growing commons powers vis-à-vis capital’ (De
Angelis 2017: 358), this strategy is clearly aligned with the goal of gaining strength 
within capitalism ‘for a subsequent re-arrangement of power, leading to system change’
(Bauwens et al. 2019: 68)."
(http://heteropolitics.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Digital-Commons.pdf)


==The political struggle of the commoners’ movement==

George Dafermos:

"We discussed the strategy by which P2PF theorists aspire to
strengthen commoners’ power in the realm of political institutions -which they refer to
as the Partner State. As we saw, the content of that concept has undergone significant
modifications over time. In the space of less than ten years, the concept has turned from
an appeal to public policy-makers for the development of a cooperative economy into a
full-fledged hegemonic strategy for taking over the State. In specific, the partner state
strategy rests on the construction of a structure of alliances with social and political
forces that become united through their support of a commons agenda and their
opposition to the capitalist enclosures of today.

In practical terms, the partner state strategy comes down to setting up citizen platforms,
such as Barcelona en Comú (that governed Barcelona from 2015 until 2019), which
aspire to take over the administrative machinery of the city, with the aim of
implementing radical reforms in the direction of commonification. The focus on modern
metropolises is accounted for by pragmatic reasons. Given the ability of ‘city
administrations’ to ‘shape the conditions for generative models of production and
exchange’ in the metropolitan field, P2PF theorists reckon that ‘the city-context’ is
therefore ‘mature for a commons transition’ (Bauwens et al. 2019: 65). In their view,
then, the question of who runs the city is at the epicentre of the political conflict between
the commoners and the capitalists.

As we remarked in sections 3.3.5–3.3.9, the strength of citizen platforms lies in their
capacity to mobilize a wide spectrum of actors in favor of the commons. Who are these
actors? To begin with, one constituent part of citizen platforms is left-leaning political
parties, both old and new, such as SYRIZA in Greece or the various Pirate Parties that
have sprung up in several European countries. According to commons theorists, what
unites these political parties under the banner of a citizen platform is their opposition to
neoliberal capitalism and their affinity for a commons-friendly political agenda. At the
same time, citizen platforms incorporate civil society actors and activists from the milieu
of social movements. These include movements, such as the Free Culture Movement,
the Free Software Movement and the Open Access Movement, which champion the
rights of commoners in fields as diverse as art, technology and science. Furthermore,
citizen platforms are made up of emerging urban, metropolitan and municipalist
movements, which agitate against the capitalist enclosure of urban-public space, the
transformation of the city into a commodity (occurring, for example, through practices
of gentrification) and the devastating effect of the ‘politics of austerity’ on the lives of
city dwellers.

The significance of that strategy is obvious. It would not be possible for the commoners
to challenge the hegemony of Capital without the active support of other social and
political forces. Citizen platforms, like Barcelona en Comú, create what Ernesto Laclau
and Chantal Mouffe (2014) call ‘chains of equivalence’ between different social 
movements and struggles. That is, they create relations and bonds of solidarity and
camaraderie between them, thereby allowing them to develop shared goals and a
common perspective on what is to be done. To put it another way, citizen platforms are
an organizational medium for turning ‘the subjects of movements into commoners’ and
radicalizing commoners at the same time (De Angelis 2017: 371). On the one hand, they
serve the purpose of radicalizing the commoners and peer producers, transforming them
thus into anti-capitalists. On the other hand, they aim to turn the gaze of anti-capitalist
activists towards the vision of a commons-based society, imbuing them with the
conviction that the anti-capitalist struggle is, as a matter of fact, inseparable from the
commoners’ struggle. In that way, we could say that citizen platforms have the potential
to accomplish what Greig de Peuter and Nick Dyer-Witheford (2010) refer to as ‘the
circulation of the common(s),’ that is, the linking up of all the various social struggles
and movements that militate in favor of the commons in some domain of human activity.
Yet, despite its strengths, the partner state strategy has a major weakness. It remains
entrapped in the realm of the politics of hegemony, failing to perceive that this strategy
has been disputed in practice by the experience of the last fifty years. As several students
of social movements have pointed out, the so-called ‘new social movements’ of the post1968 period, such as the Squatters Movement in Holland and the Autonomen in
Germany, are paradigmatic of a model of social self-management that contrasts sharply
with the hierarchical logic of the organization of the State (Katsiaficas 2006). These
social movements reject the notion of top-down representation by political parties and
trade unions. And more generally, they are opposed to all forms of hierarchical authority
and the logic of representation. That, however, does not hold only for the movements of
the past. We encounter the same negative attitude towards hierarchical authority and
representation in the ‘newest social movements’ of the 1990s and 2000s, such as the
Reclaim the Streets movement and the Indymedia network of activist media collectives
(Day 2004; 2005, Kioupkiolis 2011: 125-136). The same could be said of the social
movements that emerged in the 2010s, such as the Indignados and the Occupy
movement, which also reject the political strategy of hegemony. What does that mean?
Let us remind ourselves that hegemony is a strategy based on alliances for the capture of
the State (cf. Report 1. The Political, chapters 1.14-1.17, for a definition of hegemony
that is more extensive than the one we use here). That is its core characteristic: that is
how Gramsci conceived it and how it has been utilized by subsequent thinkers, such as
Laclau and Mouffe (in their landmark work Hegemony and Socialist Strategy [1985],
which remains hugely influential to this day). Most importantly, that is also how it has
been used by left-wing political parties and governments around the world, viz. as a
strategy for taking over the State.

However, both new and newest social movements reject that hegemonic goal. In general,
they are not interested in participating in systemic institutions and have no intention to
engage in the struggle for state power. Instead, they are focused on the construction of
their own autonomous institutions, which are governed under direct-democratic models
based on the principle of direct participation of all members. At the same time, it is their
conviction that society does not need the mediation of political parties for managing its 
affairs. That is something society can do on its own by means of open, horizontal,
collective processes of debate and decision-making. It goes without saying that these
social movements do not have much sympathy for strategies of struggle which aspire to
occupy the State. The practical critique of the politics of hegemony by new and newest
social movements, whether one likes it or not, is a fact that peer production theory
should take seriously into account. That is not only dictated by the experience of the
social movements of the past fifty years, but also by the very mode of governance of
peer production projects: let us not forget that the majority of peer production projects
are being managed collectively by their developers through open, collective, horizontal
processes. From that vantage point, the very mode of organization and governance of
peer producer communities constitutes a practical critique of hegemony.

That said, we will not go as far as to claim that commoners and peer producers reject all
state structures and institutions as a matter of principle. In contrast to the aforementioned
social movements, which are defined by their autonomy from political parties and their
conscious abstention from systemic institutions, commoners do not regard the state as
inherently authoritarian and oppressive. On the contrary, in the past few years,
commoners have begun to develop a conception of the State as a particularly important
terrain of social antagonism. According to that conception (which is largely influenced
by Nicos Poulantzas’ theory of the State [1978]), the State is the crystallization of a
correlation of forces between rival classes (Bollier 2016, Linera 2015). To put it simply,
society is made up of classes with conflicting interests, which are pitted against each
other. In a sense, the same holds true for the State, which is not a homogeneous entity,
but the condensation of a correlation of forces between competing classes, that is, the
outcome of a balance of social forces. However, that balance is intrinsically unstable,
given the antagonistic relation of social forces within the State. Hence, social
antagonism is always present within the State, as rival classes fight each other to shift
the correlation of forces in their favor.

At the same time, the State represents a monopoly of a broad range of common
resources and goods, which include natural commons like forests and beaches, but also
things such as taxes, educational certifications, national narratives, dominant ideas,
common sense and the moral principles by which individuals lead their lives. But
although these commons are supposed to belong to the entire society, the manner in
which they are actually managed is anything but democratic. Society is cut off from their
management, which is exclusively in the hands of political operatives, state
functionaries and other professional experts. In that way, the state monopolizes the
managerial process of the common goods, which it is responsible to provide to society at
large. As Alvaro Garcia Linera (2015) writes, the main visible function of the State is the
oligarchic management of the commons, which it has been entrusted with by society.
The conclusion to which the conception of the State as the crystallization of a correlation
of forces between competing classes leads to is obvious. The State should not be
abandoned to the class enemy. The critique of the oligarchic management of the
commons by the State reinforces that conclusion. In fact, it provides a compelling reason
as to why commoners should become actively engaged in the struggle for state power. 

That is the only way forward should they wish to open up and democratize the
managerial process of the plethora of commons that are controlled by the State. In that
way, what can be accomplished is the commonification of the State, that is, its
transformation into a structure based on open, horizontal, collective processes of
decision-making in which anyone can participate. Therefore, the ultimate objective of
the commoners’ movement is not the occupation of the State, but its commonification
through the adoption of open, horizontal, collective processes for the management of
state-controlled common goods.

What is missing from the theory and the strategy of the partner state is a reflection on
the limitations of the strategy itself. It is evident that the hegemonic strategy of
occupying local state power through citizen platforms must be combined with a posthegemonic strategy in order to achieve the desired democratization of participation in
institutional organs and processes of managing the commons (also, see chapters 1.17-
1.24 in Report 1. The Political). The way it is formulated today, the partner state strategy
puts emphasis on the relevance of a hegemonic strategy for taking over the state to the
commoners’ struggle. What it does not sufficiently emphasize is that this strategy is not
an end in itself, but a means for radically democratizing the State through the debureaucratization and collectivization of the processes related to the plethora of statemanaged common goods, such as public health and sanitation, public education, public
infrastructures (e.g. public roads and parks), the forests and the beaches. In that way, by
putting the spotlight on the commonification of state structures and processes related to
the management of state-controlled common goods (rather than on the capture of state
power), it becomes obvious that the ultimate goal of the commoners’ strategy is not the
substitution of one hegemonic class with another, but the subversion of what Michel
Foucault (2010) calls the governmentality of the State, that is, the very logic and mode
of state governance, through the democratization of citizen participation in the
managerial process of state-controlled commons.


One of the most important lessons we can draw from the digital commons pertains to
their mode of governance. Peer production projects like Linux, which thrive on the
contributions of thousands of developers, have evolved a governance model which, in all
its variations, is based on horizontal, open, collective processes of debate and decision-making. Of course, this should not be construed as implying that there is no authority
whatsoever in peer producer communities. Surely, there are leaders in these
communities. But their authority ‘is persuasive, not legal or technical and certainly not
determinative’ (Benkler 2006: 105). What is of utmost importance is that peer producer
communities have crafted a mode of governance which consciously and intentionally
strives to mitigate the development of hierarchical structures. As several researchers
have pointed out, peer producers’ aversion to hierarchical control and authority goes a
long way towards explaining why they have an affinity for open, horizontal, collective
processes of decision-making (Dafermos 2012). By virtue of their mode of governance,
digital commons communities are prefigurative of a new model of political governance,
in which the exercise of authority is decoupled from its characteristic command
prerogatives, which give authority figures in bureaucratic-disciplinary organizations the 
ability to give commands to their subordinates in the organizational hierarchy. Peer
production projects rely on open, collective, horizontal processes, which effectively
distribute the capacity of participation in decision-making across the entire community,
thereby democratizing it. In a sense, the result of investing decision-making authority
into a horizontal, open, collective process in which anyone can participate is that this
authority becomes a kind of commons: something that is shared by all community
members.

Let us recapitulate. Reflecting on the experience and the Zeitgeist-grabbing potential of
the new municipalist movement -that is, citizen platforms like Barcelona en Comú- led
theorists of the digital commons to modify their theory of the partner state, expanding
thus its scope into a full-fledged hegemonic strategy for taking over the state at the city level. In essence, the partner state is a strategy based on the development of a structure of political alliances in the metropolitan field with anti-capitalist and pro-commons
forces, encompassing actors as diverse as metropolitan social movements and left-leaning political parties.

The political turn of peer production theory to what is basically a hegemonic strategy for
taking over the state is very important for two main reasons. Firstly, it is conceptually
important. P2PF theorists’ recent reworking and reformulation of the concept of the
partner state updates the theory of hegemony and the related strategies in a way that
ingenuously harmonizes it with the political aspirations of the commoners’ movement.

Secondly, it is practically important. By taking into account the success of Barcelona en
Comú -that is, the fact that it succeeded in laying hold of the administrative machinery
of the city of Barcelona by uniting a large part of civil society around a commons
agenda- and the growing momentum of the new municipalist movement which acts as a
catalyst for the formation of citizen platforms in increasingly more cities around the
world, it becomes obvious that the partner state strategy proposed by P2PF theorists is
highly relevant in the present circumstances. The fact that it is grounded in the real
world makes it even stronger and more potent, increasing thus its potential to bear fruit.
At the same time, the main weakness of the partner state strategy rests on the absence of
a post-hegemonic vision that could serve as a roadmap for the transformation of state
structures in the direction of commonification. In its present form, it does not address
sufficiently the question of what is to be done once the objective of the occupation of the
state has been attained, that is, how the state apparatus must be reconfigured in order to
function as an instrument of commonification. By paying more attention to the
occupation of the state than on its transformation, the theory of the partner state runs the
risk of degenerating into yet another statist ideology. However, the real promise that lies
at the heart of the commoners’ movement is the transformation of state power into a
commons rather than its fetishization as the scepter of the new hegemons."
(http://heteropolitics.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Digital-Commons.pdf)


[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Foundation]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Foundation]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]