
= refers to mostly malicious 'twitter bots' that aim to influence political opinions and election results through automatic posting


=Discussion=

Loa Gayle:

"As a matter of fact, Ferrara and collaborator Alessandro Bessi recently made what they call a "startling discovery" regarding the proliferation of bad bots on Twitter. They found that a surprisingly high percentage of the political discussion taking place on Twitter was created by pro-Donald Trump and pro-Hillary Clinton bots, with the express purpose of distorting the online discussion regarding the elections.

For their study, Ferrara and Bessi analyzed 20 million election-related tweets created between Sept. 16 and Oct. 21, finding that 3.8 million tweets, or 19 percent, were created by bots and not actual people. Social bots also accounted for 400,000 of the 2.8 million individual users, or nearly 15 percent of the population under study.

"The presence of these bots can affect the dynamics of the political discussion in three tangible ways," the researchers said in a statement. "First, influence can be redistributed across suspicious accounts that may be operated with malicious purposes. Second, the political conversation can become further polarized. Third, spreading of misinformation and unverified information can be enhanced. As a result, the integrity of the 2016 U.S. presidential election could be possibly endangered."


Their paper, "Social Bots Distort the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election Online Discussion," is scheduled to appear in First Monday, an online journal published by the University of Illinois at Chicago Library. Ferrara also published an article earlier this year titled "The Rise of Social Bots," in Communications of the ACM. If you have the time, I recommend this report as it is very detailed and may even help you learn how to spot the bad bots, such as through the service "Bot or Not."
(http://www.rawstory.com/2016/11/malicious-twitter-bots-could-have-profound-consequences-for-the-election/)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]