
'''* Book: The City as Commons: A Policy Reader. Ed. by José Maria Ramos. Commons Transition Coalition, Melbourne, Australia (2016).'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/27143172/The_City_as_Commons_a_Policy_Reader


=Table of Contents=

* The City as Commons: a Policy Reader ............................................................. 1

==Space==

* Design and the City Commons......................................................................... 14
* Active Transit & City Commons: Putting People Back into the City & the City Back into Place ................................ 18
* Repurposing Public Spaces in a City as a Commons: the Library................. 23
* Heritage and City Commons............................................................................. 26

==Value Exchange== 

* Sharing Cities: An Asset-based Approach to the Urban Commons............. 33
* Community Currencies and City Commons.................................................... 37
* Time Banks and City Commoning..................................................................... 41
* Construction Waste Transformation and City Commons............................... 44

==Production==

* Platform Cooperatives for Democratic Cities ................................................. 48
* Coworking: Challenges and Opportunities for a Prosperous and Fair New

==Economy==

* Orchards and the City as a Commons ............................................................ 57
* Cosmo-localism and Urban Commoning ........................................................ 61
* City Commons and Energy Demand............................................................... 66
* It’s Time to Create Chambers of Commons.................................................... 71

==Governance==

* Sharing Cities: Governing the City as Commons ............................................ 77
* Devolved Commons Governance for Cities................................................... 80
* Anticipatory Governance and the City as a Commons................................ 86
* A Civic Union ....................................................................................................... 90

==Land== 

* Tax Reform for a Commons-based City ........................................................... 97
* The City as Commons: a Policy Reader iii
* Tax Delinquent Private Property and City Commons................................... 102
* Community Land Trusts..................................................................................... 106
* The City as a Regional Commons................................................................... 109

==Knowledge== 

* Open Data and City Commons...................................................................... 114
* Human Service Directory Data as a Commons ............................................ 116
* The Unseen City: Commons Oriented Cities and the Commons Beyond.. 120

==Culture==

* Culture as Commons........................................................................................ 125
* Ubuntu as a Primer for City Commons ........................................................... 128
* Cultural Intelligence (CQ) and the City as Commons ................................. 131

==Accounts==

* Bologna Celebrates One Year of a Bold Experiment in Urban Commoning .......................................................... 138
* Milano, New Practices to Booster Social Innovation .................................... 142
* The Emergence of Assemblies of the Commons .......................................... 144
* History and Evolution of the Chamber of Commons Idea........................... 150
* Big Blue Sky: Re-igniting the Art of Citizenship ............................................... 160
* Zaragoza Activa, an Ecosystem of Entrepreneurship, Social Innovation and Creativity, in an Old Sugar Factory ....... 163

=Excerpts=

==The City as Commons: a Policy Reader==

Jose Ramos:

The ‘City as a Commons’—the idea of urban commoning—is an emerging body
of ideas and practices, that have the potential to transform the ways in which
we experience and shape our urban environments, and indeed world.

This reader attempts to bring various dimensions of urban commoning into one
place, in a format that is easy to digest, communicate and advocate for. The
intent of the project is to provide a resource for urban commons advocates,
which helps them (you) to articulate and strategize urban commons
transformation projects in a variety of areas. It is by no means complete, as the
urban commoning movement has only just begun, and the scope of this
‘reader’ is limited to who has contributed. It is merely a step on the journey
toward our cities as commons.

It is also part of a process of experimentation. Many of the ideas are new: urban
collaborative governance, sharing cities, platform cooperativism, open money,
the new political contract between citizens and the state, and so on. Therefore,
you the reader are in a special position. Urban commoning is not a finished
book, completed and to be followed like a recipe. It is a book with only the first
chapter half written. You and urban commons advocates are in a place to
propose new innovations and formulations. You the readers should go through
each of the proposals with scrutiny and discernment. You may agree with some
proposals and disagree with others. If you have suggestions for improvements for
any work, let the author(s) know, or write and develop your own versions. (All the
authors emails and contact information is in the biography section at the very
end of this reader.)

Therefore, in this experiment in pathmaking, you the reader, as advocate, policy
maker, social innovator, social entrepreneur, community development worker,
writer/scholar, and citizen, play a fundamental role in this journey. It is through 
you that an urban commons will be created in different cities around the world.
It is through you that many of these ideas and proposals will be tested, adopted,
discarded or refined. It is through you that urban commoning will transition from
embryonic social practices into mature and powerful approaches that can
reshape our cities.

===What Is A Commons?===

A simple definition of the commons is: “that which we mutually depend on for
our survival and well-being”. When we consider this, there is much that is the
commons. Our atmosphere, access to educational opportunities, public safety,
social cohesion, the knowledge resources we need for our survival, the list is
endless. But there is more to it than this.
The idea of the commons has experienced a special and profound resurgence
over the past few decades. Elinor Ostrom’s work, for which she won a Nobel
Prize, was seminal in breaking the mental stranglehold of the dualism that
characterized discussions on our commons. This dualism assumed that a shared
resource must be managed by the state, or managed by private enterprise, or it
was unmanageable. She showed otherwise, how people effectively manage
their common resources as communities, outside of the state-market dualism.

Scholar and advocate of the commons, David Bollier, provided this succinct
definition for what a commons is:
* A social system for the long-term stewardship of resources that preserves shared values and community identity.
* A self-organized system by which communities manage resources (both depletable and replenishable) with minimal or no reliance on the Market or State.
* The wealth that we inherit or create together and must pass on, undiminished or enhanced, to our children. Our collective wealth includes the gifts of nature, civic infrastructure, cultural works and traditions, and knowledge.
* A sector of the economy (and life!) that generates value in ways that are often taken for granted – and often jeopardized by the Market-State.

Peer to Peer (P2P) theorist Michel Bauwens has offered these four categories to
explain some of the dimensions of the commons:

(graphic here)

There are, I believe, four types of commons to distinguish ... The first
type is the immaterial commons we inherit, such as language and
culture. The second type is the immaterial commons we create. This is
where the hugely important knowledge and digital commons come in
(since it this digital commons that is currently exploding). The third type
is the material commons we inherit, the oceans, the atmosphere, the
forests, etc.; and the fourth type is the as yet underappreciated
potential for the created material commons, i.e. productively
manufactured resources.

Thus, from a commons perspective, we are the oxygen generated by
Amazonian rainforests, water that melted from the glaciers of the Himalaya, the 
ideas produced by thinkers of antiquity, the DNA code passed down to us
through thousands of millions of years of evolution, and the open source design
revolution reshaping our lives today. Our knowledge of our cosmic self defies the
small logic of our individuality. Our individuality is our vehicle for experience and
becoming, but it is of the commons.

What binds these all as commons is their characteristic of being critical to our
mutual wellbeing and survival, such that they require a collective effort and
ethos to protect and extend them. They must, therefore, be collectively
governed by the members of society that depend on them for their well-being
and survival. As we have witnessed, however, through the 20th century and
through previous historical periods, the state does not always have the
wellbeing of the community in mind. A state may be co-opted by moneyed
interests as oligarchy, or it may become despotic. And we have also seen that
private interests via processes of capitalism are also not equipped to protect the
commons – capitalism, almost by definition, produces vast social and
ecological externalities (problems) as a by-product of the concern with
immediate profit. Protecting and extending our commons is synonymous with
active, shared and inclusive governance that does not (just) rely on market and
state, but which is based on the governance rights and practice of those that
depend on such commons.

This activity and practice is what Bollier and Silke Helfrich point to as the deeper
dimension of the commons. Commons are not things, they argue, they are “an
organic fabric of social structures and processes”. Thus the commons are not an
object we can just point to, and say “there it is”, but rather becomes so through
enacting it with others and that “thing”. Urban co-governance ideas in this
reader can thus be considered potential practices of enacting commons
between commoners and the urban environments they seek to transform as
such. As much as a recognition of common needs and mutual interdependence
on some thing (water, safety, participation), it is also the creative
enactment of bringing what is a “common good” into being through “the
consciousness of thinking, learning and acting as a commoner.”

Commons are thematically diverse, but they also transgress simple categories as
the language and worldview from which the commons as an idea arises sees
the world systemically, interconnected and interdependent. Commons are
relationally active – they are embodied through the social practices of people
interwoven into culture and geography. A safe atmosphere as a commons
arises only through its recognition as something we mutually depend on for our
survival and well-being, and which we enact as such through our practices of
collective governance and maintenance. Arturo Escobar talks about this
relational dynamic as a “pluriverse… made up of a multiplicity of mutually
entangled and co-constituting but distinct worlds.”

Thus from the point of view of the urban commons, we can think of our whole
city as relational processes of commoning, where citizens recognize and enact
commons through consciousness and action. For each of us who lives in a city,
we may see the health of the city as our own health, a city’s resilience as our
resilience, the empowerment of its citizens as our empowerment, its social
relations as our relations – and bring forth new social practices that care for and
nurture these aspects of our relational urban worlds. 

===The Urban Commons===

This reader does not engage extensively with theory, however any engagement
with policy does have to grapple with theory at some level. The reason for this is
that policy-making sits at the intersection between two crucial elements. On the
one hand, the legal (and epistemological) perspectives that frame what is
deemed possible or impossible in respect to questions of governance; and on
the other hand, the particular practices and strategies that are enacted to
‘make things happen’. Because of this, proposals for urban commoning policies
need to be seen as embodying new legal and social perspectives that
legitimate them. The current context for policy, in particular in the West, is based
on positivist law, a very narrow and technical application of contractual
property relations. Based on this, over the past 35 years or so cities around the
world have been overwhelmed by neo-liberal and “third way” policy that
provides little conceptual space for an urban commons perspective, and 
hence the policies and the practices that flow from them. 


Sheila Foster and
Christian Iaione provide us with some of the theoretical starting points that begin
to build an urban commons framework, writing:

- As an initial matter, we contend that any articulation of the urban
commons needs to be grounded in a theory of property, or at least a
theory about the character of particular urban resources in relationship to
other social goods, to other urban inhabitants, and to the state. This is
especially necessary given the centrality of property law in resource
allocation decisions that affect owners, non-owners and the community
as a whole. As David Super has poignantly written, property law has an
important role in addressing widespread economic inequality by
protecting those goods most essential to the well-being of a broad swath
of society, rather than just protecting the goods that are
disproportionately held by the wealthy. As long as large segments of the
population lack the security that property rights provide, he argues, many
social problems will remain quite intractable.

As Foster and Iaione argue, conventional legal theory has not had the
conceptual resources needed to understand the dynamics and potentials of
enacted commons and commoning, and has assumed that commons are
“unregulated open access resource[s]” which people will over-consume and
overexploit. By contrast, they argue, a normative (ethics based) understanding
of the commons asserts a community’s right to use a city’s resources, because
of the value that this produces for the whole community. In their view then, “the
city is a commons in the sense that it is a shared resource that belongs to all of its
inhabitants.” 

They write:

… the commons claim is importantly aligned with the idea behind the
“right to the city”—the right to be part of the creation of the city, the right
to be part of the decision-making processes shaping the lives of city
inhabitants, and the power of inhabitants to shape decisions about the
collective resource in which we all have a stake.

It is the very relational heart of the commons equation that transforms our
understanding of governance and property rights. It is that the quality of public
spaces is synonymous with our living quality; or how public safety equates to our
safety; or when the price of housing relates to our livelihoods – that we are
interwoven into the health of our cities – which is what must transform our
relationship from passive observers of the decaying neo-liberal state to active
shapers of a city as a commons. The vision which Foster and Iaione give for this
they call “urban collaborative governance”. In this vision:
… all actors who have a stake in the commons are part of an
autonomous center of decision making as co-partners, or co-collaborators,
coordinated and enabled by the public authority.

The state is then a facilitator or enabler for citizen led commoning, synonymous
with proposals made by Michel Bauwens and others regarding a “partner state”,
in which the state’s central role is to empower its citizens AS A WHOLE. Not
empower its property developers to the exclusion of legacy residents. Nor its
industry to the exclusion of the air quality of residents. But for the whole. Policymaking
for the urban commons, even as it emerges, sits between such
theoretical vision and the practices and strategies enacted on the ground.
A leader in the development of urban commons theory and practice is GovLab:
an independently run laboratory for the governance of the commons. GovLab
was developed to “train a new breed of professionals… experts in the
governance of urban commons.”


On 6 & 7 November, 2015 they held a
landmark conference called the “City as a Commons: Reconceiving Urban
Space, Common Good, and City Governance.” 

From the conference, GovLab
distilled these learnings on the urban commons:

1. There are many kinds of urban commons, some existing for
many decades (e.g. housing cooperatives) and others just 
emerging. Social innovation is important for designing some
types of urban commons and the conditions for commoning;

2. We must embrace the diversity of commons and commoning
yet still be careful about what we call the commons; so more
work is needed on analyzing what is an urban commons and
what is not;

3. In addition to many resources being held or managed in
common, in a collaborative fashion, the city itself must be
considered a commons–both as an urban space and as a
governing entity. The governance of the urban commons can
be a framework to update political and bureaucratic decisionmaking
processes at the city level;

4. The commons is an emerging framework for inclusiveness and
equity in cities as the world is urbanizing and cities are the
place where different cultures, classes and people come to live
together, work together and grow together;

5. The role of technology is important for the commons, but
technology is a means and not an end. It must enable and
support the urban commons, and the ability of people to come
together and collaborate in the interest of the community or
communities;

6. Collective action for the urban commons should be enabling
existing communities, stakeholders, and city inhabitants as
much as creating new urban communities, formal and informal
groups, movements, traditional stakeholders and social or
collective organizations;

7. Urban commons need an “industrial plan” and new economic
and/or social institutions to help transition some cities, and
some areas within them, away from an old economic model to
one that leverages the power of commoning and
collaboration to support sustainable, flourishing as well as more
inclusive, just and democratic communities;

8. The urban commons governance principle is not selfgovernment,
nor decentralization. It is rather distribution of
powers among public, social, economic, knowledge and civic
actors and therefore it implies a significant investment in the
design of new forms of collaboration and partnerships among
these actors;

9. Design principles for the urban commons should be written to
reflect the design principles created by Elinor Ostrom, but
adapting them to the challenges and characteristics of the
more political, confrontational, and overregulated space
which cities represent. The study of the commons in the city
should be the focus of future research beyond the study of the
urban commons. More attention should be put on
experimentation, institutional diversity, spreading of social
norms within urban contexts;

10. There should be safeguards against opportunistic, exploitative,
and short-sighted behaviors, as well as escapist flights and
utopian or ideological visions, in developing and sustaining
the urban commons. A bottom-up, as well as a circular,
approach is crucial for the urban commons and confirms
Foucault’s argument that power is “not something that is
acquired, seized, or shared, something that one holds on to or
allows to slip away; power is exercised from innumerable points,
in the interplay of non egalitarian and mobile relations”.


Along side this profound convergence are singular breakthroughs in urban
commoning that are our leading lights. For example, the urban commoning
experiment in Bologna involves a reconceptualization of the relationship
between citizen and state, and the role of citizen as social innovator in the recreation
of the city. Bologna provides an inspiring example of what is possible
for our cities.


It is in this context of innovation where this rather humble endeavor sits. While
conceived outside of their ambit, this reader was inspired by these examples
and hopes to make a contribution to this broader project of change.

===Critical Themes In The Reader===

When reviewing the thirty-four or more contributions in this reader, some themes
clearly emerge.

The urban commons represents a new political contract. As mentioned, this is
clearly seen in the development of the Bologna Regulation for the Care and
Regeneration of the Urban Commons as well as Foster and Iaione’s call for
“urban collaborative governance”. In a number of examples in this reader,
urban commoning strategies require civic-state alliances and coordination, in
the vein of Bauwens “partner state” ideas.13 In particular, new political
contracts, such as the one created in Bologna, enfranchise citizens with a right
to be social innovators in transforming their cities. Likewise, such political
contracts enlist the state as a facilitator charged with empowering citizens in
commoning the city. If a city is a commons, then following the wisdom of Elinor
Ostrom, it can be governed as one by all the members of a city that depend on
its perpetual sustainment. In contrast to the “beyond market and state” notions
of the commons, it is clear that for urban commoning, the state’s role cannot be
disowned or discarded as a critical factor.

In addition, the urban commons represents a new culture of citizenship. This is a
fundamental transformation from citizen as passive beneficiary of technocratic
systems, to one who is actively shaping the city around them, taking
responsibility for the care and development of their cities. Whereas 20th century
technocracy has infantilized citizenry, expected only to be tax payers, service
users and once every 3-4 years voters, the urban commons demands that we
step up as active citizens to not only create and shape our cities for the better,
but indeed to play a role in actively governing our cities with others.

The urban commons also represents new value exchange systems that sit
outside the traditional marketplace and outside municipal service relationships.

The sharing economy, local currencies, time-banking, circularization of waste,
and other reciprocity based systems are part of a new equation in which value
finds new ways of circulating and enriching people’s lives. To be truly commons
based, these value exchange systems must circulate the value they create
back into the communities that produced them.

It can also be added that the urban commons represents new visibility for what
has been invisible in relation to urbanism. From intangibles such as culture and
cultural intelligence, to the hidden costs of monopoly rents, to underutilized
land, and cities’ use of energy and contributions to our atmospheric commons
through carbon emissions. The commons perspective naturally unearths
dimensions of city life that are hidden by other perspectives, opening the way
for more holistic strategies of responsibility taking and wellbeing making.
Of course, the urban commons represents a new way of seeing the city. It
represents an emerging worldview and vision. This will evolve over time and
become clearer as we make the path by walking."



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]