
=Description=

Excerpted from the Commons Learning Alliance:

"Government's job in the 21st century is to restore the balance between
the commons and the market that grew so distorted in the 20th century.
This can be done without raising taxes or expanding bureaucracy.

What might America look like with a healthy balance between
commons and market? Here are some glimpses:
 

- A market sector that pays its way

Polluters and other commons users pay for usage rights. Pollution,
advertising and congestion are reduced. More money flows to common
purposes, without higher taxes.
 

- A stronger democracy

Spectrum fees cover most electoral campaign costs. Fewer elected
officials are indentured to monied interests


- A culture of popular participation

An open Internet hosts diverse commons and provides access to
other media. There are shorter copyrights and new legal vehicles for
sharing creativity. Funding flows to the arts, non-commercial radio
and TV.
 

- Science in the public interest

University research focuses on common needs. Most discoveries
remain in the public domain.
 

- Every baby a trust fund baby

Everyone receives, as a birthright, a cash inheritance and yearly dividends.
This income comes from rent charged for use of scarce common
assets. The commons thus becomes a source of sustenance for all, as
it was in pre-industrial days.


In conclusion:

Restoring a commons/market balance isn't a utopian dream. It's a
necessary and doable task. Nature and our ancestors have already done
the hard work : they created most of the wealth we simply inherited.
All that's missing - all we need to build - are appropriate legal and
institutional protections for that wealth.
 
The real utopians are those who believe the market can continue unbridled
forever. This dream has great allure, but it's a dangerous fantasy. The
reality is that, without a healthy commons, the market (and much else)
won't survive the 21st century."
(http://www.commonslearningalliance.org/content/future-commons)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]