
'''* Slideshare presentation via https://www.slideshare.net/ILSR/policy-and-legal-obstacles-to-community-composting'''

By Nick Stumo-Langer and Kourtnii Brown of Common Compost.


=Description=

"There are MANY LAYERS of compost laws! Everywhere you go, they are DIFFERENT! And they are always CHANGING!

Two major categories of laws and policies: 

* Protection: Laws that protect against air/water pollution, odors, pests, fire, unattractive compost bins or facilities, safety, traffic, and inaccurate fertilizer labeling. A challenge for community compost: These are important laws, but they are often designed for large-scale composting. 

* Planning: Laws and programs to divert waste from landfills, streamline collection and composting, and improve soil. A challenge for community compost: Top-down planning often favor large-scale solutions. You need '''5 permits to compost!''' 

1. Generators Protection: Laws that govern dumpsters and bins, including their size, appearance, location, and frequency with which they are emptied. Planning: Programs to support, encourage, and/or require source-separation. Carrot-top:

2. Haulers Protection: ● Local hauling permit requirements ● Vehicle permit requirements ● Permitting of transfer sites Planning: Increasingly, municipalities have centralized hauling systems and sometimes give exclusive hauling rights to one or a few haulers, which prohibits others from hauling.

3. Composters Protection: ● Facility permitting and oversight ● Zoning approval for facility location ● Local/regional air, water, vector control, and fire regulations Planning: Grant, loan, and technical assistance programs to help establish compost facilities.

4. New Soil Protection: ● Laws requiring testing and labeling of compost for sale ● Laws determining application allowed for different quality grades of soil Planning: Grant, loan, and technical assistance programs to encourage application of compost to improve soil quality and sequester carbon.

=More information=

* Janelle Orsi Executive Director, SELC janelle@theselc.org Kourtnii Brown Founder and Director, Common Compost kbrown@commoncompost.org

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Circular Economy]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]