
=Discussion=

Proposals from Chapters 3 and 4 in the book [[Future Money]] by James Robertson:

"The reforms proposed in these two chapters are summarised 
below. That set of reforms will transform the national money system into one
much better organised than at present to serve its purposes in the 21st century.

We should think of it as a shift from redistribution that aims to correct
the outcomes of a badly organised and managed money system, to
predistribution that organises a money system better designed to meet its purposes.

It will also provide a model for the functions of the international money
system, designed to meet the needs of world society today and in the future
– see Chapter 5.

Finally, it will provide an enabling, no longer a disabling, context for the
development of local money systems and their revival in more self-reliant
local economies – Chapter 6.

==Reforms proposed in Chapters 3 and 4 - a summary==

Reforms proposed in Chapters 3 and 4 – a summary

1. Provide the national money supply as a public service
Stop the creation of money by commercial banks as profit-making debt
and transfer responsibility to the central bank for creating money debtfree
and giving it as public revenue to the elected government.


2. Develop other sources of revenue; shift taxes off ‘goods’ onto ‘bads’

(a) Reduce and eventually abolish taxes on value added, incomes and
profits, which penalise useful work and enterprise.

(b) Replace those with taxes or charges on things and activities that
subtract value from common resources. These will include taxes or charges
on land-rent values and on the use or right to use other common (mainly
environmental) resources and take into account the capacity of the
environment to absorb pollution and waste.


3. Create a people-centred shift in public spending

Introduce a Citizen’s Income – a tax-free income paid to every man,
woman and child as a right of citizenship. The additional costs will be met
by reducing the costs of interest on government debt, of perverse
subsidies, of contracting out the provision of public infrastructure and
services to the commercial business and financial sector, and of public
sector inefficiency and waste."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]