
'''* Article: Policies for Equality Under Low or No Growth: A Model Inspired by Piketty. By Tilman Hartley, Jeroen van den Bergh & Giorgos Kallis. Review of Political Economy, June 2020'''

URL = https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09538259.2020.1769293

=Abstract=

"GDP growth is declining in industrial economies, and there is increasing evidence that growth may be environmentally unsustainable. If growth falls below returns to wealth then inequalities increase, as Thomas Piketty recently showed. This poses a challenge to managing slow and/or negative growth. Here, we examine policies that have been proposed to solve the problem of increasing income inequality in slow- or non-growing economies, including redistribution, taxation, and employment reforms. We construct a simple model, expanding Piketty’s recent work, to evaluate the parameter ranges within which these different policies can be effective. Our analysis leads to two main findings. First, except in the case of complete wealth equality, any strategy to prevent increasing income inequality must reduce returns to wealth below the rate of growth. Second, several strategies may prevent an increase in income inequality during periods of low growth and may slow rising inequality, but not prevent it, in non-growing economies."


=Summary=

From the reading notes of Michel Bauwens:

"When growth is zero, any growth in one person’s income must be accompanied by a fall in another person’s income. (zero sum)

When growth is negative, any growth or even stability of one person’s income, must negative impact another’s person income (negative sum).

In a growth economy, for inequality to diminish, economic growth must exceed returns to wealth, which have been at 5-6% in the last two millenia, while growth has been at 3-4 % in the last decades.

Thus, low-growth, stable, or declining growth economies all lead to increased inequality.

This means that environmental measures that may impact growth, would lead to greater inequality.

This means that, barring a completely equal wealth distribution, which may be politically unfeasible or even undesirable, any environmental transformation must affect the wealth and income of the wealthy. However, even if equal wealth distribution is impossible or undesirable, that does not mean wealth redistribution is not on the agenda.

Returns to wealth can proceed from productive capital, or from unproductive sources (rents).

Since high growth rates are per definition no longer sustainable, that means that growing inequality will be the law of the land, unless explicitely countered.

One strategy is a global wealth tax, that is greater than the returns to wealth, as well as measures to cap non-productive income (such as capping rent, land value taxes, etc ... Increasing equality means that the returns to wealth become negative, but which also would affect productive investments. One option is to have more stringent caps on nonproductive investments. Also: wages can be protected, implying that this expense must come from returns on wealth.

Other measures would affect the substitutability of labour by capital, which would require investment in high-labour intensive sectors, where labour cannot be easily substituted: education, culture, etc..

A key strategy would be to divert returns to wealth from the wealthy to the non-wealthy. This involves changes in property regimes , such as cooperative ownership, or public ownership. Non-productive incomes might be regulated by Georgist taxation policies; or, the sources of such income may become trusts, generating income for the non-wealthy.

Cooperatives have been found to have lower levels of internal income distribution, and countries with higher levels of cooperatives have been found to be less unequal.

Not in this article is any specific reference to the commons, though universal public goods are discussed:

* Universal public goods and mutualization through commons, are ways to protect what non-wealthy income might obtain, and may also generate specific incomes for the non-wealthy."

=Excerpts=

From the conclusion:

"The work of Piketty and his colleagues has brought widespread attention to the problem that inequality tends to rise if returns to wealth exceed the rate of growth. Given declining growth in industrialised economies and evidence that growth may be incompatible with environmental sustainability, this poses the challenge of finding solutions to the problem of increasing inequality when the rate of growth is low, zero, or even negative. Having briefly reviewed Piketty and his critics, we have presented a simple framework, based around the formula sr > g, for assessing three strategies to address this problem. One proposes redistributing wealth so that declining growth does not lead to rising inequality. A second strategy relies on decreasing rates of savings, through more spending or higher taxes on wealth. The third strategy relies on decreasing rates of returns to wealth, either as a deliberate policy goal or as an incidental result of measures that provide a minimum standard of living for the worst off.

Our framework yields two main findings. First, in the absence of complete wealth equality, any strategy to prevent greater income inequality must reduce the income of the wealthy. Second, shifting to industries with a lower elasticity of substitution from capital to labour may prevent rising inequality for low-growth economies. However, it will not prevent growing inequality for negative growth economies, since that would imply that firms would want to hire labour even if doing so yields negative returns.

Nevertheless, a wide variety of solutions can help prevent rising income inequality in a non-growing economy. Many of these policy tools are already in use in one form or another, and could be extended to prevent greater inequality in future non-growing economies. There are ways to prevent rising inequality as GDP growth declines, and even if growth is zero or negative. However, these solutions imply a reduction in income for the wealthy. To the extent that the wealthy have a disproportionate influence on political decision-making, this creates a substantial political obstacle."

[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Policy]]