'''= "Politiques des Commun: Cahier de propositions en contexte municipal": ''an overview of commons-oriented policies for the municipal level, as a preparation tool for citizen lobbying for the 2020 municipal elections in France''.'''

URL = https://politiquesdescommuns.cc/

Initiative of [[Remix the Commons]]

==Defintion==

"What proposals and policies to defend and promote the commons in the municipal context? The Proposals in the municipal context presents a sample of tools and proposals that can be applied in the fields of action within the scope of municipalities and intermunicipalities."

==Description==

"In order to nourish the reflection and action of the commoners, Remix the commons and La Myne have produced, with the support of the Fondation pour le Progrès de l'Homme, a Book of political proposals for the commoners in the municipal context of 2020.

This approach aims to make visible the legal and economic mechanisms and processes that enable the implementation of policies for local authorities based on the experiences of the local authorities movement in Europe. This digital notebook proposes to highlight the way they are organized and the strategies that allow them to have an impact in the public sphere in the municipal context.

The approach is applied to the municipal context, not as a geographically delimited territory, but as one of the dimensions of the public sphere in which municipalities are particularly present and active.

One of the contributions of this approach lies in the strong affirmation that the communes are the driving force behind a singular political project whose tools and mechanisms, and the values and principles that give them meaning, need to be updated. This assertion offers a new and complementary perspective to other movements for transition. In the medium term, we hope that it will open up a promising avenue to reduce the fragility of the actors and the fragmentation of the commons movement in France".

==Summary==

"A preliminary translation of a high level overview of the contents of the French site, done by Maia Dereva, corrections to be undertaken by Jon Husband.

==IDEAS==

Ideas for the commons in the municipal context

==THEMES==

===Shared Soils (Soil as Commons)===

The land question links a large number of issues together, such as agriculture, housing, energy and urban planning. In each of these areas, common land policies and practices revisit the notions of access and use, ownership, value and transaction, conservation and protection of land.

=== Habitat and Shared Housing ===

In the field of housing, the perspective of the commons' project consists both in deploying another way of living and in responding to the difficulties of access to housing in a context of intensified speculation and economic and finaoncial crisis.

=== Urban Resilience in the Commons ===

Rather than perpetuating relationships of domination and exploitation of our living environments, inherited from a liberal approach to environmental policies, several transition theorists propose to experiment with alternative paths.

=== Shared water ===

A discreet problem in our daily lives, the management of water and its infrastructures are essential issues whose numerous implications for our territories and our common ways of life are no longer systematically considered.


==TOOLS==
=== Negotiating urban communes ===

The public administrations have set up systems for supervising collaboration between citizens and their municipality in terms of taking charge of, or involvement in, urban communities. These systems combine regulations and a set of tools that form an engineering for the participatory city.

=== Joint Public Partnership ===

The popularity of calls for the nationalization of public services is indicative of the rejection by many of the commodification of essential services. Yet simple state ownership is not a satisfactory alternative. PPPs offer an alternative institutional design that allows us to overcome these limitations.

=== Assembly of the Commons ===

An Assembly of Communes is a political and non-partisan space of cooperation for the production, development and preservation of commons administered by and for the citizens.

=== Chamber of Commons ===

The Chamber of Commons is a political and apartisan space of cooperation for the production, development and preservation of the Commons by and for economic actors.

=== Call for commons ===

The application of the market rule is based on competition between the players in a territory, whereas the territory has everything to gain by allowing them to work together wherever possible. A call for commons aims to produce commons that are useful for an ecosystem of actors.

=== Municipal office of commons ===

The local authority can play an active role in the commons movement by enabling the development of expertise on commons within the administration, which can lead to a process of legal and political appropriation of the notion of commons by the city.

=== Making third places ===

"Making third places" refers both to the uses and practices of a space by people, to the processes that govern this space as well as the interactions that take place there, and finally to a plurality of theoretical and practical legacies which, through their cross-fertilization and diversity, allow the emergence of particular social configurations.

=== Property of use ===

Useful ownership of property is a form of ownership legitimized by the use of that property, rather than by the holding of a marketable title.

=== Recognizing cultural commonalities, Faro Convention ===

We often have a rather restricted vision of culture, as a collection of objects made of stones, monuments, a fixed and official heritage. Yet the city and the municipal context cannot be defined without the narratives that are elaborated and shared within societies.

=== Solidarity watershed ===

The solidarity watershed mechanism aims to develop common spaces (between the private and public sectors) around water management and uses between

==ACTIONS==

=== The forces of change ===

Change does not depend only on the dissemination of singular experiences. The movement of the commons is a combination of forces that act as a lever for cultural change, renewing issues of solidarity and their place on the political agenda. To join the commons, let's act in common!

=== Bringing the commons to the municipalities, RFBC ===

This fact sheet offers a look at the history of the structuring of the "Francophone Network around common goods", the actors that make it up, its role and the political issues addressed by its actions.

=== Remunicipalizing water management, Coordination EAU Île-de-France ===

This fact sheet describes the action of the Coordination EAU Île-de-France, which brings together citizens and associations around water resources in Île-de-France and throughout France.

=== Acculturating administrations to the municipalities, 27th Region ===

The 27th Region is a public transformation laboratory that designs the transformation of services and public administrations. With the Enacting the commons project, it explores the possibilities opened up by the commons in different European territories.

=== Recommending policies for local authorities, P2P Foundation ===

The P2P Foundation is an international network of researchers working towards the emergence of a new economy centred on "peer production". This fact sheet presents the experience of this organisation in terms of advocacy for communities.

=== Tooling the commons, Remix the commons ===

A collective committed to the culture of the commons, Remix experiments and disseminates tools useful to commoners and supports the emergence of the commons movement.

[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:France]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Politics]]