'''* Article: Old Utopias, New Tax Havens: The Politics of Bitcoin in Historical Perspective. By Stefan Eich.'''

URL = [https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5ae8a7b625bf02c0b85aec02/t/5b44d212575d1fc3aa4c7284/1531236883078/Eich%2C+The+Politics+of+Cryptocurrencies+2018+OUP.pdf pdf]


=Abstract=

"Cryptocurrencies are frequently framed as future-oriented, technological
innovations that decentralize money and thereby liberate it from centralized governance
structures and the political tentacles of the state. This is misleading on several counts.
First, electronic currencies cannot leave the politics of money behind even where they
aim to disavow it. Instead we can understand their impact as a political attempt to
depoliticize money. Secondly, the dramatic price swings of cryptocurrencies such as
Bitcoin challenge their claims to be currencies and place them more persuasively as
speculative assets. Ironically, while the preferential tax and regulatory treatment of
cryptocurrencies hinges on their nominal status as currencies, their success as speculative
assets has undermined precisely such claims. Thirdly, far from heralding a radical break
with the past, electronic currencies serve as a reminder of the still unresolved global
politics of money of the 1970s. To support these three interrelated theses this chapter
places the rise of cryptocurrencies in the historical context of the international politics of
money since the 1970s and the response to the Financial Crisis of 2008."


=More information=

* Book (from the same author): [[Political Theory of Money from Aristotle to Keynes]]

* Friedrich August Hayek, Denationalisation of Money, Hobart Papers Special 70 (The Institute of
Economic Affairs, 1976); enlarged version reprinted as Friedrich August Hayek, “The Denationalization of
Money: An Analysis of the Theory and Praxis of Concurrent Currencies [1978],” in Good Money, Part II,
ed. Stephen Kresge, The Collected Works of F.A. Hayek, Vol. 6 (Liberty Fund, 1999) 128-229.

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]
[[Category:Crypto Economy]]
[[Category:P2P History]]