
'''= project to design "a ‘political system’ with a universal 'political currency' that extends social currency, and scales to any network size, a universal credit for a global [[Panarchy]] 'internet'.'''

URL = http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/

=Description=

"This is a sketch of a terminology framework currently in development

It combines economics, memetics and politics into one framework.

Aim is to leverage the wealth of collective intelligence to design better ‘political systems’ that self-organize in heterarchical networks.

It all relates to ‘negative stuff/memes/behavior/u know what I mean’ aggregating along hierarchies of power, thus a heterarchical network behaves like a 'mimesis triage system' and is more resilient to ‘bad stuff’. The nodes/people are free to connect as they consider wise, along social currency, and this self-organizes into groups of common good."


'''2.'''

"it´s just one system, one software, but I have a hunch it could scale to the entire planet, and each network cluster would interact as a ‘local economy’, and this is only for large scale networks / communities, small scale probably work better with just social currency, like u said, but larger scale ‘industries’ probably benefit from what I just decided to call ‘political currency’ that coordinates them

this is essentially just basic income capitalism, but I think developing a more accurate scientific terminology framework will accelerate the transition."


=Discussion=

'mimesis flows through social networks. Within hierarchical networks, memes aggregate down the rank.


within heterarchical networks, memes compete in a democratic attention economy.

The optimal political system for the homo sapien population would be a heterarchical democracy.

The political system that is described in the ‘bipedaljoe infoverse’ is designed to elevate their social memetic nature.

A ‘decentralized monetary system’ with a ‘basic income algorithm’ automatically redistributes wealth, id est power, to maintain a heterarchical social network. The amount of redistribution is enough to disintegrate costly hierarchical structures. This elevates their mimesis pathways, and the most altruistic of their social nature.

This system is designed from sapiens collective intelligence, and their knowledge about their own memetic nature.

If you see the patterns, just get reproducing with people around the globe, and upload more memes to the attention economy of the ‘global conversation/mimesis’."
(http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/post/40865716135/lightsinthetunnel)


'''2.'''

"The origin of labour exploitation and inequality can be found in the evolutionary psychology of dominance hierarchies. These hierarchies evolved for small tribes, small and familial enough for people to find means to claim their right one way or another. Even if people lacked barter resources, there was always gossip, sympathy and other social means. The tribes upheld fairness somewhat like modern families, relying on social means rather then economic ones to secure fairness. But society grew bigger, and under the rules of mass-civilization capitalism, there is no longer any empathy or sympathy to appeal to, no social means to claim ones right. The social means to uphold equality has been replaced. Creatively destroyed. Now,money talks. Thus in order for our social nature to function in our modern systems built around money, it´s imperative to recognize that today money is the primary mean for exerting dominance and that we need to decommission the systemsinhumane dominance hierarchy, by ending the primary reason for subjugating to it: poverty."
(http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/post/40865781039/history)


=Glossary=

==Basic Income Algorithm==

"A mutual currency system such as Ripple scales to any network size, and the same ‘currency’ can be used by the entire human population. ’mutual currency’ sets value for every transaction, every node can set the value it considers wise, and, and it automatically balances to panarchy trade.

This software already exists, see #software. What needs to be added is a basic income algorithm that self-balances to each of the overlapping heterarchical clusters, wealth is redistributed proportional to connectivity, each network cluster behaves like a local economy, and when transactions overlap networks, the algorithm balances to that as well.

That is the algorithm that needs to be invented. All other software is already online."
(http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/post/40874939434/basicincomealgorithm)


==Basic Income Capitalism==

"Basic income capitalism, or capitalism ++,  is essentially a political system, where money is the currency of political trust, a political currency, invested to guarantee responsible governance of our common infrastructure. From this framework, it is only within corruption prone systems that political currencies are needed as an extension of social currency. It is only to facilitate responsible governance, it is only as politics. Political currency ('money') is essentially direct democracy, it´s a vote. This means that only 'corruption prone' infrastructure needs to be facilitated through monetary/political currencies. This somewhat equals scarce physical infrastructure, and thus relieves a lot of digital culture and social stuff from the monetary economy, opening them up to more holistic social currency. People just use votes to secure responsible governance of our commons, what commercial industries should be governing and processing our scarce physical commons.

There´s a lot of language ambiguity in all this, mixed up terms and words, and this leads to conflict and barriers when discussing this, but it´s essentially simple: political currency, money, is an extension of social currency to act as vote in a complex adaptive political landscape, and this system will integrate a basic income algorithm to feedback wealth from the infrastructure to fund all human activity. It´s a feedback loop, us people live and vote with political currency, and those trusted to govern our scarce common resources process scarcity into abundance, that feeds back to fund our lives, majority which is non-commercial/monetized/industrial, and thus funded by the wealth abundance. Political currency (money) will only be meaningful as a vote in distributing infrastructure governance, all other human activity will be through social currency.

It is only when elevated above subsistence, that people are free to vote as 'free individuals' - as it is now,  every vote is a 'purchased vote', it´s corrupt, and that is why every capitalism political system is failing. It is not a democratic system, it´s a corrupt, rigged, plurocratic, pyramidal, catastrophe."
(http://bipedaljoe.blogspot.se/2013/01/economics-politics-of-capitalism.html)


==Hyperempowered Society==

"The top-down social contract was designed to facilitate control, to secure centralized power for the disconnected society. In the hyperempowered society, a bottoms-up social contract will be designed to facilitate autonomy, to elevate hyperempowerment. This is were all unfolding narratives intersect. All of them, the intersection of technology, politics, economics, and the torrent of cultural transformations, it´s a shift in connectivity, and subsequent shift in power - no longer flowing through hierarchies, but rippling through networks, and we are all connected, and we are all sharing, and we are slowly perceiving that the other knows as much as ourself. The absurdity in maintaining centralized top-down hierarchies in an distributed network, cannot be understated - memes ripple, they torrent, and this demands an economic algorithm, a basic income social contract, an unconditional trust in every persons sapience, because now more then ever, is the other as connected as oneself."
(http://bipedaljoe.blogspot.se/2013/01/the-hyperempowered-generation-basic.html)


==Memetics==

"In hierarchical mimesis, one node infects the entire network
In heterachical mimeis,  memes needs to propagate throughout the entire network to survive

The distributed mimesis network is infinitely more resilient to corruption, id est ‘bad memes’

All human transaction follow these patterns, wether it be social currency or extension of that, id est political currency, in hierarchical networks, one node infects the entire network.

The most resilient political system is one that elevates heterarchical networks,
and one that also scales to any network size, 
clusters form local economics, and these overlap to a glocal economy 

The ‘political system’ described in this infoverse scales to any size, connecting through networks of trust, and each network cluster behaves as a ‘local economy’, 

Small networks, such as local communities, might not benefit from an extension of social currency, but larger networks such as industries benefit from a ‘political currency’ that coordinates them, and this currency might as well be universal/global, since value is set in every transaction, and thus it scales to the entire planet, a panarchy mirroring the internet."
(http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/post/40871379137/memetics)



==Mutual Currency==

"As networks grow in size it is useful to have a universal ‘political currency’ that extends social currency, and scales to any network size, a universal credit that scales to a global panarchy. Think of it as the internet of economics."
(http://politicalcurrency.tumblr.com/post/40865536726/mutualcurrency)


==[[Panarchy Economics]]==

"The design of 'panarchy economics', or whatever we shall call it, mirrors the design of the internet. They both evolve from and for the same conditions, to elevate collective intelligence, and both systems have the surprising ability to change everything."
(http://bipedaljoe.blogspot.se/2013/01/economics-internet-of-economics.html)


'''2.'''

"The ecology of our planet supports all the overlapping networks of people that make up our human population. In these glocal networks, economic systems route the flow of value, scaling from local to global. This global network of people, of us, is a complex adaptive system of sentient, connected persons. 

Networks are the fundamental organizing principle of life itself, from cells, to ecosystems, to society, technology and beyond. Networks are flexible and resilient, able to adjust to changing environments. They are scalable, have no center and can operate in a wide range of configurations.

The cumulative effect of the shift from pyramidal hierarchies to networked heterarchies comprised of overlapping spheres of authority and collective action is called panarchy. Panarchy resembles not so much a structure, but an ecosystem – an organic, fluid complex adaptive system. 

The systems for coordinating human activity, economics and politics, continuously adapt to our accelerating socio-technological evolution, and our current generation of technology unfolds a new political and economic narrative. This narrative more accurately describes the complexity of our human family, and the overlapping networks of people that make up our glocal civilization.

This emergent narrative of p2p networked economics, complex adaptive, fluid organic, is what I call panarchy economics, a transitional term to help restructure our cultural beliefs. It´s an emerging framework of economics for the panarchy civilization, of fluid complex adaptive economic systems, that scale from local to global, from self-sustaining individuals to global relationships - it´s a systems-design that allows for this scalability, for a resilient, flexible, organic, natural system that allows us to coordinate our activity within the networks we are part of.

In essence, panarachy economics, or economics, deals with the rules for transactions, it is an implemented system of protocols, mutual agreements, it is politics, it´s an interface for co-existing. It is housholding of our common resources, accomplished through the resilience of communal autonomy and freedom, it is decentralization as a rational alternative, it is an implementation of the science of anthropology, psychology, human ethology and all our collective knowledge about human nature. 

This systems-design of scalability is the core of panarchy economics, it´s protocols should scale from local to global without friction. There are already protocols that accomplish this, like the ripple monetary system, and similar designs will be implemented globally, and they will scale to any network size. In these 'decentralized monetary systems' a 'basic income algorithm' will be implemented, that redistributes wealth to every node of the network, a taxation that elevates every person to act autonomously on the market. It´s a rational algorithm to guarantee uncorrupt flow of human activity, an investment, a transition shift from the top-down economy to the bottoms-up economy. I´ve written more on this, and there is a world of knowledge out there in our global network, you´ll find links around this hub, just click around the web and it´s all out there.

The beauty of all this, if I may make broad generalizations, is that a 'decentralized monetary system' with a 'basic income algorithm', a nexus monetary algorithm (need a better word...) will extinct ALL the negative consequences of capitalism and elevate our altruistic nature, it will eventually develop into a resource based economy as people find they only need payment for scarce, physical goods, and all other activity will be within the gift economy, it will accelerate all other cultural transitions (such as changing 'education' and 'juridical' norms), so it´s a priority in my mind, at least."
(http://bipedaljoe.blogspot.se/2012/11/holonomics-panarchy-economics.html)


==Unconditional Equality==

"A free-market economy can only truly work if the people that comprise it are autonomous enough to barter as equals. As long as there is poverty in the system, the people will not trade on equal terms. The precarious will be exploited by the powerful. As long as people are unable to barter as free agents, one side of the barter will be exploited. Only equals can engage in fair trade, and thus form the banks of a healthy free-market economy. The objective of economics as a science should be to obscure the algorithms by which to maximize profit and wealth, and it is obvious from history and modern sociology, that this algorithm includes social equality. Equal societies are wealthier and healthier.

The origin of labour exploitation and inequality can be found in the evolutionary psychology of dominance hierarchies. These hierarchies evolved for small tribes, small and familial enough for people to find means to claim their right one way or another. Even if people lacked barter resources, there was always gossip, sympathy and other social means. The tribes upheld fairness somewhat like modern families, relying on social means rather then economic ones to secure fairness. But society grew bigger, and under the rules of mass-civilization capitalism, there is no longer any empathy or sympathy to appeal to, no social means to claim ones right. The social means to uphold equality has been replaced. Creatively destroyed. Now, money talks. Thus in order for our social nature to function in our modern systems built around money, it´s imperative to recognize that today money is the primary mean for exerting dominance and that we need to decommission the systems inhumane dominance hierarchy, by ending the primary reason for subjugating to it: poverty.

The only way to do this, the only way to create a fair market in capitalism, is to elevate all people above poverty, unconditionally. That is the only way people can ever be free to barter as truly free agents. It is only between autonomous equals that a fair trade is to be expected. The only way to fund a society of equals is to unconditionally elevate everyone above poverty. It has to be done unconditionally, otherwise, someone will abuse their power and state conditions to gain advantages on the market. Without unconditional social rights, there will be inequality, and people will be exploited. A genuinely free markets of voluntary exchange cannot exist within the exploitative conditions of capitalism.

To date, no capitalistic state has anything close to a market of equal individuals. They retain the structural dominance hierarchies that no longer function in modern society. An unconditional right to basic needs, in form of an unconditional basic income, is of fundamental importance if we are to elevate capitalism to a truly liberal and fair market-economy. Unconditional Basic Incomes are the best investment to increase wealth by liberating individuals to participate in a free market as truly free agents, liberated from the costly coercion of utter destitution. Unconditional Basic Incomes are of fundamental importance if our economic systems are to function, and it is of fundamental importance that the grant is unconditional, otherwise it will be exploited."
(http://bipedaljoe.blogspot.se/2012/11/unconditional-equality.html)

=More Information=

# graphic: http://25.media.tumblr.com/a95ed1aff0a7578587bec37c33b14608/tumblr_mguqzx7jki1s3gbl5o1_500.jpg
# rough sketches: http://panarchyeconomics.blogspot.se/
# twitter: @holonomics9


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Money]]