
'''* Hacking and Hustling. The Political Economy of Not Asking Permission.'''

URL = http://hackingandhustling.com/

=Description=

"Innovation has become the prima economic development tool of cities. Obama said “innovation” nine times in his 2013 inauguration speech, more than any other presidential speech in history. As US cities went bankrupt and a deep recession was felt in all corners of the country, startups in the Bay Area grew at an unprecedented rate. While “sub-prime mortgages” became a household word, Twitter grew up to aid political revolutions, Facebook became a brand enabler, and Google was welcomed into nearly every part of our lives. The country had an identity crisis, as entrepreneurs had a coming of age. Cities from around the world regularly send delegations to San Francisco, they tour tech companies, overhear complaints about the high-cost of housing, and survive the one-hour wait for a dinner table on a Tuesday night #wewantthis they’re thinking. They recognize that innovation is a powerful engine of growth to revitalize communities and create jobs. The strategy of most cities is investment into research parks, “innovation clusters”, and most recently incubators and accelerators #missthemark. There is a general failure in understanding that Transformative Innovation, the kind that creates entirely new markets, must disrupt power structures and DOES NOT and CANNOT ask permission. Hacking & Hustling tells a story about this side of innovation."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Economics]]

 
The side where structures of authority lurk in the shadows of bureaucracy to prevent innovation from seeing the light of day. Where exploitation of entrepreneurs goes unchecked. Where resources are scarce. It is from this dark side of innovation where transformation happens–where new ways of believing are conceived. Innovation can be born from a supportive environment, whose elements nurture–but other times, innovation flourishes in spite of its surroundings. This story begins with the latter."