

=Description=

Michael Shuman: 

"In nature, pollinators like bees take the pollens from one plant and spread them around to others, creating a fertile ecosystem for other plants and animals.  No higher authority cuts the bees a paycheck to pollinate—they do this naturally.  So a pollinator enterprise is, in my view, an economic development program that shares and spreads the best of what local businesses offer, creating a fertile entrepreneurial ecosystem.  And importantly, like bees, they do this naturally, as a self-finance business, without requiring subsidies from foundations or government agencies."


=Typology=

5 Kinds of Pollinator Businesses:

"Local economic development, according to Shuman, encompasses five functions, which are easy to remember with five P words:  planning, people, partnerships, purchasing, and purse.

==Planning==

– identifying the best opportunities for creating new local business or expanding existing ones, such as identifying areas to replace imports with local goods.

Pollinator example: The Main Street Genome Project [http://mainstreetgenome.com/]


==People== 

– training and supporting entrepreneurs who are leading these leak-plugging businesses.

Pollinator example: Fledge, a Seattle-based incubator [http://fledge.co/]


==Partnerships==

– groups of local businesses that are more competitive as a team than they would be operating alone.

Pollinator example: Tucson Originals [http://tucsonoriginals.com/]


==Purchasing==

– encouraging consumers, businesses, and government agencies to buy more local goods and services, more of the time.

Pollinator example: Supportland (recently rebranded as Placemaker). [http://www.locavesting.com/ecosystem/this-social-enterprise-wants-to-magnify-the-power-of-local-businesses/]


==Purse==

– channeling local savings, whether they are in banks or pension funds, into promising local businesses.

Pollinator example: Credibles [https://credibles.co/] ."

(http://www.locavesting.com/new-economy/michael-shuman-on-pollinators-social-enterprise-and-remaking-economic-development/)

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]