
"polytechnic," a term coined by Lewis Mumford to describe the coexistence of different "phases" of technology in a single "technological pool."


=Description=

By Kevin Carson of Mutualist.org, this is an excerpt from a [http://members.tripod.com/kevin_carson/sitebuildercontent/sitebuilderfiles/chapter--decentralizedproductiontechnology.pdf draft chapter] on Decentralized Production Technology from his forthcoming book.

Excerpts are from Lewis Mumford. The Myth of the Machine:  The Pentagon of Power, pp. 154-55.  

"''Similarly [to a gene pool], one may talk of a technological pool:  an accumulation of tools, machines, materials, processes, interacting with soils, climates, plants, animals, human populations, institutions, cultures.  The capacity of this technological reservoir, until the third quarter of the nineteenth century, was immensely greater than ever before:  what is more, it was more diversified--and possibly quantitatively larger, as well as qualitatively richer--than that which exists today.  Not the least important part of this technological pool were the skilled craftsmen and work teams that transmitted the colossal accumulation of knowledge and skill.  When they were eliminated from the system of production, that vast cultural resource was wiped out.''

This diversified technological assemblage not merely contributed to economic security:  it permitted a continuous interplay between different phases of technology; and for a time this actually happened.

As an example, he mentions incorporation of new scientific advances into old technology, like "''the altered cut of mainsail and jibs in modern sailing vessels:  a change resulting from the closer analysis of air flow for the purpose of improving airplanes''."    The sea-going technology of Poul Anderson's Maurai is an excellent fictional example of the same thing.  A real-world example is 20th (and 21st) century organic farming, as developed by the Rodales, Louis Bromfield and John Jeavons, which involves the recovery and preservation of  older technique (much of it, like raised-bed technique and crop-rotation, itself a highly refined art of the eotechnic period--about which see below), and its synthesis with the latest findings of soil science, botany and bacteriology. 

There was no reason whatever to make a wholesale choice between handicraft and machine production:  between a single contemporary part of the technological pool and all the other past accumulations.  But there was a genuine reason to maintain as many diverse units in this pool as possible, in order to increase the range of both human choices and technological inventiveness.  Many of the machines of the nineteenth century, as Kropotkin pointed out, were admirable auxiliaries to handicraft processes, once they could be scaled, like the efficient electric motor, to the small workshop and the personally controlled operation."


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Technology]]