'''= a website that will bridge the divide between the input the American public wants to provide and the information Members of Congress want to receive.'''

URL = http://www.popvox.com/


=Description=

Marci Harris:


"Constituent communications are flooding and overwhelming Congressional offices. The resulting logjam is not good for the public trying to express an opinion and causes diminished returns on the investment advocacy organizations make to get their message through.  The POPVOX team is hard at work on a tool that will help deliver the public’s message to Congress in a way that Congress can best receive it and act upon it.

The idea for POPVOX began when, as a Congressional staffer, I was frustrated with the unmanageable amount of input coming into legislative offices.  In my experience, the increasing emails, tweets, Facebook comments, petitions, form letters, faxes, etc. did not help the public’s message get through.  On the contrary, the ever-louder noise decreases the effectiveness of traditional advocacy tools. I’m not saying that online petitions are a sham, just that if their purpose is to get a message to Congress, they are increasingly ineffective.

I’m also not saying that Congress ignores messages from constituents. In fact, exactly the opposite.  As I noted in a piece for GovTrackInsider.com, constituent input is one of the most important factors in a legislator’s consideration of new bills and issues. New legislative initiatives sometimes originate with a constituent letter. That doesn’t mean your Representative or Senator is taking a poll on every decision to be made. You elected them to make good policy by educating themselves on the pros and cons of each issue, balancing competing priorities, and running decisions though their personal filter of experience and values.

I am saying that the cacophony of incoming messages has become too loud for legislators to hear what constituents are saying. The result is an absolute, unrelenting, aggressive information overload. Clay Shirky has suggested, “Any time you hear the term ‘information overload,’ ask: ’which filter is broken?’”  The broken filter is the Lucy-and-Ethel-in-the-chocolate-factory state of affairs for the staff and interns of the 541 legislative offices on Capitol Hill."
(http://www.popvox.com/blog/2010/08/23/welcome-to-popvox/)





[[Category:Politics]]