
'''= a framework for drafting a website Portability Policy, which explains the ways that people can bring things into a website and take them out'''

URL = http://www.portabilitypolicy.org


=Description=

"The [[DataPortability Project]] introduced a framework for drafting a website Portability Policy, which explains the ways that people can bring things into a website and take them out. The group released PortabilityPolicy.org to help companies learn, write and post a plain-language portability policy.

A portability policy is for a website's users. It enables website owners to communicate in a way that helps people make informed decisions about where to store their data — including pictures, messages, audio, video, lists, settings, and chats. It answers users' most important questions: What data can I bring to this site? Can I move my data from the site later? Can third-party sites use my data?

A portability policy addresses many aspects of a person's data: APIs and data formats, identity and authentication, cross-site use and synchronization, control over data sharing with other sites, personal backup, use of shared and semi-public information, a person's ability to delete an account, a person's rights after closing an account, the physical location of a person's data, and how to resolve disputes. Companies and organizations introducing portability policies currently include Topguest, RadWebTech, the .tel registrar, and Tubefilter.

Every website or application that lets people enter their "digital stuff" should post a portability policy. www.PortabilityPolicy.org has templates, examples, and questions to help site owners get started."
(http://www.earthtimes.org/articles/press/communicate-user-data-rights,1357728.html)


=More Information=

#[[Data Portability]]



[[Category:Standards