
=Contextual Quote=

T.M. Murray:

"The cult of powerlessness, no less than the cult of power, is infused with political romanticism. The fury unleashed by the masochist nationalist, no less than the positive nationalist, contains its own justification because fury must be caused by external defamation. ‘They should have known’, says one nationalist. ‘We should have known’, says the other. Both positive nationalism and masochist nationalism are societal pessimists. One says strangers are dangerous. The other says natives are dangerous. Both types of nationalist end up taking a surprisingly callous, ungenerous attitude towards suffering individuals in overseas cultures. Brandishing their exoticism and moral relativism, multicultural leftists perceive other peoples’ suffering romantically while stubbornly disavowing the virtues of progress that they themselves enjoy."

- T.M. Murray [https://dontdivideus.com/t-m-murray-reviews-goran-adamsons-latest-book-masochistic-nationalism/]


=Discussion=

T.M. Murray on  the concepts of "positive vs negative nationalism in Goran Adamson's book on [[Nationalist Masochism]]:

"Swedish sociologist Göran Adamson’s latest book is about two forms of nationalism. Both treasure their own culture of spiritual identification along with its roots and biased textbooks. Both are enticed by kitschy, nebulous origins. They share an obsession with past injustice and idealise homogeneous groups, underscoring their unique differences from others. Neither mind imposing laws and customs from its respective homeland on cultures deemed inferior. One of them (white supremacist nationalism) unites in vengeance, the other (anti-white nationalism) in shame.  One insists that Christianity is inherently peaceful, the other than Islam is unambiguously innocent. Both emanate from the early 19th-century Counter-Enlightenment.  Whether you talk to people from overseas in a coarse voice or whether you coddle and mollify foreigners as though they were infants, your attitude is one of superiority. It is racist.

The catalyst for Adamson’s polemic is George Orwell’s 1945 essay Notes on nationalism in which the latter observed that a nationalist is one who thinks primarily in terms of competitive prestige. He may be a ‘positive’ or a ‘negative’ nationalist – that is, he may be in the business of boosting or denigrating his nation – but in either case, he is obsessed with hierarchies in which actions are held to be good or bad, not on their own merit, but according to who does them. Orwell described the British version of negative nationalism typical of his contemporary literary intellectuals as a combination of collectivist self-abuse and excitement, for which he coined the term “transferred nationalism”.  He described a form of nationalist allegiance that fastens onto a foreign country, making it an object of intense romanticism. The distinction between positive nationalism (the object of the bourgeois left’s loathing) and “transferred nationalism” (the illiberal left’s favourite pastime) is merely geographical and superficial. Their sentiments, attitudes and ideas are identical. Adamson takes Orwell’s concepts of negative nationalism and transferred nationalism and invents his own term for their commonalities: “masochist nationalism”.

The illiberal new left that has coalesced around Critical Race Theory frames the conflict as a rift between narrow-minded, Trump-voting nationalists and progressive, unprejudiced internationalists.  Adamson exposes the illiberal left’s internationalism as the mirror image of positive nationalism — not its antithesis. The UN, the EU and silicon valley’s big tech, the Washington elites, New York Times and The Guardian, the globalists and multiculturalists taking down the borders of nation states from outside and within, have merely replaced adulation for their own country with a patronising warmth for all things exotic.

Drawing many examples from his own country, Sweden, Adamson chronicles many ways in which the nationalist’s beliefs about his people’s roots overlap with those of the masochist nationalist. While the nationalist claims that our roots are deep and strong, whereas the roots of others are weak and short, the masochist nationalist claims that we have no roots. All has been imported or stolen. Wearing his xenophile blinders, the masochist nationalist overlooks troublesome aspects of exotic cultures for the sake of kitschy multicultural aesthetics. Those who sneer at the nationalist’s mythical zeal at home are thrilled to see it flourish the minute national pride is sunk into another culture’s language, folk music, nationalist-sentimental poetry, literature, or home-grown cuisine.

The embrace of hypocritical double standards can be seen in the similarities between the positive nationalist’s self-obsession and left-wing Swedes’ indiscriminate excitement for the exotic. Adamson cites Christopher Caldwell’s observation about Europeans who consider churches houses of stupidity, sexism and superstition and then rush to embrace exotic religions like Islam with “childish credulity”.

In the xenophile’s amnesia and enthusiasm to realise an exterior political ambition, Adamson sees another similarity with the positive nationalist.  If the past can be erased by political views, then it can just as easily be created by ideology.  Reality ceases to be something we must accept and is transformed into a product of political pressure. If we can be completely dissociated from our past and be made to pretend to have no relationship to our own culture, this begins to smack of complete mind control.

Masochist nationalists groomed in post-modernity transform a quest for truth into a codified call for authoritarianism with its stamping out of dissent. When masochist nationalists mistake criticism for fascism, all conflicts – whether civil or not – will be deemed politically suspect. Democracy will be defined by groupthink. Here too, Orwell is instructive. He predicted that racists were bound to come back, next time under the name of “anti-racists”."

(https://dontdivideus.com/t-m-murray-reviews-goran-adamsons-latest-book-masochistic-nationalism/)


=More information=

* Book: Göran Adamson. Masochistic Nationalism.

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]