
'''* Article: Jelena Vasiljević. The possibilities and constraints of engaging solidarity in citizenship. FILOZOFIJA I DRUŠTVO XXVII (2), 2016'''

URL = http://www.doiserbia.nb.rs/img/doi/0353-5738/2016/0353-57381602373V.pdf


=Abstract=

"In a broader sense, this article is interested in solidarity as a politically
operational concept. To be able to answer more general questions – like
What does it mean to base a political community on the principles of solidarity? Can
acts of solidarity be used not only to help (support) others, but with the aim to change
power relations and constitute new political orders as well? – we must first situate
solidarity in relation to some already established frameworks of thinking about
the political community. It is within theories and models of citizenship that I want
to situate my exploration of the political value of solidarity in this paper. Firstly,
if we want to go beyond isolated gestures and actions of solidarity, to question
its general capacities for political reordering, we need to firmly anchor it in broad
concepts that capture the ideals and visions of political community. Without a
doubt, citizenship is one such concept. Secondly, there is hardly a theory or approach
to citizenship that does not presuppose some aspects of solidarity as
foundational. Finally, and closely related to the previous point, citizenship and
solidarity, although often conceptually intertwined, form a paradoxical duo, reflecting
further potential paradoxes that may arise from endeavours to engage
solidarity as a political principle. In short, citizenship is a simultaneously inclusive
and exclusive notion, incorporating the idea that some sort of boundary encircles
a body of citizens (most often, but not exclusively, nation-state boundaries),
despite the fact that solidarity loses much of its meaning when expected to
operate and be exercised within certain imposed limits."

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]