
= conference on [[Komunal]] urbanism

URL = http://postcapitalistcity.blog.hr/2009/08/1626631071/after-the-international-conference-postcapitalist-city-in-pula.html

=Description=

Conference review at http://postcapitalistcity.blog.hr/2009/08/1626631071/after-the-international-conference-postcapitalist-city-in-pula.html

Theme of the first day will be architecture of autonomous spaces. Groups with experience in occupations in the city, constructing architecture in social centers and other spaces outside building permission doctrine will present their projects. After individual presentations (duration cca. 15 min) public discussion will be held with intention to provide common statements and material for the agenda.


Saturday, 15.august 


Theme of the second day of the conference will be urbanism without government. Groups will present their experience in the field of participatory urbanism, direct land use, new cartography and mapping, different perception of the city, interactions with social movements in the city, etc. After individual presentations (duration cca. 15 min) public discussion will be held with intention to provide common statements and material for the agenda. 



Sunday, 16. august 

Third day will be internal discussion between participants. Theme of the discussion will be development of common document (agenda, declaration,...) which will combine personal experience and knowledge of different groups and direct them toward general goals. Document could be useful as a theoretical reference point for further initiatives and action, but also as a statement calling for social approach in architecture and urbanism






=Participants=

Italy:

* [http://www.metrozones.info/ M.I.M.O. Lab] from Milan
* [http://www.salottobuono.net/ Salottobuono] from Venice
* Antonella and Susanna Perin from urbanXchange, who explore in the suburbs of Rome parts of the city born by self- organized urbanism in the seventies.
* [http://www.fram-menti.com/ Fram-menti] from Treviso: "their method of work concentrates on organizing events in spaces that they want to activate. In their approach planning is not based on conventional methods, already appropriated by current power relations, but on managing events which change existing conditions in the city."
* [http://www.multiplicity.it/ Multiplicity Lab Project] about ways of living in Milan. In this research different heterotopic settlements were mapped in the city which clearly show diversity of current metropolitan settlements. Citizens and community dispersed through these differences can define “a metropolitan multitude” – the subject which reclaims the city for itself and develop common land. 


Germany:

* [http://www.raumlabor-berlin.de/ Raumlabor] from Berlin 
* Berlin based group [http://www.metrozones.info/ MetroZones] 


France:

* [http://www.exyzt.org/ Exyzt] from Paris: for Exyzt and Raumlabor "self building was positioned on a more radical level; they explained their projects as “materialized fictions” or “fragments of utopia”. These fragments are useful physical example of some future city or places of gathering which can construct different identity inside existing community. These interventions can then become small, temporary, but frequent cracks inside the capitalism."


Netherlands:

* [http://www.stealth.ultd.net/stealth/ Stealth Ult.], "group working between Rotterdam and Belgrade, showed an example from Amsterdam and discused what happens when the tools are re-appropriated and connected with the multitude. When this happens and if there exists a common language between different subjects we can start to implement permanent utopia in the city. City can then be developed nor with the state nor with the market but as a common process."


Spain:

* [http://www.observatoriometropolitano.org/ Observatorio Metropolitano] from Madrid "pointed out that all of these processes need researchers and activists not as scientific outside observers but as militants who have clear political statement and who push the process toward conflict with existing power relations and toward new potentials outside existing structures."

* [http://www.hackitectura.net/ Hackitectura] from Sevilla: how to organize a city regarding all these processes? According to them new city, in this occasion they called it post-capitalist city, can develop following 4 crucial points: autonomy of mobility and access, autonomy of production and flexibility, re-appropriation and emancipation of technologies and final point – developing through ecosophy which combines natural, social and cultural diversity.


[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Conferences]]