

=Description=

Hendrik Rood:

"The group of economists that try to proceed on the work of Hyman Minsky and Joseph Schumpeter (who was Minsky's PhD supervisor).
 
They sometimes call themselves Post Keynesians, to distinghuis themselves from the neo-classical New Keynesians (like Paul Krugman, Brad deLong, Joseph Stiglitz, Greg Mankiw etc.).
 
Examples are:
- Michael Hudson and William Black (American Monetary Institute)
- Steve Keen (Australia)
- Eric Janszen
 
Close to this school of thought is James K. Galbraith.
 
Michael Hudson wrote about the nascent home crisis in the USA and quite some other subjects in Harper's Magazine before the crash came.
For instance: http://www.insurgentamerican.net/download/MichaelHudson/Hudson_RoadToSerfdom.pdf
 
A recent book by Eric Janszen with some proposals:
http://www.amazon.com/Postcatastrophe-Economy-Rebuilding-America-Avoiding/dp/1591842638
 
Steve Keen's book Debunking Economics is available for a reasonable prize as eBook.
 
One of the more interesting chapters in that book is when he discusses the various "heterodox" economic schools.

- Austrian Economics
- Post Keynesian Economics
- Evolutionary Economics (which he merges with Institutional Economics, these groups tend indeed to overlap in many countries)
- Complexity Economics (The Santa Fé school, also known as Econophysics, Mandelbrot's work)
- Sraffian Economics (a school I am unfamiliar with)
 
That chapter contains a very neat explanation on where and why these Heterodox Schools disagree with Neo-Classical Economics and what kind of implications that has for their lines of thinking.
 
Their models tend to emphasis dynamic endogenous flows and cycles. While most neoclassical models are at best shifts between punctuated equilibria, as their key device is to presuppose a (general) equilibrium. The issue is however increasing returns and non-linearity, creating multiple equilibria or chaotic cycles around (strange) attractors.
 
One of the eternal problems of Heterodox schools is that most policy makers and civil servants want to "play it safe" and stick to Neoclassical Economics. A bit like the old paradigm of the seventies "Nobody got fired for buying IBM".
 
See also: Nobody Saw it Coming - http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/15892/1/MPRA_paper_15892.pdf 

This paper discusses the key similar features in the reasoning of a group of economists that did see the crash coming and warned in advance based on models of the economy they made explicit (which differs from most stock market analysts, as they tend to be non-explicit in how they arrive at their predictions and reasoning)."
(Arch-Econ mailing list, December 2010)


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Economics]]