
'''= "production of sustainable and affordable clothing".'''

URL = http://www.postcouture.cc/

=Description=

"The Post-Couture Collective offers an alternative to today’s fashion system. We’re introducing a new era in the production of sustainable and affordable clothing. In our vision clothing is designed on the principles of open-source, and is made using 21st century technology. We are the first fashion label that truly embraces the [[Maker Movement]] and the [[Third Industrial Revolution]]."


=Discussion=

==Our Vision==

"The fashion industry is changing drastically in the next 5 to 10 years. 

The Post-Couture Collective is one of the first start-ups that successfully combine fashion and technology to approach challenges in this industry. We use innovations from the tech industry to create a sustainable alternative to tradition garment production today. 

To be able to continue our research, and achieve the goals we have set our for the next few years we are now looking for collaborations with companies, or investments from people that believe in our vision.


We propose a new global fashion-system that uses the growing infrastructure of Makerspaces and Fablabs as production locations, in which consumers become prosumers, and where designers digitally shares their creations to be produced locally, on demand, made-to measure, by the end-users.

The Post-Couture Collective brings designers and technical experts together to work on real-world solutions to the problems that are too big to be tackled by a very conservative industry. Our research spans the fields of garment design, production and retail. 

Now is the time to invest in one of the pioneering collaborations that drive the changing paradigm of fashion, that we will all notice in the near future.
 

Our goals:

- We will develop concepts that explore the additional value that physical retail locations can have over webshops.

- We will develop enhanced online retail-experiences and online design and customisation tools for garments. 

- We will build a global network of young and established fashion-designers to create post-couture collections in many different styles.

- We will develop a system for collecting used clothing so it can be recycled into new usable fabrics.

- We want to build an online tool to provide our customers access to a global network of production locations or work together with existing systems like 3D-Hubs and Ponoko to build an integrated system specifically for the production of clothing. 

- We want to work with the best programmers to continue developing the software we need to make garment designs interactive, so they’re ready to be used for dynamic grading and made-to-measure production in Makerspaces."
(http://www.postcouture.cc/news-backend/20151016investing)

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]