
'''* Report: Post-Industrial Journalism: Adapting to the Present. a report by C.W. Anderson, Emily Bell, Clay Shirky. Tow Center for Digital Journalism,'''

URL = http://towcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/TOWCenter-Post_Industrial_Journalism.pdf


=Excerpt=

From the introduction:

"This essay is part survey and part manifesto, one that concerns itself with the practice
of journalism and the practices of journalists in the United States. It is not,
however, about “the future of the news industry,” both because much of that future
is already here and because there is no such thing as the news industry anymore.

There used to be one, held together by the usual things that hold an industry
together: similarity of methods among a relatively small and coherent group of
businesses, and an inability for anyone outside that group to produce a competitive
product. Those conditions no longer hold true.

If you wanted to sum up the past decade of the news ecosystem in a single phrase,
it might be this: Everybody suddenly got a lot more freedom. The newsmakers,
the advertisers, the startups, and, especially, the people formerly known as the
audience have all been given new freedom to communicate, narrowly and broadly,
outside the old strictures of the broadcast and publishing models. The past 15 years
have seen an explosion of new tools and techniques, and, more importantly, new
assumptions and expectations, and these changes have wrecked the old clarity.

There’s no way to look at organizations as various as the Texas Tribune,
SCOTUSblog and Front Porch Forum or such platforms as Facebook, YouTube
and Storify and see anything like coherence. There’s no way to look at new
experiments in nonprofit journalism like Andy Carvin’s work at NPR during
the Arab Spring and convince yourself that journalism is securely in the hands
of for-profit businesses. And there’s no way to look at experiments in funding
journalism via Kickstarter, or the coverage of protest movements via mobile
phone, and convince yourself that making information public can be done only
by professionals and institutions.

Many of the changes talked about in the last decade as part of the future landscape
of journalism have already taken place; much of journalism’s imagined
future is now its lived-in present. (As William Gibson noted long ago, “The
future is already here. It’s just unevenly distributed.”) Our goal is to write about
what has already happened and what is happening today, and what we can learn
from it, rather than engaging in much speculation."
(http://towcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/TOWCenter-Post_Industrial_Journalism.pdf)

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Articles]]