

=Discussion=

Joshua Citarella:

"These terms are always contested. For me the best definition goes
something like this: Where Marx says that alienation arises with
industrial capitalism from waged labor and the commodity form, the
Post-left would argue that alienation begins even earlier with agrarian
societies and labor specialization. They claim that our inability to be
self-sufficient has alienated us from our own nature, our environment,
and essentially domesticated the human being. Their ideal society is a
band of nomadic hunter-gatherers living off the natural abundance of the
land. They frequently talk about imminent ecological disaster and the
necessity for degrowth.

Back in 2015, the Post-left is almost non-existent on Politigram.
Anarcho-primitivism is often the butt of jokes from just about every
corner of the community. The few unironic Anprim, or Green Anarchy,
accounts that do exist have low engagement and post infrequently. While
environmentalism is an essential component of the zeitgeist on
Politigram, it is rarely the focal point around which these users orient
their politics. At the time, these accounts generally describe themselves
as Anarcho-communist, syndicalist or socialist.

As the 2016 election cycle ignites the whole of American culture, these
young radical leftists undergo a curious evolution in their political
ideology. At first, many of them rally behind Bernie. While his positions
are often described as insufficiently radical, and too centralized for their
anti-authority leanings, they had a general consensus in their support;
‘No candidate is perfect but this one will do’.

When Bernie is ultimately defeated by the Democratic establishment, this
group soon finds themselves without a suitable representative. DNC
collusion with Hillary’s campaign seems to vindicate many of their long
held anti-state sentiments. All types of centralization are now fully
discredited. Pro-anarchist posting flourishes. Once Democratic socialism
is off the table, these users rapidly lose faith in electoral politics.
When Clinton is defeated in the general election, all hell breaks loose
online. For the burgeoning Post-left of Politigram, this is the final
confirmation they need. Posts about Anti-civilization and nihilism are
now in full swing. It seems like every aspect of society is moving further
towards the political right. ‘The collapse is imminent. It's coming sooner
than we thought.’

The irony of being an anti-tech radical on the internet is not lost on these
teens. Everyone in today’s society lives in constant contradiction of their
ideals. In these young corners of the internet everything is
simultaneously ironic and genuine.

While they rarely discuss it outright, my general assumption is that their
hatred of technology is symptomatic of the times. Teenagers lives are
more permeated by social media than any other demographic. Many of
these users fit the profile of Kekistan 4chan type culture; isolated gamers
and introverts without strong social ties IRL. Their banter is qualitatively
similar in its edginess and rapid pace. As 2016 politicized all aspects of
pop culture and moved much of their demographic towards the right,
these users radicalized in the opposite direction.

Just a few years earlier, it would have been unimaginable to describe the
2016 meme-osphere and rightward political shift in youth culture. As the
Overton window expands, new radical positions enter the mainstream.
Young people have the most to lose in climate change scenarios.
Ecological collapse is extraordinarily effective in radicalizing Gen Z."
(http://joshuacitarella.com/_pdf/Politigram_Post-left_2018_short.pdf)

=Status=

Joshua Citarella:

"Terms like Post-left-communization, Eco-anarchy, Green anarchy,
Anti-civilization, Primitivism, Leftcom, Nihilist Communism, Egocom,
among many others, are used almost interchangeably here. They refuse
to collect under a single moniker.

John Zerzan is major figure within this group. Other contemporaries
include Fredy Perlman, Derrick Jensen, Kevin Tucker and various writers
associated with Black & Green Press (named for the colors of
Anarcho-primitivism). The most credentialed, living scholar discussed
within these circles is James C. Scott, a professor in the political science
department at Yale University whose work focuses on early agrarian and
non-state societies."
(http://joshuacitarella.com/_pdf/Politigram_Post-left_2018_short.pdf)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]