

URL = http://www.post-consumerism.com/


=Description=

"Post-Consumerism is the idea that something can have value without having a price tag attached to it. Post-Consumerism revels in the power of the individual: in the belief that a person is not what they buy, own, or consume. Post-Consumerism is a re-awakening of humanism; a fatigue of being pushed to the point of purchasing strictly for vanity. Post-Consumerism says that one cannot purchase identity, individuality, or self and speaks to those who really should know better.

Post-Consumerism espouses the virtues of responsibility and accountability in the commercial world. Post-Consumerism is based on freedom of choice, and as such believes that free-market capitalism is the best way to run an economy. Post-Consumerism, therefore, does not disparage corporate coffee houses merely because they are such, but, instead, believes that the individual has the power, freedom, and responsibility to cast the dollar vote accordingly.

Post-Consumerism, however, claims that far too many dollar votes have been cast in the direction of vanity, with little regard to selflessness. Post-Consumerism suggests that consumerism has become a religion in the Western World. Post-Consumerism proclaims, proudly, that to say the Dollar is not Almighty is Heresy.

The Post-Consumerism campaign has been given a logo which, on one hand, exploits the current mass-branding mentality, and the other hand, juxtaposes an oversized Registration mark next to the words "Post-Consumerism". Imagine: the idea of "Post-Consumerism" as a trademark! (No, it is not trademarked...yet.)

The Great Act of Post-Consumerism will be when an individual builds a viable, lucrative business to a substantial volume, and then discourages consumers from purchasing the product(s)! The Company will wither not through mis-management, but through the message of Post-Consumerism; a commercial entity which destroys itself by market forces influenced by its own message. The idea destroys the means of conveyance. This will be the Jesus of corporations. It will die for the sins of flagrant consumerism."
(http://www.post-consumerism.com/post.html)

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Movements]]