

=Description=

John Esposito:

"A large collection of papers openly available to anyone to read creates its own set of problems:  Which papers are worth paying attention to?  After all, not all of the provost’s picks get it right 100% of the time.  Our OA service needs a form of post-publication peer review.  And here we are quite fortunate, as the current crop of Web 2.0 services presents plentiful models for online commentary.  Professor Jones, who is a member of the faculty of Ultimate U., deposits her paper, “Specific Qualities of the Generic,” in an OA repository.  Indexed by Google and other services, the paper quickly comes to the attention of people working in the field, who post their critiques alongside Jones’s document.  The software enables comments and comments on comments; the paper lives with its commentary all around it — in one virtual place, for the convenience of all researchers.

It will be noted that some papers will attract a great deal of commentary and other papers none at all.  This is as it should be.  Papers with important information will be cited repeatedly, which in turn will give them higher search engine ranking and bring other readers to them (a process known as “the law of increasing returns“).

Our OA service has thus put an end to one of the most inefficient aspects of traditional publishing:  whether a paper is good or bad, it costs the same amount of money to put it through the editorial review process.  Post-publication peer review aligns effort and cost with the quality of the material.

This leads us to the economics of our new OA service.  By switching from pre-publication peer review to post-publication peer review — and placing a big bet on the utility of search engines — we have shifted the large, ongoing costs of managing a publishing operation to a one-time investment in the software platform, which enables the deposit and review of papers. Some current OA services charge large fees to authors, but this is because they are clinging to the editorial model of traditional publishing.  The combination of Provostial Publishing, cloud repositories, and post-publication peer review drives the cost of scholarly communications down and down. Recall that you can upload anything to Google Docs.  If the platform is properly designed, the marginal cost of adding new papers and commentary approximates zero."
(http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2010/03/15/lets-make-open-access-work/)


=Discussion=

==Financing P3R==


John Esposito:

"To finance this service (putting aside the start-up costs), an author would pay to have his or her paper deposited in the OA repository.  We don’t know how much to charge, but we know the formula:  the number of papers multiplied by the deposit fee per paper must exceed the ongoing operating costs.  If those operating costs are, say, $1 million a year (it is simply astounding to see how little it costs to operate cloud-computing services once the underlying platform is built) and we anticipate that 1,000 papers will be deposited each year, the minimum cost to each author would be $1,000.  If we forecast 10 million papers, an author would be charged $.10.  It may be that we will find that the administrative cost to collect such small sums hardly make it worth the effort.  Perhaps upon being granted an advanced degree, a prospective author would simply write a check for $50 for lifetime deposit fees, subject always to the sponsorship of a provost or provost’s proxy.

One policy that I would strongly urge upon any OA service is to invite commercial exploitation, provided that such commerce does not require that any of the research material go behind a pay wall.  This recommendation runs counter to the common practice of stipulating that there will be no commercial use of the material.  Capital, however, makes things happen.  We cannot tell in advance what new services entrepreneurs will come up with, but we are likely to find exciting new add-on capabilities for the OA content.  It is one thing to insist that all research content be OA, quite another to banish financial incentives altogether.  The scholarly community would benefit from harnessing the profit motive to the aims of researchers.

What’s not to like about this model, which I contend could become economically sustainable in a short time?  Or I could say, What’s to like?  This model incorporates many of the innovations of services such as arXiv, PLOS One, DSpace, and BMC, but it does not deliver everything that we expect when we turn to an established journal.  The key to this model is to substitute information technology for human-mediated editorial activity and the investments in branding that go with it.  Perhaps the trade-offs are too great.  On the other hand, this kind of development may be inevitable, at least in part, for some disciplines.  Once established, such services may go through a process of continual improvement.  If they don’t satisfy the needs of the research community, they will disappear."
(http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2010/03/15/lets-make-open-access-work/)



[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]