


=Discussion=

==Causes of Post-National Feeling==

Saska Sassen:

"The context for this possible transformation is defined by two major, partly interconnected conditions. One is the change in
the position and institutional features of
national states since the 1980s resulting
from various forms of globalization. These
range from economic privatization and
deregulation to the increased prominence of
the international human rights regime. The
second is the emergence of multiple actors,
groups and communities partly strengthened
by these transformations in the state and
increasingly unwilling to automatically
identify with a nation as represented by the
state. The growth of the Internet and linked
technologies has facilitated and often
enabled the formation of cross-border
networks among individuals and groups with
shared interests that may be highly specialized, as in professional networks, or involve
particularized political projects, as in human
rights and environmental struggles. This has
engendered or strengthened alternative
notions of community of membership.

These new experiences and orientations of
citizenship may not necessarily be new; in
some cases they may well be the result of
long gestations or features that were there
since the beginning of the formation of
citizenship as a national institution, but are
only now evident because enabled by current developments."

(https://saskiasassen.com/PDFs/publications/Towards-post-national-and-denationalized-citizenship.pdf)


=More information=

* Article: Towards Post-National and Denationalized Citizenship. By SASKIA SASSEN.

URL = https://saskiasassen.com/PDFs/publications/Towards-post-national-and-denationalized-citizenship.pdf

"Most of the scholarship on citizenship has
claimed a necessary connection to the
national state. The transformations afoot
today raise questions about this proposition
in so far as they significantly alter those
conditions which in the past fed that articulation between citizenship and the national
state. If this is indeed the case, then we need
to ask whether national conceptions of
citizenship deserve the presumptions of
legitimacy and primacy that they are almost
always granted. This chapter interrogates
the validity of this presumption and in so
doing underlines the historicity of both the
institution of citizenship and that of national
state sovereignty. It is becoming evident
today that far from being unitary, the institution of citizenship has multiple dimensions, only some of which might be
inextricably linked to the national state. This
chapter discusses the rapidly growing literature that is documenting and conceptualizing these issues, with particular attention to
post-national conceptions of citizenship."

(https://saskiasassen.com/PDFs/publications/Towards-post-national-and-denationalized-citizenship.pdf)

[[Category:Global_Governance]]