
'''* Book: Post-Capitalist Futures. Paradigms, Politics, and Prospects. Ed. by Samuel Alexander, Sangeetha Chandrashekeran, Brendan Gleeson. Palgrave Macmillan, 2022'''

URL = https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-981-16-6530-1


=Description=

"* Brings together some of the boldest and most creative thinkers around the world
* Explores and analyses the various ways post-capitalism may emerge
* Pushes the frontiers of critical analysis and the imagination

"As the crises of capitalism continue to intensify, radical thinkers must conjure realistic and inspirational alternative futures beyond this failing social order. This book presents a stimulating array of essays exploring such post-capitalist futures. With contributions and perspectives from the Global North and Global South, central topics include ecosocialism, ecofeminism, degrowth, community economies, and the Green New Deal. There are also chapters offering analyses of land, energy, technology, universal basic services, and (re)localisation of economies. The book is in three parts. The first presents various alternative paradigms for thinking about – and working toward – post-capitalist futures. The second section offers perspectives on alternative governance strategies and approaches for post-capitalist futures. The closing section gathers various analyses of post-capitalist geographies and resistance. Going beyond critique and instead envisioning alternative imaginaries, this collection should challenge and inspire readers to think and act upon the range of possibilities immanent in our crisis-ridden present."

[[Category:Post-Capitalism]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Cases]]