
=Description=

Dr. Niko Paech:

"the concept of post-growth economics rests on
the following premises:

* No ecological uncoupling of economic growth measured in money
is in sight. In an expanding economy, “boomerang effects“ wipe out
advances in de-materialisation or ecologisation as result of growing
demand. This becomes really dramatic when (well-meaning) sustainability
innovations actually trigger additional energy and material
flows: Successive waves of modernisation become necessary in
order to deal with the unforeseen environmental repercussions of
respective foregoing ones. The highly respected studies produced
by the Global Carbon Project reveal two important facts: 1. Even
during earlier phases which did exhibit a certain uncoupling tendency,
the accomplishments were offset by the effect of economic
growth to such an extent that global CO2 emissions have increased
unrelentingly. 2. Recently the uncoupling tendency again went into
reverse: The CO2 intensity of value creation is currently increasing
on a global scale!


* An important finding of the so-called “Science of Happiness“
postulates that once a certain level has been reached, an increase
in monetary or material wealth no longer contributes to subjective
well-being. Many consumer activities are of a symbolic nature, aimed
at social prestige or a feeling of belonging to a specific group
or “scene“. Innovations create new offers for material self-portrayal
to be picked up by pioneers. If you don’t join in, you’re left behind.
Consequently, ever more consumer effort is required to defend one’s
social integration. Insofar as the choice of consumer options is literally
exploding and there are only 24 hours in a day, the time needed
to exhaust consumer options becomes a critical factor. Heaping up
possessions stands in contradiction to quality of life.


* Future economic growth is also justified with the need to alleviate
poverty and the injustice of unequal distribution. In place of a conflict-ridden
redistribution of existing wealth, it is considered politically
more acceptable to boost growth, by which the lot of the needy can be
improved without encroaching on the status quo of the well-situated.
World reality makes it blatantly obvious that such “peacemaker” logic,
by way of which issues of distribution and scarcity are transformed
into appeals for growth, has been a failure.


* The economic foundations of growth are being eroded. Mainstream
economists attribute the wealth of societies to the efficiency
characteristics (Adam Smith) or the innovativeness (Joseph
A. Schumpeter) of systems based on free markets. In so doing,
though, they are describing the gear mechanism of the prosperity
machine, rather than the fuel it burns. All consumer societies are
based on the unlimited and cheap supply of fossil energy. This side
of expenditure is now exploding in the wake of increased purchasing
power on the part of a global middle class, now expanded by some
1.2 billion so-called “new consumers“ in the emerging economies
(China, India, etc.). Even the International Energy Agency (IEA),
otherwise criticised for its conservatism, now forecasts an increase
in the price of a barrel of crude oil to 200 dollars by the year 2030.
What until recently was referred to as “peak oil“ has now turned
into “peak everything“. The income side of the northern prosperity
model is also beginning to topple. Until now it has been bolstered
by an innovation lead which gave it the edge in international competition.
As result of investment in the education system, building
up modern infrastructures and, last not least, the global mobility of
their new middle classes, the emerging economies are increasingly
able to conquer new markets – the selfsame markets which via exports
have historically financed the consumption of the established
industrial nations."



=Characteristics=

'''Elements of a post-growth economy, by Dr. Niko Paech'''


"An ecologically and socially sustainable economy must be free
from all dependency on growth and subsequent pressure for
growth, including

- the innovation orientation of modern market economies,

- the present monetary and interest-earning system,

- expectations of high profit,

- external supplies of resources based on a model of global division
of labour,

- a culture of unquestioning pursuit of material self-actualisation.


To this we can add a number of conceptual strands capable of enhancing
a post-growth economy:


1. Cutting down and slowing down. 

Simply exchanging previous
patterns of consumption for assumedly more sustainable variants is
not enough. Consumer desires should be mitigated so that they can
be met by sustainable solutions. The sufficiency strategy addressed
here confronts the frenzied quest for further increases in possessions-prosperity
and material comfort with a counter question: How can
“overfilled“ life styles and ultimately society as a whole be freed
from “energy slaves“, consumption and comfort “crutches“? Rather
than forgoing something, consumers in danger of drowning in an
avalanche of self-actualisation offers – which on top of everything
involves time-killing comparison, evaluation and selection – would
actually be freeing themselves from superfluous consumption. It
also accords with economic logic in the purest sense to rid oneself
of any ballast that puts a strain on time, money, space and ecological
resources without appreciable returns or benefit.


2. Balance between self-sufficiency and dependency on consumption.

Inability to finance the globalised consumption model leads to social
unrest. When the money-making growth machine stalls, prices rise,
wages fall, or firms close down, people with a monetary-based dependency
on imports and consumption must live in constant fear of
becoming “victims of globalisation“. Only supply structures with short
distances between consumption and production can be considered as
being socially stable. This would entail reactivating skill sets and satisfying
needs manually and by virtue of one’s own capabilities with no
recourse to commercial markets. By reshaping the division of labour
it would be possible to combine self-sufficiency and consumption in
such a way that monetary and growth dependency would decrease.
Self-work, (urban) subsistence, community gardens, exchange rings,
networks of mutual aid, give-away markets, organisations for community
use of devices, appliances and tools, etc., would contribute
towards gradual de-globalisation.


3. Regional economy. 

Many needs could be met by means of regional
markets, shortened supply chains entailing concepts like Community
Supported Agriculture (CSA). Regional currencies could ensure that
purchasing power stays in the region, bringing about an uncoupling
from globalised transactions. In this way it would be possible to retain
the efficiency advantages accruing from a money-based division of
labour, but now within an ecologically viable and more crisis-resistant
framework.


4. Material zero-sum game. 

Consumer desires which cannot be
substituted by “cutting down“ or creating local/regional supply structures
could continue to be met within the framework of the global
consumption model. Corresponding products and infrastructures
could be optimised, opening up hitherto untapped possibilities for
lengthening product life cycles or intensifying their use to such an
extent that value could be created with no need for extra material
production, resulting in a “material zero-sum game“. Only in the
event that these strategies prove to be insufficient would the need
arise to apply the efficiency and consistency strategies favoured by
mainstream sustainability research.


5. Institutional innovations. 

Finally, two framework conditions
need to be satisfied; namely, on the one hand, a land and monetary
reform to mitigate the pressure for growth inherent in the system.
For instance, the regional currencies mentioned in the foregoing
could be backed by a negative interest or a demurrage charge. On
the other hand, the long overdue introduction of a system to assess,
attribute and cap environmental burdens so that the broad sustainability
concept is concretised by personal CO2 accounts. Everybody
would have the right to the same
annual emissions quota (approx.
2-4 tons), which would, though,
be negotiable. The sum of all
quotas would not be allowed to
exceed the highest permissible
total environmental burden
compatible with the two-degree
climate protection goal.
Markets, entrepreneurs, money,
consumer goods and technological
innovations would still
be necessary in a post-growth
economy – but far from a culture
of exorbitance. It is the size of
the dose that makes it poisonous.
The economy is no different."


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Economics]]