'''* Article: Breaking the Chains of Open Innovation: Post-Blockchain and the Case of Sensorica. By Alex Pazaitis. Information (Switzerland) 11(2):104, February 2020'''. DOI: 10.3390/info11020104

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339342899_Breaking_the_Chains_of_Open_Innovation_Post-Blockchain_and_the_Case_of_Sensorica


=Abstract=

"Open innovation is a concept in flux; from the practice of large-scale, internet-mediated collaboration, to a strategic option and business model for firms. However, the scope and breadth of its transformative dynamic is arguably restrained. Despite the theoretical and empirical benefits of openness, established firms face significant challenges deploying the coordination patterns of open innovation communities, further reducing the potential of spill-overs in the supply chain. Viewed differently, open innovation presents more user-centric and responsible innovation paths. These are manifested in the processes and outputs of open innovation by empowering participation and by successfully employing the capacities of user communities. To reap the benefits of open innovation, a rapid reconfiguration of the production and exchange structures is needed in intrafirm and interfirm relations. Sensorica is an open enterprise that achieves such forms of organization and a unique techno-social infrastructure supporting them. It illustrates a potential path that can realize the full potential of open innovation, for users, firms, and the economic system as a whole."

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339342899_Breaking_the_Chains_of_Open_Innovation_Post-Blockchain_and_the_Case_of_Sensorica)

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]
[[Category:Cases]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]