== Questions ==

'''What are the critical questions you hope to discuss with peers at Contact?'''

- how do we more effectively share resources amongst ourselves?

- how do we fund early stage pre-proof of concept social innovations / enterprises?

- what kind of business models are available or being developed for social entrepreneurs?

'''What topics do you plan to lead a discussion about at Contact?'''

'''What are you hoping to learn about or hear a presentation about at Contact?'''


== Proposed Discussion Topics ==


• '''[[Mass Collaboration Architecture: how do we connect and support the collaboration efforts of large numbers of people and projects that have aligned interests?]]''' - If interested contact suresh2323 (at) gmail (dot) com

• '''[[Pre Proof of Concept Funding for Social Innovators: how do we substantially increase the pool of risk capital for social innovators?]]''' - If interested contact suresh2323 (at) gmail (dot) com

• '''Gamifying the Transition to a Sustainable Civilization''' - If interested contact george (at) community-intelligence (dot) com.

• '''[[Building an Economic Ecosystem for New Business Models and Ideas]]''' - If interested contact curtis (followed by at) worldhouse (followed by dot) org.

• '''[[Seeding the emergence of free and resilient communities]]''' - If interested contact mark (followed by at) openworld (followed by dot) com.

• '''[[Social Technology and Emergent Democracy]]''' - If interested contact jon.lebkowsky (followed by at) gmail (followed by dot) com.

• '''[[Bottom-Up Emergent Organization and Decision Making]]''' - If interested contact curtis (followed by at) worldhouse (followed by dot) org.

• '''[[Common Global Software Infrastructure for an Open P2P World]]''' - If interested contact curtis (followed by at) worldhouse (followed by dot) org.