'''* Book: The Politics of Waking Up: Power and possibility in the fractal age. by [[Indra Adnan]].'''

URL = https://systems-souls-society.com/insight/perspectiva-press/the-politics-of-waking-up-power-and-possibility-in-the-fractal-age/

=Description=

"Indra Adnan has written a comprehensive and necessary account of ‘waking up’ – to the realities of climate crisis, social breakdown and personal agency – implicating us all. In the internet era, no-one escapes the global revolution of learning, connecting and mobilising.

Our times demand political responses that the current politics – led by squabbling parties and their exhausted ideologies – cannot provide. How do we put the full spectrum of a consciously awakening humanity at the heart of society, economy and politics? As social bonds fray and the planet burns, a politics of ‘waking up’ is more urgently required than ever. Informed by decades of public advocacy, transformative work with both local and global communities, and Indra’s lifelong commitment to inner transformation, The Politics of Waking Up lays out practical, beautiful and urgent ways to redesign politics for an era of people power.

Drawing on her role as co-initiator of The Alternative UK, Indra shares a compelling vision of a fractal politics alive to new and practical patterns of behaviour and social prototypes. The Politics of Waking Up presents a coherent and radical alternative to our current socio-political turbulence. One that is there for the taking."

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]