

'''Book: The Power of Networks. David de Ugarte.'''

URL = http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf

=Summary=


“The main idea underlying this book is that the key to
understanding most of the new social and political
phenomena lies in grasping the difference between a world in which information spreads through a decentralised
network and a world in which information spreads through
a distributed network.”

Five theses proposed in this book, by David de Ugarte:

“1. The world, impelled by technological change, is
changing the structure of the network through whcich
information is transmitted.

2. The structure of information – and therefore of power
– took until recently a “decentralised”
form, with “hierarchical” powers and institutions and individuals
with “filtering powers”. But technologies like the
internet are impelling it to take an increasingly
“distributed” form in which anyone can potentially
find, recognise, and communicate with anyone else.


3. This distributed world is creating a means of
communication in its own image: the blogosphere,
the set of online tools for personal publishing and
communication.


4. As a whole, this mode of communication can, in
increasingly larger parts of the world and not
precisely in the most spectacular manner in
developed countries, change the public agenda and
turn questions which traditional media filter or do not
take up at all into topics for social debate. A blog is
not a medium, but the set of all blogs is.


5. Cyberactivism is a strategy for the creation of
temporary alliances of individuals who, using tools
from that network, generate a critical mass of
information and debate which will make that debate
transcend the boundaries of the blogosphere and
move into the “real world”; or which will perceptibly
modify the behaviour of a large number of people.


6. In such a world, everyone – businesses, social
activists, and, in general, anyone who wishes to
spread an idea as widely as possible – are driven to
cyberactivism. That is, they are driven to
communicate, bearing in mind the way in which
people will relay their ideas to others who in turn will
will do the same in a chain as long as possible.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf)



=Excerpts=

==Introduction==

David de Ugarte:

“That we are living in changing times and that those
changes have something to do with "social networks" has
become a commonplace, almost a cliché, by now. And yet
nobody seems to be very clear about what those networks
are, and, above all, what is new about them. After all, if
the networks we are talking about are the networks
established by people when they interact, society has
always been a network. And if we are talking about
activist movements, they have also been there forever,
interacting with each other in a sort of hyperactive parallel
universe. There are however two new elements concerning
this issue that everyone intuitively understands. On the
one hand, there is the Internet and its most direct
consequence: the emergence of a new sphere of social
interaction which every day brings millions of people
together. On the other hand, there is the recent appearance
of a wide literature on networks applied to every field,
from physics and biology to economics, as well as the
inevitable spate of popular science, marketing ploys, and
advertising gimmicks.


Then there is a whole series of movements ranging
from revolution to civic protest, through a new kind of
sophisticated hoopla which nobody knows very well how
to class, and which frequently fills newspaper pages. They
first event of this kind became well-known
when in 2000
the crowds took to the streets of Manila to demand
President Estrada's resignation. The media then remarked
on the lack of leaders, and on how political entities and
trade unions were forced to follow the people instead of
heading them. But that was too far away from Old Europe
and we paid little attention to it, just enough for many of
the thousands of participants in the demonstrations which
took place in Spain on 13th March 2004 to be aware of the
role they could play in bringing about a crucial change.

That was Mobile Phone Night, and even though the degree
to which it influenced the results of the presidential
election the following day is still a matter of debate,
nobody can deny that it was a radically new moment in
Spanish history. In a short book published online just a
few months before, the Spanish economist Juan Urrutia
had predicted such rallies, and provided the
methodological tools with which to understand them. He
termed them "cyberthrongs". A year and a half after that,
in November 2005, the French Police acknowledged their
helplessness in the face of the Paris suburb revolts,
arguing that the speed with which the revolters acquired
veritable "urban guerrilla" techniques and experience
made it impossible for them to act effectively. Some claim
that a mysterious new collective subject has emerged.
Howard Rheingold has spoken of "wise crowds". In this
book I won't treat them as if they were all part of the same
movement, but rather as symptoms of a new form of social
organisation and communication which is growing ever
stronger, and through which very different, even mutually
contradictory, ideas can be upheld. Information rallies
such as those that led to the Madrid Big BoozeUp
in the Spring of 2006 and to Dan Brown's popular discrediting in
Spain have also entered this cyberthrong hit parade that
shows that something is changing. 

This book aims to
define that something, and how we common citizens can
gain greater independence and power of communication
through it. It has three parts. The first part is a very brief
history of how social networks, the map of relationships
through which ideas and information move, have changed
through time, driven by changes in communication
technologies. The second part focuses on the new political
movements, from the Colour Revolutions in Eastern
Europe to cyberthrongs all over the world. It also sketches
out the two basic models of cyberactivism that lead to the
massive spread of new messages from the web. Finally,
the third part tries to provide all kinds of individuals,
companies, and collectives with some useful conclusions
concerning how to communicate socially in a distributed
network world, a world in which we are all potential
cyberactivists.”
(http://deugarte.com/gomi/the-power-of-networks.pdf)


=More Information=

The key distinction between a [[Decentralized Network]] and a [[Distributed Network]]


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Network Nations]]