'''* Book: Power and Modes of Exchange. [[Kojin Karatani]].'''

URL =

== Summary ==

From the author, [[Kojin Karatani]]:

"I have been rethinking the mode of exchange in
the same line, which will become a book titled “Power and Modes of
Exchange”. At the heart of that book is what might be called the “science
of spirits”. My consideration of “spirit” has some of its origins in Hegel’s
spirits (especially in his Philosophy of Right, which deals with the
problem of the capital-nation-state) and Marx’s fetish (Capital). In this
essay, I will give a very brief introduction to this “science of spirits”."

- From the essay "Science of Spirit," by Kojin Karatani, published in [https://www.crisiscritique.org/storage/app/media/2021-12-13/cc-82-kojin-karatani.pdf Crisis & Critique], Vol. 8, Issue 2, Dec. 13, 2021.

== Discussion ==

Please read:

* [[Hegel’s Spirit is a Ghost That Operates in the Way of the Unconscious]]

* [[Marx and Engels' Analysis of the Spirits as Power and of the Power of the Spirits]]


=More information=

* [[Structure of World History]]
* See also the essay "Capital as Spirit," by Kojin Karatani, published in [https://www.crisiscritique.org/storage/app/media/2016-11-16/kojin-karatani.pdf Crisis & Critique], Vol 3, Issue 3, Nov. 16, 2016 - 
* [[Introduction To Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Evolution of the Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Historical Approach to Shifts in Modes of Exchange]]
* [[From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Kojin Karatani on Why We Should Move from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Mode Of Production]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Integral_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Class_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]