
'''* Report: [[Practical Guide to Transformative Change Making]]. By Marc Saxer. Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, March 2017'''

URL = http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf


=Description=

"When technological, economic or social changes are transforming
society, but effective mechanism to shape these transformations
are missing, crises can occur. Transformative Change Making
(TCM) introduces a new method to create the societal buy-in
needed to tackle such transformation crises.

* TCM uses a set of techniques to break social silos, makes use of
the knowledge disseminated through society, and visualises the
challenges in the political field. TCM strengthens the ability of
policy makers to reach out to constituencies, encourages private
sector contribution to the common good, builds the strategic
capacity of civil society and political literacy of all stakeholders.

* Making use of discourse steering as an instrument, TCM proposes
an alternative vision for a better tomorrow, constructs a credible
change narrative and aims at creating success stories around
catalytic projects.

* TCM has been successfully used to facilitate reform processes in
India, Pakistan, and Thailand. As a work in progress, it will be
further adapted to match the local context. This beta version of
the practical guide is meant to give practitioners an easy to use
introduction into the method."
(http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Transformative Change Making]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Articles]]