
* Paper: A Practice Perspective on Websites for the Sharing Economy
Gabriel H. Mugar. 

URL = http://buildingthecommonsdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2013/08/iconf13.pdf

=Abstract=

"The sharing economy describes an economic model in which people sell, share, or barter their skills or 
owned assets directly with others. This economy is facilitated primarily by websites that act as hubs for 
the visibility and transactions of local assets. Yochai Benkler notes that such peer-to-peer transactions  are mediated not by market prices or organizational hierarchies, but by normative frameworks. The ways 
in which the normative frameworks are produced and perpetuated by transacting parties on the websites has yet to be studied by scholars. This paper proposes a practice perspective as a theoretical framework 
and Sense-Making as a methodology to explore how users interact with each other on the websites, so  as to produce and sustain the normative frameworks critical to the success of the sharing economy."


=Excerpt=

"The question of how such websites support social frameworks has been addressed in research  from a distinctly quantitative perspective, looking primarily at the impact of reputation management 
systems on the willingness of participants to engage in peer-to-peer transactions on such platforms as eBay (Resnick & Zeckhauser, 2002; Resnick, Zeckhauser, Swanson, & Lockwood, 2006) and  Couchsurfing.org (Adamic, Lauterbach, Teng, & Ackerman, 2011; Lauterbach, Truong, Shah, & Adamic, 
2009). While reputation management systems are a critical feature of the sharing economy, reputation is  only one aspect of what factors into establishing the normative framework of a website for the sharing 
economy. Other questions that are important to understand for the continued success of the sharing  economy include, for example, how users engage features of the site to help them understand how to 
effectively negotiate the price or trade of assets, how the site's features help users to communicate  effectively with other participants on the site, or what users look for when assessing the reputation of  other users."

Source:  Mugar, G. H. (2013). A practice perspective on websites for the sharing economy. iConference 2013 Proceedings (pp. 738-741).  doi:10.9776/13354

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Sharing]]