
=Description=

Mark Graham:

"Our team of leading researchers have developed a four-step methodology to put this paradigm into practice in our work with the Fairwork action research project: 


'''First''', ''we begin by identifying specific, real-world problems''. Research that doesn’t start with the lived experiences of communities’ risks being irrelevant.  

'''Second''', ''we engage deeply with theory, using critical realism to analyse the structural and systemic forces'' at play. It’s not enough to describe what’s happening; we need to understand why. 

'''Third''', ''we move to action. Pragmatism demands that we devise interventions that are practical'' and achievable. This is where theory meets practice, and where real change begins. 

'''Finally''', ''we evaluate our work, reflecting on the outcomes'' of these interventions. This step isn’t just about assessing success or failure; it’s about refining both our theoretical understanding and our practical strategies based on what we’ve learned. 


This approach transforms how we think about field of development studies. By merging the depth of critical realism with the hands-on applicability of pragmatism, we create a methodology that doesn’t just interpret the world—it helps change it. As researchers, we’re not content with research that sits on a shelf; we aim to foster work that’s relevant, impactful, and adaptable to the dynamic challenges of our time. 

Through pragmatist-critical realism, the field of development studies can truly live up to its promise of driving meaningful change."

(https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/a-team-of-international-researchers-devise-a-new-approach-to-development-studies-that-effectively-bridges-theory-and-practice/)


[[Category:Integral Theory]]

[[Category:Research]]