
=Bio=

"Prasad Shetty is an urbanist based in Mumbai. He has studied architecture (Mumbai) and urban management (Rotterdam). He currently teaches at the School of Environment and Architecture (SEA) and also works with the Mumbai Metropolitan Region – Environment Improvement and Heritage Conservation Society. He is one of the founder members of the urban research collective; CRIT and the Society for Envirnoment and Architecture.

Earlier he has worked as an urban manager at the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority. He has also been a lecturer at the Kamla Raheja Vidyanidhi Institute for Architecture; an Independent Fellow at the SARAI-CSDS, Delhi; a Consulting Urban Management expert to the Town Administration of Mendefera, Eritrea; and an Expert Member to the Dadra–Nagar Haveli Planning & Development Authority. His work involves research and teaching on contemporary Indian urbanism including architectural practices, studies of post-industrial landscapes, housing, archiving post liberalization developments, entrepreneurial practices and urban property.

His recent works include: De-Mapping: an installation emerging from the hyper-mapping tendencies of urban study practices (supported by Khoj, Delhi); Bombay Talkies and Other Stories of Malad: a research on the land politics in the suburb of Mumbai (supported by Majlis, Mumbai); Being Nicely Messy: a research on projecting future mobility of Mumbai (supported by the Audi Urban Futures Initiative); and Gurgaon Glossaries: compiling the terms that are getting formed when the new city of Gurgaon is settling (supported by SARAI, Delhi & the Devi Art Foundation).

=More Information=

contact:  askshetty@gmail.com

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:India]]