=Source=

This is from an unsigned Memorandum:

* Capture of U.S. Critical Infrastructure by Neoreactionaries. February 5, 2025


=Description=

"Praxis aims to “restore Western Civilization and pursue our ultimate destiny of life among the stars.” Praxis 
is a crypto-native city-state, aligned with the network state ideology. Praxis founder Dryden Brown traveled to 
Greenland in late 2024 in an attempt to buy land or establish a charter city. The project gained renewed relevance as 
Musk supported interest in annexing Greenland, with officials suggesting that U.S. control over the island could be 
secured through economic leverage or diplomatic pressure.
  
Brown has framed Praxis as part of a broader geopolitical expansionist project, positioning Praxis as a test 
case for "Terminus," a Mars-based city concept favored by Elon Musk. The initiative has attracted ~500M in funding 
from various investors, including Paradigm Capital (backed by former Coinbase founder Fred Ehrsam), FTX, Joe 
Lonsdale (former Palantir co-Founder) and Pronomos Capital (backed by Peter Thiel and Patri Friedman).  

The project has actively recruited young, male "hardtech" entrepreneurs. Praxis has faced backlash for its 
Eurocentric, elite-driven ideology, including past claims that Western beauty standards are superior. Former Praxis 
employees claim that Brown talked about attracting top tech talent to the futuristic city with “hot girls” and lavish 
parties. Brown insinuated on X that the West Bank will be used for a new charter city."

[[Category:Network_Nations]]