

=Discussion=

James Quilligan:

" Civilization can recover the ordinary
sense of value that arises from the direct experience of
Being by refocusing on the freedom and equality inherent in polycentricism — the
spontaneous, self-correcting order of socially negotiated
rules. This does not mean reinstating the practice of pure
gift exchange across the world. But it will mean recovering its core
meaning—the inalienable value of presence—through the experience
of what is already right before us and within us, whether
preexisting or created. This requires an economics which does
not separate subjects from objects or persons from things. The
essence of the gift economy is not use value (C) or exchange value
(M), but presence value (PV). As a completely independent center
of economic activity (from those outlined in Figure 1), presence
value allows us to restore the context and wholeness of
intersubjective experience through new forms of common action
and practice. (Author’s note: I had previously called this preservation
value in ‘The Commons of Mind, Life and Matter,’ Kosmos,
spring/summer 2010, and ‘Interest Rates and Climate Change,’
Kosmos, fall/winter 2010, but now believe that presence value is
a more accurate term.)

Here’s how presence value is expressed in a commons-based
economy: the users of resources become the co-producers of their
own goods (through mutual platforms, networks and technologies,
peer-to-peer production, employee-operated businesses
and cooperatives). When the motivations, skills, knowledge,
ideas, learning and imagination of these users/producers are
embodied directly in their collaborative activities, nature and society
are fully present. As in a gift economy, natural and social
growth are fused together through the realization of biopolitical
labor. To sustain this process in social policies, rules and institutions,
resource users/producers develop legal entities called commons
trusts, alongside a plurality of other commons-based
organizations in civil society and local government. "
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-one-common-being.pdf)

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]