= the global heritage of humanity as a whole — a commons of pyramids, temples, and other shared historical and natural treasures


=Description=

From the NewCommons Signals database at 
http://research.iftf.net/node/779

"Beginning in 1972, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) started the World Heritage program, defined as (from their site):

    
''Heritage is our legacy from the past, what we live with today, and what we pass on to future generations. Our cultural and natural heritage are both irreplaceable sources of life and inspiration. Places as unique and diverse as the wilds of East Africa’s Serengeti, the Pyramids of Egypt, the Great Barrier Reef in Australia and the Baroque cathedrals of Latin America make up our world’s heritage.''
(http://whc.unesco.org/en/about/)


    
What makes the concept of World Heritage exceptional is its universal application. World Heritage sites belong to all the peoples of the world, irrespective of the territory on which they are located."
(http://research.iftf.net/node/779)


=Characteristics=

"Key commons criteria:

- Heritage sites are explicitly recognized as a commons for appreciation. Agreement on who should conserve and who should benefit, less common.
- Stakeholders: at the global level, there is reasonable consensus that the stakeholders are future generations. At the more practical, immediate level, there are arguments over “ownership” and “control.”
- Interdependence: Again, fairly easy at the conceptual global level. If those who have access to treasures don’t conserve them for everyone, everyone suffers. Interdependence is less easy to see at the practical level.
- Participatory maintenance: Conservation essential. Not worth much if the people cannot participate by experiencing these treasures.
- Ownership, conservation, and use rules are critical.
- Vulnerability. Many sites highly vulnerable. Some not conserved either due to lack of agreed status and/or lack of funding. Over use will destroy them.
- Self governance… UNESCO tries to engage countries in appropriate self governance.
- These resources are not renewable."
(http://research.iftf.net/node/779)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Policy]]