
'''Article: Priced and Unpriced Online Markets. Benjamin Edelman. Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 23, Number 3—Summer 2009—Pages 21–36'''

URL = http://people.hbs.edu/bedelman/papers/priced-and-unpriced-online-markets-jep2009.pdf



=Abstract=

"ome online resources are free and others are not—but it can be hard to
predict which resources are in which category. Do users pay for web-based
e-mail? Sometimes they do, as in the case of lifetime e-mail service from
Pobox, but often they do not, as in the case of Hotmail from Microsoft or Gmail
from Google. Do users pay for wireless Internet access at “hotspots”? Historically
such access carries a fee, as it does at the T-Mobile HotSpots at many airports and
hotels, but now a number of retail outlets are providing such access without a fee,
such as Panera Bread, Whole Foods, and recently Starbucks. Do users pay for
software? Many users do pay for a wide variety of commercial software, yet other
software like the Linux operating system and the FireFox web browser can be
downloaded without charge.

Zero prices offer important benefits, even relative to small positive prices. For
one, fee-free access reduces transaction costs—eliminating the need for billing
systems as well as, in many cases, account setup, user names, and the like. Furthermore,
zero prices seem to create an environment of experimentation and progress
for products and consumers (Lessig, 2002; von Hippel, 2001). Finally, consumers
overwhelmingly favor zero-price products, even beyond what might be predicted by
their ordinary efforts to maximize consumer surplus (Shampanier, Mazar, and
Ariely, 2007).

Yet experience in other contexts offers cause for concern. Although marginal
costs may be near zero for many levels of use of online resources, costs generally
eventually increase as usage nears a capacity constraint given by technological
capability or system design. More generally, experience in other contexts repeatedly
reveals overconsumption, scarcity, and even hoarding when resources are
provided without charge. For examples, see Parry (2002) on highway congestion,
Starkie (1998) on airport landing slots, and Baumol and Oates (1988) on pollution.

With competing forces both supporting and opposing zero prices, typical
Internet-related activities—like surfing the web, web searches, and e-mail, along
with behind-the-scenes practices like domain names and the allocation of IP
(Internet Protocol) addresses—present a natural context to reevaluate our sense of
the tradeoffs that arise between free and a positive price.'


=Author=

Benjamin Edelman is Assistant Professor of Business Administration, Harvard Business
School, Boston, Massachusetts. His e-mail address is bedelman@hbs.edu.



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Business]]