
This is from a draft document by Evan Prodromou, listed here at http://autonomo.us/wiki/Free_Service_software



=Context=

Evan Promodrou, 11/2008:

"I was thinking about some best practises for Free Service software. By this, I mean software that's suitable for creating an [[Open Software Service]]. I've put a draft checklist on the autonomo.us wiki.

http://autonomo.us/wiki/Free_Service_software

Some of these guidelines might not be applicable to all kinds of software; for example, an anonymous file-sharing package  that doesn't have user accounts or identity. (Admittedly, it was hard for me to come up with a kind of Web software that didn't have some idea of user identity...)

Eventually I expect to make this a blog post on autonomo.us."



=Principles=

This is an outline of some best practices for software to be deployed as Free Services.

   
1. It should have a Free Software license. The AGPLv3 makes a good license since it insists on sharing source with users of network services.
   
2. It should have features to make it easy to share the source of the running instance, especially if the software is modified. Example: Identi.ca software has a prominent "source" link on every page. (Not easy to get source of modified software, however.)
   
3. It should make it easy to add a license for Free Cultural Works. Ideally, the software should ship with a Free Culture license as the default.
   
4. It should let users select alternate licenses for their own contributions.
   
5. It should make data available in standard, open formats where possible.
   
6. It should make data available in bulk for a particular user, so they can "back up" their personal data. Example: all my blog posts.
   
7. It should make data available in bulk for all users, so that third-parties can fork, republish, or just analyze the site-wide data. Example: all blog posts for all users on a server. Example: XML exports of Wikipedia.
   
8. It should let users easily import their data from another server. Example: Carrie sets up a new blog on blogs.example.com and copies the data from her old blog to the new blog.
   
9. It should allow users in one security domain to communicate with users in another security domain. Example: fred@example.net can send email to jennifer@example.org.
  
10. It should let users on one server interact with objects on another server. For example, JackH at wikihow.com can edit pages on Wikitravel using OpenID.
  
11. It should let users assign an existing identity to their account. For example: Fred owns the example.net domain. He has an account on Gmail, and he can fairly easily configure that software so that email to fred@example.net will come to his Gmail inbox, and email he sends from Gmail will have "From: fred@example.net". Another example: Carrie owns the example.org domain. She gets a blog from wordpress.com, and assigns the blog.example.org name to her WordPress blog.
  
12. It should let users move their identities to a new account on their own server or on a competitor's server. Example: Fred can move his example.net email from Gmail to another server. Example: Carrie can move her blog to a different server, and keep the domain name she owns.
  
13. It should use a badge from the OKFN: http://www.opendefinition.org/ossd "


[[Category:Standards]]