
'''= OpenBiblio Principles formulated by the Open Bibliographic Data Working Group of the [[Open Knowledge Foundation]]'''

URL = http://openbiblio.net/principles/


=Text=

"Formally, we recommend adopting and acting on the following principles:

   
1.

Where bibliographic data or collections of bibliographic data are published it is critical that they be published with a clear and explicit statement of the wishes and expectations of the publishers with respect to re-use and re-purposing of individual bibliographic descriptions, the whole data collection, and subsets of the collection. This statement should be precise, irrevocable, and based on an appropriate and recognized legal statement in the form of a waiver or license.

      
* When publishing bibliographic data make an explicit and robust license statement.
   


2.

Many widely recognized licenses are not intended for, and are not appropriate for, bibliographic data or collections of bibliographic data. A variety of waivers and licenses that are designed for and appropriate for the treatment of data are described at http://opendefinition.org/licenses/#Data. Creative Commons licenses (apart from CC0), GFDL, GPL, BSD, etc. are NOT appropriate for data and their use is STRONGLY discouraged.

      
* Use a recognized waiver or license that is appropriate for data.
   


3.

The use of licenses which limit commercial re-use or limit the production of derivative works by excluding use for particular purposes or by specific persons or organizations is STRONGLY discouraged. These licenses make it impossible to effectively integrate and re-purpose datasets. They furthermore prevent commercial services which add value to bibliographic data or commercial activities which could be used to support data preservation.

      
* If you want your data to be effectively used and added to by others it should be open as defined by the Open Definition (http://opendefinition.org) – in particular non-commercial and other restrictive clauses should not be used.
   


4.

Furthermore, it is recommended that bibliographic data or collections of bibliographic data, especially where publicly funded, should be explicitly placed in the public domain via the use of the Public Domain Dedication and Licence or Creative Commons Zero Waiver. This promotes the maximum possible reuse of the data, in line with the general ethos of sharing within the publicly funded cultural heritage sector.

      
* Where possible, explicitly place bibliographic data in the Public Domain via PDDL or CC0."
(http://openbiblio.net/principles/)



[[Category:Standards]]