
Gordon Cook on the work of Eva Waskell, pioneerof the [[Election Integrity Movement]]: 

The [[Privatization of Democratic Elections via Computer Technology]], on [[Eva Waskell]] and the Election Integrity Movement. Cook Report, February 2010

Full report at http://www.cookreport.com/eva.pdf

Intro via http://www.cookreport.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&catid=38%3Acurrent-issues&id=253%3Aapr-may-2010&Itemid=73


=Excerpts=

"Waskell: “The most important political office is that of private citizen.” Justice Louis Brandeis said
that, not me. And citizens in the election integrity movement take their political office pretty seriously.
They’re trying to live it. And don’t forget, they’re angry citizens. Angry citizens who have the
potential to have a powerful and lasting effect on shaping election reform if they can channel that
anger into effective action. There’s a connection here to something a member of the audience at
Supernova 2009 said. I’m paraphrasing a tiny bit. “The public Internet was created by angry young
men. Now it’s run by old men who still act like angry young men.” Something similar in terms of
harnessing human energy is happening with today’s innately curious citizens who for the first time
really started paying attention to how elections were run and then suddenly they became angry! It
was citizens who were closest
to the nuts and bolts of
local election procedures
as practiced. They were in
the trenches and saw with
their own eyes what was
happening on election day
at the polls and at the
LEOs office, and on election
night in the central
counting room, and they
had a gut reaction to much
of it. It was citizens who
directly observed the
meaningless pre-election
logic and accuracy tests,
the meaningless recount
procedures, the flagrant
partisanship, the barriers
to observer access, the
rigged recount in Ohio after
the November 2004 election."

'''COOK Report: Don’t these various citizen groups have anything in common?'''

Waskell: There definitely is common ground and common purpose to what these dedicated volunteers
are doing but they’re largely functioning in cells. I haven’t seen any real kind of sustained national
coordination. The Creekside Declaration of March 22, 2008 is one attempt by about a dozen
election integrity advocates (including election official Ion Sancho of Leon County, Florida) to define
a common purpose: “Our mission is to encourage citizen ownership of transparent, participatory
democracy.” And Nancy Tobi in New Hampshire, Andi Novick in New York, voting rights attorney
Paul Lehto from Washington state, and Bev Harris’ watchdog group Black Box Voting and her
mighty elves have begun to focus more and more on election integrity and election reform as a
human rights issue. In addition, Harris et al rightly focus on the public right to know, public access
to open election data, transparency, and accountability. Right now these concepts, especially the
public right to know, public oversight and public control of elections, are pretty foreign to mainstream
thinking in general and within the election community itself.


'''COOK Report: Let’s get back to the nascent election integrity movement.'''

Waskell: Some of the initial post-2000 efforts of the election integrity movement have been quite
successful. But if this is going to grow into a genuine movement that makes a permanent difference,
they are going to have to build relationships with election officials based on mutual respect
and understanding. Exactly what Greg Mortenson did in Afghanistan as described in his recent
books Three Cups of Tea and Stones Into Schools. Mortenson also points out that the very first
step in his mission to promote peace through education was listening. He listened to the people. He
listened and he heard what they wanted and that was what motivated him. I can’t emphasize
enough how critical face-to-face listening is as a first step.

Right now I don’t see much listening and mutual respect at the local level. Citizen activists and
election officials are largely throwing stones at each other. Yes, election officials must be held accountable
if they violate the law and I know from first-hand experience that they have done so repeatedly
with total impunity. This has set a very bad and deeply engrained precedent within our
election system. Just ask the two women who found official election records, results tapes of precinct
vote totals, in a dumpster behind the election department building in a county in Florida—a
crystal clear violation of the federal law regarding retention of election records. And it was caught
on videotape! The citizens were subsequently harassed by officials but the LEO was not punished at
all. Injustices like this must not be allowed to continue. They’re part of what fuels many activists.


At the same time, this arrogant and unlawful behavior does not reflect the vast, vast majority of
hard-working, patient, dedicated and honest election officials who are doing the very best they can
with very limited resources and working under pressure coming from a very large number of conflicting
forces. Let’s think about what they have to deal with as the ringmistress or ringmaster of a
30-ring circus. By the way, election administration/management courses in The Election Center’s
Professional Education Program cover the topic of “organized anarchy.”

Election officials need to remember that there are definitely some citizens who ask questions that
expose their basic ignorance about election procedures. And there are citizens who only seem to
point out what you’re doing wrong and not what you’re doing right. (Election administration is like
housework in this regard. People only notice when something is not done. “You didn’t wash my blue
socks.” There’s never any praise for what is routinely done. “Hey sweetie, thank you ever so much
for taking out the garbage. Let me give you a hug.) This does not mean that all citizens can be
painted with the same brush of disdain.
At some point, hopefully in the near future, citizens and election officials are going to have to create
a process equivalent to having three cups of tea. And they need to create a safe space where
this can happen. It’s going to be exciting to see how this unfolds in each jurisdiction.

'''COOK Report: Can you briefly summarize how your focus shifted over the years?'''

Waskell: Before I say something about my shift in focus over the years, let me say something
about my focus during an actual election. It was always necessary to shift your focus and your
awareness during any election to ensure that you saw the whole problem in context and in relationship
to all of the other parts of the election system. The trick in doing this was that some of the
election context was visible and some of it was either invisible or a taboo topic you didn’t talk
about. At the same time, you had to know what was important and keep your eye on that. You had
to understand what you were looking at. This is a key factor in election monitoring that’s overlooked
all the time. You can’t effectively monitor a process you don’t understand. You wouldn’t
want me to evaluate brain surgery, for example, or someone’s golf swing. Yet we have people observing
an election process all the time and they have no idea of what they’re looking at...whether
it’s the pre-election logic and accuracy test or the vote counting. One last point. Because there’s so
much happening election day within a very short period of time, it’s very easy for something that’s
critical to get lost in the chaos.


'''COOK Report: So how did your focus and your thinking about elections evolve over time?'''

Originally I focused on the technology and the need for robust, mandatory standards.
And I researched the ownership of the vendors when I had the chance. Who really owned these
private companies whose software had such enormous political power? Who were the programmers?
Who were the other employees? Ronnie Dugger has done a lot of digging in this area and so
have a number of citizen-based groups. Unfortunately, what these public service investigators have
uncovered and documented is not well known at all outside the activist community. So government
agencies in Nevada and California know more about the employees in casinos and the people who
collect money from parking meters than any election official at any level of government anywhere
in the country knows, or has even tried to know, about the people who own, work, consult with and
are tied to the companies that manufacture voting systems. When any state or local election
sleuths examine the private vendors, their number one concern is whether or not the company will
remain solvent so no LEO gets burned buying a voting system and then having the vendor go out
of business. The vendors will tell you that this entire situation isn’t really a problem because they
do backgrounds checks on their employees. No further comment. Let’s move on to something more
uplifting.


'''...'''

The proprietary vote-counting
software was the first dragon I wanted to slay. Then later I realized that trade secret election software
does much more than count votes. The vendors’ election management systems are used for
many essential and critical functions throughout the election process and all of this software is uncertified,
unexamined and unregulated. So first it was all about the flawed voting equipment and
this impenetrable black box that was counting votes.

And because I jumped into the three lawsuits at the very beginning, I quickly saw the limitations of
the courtroom process. Then over the course of a few decades, I spoke with numerous attorneys
across the country who were involved in a variety of election litigation at the local level. The common
theme that emerged here was that the courtroom was a dead end. The Catch 22 situation the
plaintiff always faced was that you have to show fraud before you get access to the voted ballots.
But you have to inspect the original voted ballots if you expect to prove fraud. And even if a judge
orders the LEO to turn over the ballots or the election database on the election computer, some or
all of the key evidence—without failure—has a funny way of disappearing. The plaintiff is left
empty-handed (and soon to be ridiculed) and the LEO goes back to work as if nothing happened,
except that the LEO will be sure to tell the stenographers—I mean the press—about how much
money the “sore loser” has cost the local taxpayers.

That reference I just made to a judge ordering the election database on the election computer to
be turned over to the plaintiff comes from a court case in Pima County, Arizona stemming from a
2006 Regional Transportation Authority election with just a yes/no choice on the ballot. I don’t
know where to begin to talk about this election and the actions of the local election department in
Tucson because there are so many absolutely excellent examples of what really happens when
someone gets too close to potential hard evidence. The voted optical scan ballots suddenly get
moved to another county...for safekeeping. Poll tapes with vote totals go along for the ride. Critical
documents are missing and never found. No one is held accountable. Transparency is close to zero.
Observer access to the hand recount is restricted. The press reports are very, very misleading and
incomplete, and when you read the citizen reports about what happened, the details that emerge
are disturbing. It’s a perfect story for PBS’s FRONTLINE but the entire story would have to be
shown in several parts so people would have time to absorb the dirty little election secrets that
were exposed. But it’s the disappearance of evidence that should concern us.


'''What needs to be done now?'''


In addition to a Democracy Index, we also need to get to work on gathering election data for a
Transparency Index and an Accountability Index for LEOs. Citizens have a pretty good head-start
on gathering solid data in these areas. One of the groups that come to mind is SAVE R VOTE in
Riverside, California, which was founded by Tom Courbat. SAVE R VOTE has written six citizen observation
reports on six elections from June 2006 to November 2008 and submitted them to the
Riverside County Board of Supervisors and state election officials. These reports detailing multiple
and repeated violations of election procedures, chain of custody, security, transparency and auditability
are well worth the read. I suggest starting with the report on the June 2008 election entitled
Broken Links <http://electiondefensealliance.org/files/Broken_Chains_of_Custody_SRV_0608.pdf>
and the follow-up report on the November 2008 election entitled Missing Pieces
<http://electiondefensealliance.org/Riverside_Missing_Pieces>.
(http://www.cookreport.com/eva.pdf)



[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Articles]]