
=Description=

"Many educators and activists use privilege walks as an experiential activity to highlight how people 
benefit or are marginalized by systems in our society. There are many iterations of such walks with 
several focusing on a single issue, such as race, gender, or sexuality. This particular walk is designed 
with questions spanning many different areas of marginalization, because the goal of this walk is to 
understand intersectionality. People of one shared demographic might move together for one question 
but end up separating due to other questions as some move forward and others move back. This 
iteration of the privilege walk is especially recommended for a high school classroom in which the 
students have had time to bond with each other. 
 
Many people with certain privileges never notice them, because they are so woven into the 
mainstream that those who have them cannot see them. For youth, understanding and acknowledging 
privileges is key to understanding why and how they react and perceive their surroundings. The 
capacity for youth to objectively reflect on their interactions with the world will be invaluable. The focus 
on intersectionality in this practice will allow practitioners and students alike to understand that having 
one privilege does not make up for another marginalization and that every privilege or marginalization 
exists on a different but intersecting plane from another. This focus will help to avoid having positive 
developments being derailed by debates over who is more oppressed. It also helps youth understand 
ideas of intersectionality and be aware of marginalized groups within the marginalized group.  
 
Goal: To discuss the complicated intersections of privileges and marginalization in a less confrontational 
and more reflective way."

(https://pocc.nais.org/PoCC/media/documents/Privilege-Walk-Activity-for-the-Classroom.pdf)

[[Category:Identity Politics]]