

=Discussion=

Charles Leadbeater and Paul Miller in the [[Pro-Am Revolution]]:

"For most of modern history the British army was a Pro-Am
organisation. It was only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
that it became professional. Before that, lords, lairds, nobles and
monarchs raised armies from among the local community. Even
when the regular army became professionalised the amateur
tradition remained important, for instance in the role of the Home
Guard during the Second World War and more recently the
Territorial Army (TA).

Some historians trace the roots of the auxiliary, volunteer and
militia to Anglo-Saxon traditions of communal military obligation
that became transformed into medieval law and then into the
statutes that set up the people’s militia in 1558. The obligation to
serve in the militia was imposed upon owners of property in 1757
and it then became a tax on employer manpower in 1831. By the
early twentieth century the militia, imperial yeomanry and
auxiliary forces were merged to form the territorial forces, the
precursor to today’s TA.

From the sixteenth century onwards a large standing army was
discouraged, as a military despotism was feared. In the Second
World War illustrious members of the Home Guard, among them JB
Priestley and George Orwell, stressed the democratic and
egalitarian nature of the auxiliary forces that embraced a far wider
cross-section of society than the regular army.

In The Amateur Military Tradition, Ian Beckett describes the
definitive history of the auxiliaries: ‘Auxiliary forces have been the
real point of contact between army and society in Britain.
Auxiliaries provided opportunity. This might be the opportunity of
experiencing something different or of enjoying recreational
facilities or comradeship, which might not otherwise have been
enjoyed.’30 It was also, he noted, a route for social advancement
and acceptance into society.

Much of this is still echoed in the way the TA presents itself: as an
organisation that provides challenge and comradeship, as well as
the opportunity to learn skills that will stand people in good stead
in their working lives. At their peak in the late nineteenth century
the auxiliary forces accounted for perhaps 6 per cent of the male
population aged between 15 and 35. Close to two million men
passed through the voluntary forces and militia during the last
decades of the nineteenth century. The TA has just 40,000
members. For most of its members, the TA is a parallel career. Every
TA member has 8–10 weeks’ training, with officers going on a two-
week programme at Sandhurst. Most members devote at least 28
days a year to the TA and for that they get a £1,500 ‘bounty’. Most
TA members give up weekends and holidays for training in excess
of the standard 28 days. Local TA branches are supported by
members of the regular, professional army.

The Territorial Army is a hybrid, Pro-Am organisation: a local,
largely volunteer force, supported by professional soldiers and
tightly linked with the professional army. The TA provides one
model for how the state and professionals can foster Pro-Am forms
of organisation that create public value."
(http://www.demos.co.uk/files/proamrevolutionfinal.pdf)



[[Category:Security]]