


=Description=

A hypothetical scenario proposed by David Hookes:

"The role of knowledge-workers was important in creating the political and practical
means to develop sustainable technologies in many areas. Knowledge workers were
the largest group, about 40 %, of the working population in advanced countries by the
end of the first decade of 21st century. Seed funding was obtained from a number pf
private and public sources for the establishment of an advanced use of the internet
called PSI-net (usually known as Ψ-net) or Problem-Solving Intelligent net which
used the latest distributed AI techniques. Its original purposes were so that (i) groups
active in sustainable and green development work could access the most advanced
scientific and technical expertise (ii) scientists and engineers could find the optimal
solution to environmental problems. However it developed much beyond that original
mission to provide a kind of cyber nous-sphere that allowed people to test out their
ideas critically and think creatively and reflectively in and across many areas of
human knowledge rather than just in the applied sciences. The Ψ-net was linked to the
high-performance supercomputing grids developed by the EU and in the USA in the
first decade of this century. This grid of multi-teraflop [teraflop = a million million
FLloating point OPerations per second] supercomputers meant that most design
solutions and complex processes could be rapidly modelled or simulated. Thus the
speed and range of problem-solving was greatly increased.

An important subspace was involved on discussing political structures necessary to
implement the planet–saving programs. For instance, political scientists and political
activists examined the blockages and failures of existing political structures that were
preventing a rational solution to the world’s environmental problems. An economics
Ψ-subnet interacted with the politics Ψ-subnet to discuss climate instability as a
manifest failure of the market system [6]. In short the Ψ-net with its many interacting
subnets became like a ‘world brain’ and is now seen as an important evolutionary
development of our species as a whole as it was accessible from all social groupings
from universities to villages in the (rapidly) developing world. The use of ideas from
quantum physics was especially important in providing the conceptual breakthroughs
necessary for its implementation. This involved being able to relate both local to non-
locals effects which is common to quantum theory and political economy."

(http://hometown.aol.co.uk/davehookes/Newyork1.pdf)


[[Category:Intelligence]]