
=Description=

'''1.'''

"Procomuns is a forum for the cocreation of public policies for a commons-oriented collaborative economy. Collaborative policies for collaborative economy. A space for the codesign and development of proposals, and public-commons solutions for a commons collaborative economy.
 
The collaborative economy based on digital platforms is growing exponentially, creating challenges and opportunities. It has turned into a top priority for the political agenda around the world, and the involvement of citizenship is key, as well as the differentiation of models and to impulse of the commons model and platform cooperativism as an opportunity to democratize economy at a large scale."


'''2. By Mayo Fuster Morell:'''

"The [[Commons Collaborative Economy]] refers to collaborative consumption, production,
sharing, and exchange among distributed groups of peers – supported by a digital platform
– in conditions that empower them and society as a whole. The concept is in direct
contrast to extractionist and explorative modalities, represented by companies like Uber
and Airbnb. The commons collaborative economy results from the encounter of four
trajectories of socio-economic innovation and democratization: the social and solidarity
economy, including the cooperative tradition; the open knowledge of the commons; the
environmental sustainability of the circular economy; and the gender perspectives of the
feminist economy. Its enterprises support fair, sustainable, inclusive, and distributed
patterns. Its business, governance models, and philosophy place the citizens in the central
role as producers and decision makers in the economy, and ensure that economic growth
is connected to the needs of society.

Barcelona city government believes that the commons collaborative economy is better for
city residents than the commercial-oriented collaborative economy; hence it is promoting it
as such. Moreover, the city council considers collaborative economy policies should be
produced collaboratively. It was for this purpose that it formed BarCola, a working group
between Barcelona City Council and the city’s commons collaborative economy sector,
represented by 20 enterprises. It was also why it supported the organization of
Procomuns, a forum for policy co-creation.

Procomuns has developed and proposed over 120 related policy recommendations for
Barcelona, including specific measures related to work. These recommendations are
informed by the research of the Dimmons group at IN3 (Open University of Catalonia), the
P2PValue Project, and the Procomuns conference co-organized by Barcelona City Council
in March 2016. The goal of these policy recommendations is to promote fair, respectful
and nonexploitative working conditions, particularly in collaborative economy projects. This
includes the elimination of labor exploitation, sexual harassment, and gender gaps. This
also includes the protection of “responsible citizen producers” as a new agent that
generates the economic and social commons, and the fighting of corruption and "revolving
doors" in the collaborative economy policy field. 

'''These policy recommendations have been embraced by Barcelona’s city council. An implementation plan for the citizen-approved policies has been drawn up and funded, and the implementation phase has begun.''' 

Furthermore, the policies are not the only thing of
interest: the highly collaborative policy formulation process is also worth noting."
(https://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2(1).pdf)

=Conference=

==2017==

Mayo Fuster Morell:

"This year 2017 is the year of the regulations of the collaborative economy: we will discuss with representatives of the European Parliament, the Generalitat of Catalonia and the Barcelona City Council about which policies could support the commons, and we will define guidelines for cities. We will reflect with Yochai Benkler, expert in digital commons, on the deep transformations underway, as well as define strategies of passing from an oligarchical economy to open social economy. We will present resources for entrepreneurship, economic models and technologies for the scalability of initiatives, and co-design solutions for city challenges, regarding housing, care, precarity and exclusion."

=More Information=

==The conference==
 
27 & 28 of June (Tuesday and Wednesday) in Barcelona Activa (C / Laguna 162-164) from 9am to 19pm every day, and final party at 28th at La T. Registration is open and free. .
 
Program: http://procomuns.net/ca/programa-2017/ ; Registration: http://procomuns.net/ca/inscripcio/

==The policies==

* View the full policy here: http://procomuns.net/en/policy
* Summary of the policy including the 10 policies that received more citizen support:
http://procomuns.net/wpcontent/uploads/2016/03/CommonsDeclarationPolicies_eng_v03_summary.pdf
* Procomuns videos: http://procomuns.net/en/streaming-videos
* Interview detailing the collaborative policy development process:
http://www.shareable.net/blog/barcelona-crowdsourced-its-sharing-economy-policies-canother-cities-do-the-same

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]