
* Research thesis by Kenia Alice at ECO-URCA, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


=Contents=

Title: Proceedings of subjectivity in the production of audiovisual movements of global struggles

First Chapter - Historiography of devices and struggles. Two genealogies -

1.	May 68 / Situationism / Fights specific policies - the personal is political. Born another type of political struggle linked to other artistic expressions and subjective processes.

2.	Seattle 99 - The multitude against Empire - antiglobalization struggles - emergence and intensification of virtual activism - hackers / add busters / culture jamming / flash mobs / CMIS.


Second Chapter - Struggles Global Contemporary - aim to understand their devices and their inflections and aesthetic styles - case studies -

1.	Occupation of squares - Arab Spring and Occupy 15M - Organization networking and download of cyberspace / Locative Media - the livestream as style and political strategy. The self-representation as CLAIM.

2.	The reappropriation of images - Chile and pop culture.

3.	Anonymous - borrowed from the common media as an instrument of struggle. Symbol (mask) historically disputed: Guy Fawkes, V for Vendetta (Comic / Movie), group Anonymous.

4.	Brazil - Movements - occupation Pinheirinho - Freedom Marches, Marijuana - Movement of Free Pass …


Third Chapter - Conceptual and Questions 

1.	What are these subjective processes constructed by these global struggles contemporary. 

2.	We think globally into new aesthetic forms-political struggles …

3.	To what extent the concept of Negri - Common / Empire / Crowd - resists the practice of the movements ...


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Brazil]]