=Description=

Zack Walsh:

"Process-relational ontologies posit that everything is
co-created, constituted in and through relations to other things, human and
nonhuman. We are literally in every moment of our existence co-creating one
another and the world that we live in.

Many cultures, practices, and embodied ways of being in the world are
informed by versions of process-relational ontology. Margaret introduced
Native American traditions that consider both humans and nonhuman entities
as persons. The stone and the river are seen as unique persons co-creating each
other, which is why prayers often end with “for all my relations.” Processes
of emergence extend outward, mutually influencing each other to varying
degrees, through complex interconnections in the web of life. Peter Doran, a
law professor from Queen’s University Belfast, introduced the Huayan tradition
of Buddhism which uses the metaphor of a jeweled net to describe the infinite
complexity of a multi-causal universe. At each node of the cosmic net, there
is a multifaceted jewel that reflects all the others while keeping its own unique
position. When one thing arises, all things arise simultaneously. Everything in
this net has mutual causality, so that what happens to one thing happens to the
entire universe.

Margaret Stout noted that a key distinction between undifferentiated and differentiated
relational ontologies concerns the relationship between the parts and the
whole. Undifferentiated relational ontologies completely fuse the parts within
the whole, whereas differentiated relational ontologies maintain a distinction
between parts and wholes. Soviet state communism is a good example of an
oppressive governance structure that fuses individuals (parts) within larger
forms of collectivism (wholes). Given that problematic sense of enclosure, Silke
Helfrich and David Bollier explained why differentiated relational ontologies
are better expressions of commons governance. Different individual agents
collectively manage resources and organize society according to both their
distinct agency, preferences, and values and at the same time, a collective
understanding of how they can work together in larger systems of coordination
and integration. Margaret noted that this understanding of commoning is a
clear manifestation of Integrative Governance and its grounding in relational
process ontology."
(https://cdn6.commonsstrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Zack-Walsh_Ontology-as-a-Hidden-Driver-of-Politics_def2.pdf?)

=Characteristics=

Zack Walsh:

"Differentiated relational ontologies, including process-relational ontology, are non-essentialist,
meaning that they do not attribute a definitive character or essence to anything.
Everything changes in relationship to everything else and the various potentials
presented by each moment. It is therefore important to always leave concepts
open for further reflection and definition.

Although process-relational ontologies have become an emerging topic of
interest in recent scholarship, they have existed from time immemorial within
indigenous traditions. As Zoe Todd (2016) explains, recent academic discourses
often colonize that history. Academic discourse is often exclusionary and nondialogical, highly rational and assertive, and not open to the profoundly spiritual
and emotional aspects at the core of ontological claims. Ontological dialogue
therefore requires not only theorizing but embodied ways of sensemaking. This
is one of the reasons why the patterns approach was discussed in this workshop."
(https://cdn6.commonsstrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Zack-Walsh_Ontology-as-a-Hidden-Driver-of-Politics_def2.pdf?)

=Discussion=

Zack Walsh paraphrasing Peter Doran:

"The modern frame is in active denial of some
form of relationality. Western ontology, Peter
said, is based on fear and insecurity. He said our bids for ontological security
are complex responses to our deep vulnerability as a species. The paradox is
that the privileged Western response valorizes control, self-sufficiency, heroic
individualism, and a disembodied disposition that are built on a denial of our
vulnerability and mortality, resulting in individuals feeling deep disconnection.
Western ontological discourses are still haunted by bids for an “ontotheology”—a flight from the real, from mortality, from vulnerability, and from
complexity. Western ontology is privileged, nevertheless, due to the historical
and geopolitical power of western societies. Therefore, it is important not to lose
sight of the role of hegemonic political power in privileging certain ontological
claims in the world. Indeed, a growing number of scholars such as William
Connolly, Sergei Prozorov, Bruno Latour, Marisol de la Cadena, and Mario
Blaser see ontological conflicts as the deeper source of many political conflicts.
Alexandros Kioupkiolis, a political scientist from Aristotle University, noted
that attempts at political reform within the current paradigm are largely
meaningless, because the paradigm itself is what drives today’s social and
ecological crises. It is really important therefore to discuss ontological issues
to get at the root of contemporary political problems. In such discussions,
however, it is difficult to determine which ontology (if any) offers a more
accurate description of the world. Conversation can become challenging as
you try to reconcile different ontologies, so it is important to consider how we
speak about ontology."
(https://cdn6.commonsstrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Zack-Walsh_Ontology-as-a-Hidden-Driver-of-Politics_def2.pdf?)

=More information=

* Stout, M. (2012). Competing ontologies: A primer for public administration. Public
Administration Review 72 (3): 388–398. doi: 10.111/j.1540-6210.2012.02530.x

* Stout, M. & Love, J. M. (2013). Relational process ontology: A grounding for global
governance. Administration & Society 20(10): 1–35. doi: 10.1177/0095399713490692

* Stout, M. & Love, J.M. (2015) Integrative process: Follettian thinking from ontology to
administration. Anoka, MN: Process Century Press.

* Stout, M. & Love, J. M. (2016). A radically democratic response to global governance: Dystopian utopias.
New York: Routledge.

* Stout, M. & Love, J. M. (2019). Integrative governance: Generating sustainable responses to global crises.
London, UK: Routledge.

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]