
'''* Essay: The Production of Subjectivity: From Transindividuality to the Commons. Jason Read'''

URL = http://www.lwbooks.co.uk/journals/newformations/articles/nf70read.pdf


=Abstract= 

"Collectivity is increasingly difficult to conceptualize. This is perhaps due to
a long philosophical cold war. Which has left us with concepts of social relations that
start with an irreducible individual, figuring society as nothing other than the sum total
of individual actions, as in social contract theory and various forms of methodological
individualism, on the one hand, and spectres of organic or functionalist totality, on the
other hand. Against both terms of this division this paper examines Gilbert Simondon’s
work on individuation to explore the transindividual production of subjectivity. The
conditions of our subjectivity, language, knowledge, and habits, are neither individual
nor part of any collective, but are the conditions of individual identity and collective
belonging, remaining irreducible to each. These conditions have become increasingly
important to the contemporary production process, becoming the source of new forms of
wealth. They are the new commons that are increasingly becoming enclosed, privatized.
Finally, following the work of Paolo Virno and Bernard Stiegler, I argue that these
commons, the transindividual production of subjectivity, can become the basis of a new
politics, a politics irreducible to individuality or totality."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]