==Contextual Quote==

"PD offers a more open, decentralized, locally rooted, efficient, egalitarian democracy, supported by
leaner and more flexible government(s), as joined by a
more capable public. Its policies and institutions cohere
and mutually support one other in driving up social
learning and productivity, visibly benefiting citizens via
a better democratic order. It both satisfies democracy’s
“survival criterion” and reopens its future. It may not be
nirvana, but it’s not too shabby."

- Joel Rogers [https://cows.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/1368/2020/04/2015-Productive-Democracy.pdf]

==Description==

Joel Rogers:

"Productive democracy, an alternative to both neoliberalism and traditional social democracy, would focus on those that encouraged wide contribution to developing the total factor productivity (including human, physical, and natural capital) of well-organized places, with shared local capture of its benefits. These places would compete on the dynamic efficiency of their governing institutions and public goods, and cooperate on joint gains to same. Governing institutions would be designed for resilience (i.e., learning and adaptive capacity) and enlistment of free citizen contribution to this project, which requires sustained and cooperative experiment and problem-solving. Practical material equality would be achieved by cost-reducing public goods, asset equalization (“property owning democracy”), and transfers and insurance tied closely to society-wide productivity. Within places, the social contract between governing institutions and citizens — preparation for social contribution, expectation of its provision — would rest on the traditional radical democratic conviction that, given fair terms, ordinary people are both able and willing to govern themselves and contribute to a society (and global order) fit to live in."
(was at www.realutopias.com/proposal-sessions/proposal-sessions-l-z/real-utopia-proposal-session-productive-democracy/)

==Discussion==

Joel Rogers:

""We usually think of
democracy as a
source of inclusive
representation and
distributive fairness,
which it surely is. But it is also a source
of problem-solving, invention and thus
wealth generation—a source of value, not
just values. After forty years of the corporate-sponsored defamation of democracy
as whining parasitism or incompetence,
and of democratic government as mere
“waste, fraud and abuse,” it’s imperative
that progressives show the ability of both
to actually work, to be useful, in everyday
life. Call this demonstration of usefulness
democracy’s “survival criterion.”
Doing so is one central aim of productive democracy—and the source of “productive” in its name. 

PD would highlight the centrality of fostering both social
learning and productivity—understood not just as output
per unit of input, but as value per unit of input (and where
“natural capital,” aka the environment, is included in that
calculation)—in achieving more ambitious egalitarian
ends. It would place a bigger and more visible bet than
social democrats ever did on a well-ordered democracy’s
ability to help citizens create social wealth—and solve
social problems. Its signature politics would be efforts to
develop and harness that contribution. Indeed, it would
define the “general welfare” not just as physical and economic security and reasonably equal opportunity and life
chances, but as the capacity and interest of all citizens to
make such contributions, to be actively engaged in building their own society."

(https://cows.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/1368/2020/04/2015-Productive-Democracy.pdf)

==Policy==

Joel Rogers:

"Let’s go to the
essential elements. These are summarized in the sidebar “Three Public Philosophies,” which aims to clarify
PD’s policy, governing, and broad “constitutional political economy” by contrasting its approach with those
of neoliberalism and traditional social democracy."

{| class="wikitable"
|+ THREE PUBLIC PHILOSOPHIES
|-
!  
! Neo‐Liberalism
! Social Democracy
! Productive Democracy
|-
! Economic strategy
| Inequality/incentives
| Effective demand
| Effective supply of high‐road productive infrastructure
|-
! Redistributive peak
| None
| Late
| Early
|-
! Asset ownership
| Narrow
| Narrow
| Wide (private firms and public commons)
|-
! Income security
| None
| Employment, redistribution 
| Social dividend (basic income)
|-
! Revenue
| Regressive taxes on private income/profits
| Progressives taxes on private income/profits
| Progressive taxes on private income, consumption, wealth, public bads
|-
! Intl economic strategy
| Forced integration
| Strategic protectionism
| Balanced trade, managed diversity, global public goods
|-
! Privileged branch
| Judiciary
| Executive
| Legislature and problem‐solving public
|-
! Public administration
| Disable affirmative state
| Delegation/rule‐bound
| Deliberative democratic experimentalism
|-
! Intergov relations
| Regressive federalism or unitary state
| Progressive unitary state, limited federalism
| Democratic (progressive & cooperative) federalism, rooted in metros/regions
|-
! Social contribution
| Demand/not enabled
| Enabled/not demanded
| Strongly encouraged and enabled
|}

===A committment to the effective supply of the productive infrastructure===

"Considering, first, policy: in the realm of economic
policy, PD would continue to use the traditional Keynesian tools of macroeconomic steering to maintain “effective demand” and keep the economy near its full potential. But it would commit as well to effective
supply of the “productive infrastructure”
needed to support the economy we actually want, not just the one we have. By this
I mean a suite of policies, public goods, and
institutions that together work to raise performance standards for firms and communities, enable both to meet them, and capture
and share the resulting increased wealth.

This infrastructure is intrinsically local.

The relevant “location” can and sometimes
would be the whole nation. But it may be
easier to imagine it in terms of metropolitan
areas (cities and their surrounding suburbs
and commuting sheds), the densely populated and geographically compact engines
of wealth in all national economies. (In the
United States, for example, on just 12 percent of our land area, the top 100 metropolitan regions house two-thirds of our total
population and produce more than threequarters of our annual GDP.)
Already adopted in many cities (but nowhere near all), typical policies include things
like standards on job quality, training, career
pathways and a living wage at area firms;
requirements for reduced waste (eventually
zero); and broad encouragement of worker
organization and ownership. Typical public
goods, with their positive effects in lowering
living costs, increasing sustainability and improving the local quality of life, are things
like public transportation, education, recreational facilities and public space."

===Preparing all citizens to participate and make a contribution to society===

"Productive democracy would also argue for increasing
the relative share of total “welfare” investment made early
in life (everything from early-pregnancy care to perinatal
and visiting-nurse assistance to whatever else is needed,
up to adulthood, by way of health, education, counseling or other support).
While this may be expensive, producing capable and confident adults is still much cheaper
than repairing broken ones, and PD’s commitment to
equality means preparing all citizens to participate and
make a contribution to society. For similar reasons, it
would also supplement employment income with a basic
income guarantee for all (as most of Latin America does
now, and Switzerland and other European countries are
seriously considering). And it would vastly widen worker-citizen ownership, both of private firms and society’s
“commons.” The latter includes both our natural commons (air, land, water, flora and fauna) and our created
one, especially those parts of special benefit to business
(e.g., physical infrastructure, intellectual property and
business law, central banking)."

===PD would promote experimentation and deliberative problem-solving, involving citizens===

"Productive democracy would move government
more squarely back into the business of public debate
and deliberation. Its “privileged” unit of government
would not be those private-property guardians so favored by neoliberals—the judiciary. Nor would it be
the executive-centered administrative state favored
by social democrats. Rather, it would be the “people’s
house,” the legislature—and the organized public itself.
In PD’s version of progressive federalism, the national
government would establish and fund a set of core commitments to all citizens; state and regional governments
would be free to experiment (or not) above that. Preserving its commitment to the affirmative state—the
belief that solving problems is the government’s job—
PD would promote experimentation and deliberative
problem-solving, often involving citizens, in achieving
legislatively declared goals. It would ensure and measure accountability by the actual progress toward such
declared goals, not by monitoring the observance of often meaningless bureaucratic rules."

==More Information==

* (no longer at) www.realutopias.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Joel-Rogers-Real-Utopia-proposal-Productive-Democracy-2012.pdf
* [https://cows.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/1368/2020/04/2015-Productive-Democracy.pdf Productive Democracy]: The Nation (150th Anniversary Issue) 400 (April 6, 2015): 206-210.

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]