
= '''The category of the prosumer commodity/produser commodity does not signify a democratization of the media towards participatory systems, but the total commodification of human creativity.'''


=Discussion=

Christian Fuchs [http://fuchs.icts.sbg.ac.at/ICTS_EJC.pdf]:

"The difference between the audience commodity on traditional
mass media and on the Internet is that in the latter the users are also content
producers: there is user-generated content, the users engage in permanent creative
activity, communication, community building and content production.
That the users are more active on the Internet than in the reception of television
or radio content is due to the decentralized structure of the Internet that
allows many-to-many communication. Due to the permanent activity of the
recipients and their status as prosumers, I would in the case of the Internet
argue that the audience commodity is a prosumer commodity or produser
commodity. '''The category of the prosumer commodity/produser commodity does not signify a democratization of the media towards participatory systems, but the total commodification of human creativity.''' Much of the time spent online produces profit for large corporations like Google, NewsCorp (which
owns MySpace) or Yahoo (which owns Flickr). Advertisements on the Internet
are frequently personalized. This is possible by surveilling, storing and assessing
user activities with the help of computers and databases. This is another
difference to television and radio, which due to their centralized structure provide
less individualized content and advertisements. But in the area of the traditional
mass media also, one can observe a certain shift as, for instance, in the
case of pay-per-view, televotings, talkshows and call-in TV and radio shows. In
the case of the Internet, the commodification of audience participation is easier
to achieve than on other mass media. 

The rise of the Internet prosumer
commodity also shows that the visions of critical theorists like Benjamin,
Brecht or Enzensberger of an emancipatory media structure has today been
subsumed under capital. New media do carry a certain potential for advancing
grassroots socialism, but this potential is antagonistically entangled in the
dominant structures and it is unclear if the capitalist integument can be
stripped away. Personalized advertisement on the Internet is an expression of
the tendency towards what Deleuze has termed the ‘[[Society of Control]]’ as an
aspect of contemporary marketing and capitalism, in the sense that individuals
are activated to continuously participate in and integrate themselves into
the structures of exploitation (see Fuchs 2008: 149ff.), during as well as outside
wage labour time.

The more users make use of advertisement-based free online platforms
and the more time they spend online producing, consuming and
exchanging content, communicating with others, the higher the value of
the prosumer commodity they produce will become, the higher the advertisement
prices will rise and the higher the profits of the specific Internet
corporations will be. ‘The price that corporations pay for advertising spots
on particular programmes is determined by the size and social composition
of the audience it attracts’ (Murdock and Golding, 2005: 65)."
(http://fuchs.icts.sbg.ac.at/ICTS_EJC.pdf)


=More Information=

#[[Audience Commodity]]


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Business]]