Here below is our own '''Open Hardware Directory'''.

See also 

#[https://certification.oshwa.org/list.html CERTIFIED OPEN SOURCE HARDWARE PROJECTS]
#the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_open_source_hardware_projects Wikipedia list]; 
#the [http://www.ohanda.org/index.php/Product_ID Ohanda product registry] has more than 30 registered products in May 2011.
#the [[Open Hardware Catalog]], an index of designs that are under a license compliant with the Open Source Hardware Definition
#the [[OHO Open Hardware Observatory]]:  "OHO is a search engine for sustainable open hardware, open design and maker projects". [https://oho.wiki/]
#OPEN! [[List of Open Source Hardware Products]]. Available online: https://opensourcedesign.cc/wiki/index.php/List_of_open_source_hardware_products (accessed on 5 August 2019).


{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

= Concepts =

|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="75%"|

#[[Free Hardware Design]], [[Open Development]], [[Open Customization]] ; [[Open Design]], [[Open Hardware]], [[Open Innovation]], [[Open Source]], [[Open Source Product Design]], [[Open Source Hardware]]
#[[Citizen Product Design]]; [[Co-Creation]]; [[Co-Design]] ; [[Desktop Manufacturing]] ; [[Peer Production Entrepreneurs]] ; [[Self-organized Design Communities]]
#Typology by degree of openness: [[Closed Hardware]]; [[Open Interface]], [[Open Design]], [[Open Implementation]]
#It is increasingly easy and popular to share and swap physical goods, i.e. [[Freecycling‎]], using [[Free Stores‎]] and [[FreeSharing Network‎]]s. See also: [[Regifting]] and [[Regiving]]
#"Light Green Ecology" points to the necessity to conceptualise material streams in a bio-logical way: Spontaneus abundance and upcycling as principles. [[Free Resources]], [[Cooperative Cycles]]
# [[Value Network]]

|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="25%"|

More:

#[[Citizen Product Design]]
#[[Community Supported Manufacturing]]
#[[Co-Creation]]
#[[Co-Design]]
#[[Crowdsourced Advertising]]
#[[Crowdsourced Design]]
#[[Open Customization]]
#[[Open Design]]
#[[Open Source Architecture]]
#[[Open Source Hardware]]
#[[Open Source Permaculture]]
#[[Open Hardware]]
#[[Open P2P Communities]]
#[[Open Peer to Peer Design]]
#[[Open Source Hardware]]
#[[Open Source Physical Objects]]
#[[Open Source Product Design]]
#[[Open Innovation]]
#[[Peer Production Entrepreneurs]]
#[[Personal Fabricators]]
#[[RepRap]]
#[[Self-organized Design Communities]]

|}

{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

= Tools =

|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|


=='''Other Directories'''==

#The [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source_hardware Open source hardware page] of the Wikipedia contains many links; See also the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Open_hardware Open hardware] category page
#For news updates on product hacking, see the list maintained by Stephen Vermeulen at http://vermeulen.ca/product-hacking.html
#The [[Open Innovations Project]] has a well organized, and updated directory of [http://open-innovation-projects.org/project-list/ projects] which is the best place to gauge the maturity of the various projects. While it as at present not as comprehensive as this list, it has a lot more details per project, and is organized as a real database.
#The [http://blog.makezine.com/archive/2008/11/_draft_open_source_hardwa.html 2008 Open Source Hardware Directory] from Makezine, is conceived as a gift catalogue for hardware hackers.
#Oriented to hardware machines, this [[Thingiverse]] directory of open designs appears the most sophisticated at present.
#[http://www.harkopen.com/ Harkopen]: an open hardware community with project hosting
#[http://www.opencollector.org/ Open Collector] has a database with open hardware and hardware design tools.
#[http://debianlinux.net/hardware.html Hardware on Debian Linux] - a collection of portals, projects, and tools.
#[http://www.ohwr.org/ Open Hardware Repository] - for electronic hardware designers
#[http://www.thingiverse.com/about Thingiverse] is a repository reaching far beyond electronic hardware, rather its for all physical objects that are designed digitally. The special feature is that it lists tools for realisation, Tracks people who design, people who make and people who use.

=='''Development Toolkits'''==

#[http://www-asim.lip6.fr/recherche/alliance Alliance], free CAD tools and portable libraries for VLSI design
#[[Arduino]], an open-source electronics prototyping platform based on flexible, easy-to-use hardware and software.
#[http://beagleboard.org/ BeagleBoard] - an ultra-low cost, high performance, low power platform for embedded devices with laptop-like performance.
#[[Bluespec]], a software tool developed at MIT for designing and testing circuits, making life easier for open-source-hardware engineers
#[[Fritzing]], an open-source initiative to support designers, artists, researchers and hobbyists to take the step from physical prototyping to actual product
#[http://www.lunkwill.org/gadgetboard/ Gadget Board] is a low cost, user friendly microcontroller experimentation board.
#[http://gainer.cc/ Gainer] - an environment for user interfaces and media installations to handle sensors and/or actuators with a PC on various programming environments.
#[http://leox.org/ LEOX], Complete, free, open source, set of hardware and software components usable to build an embedded computer with its operating system that can be incorporated easily into a FPGA or into an ASIC...
#[http://sites.google.com/site/liberlabsite/ LiberLab], a DIY digital lab at a very low price
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_CASCADE Open CASCADE] - software development platform freely available in open source.
#[http://www.replab.org/ RepLab]
#[[Wikifactory]] "a social platform for collaborative product development. Designed for open source communities, designers and product companies [https://wikifactory.com/]

|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

== Companies ==

#[[Adafruit Industries]], sells kits and parts for original, open source hardware electronics projects
#[http://www.evilmadscientist.com/ Evil Mad Scientist]: (OSH electronics)- USA 
#[http://www.eyebeam.org/ Eyebeam Atelier]: open source hardware lab 
#[[Liquidware]]: open source electronics shop
#[http://www.moderndevice.com/ Modern Device Company] (OSH electronics)- Rhode Island, USA 
#[http://www.iaacblog.com/2008-2009/term02/s3/?p=1397  n-e-r-v-o-u-s.com]: an open source web site under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike license: in which generative design methods are used to create new forms of products with the use of rapid prototyping methods. It allows members to login, download, upload and create designs. 
#[http://www.northxsouth.com/ North-by-South], a San Francisco-based company specializing in open source development projects in the Americas 
#[http://touchkit.nortd.com/ NORTD] (OSH + OSS multitouch)- New York USA and Austria EU 
#[http://www.oomlout.com/ Oomlout]: (OSH electronics)- Vancouver BC 
#[http://www.iaacblog.com/2008-2009/term02/s3/?p=1386 open furniture]: OF is an open source platform that exhanges and sells designs. The concept of this effort is to create a company that can be profitable while, at the same time, can keep its interest in the idea of sharing and exchanging. The platform is open to anyone interested in design and it functions based on a point system that facilitates users to download and fabricate products.
#[http://www.openpattern.com/ Open Pattern] - Embedded Systems Engineering (OSH) - Paris, France 
#[[Ponoko]]: [[3D Printing]] shop
#[http://www.iaacblog.com/2008-2009/term02/s3/?p=1338 SourceShop - an Open Source Platform]:  SourceShop is a shop of digitally fabricated designer products that can be purchased by anybody. This exchange intends to go beyond its commercial aspect by expanding knowledge towards the world of digital fabrication. The main goal of SourceShop is to share knowledge between students, participants and all interested people of digital fabrication.
#[http://www.sparkfun.com/commerce/categories.php SparkFun Electronics] - Colorado USA (e.g. Lilypad, Arduino pro and PCB design libraries) 
#[http://www.traversaltech.com/home.phtml Traversal Technologies] - U.K.
#[https://www.turris.cz/en/ Turris] - Open hardware network devices - Czech Republic



==Events==

#[http://www.piksel.org/piksel07 Piksel] festival for free/libre and open source audiovisual software, hardware and art

== Organizations ==

#[[Open Hardware Foundation]] [http://www.openhardwarefoundation.org/]
#[[Open Hardware Initiative]]: Lobbying for [[Open Source Hardware]] [http://www.open-hw.org/]
#[[Shared Design Alliance]]


== Places for Learning ==

#[[Fab Academy]]
#[[Hackerspaces]]


=='''Reference Sites:'''==

#[[Appropedia]]
#[[DesignBreak]]
#[http://inventgeek.com/ InventGeek]
#[[Instructables]] 
#[http://makezine.com/ Makezine]: magazine for the DIY makers community [http://blog.makezine.com/archive/2008/11/_draft_open_source_hardwa.html]
#[[Open Circuits]], a wiki for sharing open source electronics knowledge, schematics, board layouts, ports and parts libraries
#[[Open Cores]], a loose collection of people who are interested in developing hardware, with a similar ethos to the free software movement"
#[[Open Sustainability Network]] and its [[Standarrd]] blog
#[http://spi-inc.org/ SPI], founded to help organizations develop and distribute open hardware and software.
#[[TaskForge]]

== Other Resources ==

#[[Open Hardware License]] [http://www.tapr.org/OHL]
#[[OpenShorts Podcast]]: a record of hackable products
|}

{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

= Open Products Directory: Electronics =
Notation: 
* s = software open source / developer community
* h = hardware open for manufacturing

For an alternative topic organization, see the [http://www.appropedia.org/Category:Topics Appropedia Topic Tree]


|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

== Open CPU ==

For all updates, go here at http://www.open-innovation-projects.org/project-list/simple?start=0

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amber_(processor_core) Amber] is an ARM-compatible 32-bit RISC processor. Amber implements the ARMv2 instruction set.
* [http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:BeeBoard BeeBoard]: Low-cost CPU compatible with the popular Arduino’s dev tools
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coreboot Coreboot] [http://coreboot.org/], aimed at replacing the proprietary BIOS (firmware) 
* [[E-Risc]]: a scaleable RISC microprocessor for embedded applications
* [http://f-cpu.seul.org/ F-CPU], Freedom CPU project initiated in mid-1998.
*[[Gumstix]]: the world's smallest full function, open source computers.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LEON LEON] is an open source 32-bit SPARC-like CPU created by the ESA. It's the standard CPU for the European Space Industry.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milkymist Milkymist SoC], featuring the LatticeMico32 microprocessor core, has a complete set of independently developed open source system-on-chip cores such as a SDRAM controller, bus components, graphics accelerators and a variety of I/O devices.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenCores OpenCores] is a loose community of designers that supports open-source cores (logic designs) for CPUs, peripherals and other devices. OpenCores maintains an open-source on-chip interconnection bus specification called Wishbone.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenRISC OpenRISC] is a group of developers working to produce a very-high-performance open-source RISC CPU.
* [[Open SPARC]] [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenSPARC] is a project with an already created UltraSPARC T1 multicore chip by Sun Microsystems. As of August 2007 a T2 chip is also in the pipeline Sun's OpenSPARC
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenRISC OpenRISC] is a group of developers working to produce a very high performance open source RISC CPU.
*[[Minnowboard]] is an online community dedicated to the support of Open Hardware utilizing Intel processors.

== Designs that Include a CPU ==

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASoC ASoC] (ALSA System on Chip).
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arduino Arduino] is an open-source physical computing platform based on a simple I/O board and a development environment that implements the open source Processing / Wiring language. [http://www.engadget.com/2008/05/19/the-arduino-gets-downsized-becomes-the-nano/ Arduino Nano] is a small 16MHz embedded micro controller
* BalloonBoard.org produces open arm-based development boards, aimed at OEMs and further education.
* [http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:BoardX BoardX]: An open source motherboard where everything is a plugin - even processors and power supplies
* Ethernut - open-source electronics prototyping platform for building tiny Embedded Ethernet Devices.
* Maple - open-source Arduino-compatible development hardware based on an ARM Cortex-M3 microprocessor designed by LeafLabs, a company focused on open-source hardware.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milkymist Milkymist One] – Single-board computer implementing all the core logic with open source Verilog HDL design files, which is confidential and proprietary in most other open-source hardware computers. It is an interactive VJ station featuring the open-source Milkymist SoC as CPU
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimig Minimig] – a re-implementation of an Amiga 500 using a field-programmable gate array (FPGA).* OpenBook - tablet design, positioning between $100 laptop and consumer Tablet PC´s price, which wants allow tablet usage to masses by high volume production.
* OpenPCD - Open RFID reader/writer project, using AT91SAM7S128 microcontroller. 
* Pinguino - open-source electronics prototyping platform based on PIC (Microchip). A alternative is the Jaluino board supported by the JAL compiler (JAL). There is support for both hardware and software.
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLAICE PLAICE] - an open source hardware and software project developing a powerful in-circuit development tool that combines in one device the 
features of a FLASH Programmer, Memory Emulator, and High Speed Multi-Channel Logic Analyzer. It runs uClinux.
* [http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:Sanguino Sanguino]: Arduino work-alike, but smaller, board based upon the ATMega644P
* [[SquidBee]] - Open Mote based in Arduino for developing sensor networks. "Open Hardware and Source wireless sensor device. The goal of SquidBee is getting an "open mote" to create Sensor Networks"
* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tinkerforge Tinkerforge] - Bricks and Bricklets (Modular hardware kit).

== Graphics cards ==

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milkymist Milkymist SoC] contains an open-source Verilog HDL design of an embedded high-performance 2D texture mapping unit.
* [[Open Graphics Project]] [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Graphics_Project] [http://lists.duskglow.com/mailman/listinfo/open-graphics] aims to design an open architecture and standard for graphics cards.
* [http://oege.ie.hva.nl/~meeuwi10/pVGA/projectvga.php Project VGA]

== Other Electronic Parts and Components ==

#[http://beagleboard.org/ BeagleBoard] - an ultra-low cost, high performance, low power platform for embedded devices with laptop-like performance.
#[http://dangerousprototypes.com/bus-pirate-manual/ Bus Pirate], an open source hacker multi-tool that talks to electronic stuff.
#[http://packets.goto10.org/packets/wiki/CATkit CATkit] microcontroller kit by Tom Schouten
#[http://www.create.ucsb.edu/~dano/CUI/ Create USB Interface]: artist-driven microcontroller project
#[http://ethernut.de/ Ethernut], Open Source Hardware and Software Project for building tiny Embedded Ethernet Devices
#[[Etherrape]]: Microcontroller with ethernet
#[[ExpressPCB]], manufactures self-designed motherboards
#[http://freeio.org/ Free IO]
#[http://www.lunkwill.org/gadgetboard/ Gadget Board] is a low cost, user friendly microcontroller experimentation board.
#[[Little Bits]]: an opensource library of discrete electronic components pre-assembled in tiny circuit boards
#[http://icculus.org/manticore Manticore], an open source hardware design for a 3D graphics accelerator
#[[Octopus USB]]: different Interfaces from the world of microcontroller over an easy USB interface
#[http://scrying.org/ Scrying] low-power radio boards by Martin Howse


==[[Open eBook Reader]]==

#[[Microtouch]]


|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

==Amateur Radio==

#CB PLL Board - Prototype microprocessor tuning for CB & 10 Meter Radios.
#ClockTamer - configurable clock generator for the use with USRP and other radio equipment.
#[http://www.ettus.com/about Ettus Research USRP]: universal software radio peripheral product (USRP) hardware and daughter boards for software radio. I
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D-STAR#Home-brew_D-Star_radio Homebrew D-STAR Radio]
#[[Open HPSDR]], or: [[High Performance Software Defined Radio]] [http://openhpsdr.org/] 
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=RHINO_Platform&action=edit&redlink=1 RHINO] Platform - a software defined radio intended board with Spartan-6 FPGA and the ARM Cortex-A8 core, running BORPH Linux.
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Software_Radio_Peripheral Universal Software Radio Peripheral]

==Audio Electronics==

#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIDIbox MIDIbox] The MIDIbox project is an open source modular DIY hardware and software platform for MIDI devices like controllers, synthesizers, sequencers
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monome Monome] 40h - A reconfigurable grid of sixty-four backlit buttons, used via USB. A limited batch of 500 monome 40h has been produced. All the design process, design specifications, firmware and PCB schematics are available online
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuros_Technology#Neuros_Digital_Audio_Computer Neuros Digital Audio Computer] an open source portable digital audio player


==Video Electronics==

#[[Milkymist]]: open source solution for the live synthesis of interactive visual effects for VJs  
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuros_Technology#Neuros_OSD Neuros OSD] an open source digital video recorder

== Open Computers ==

#[http://sharism.cc/ Ben Nanonote] ultra small form factor computing device [http://www.linux.com/news/embedded-mobile/netbooks/296251:a-review-ben-nanonote-gets-small-with-embedded-linux review]
#[[Bug Labs]], a programmable hardware device, The Bug, run on open source software Bugbase  '''s'''
#[[CHIP]]: C.H.I.P. is a personal single-board computer advertised as "the world's first $9 computer". [https://getchip.com]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECB_AT91 ECB AT91] - Single-board computer based on the Atmel AT91RM9200 ARM9 processor (180 MHz).
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECB_ATmega32/644 ECB ATmega32/644] - Single-board computer based on the Atmel ATmega32/644 (20 MHz) with webserver-capability and less than 100mA power consumption
#[[Novena]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLinuXino OLinuXino] is an open-hardware single-board computer running Android (operating system) and Linux designed by OLIMEX Ltd in Bulgaria.
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLPC_XO-1 OLPC XO-1], One Laptop Per Child project
#[[Open OEM]] - Project to build the first open source computer, 
#[[Open Source Laptop]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pandora_(console) Pandora] - a handheld game console designed to take advantage of existing open source software and to be a target for home-brew development.
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PC532 PC532] - a personal computer design based on the NS32532 microprocessor, released in 1990.
#[[Raspberry Pi]]
#[http://www.qi-hardware.com/faq/ Qi Hardware NanoNote]: an open source hardware handheld mobile PC
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simputer Simputer] - handheld computer aimed at developing countries
#[http://www.alwaysinnovating.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page Touch Book] ... and Touch Book OS
#[http://www.viaopenbook.com/ Via OpenBook]: only the case design is open
#[http://zerodollarlaptop.org/ Zero Dollar Laptop]

==Open Computer Accessories==

#[[Fair Mouse]]

== Open Telephones ==

#[[Android]], Google's open handset project ; [http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:Android_Open_Accessory_Development_Kit Android Open Accessory Development Kit]: Open Standard for Android Accessories
#[[Flow DIY]], an open source hardware platform so anyone can make a smartphone with the Android operating system 
#[[Free Telephony Project]], [http://www.astfin.org/ Astfin] provides free  reference designs for embedded telephony.  '''s,h'''
#[[GTA04]], [[Open Smartphone]] using [[OpenMoko]]
#[[IP04 Four Port IP-PBX]]: Open Hardware Four Port IP-PBX 	
#[[IP08 Eight Port IP-PBX]]: Similar to IP04 with 8 ports. Will be produced by Atcom.	
#[[Maemo]]: Open source software development kit for mobile internet devices. Founded and maintained by Nokia for there N770, N800, N810 internet tablets.
#[http://www.villagetelco.org/ Mesh Potato]: A Wi-Fi mesh router and SIP client for analog phones 	
#[http://omapzoom.org/ OMAP Zoom]: Enables innovative devices and services to market on all leading mobile operating systems, including Android, Linux, LiMo, Symbian OS, etc..
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenBTS OpenBTS] and OsmoBTS - Open source software based GSM base stations.		
#[[Open Handset Alliance]]
#Opencellphone.org - an RFID-enabled [[Open Cellphone]] project, also called '[[TuxPhone]]'
#[http://www.opencircuits.com/Open_Mobile_Gadgets Open Mobile Gadgets]
#[[Open Moko]] - open phone framework (see [[Open Mobile Telephony]]) - [http://mobile.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=09/04/04/228240&art_pos=4 update]; OpenMoko’s [http://us.direct.openmoko.com/products/neo-freerunner Neo FreeRunner]: open source smartphone
#[[Open Pandora]] [http://openpandora.org/] - the ultimate open source handheld device.
#OsmoBTS - Open source software based GSM base station
#[[Phonebloks]]: modular phone / open hardware
#[[Project Ara]]: Motorola's modular phone open hardware project
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TuxPhone TuxPhone] A project to develop open-source (hardware and software) GSM/GPRS cellphone.
#[http://rowetel.com/ucasterisk Ucasterisk], free hardware designs for telephone systems. Both the hardware and software are open.

== Open Wireless Hardware ==

#[http://www.digitalhome.ca/ota/superantenna/ Gray-Hoverman Antenna]: For UHF Television Reception
#[[Open Pattern]] [http://www.openpattern.org/drupal-5.3/?q=node/1], embedded electronics for wireless
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Openpicus Openpicus] – Open-source platform for smart sensors and Internet of things
#[[Open Router]], i.e. [http://www.myopenrouter.com/ Netgear Open Router WGR614L] [http://mobile.slashdot.org/mobile/08/06/29/005233.shtml]
#[[Pinoccio]], the [[Wireless Mesh Network Micro-Controller]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PowWow PowWow Power Optimized Hardware and Software FrameWork for Wireless Motes] is an open source hardware and software platform for wireless sensor networks.
#RedBee  open source/hardware 802.15.4 development system based on the Freescale MC13224V ARM7 radio.
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sun_SPOT Sun SPOT] is an open source hardware and software platform for sensor networks and battery powered, wireless, embedded development
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RONJA Twibright RONJA] – Open-source free-space optic system, DIY in a garage, 10 Mbit/s full duplex/1.4 km
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USRP USRP] universal software radio peripheral is a mainboard with snap in modules providing software defined radio at different frequencies, it has a USB 2.0 link to its host computer.
#[[Wireless Mesh Network Micro-Controller]], the [[Pinoccio]]
|}

{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

= Other devices primarily based on Electronic Components =

See the [[Hardware Product Canvas]]  which contains the electrical-mechanical components (or simply parts) contained in hardware: http://hardwareproductcanvas.com/



|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|


===Cameras===

#[[Apertus]], aims to produce “an affordable community driven free software and open hardware cinematic HD camera for a professional production environment”. 
#The [[AXIOM Gamma]] : "open technology camera system and the first to fully utilize a modular hardware concept (the "Open Module Concept"). The Open Module Concept renders the AXIOM Gamma to be a fully extendible and repairable camera system, not to be outdated any time soon." [https://eu.axiom-camera.com/] 
#[[Craft Camera]] ; D.I.Y digital camera made of a cardboard case and an electronic system powered by Arduino [http://craft-camera.com/BLOG-1]
#[[Elphel]], cameras and imaging solutions'''s,h'''
#[[Fab Camera]]: A simple digital camera that can be easily created in a fablab, a hackerspace
#[[Frankencamera]], [[Open Source Camera]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LeanXcam leanXcam]
#[http://kekado.zapto.org/kevin/open.html Lux] [http://kekado.zapto.org/kevin/open.html]: 100% open source camera
#[[Open 3D Printed Camera]], see [[Open Reflex]]
#[[Open Reflex]]: an Open-Source analog 3D Printed Camera 
#Xué - reconfigurable network camera based on the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milkymist Milkymist] system-on-chip.

===Communication===

* [[Open Source Haptic Wireless Input Device]], i.e. [[Avoccado]] is an open source haptic wireless input device with accelerometers, gyroscope sensors and capacitive touch inputs. [http://etemu.com/]

Some common communication parts:

#@Bluetooth (http://upverter.com/upn/ec29d2f9849939ec/)
#Infra-Red (IR) (http://upverter.com/upn/450d2331f2cf7162/)
#USB (http://upverter.com/upn/642782fd84d174c7/)
#Wifi (http://upverter.com/upn/7d369a9e8b445e42/)
#ZigBee (http://upverter.com/upn/dca461eebec67599/)

=== Gaming ===

For status updates go here at http://www.open-innovation-projects.org/project-list/simple?start=0

#[http://technabob.com/blog/2008/10/27/arduino-gamepack-make-your-own-open-source-gameboy/ Arduino GamePack][http://www.engadget.com/2008/10/28/open-source-game-boy-has-five-awesome-parts-zero-games/], an [[Open Source Game Player]]
#[http://www.adafruit.com/index.php?main_page=product_info&cPath=30&products_id=133 Fuzebox]: fully open-source, DIY 8-bit game console
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GP2X GP2X] an open-source, Linux-based handheld video game console and media player created and sold by GamePark Holdings of South Korea.
#[http://openpandora.org/ Open Pandora]: Linux based gaming console
#[http://uzebox.org/ Uzebox]: An open source game console

=== Lights ===

#[http://www.lochraster.org/fnordlicht/ Fnordlicht]:Intelligent Moodlight
#[http://greenledlamp.info/ Green LED Lamp]]: works with renewable energy
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LED_Throwies LED Throwies] - non-destructive graffiti and light displays
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monome Monome 40h] - A reconfigurable grid of sixty-four backlit buttons, used via USB. A limited batch of 500 monome 40h has been produced. All the design process, design specifications, firmware and PCB schematics are available online
#[[Night Brights]], the entire making process of the lights is open source and shared publicly
#[[Semitone Open Dimmer Project]]: he development of comfortable standalone digital light dimmers for home use
#[[Strobit Triggr Project]]:
#[http://www.adafruit.com/index.php?main_page=index&cPath=6 SpokePOV] and [http://www.makershed.com/ProductDetails.asp?ProductCode=MKAD1 MiniPOV] - "Spoke POV is an easy-to-make electronic kit toy that turns your bicycle wheel into a customized display!"

=== Music & Music Electronics ===

#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arduinome Arduinome]
#[http://www.auroramixer.com/about.html Aurora]: music mixer for DJ's
#[[AVR Butterfly MP3]]: Open design for a portable MP3 player, in both hardware and software
#[[AX84 Firefly]]: The Cooperative Tube Guitar Amp Project
#[[Daisy MP3 Player]]  '''s,h'''
#[[eChanter]]:  electronic bagpipe chanter
#[http://www.hovalin.com/ Hovalin]: AN OPEN SOURCE 3D PRINTABLE ACOUSTIC VIOLIN
#[[Meeblip]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIDIbox MIDIbox] The MIDIbox project is an open source modular DIY hardware and software platform for MIDI devices like controllers, synthesizers, sequencers
#[http://www.monome.org/ Monome]: a midi controller for computer-based music that uses community-created, open-source software [http://www.onthecommons.org/content.php?id=2486]
#[http://www.openthing.org/products/niftymitter/ Niftymitter]: short range FM transmitter based on open source hardware design, handy for small scale radio broadcasts, building a distributed PA system for performances, linking your personal audio player to your car radio, or for general audio experimentation. 
#[[Open Pipe]] ; [http://openpipe.cc/development/]  ; replicates a Galician BagPipe thanks to Arduino Technology
#[[Open Source Guitar]]. See: [[Zoybar]], [http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-open-source-guitar]
#[[Open Source Monome]]
#[[Open Source Music Hardware]]
#[[Open Source Supercapacitor-Powered Portable Speakers]], the helium speakers from Blueshift
#[[SpiffChorder]]: a platform for building your own USB-based chording keyboard
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoicheia Stoicheia] a dual gate Euclidean sequencer
#[http://www.k9spud.com/traxmod/ Traxmod]: a small digital audio player using the Microchip PIC32 high speed microcontroller chip
#[[Universal Software Radio Peripheral]]
#[[x0xb0x]], "Roland" MIDI synthesizer
#[[Zoybar]]: open design guitar [http://www.shareable.net/blog/the-open-source-guitar] that can morph into other instruments [http://www.zoybar.net/] [http://www.onthecommons.org/content.php?id=2486]

|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

===Processing===

Some common processing parts:

#Atmel 8-bit Microcontroller (http://upverter.com/upn/875acec95d0341fc/)
#Energy Micro ARM Processor (http://upverter.com/upn/605c6d678db5986f/)
#Xilinx FPGA (http://upverter.com/upn/ada527d7e4a6f551/)

=== Robotics ===

See also: [[Open Source Robotics]]

#[http://oomlout.com/serb.html Arduino Controlled Servo Robot] (SERB)
#[http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:Basic_Pentapod Basic Pentapod]: Basic Pentapodal Robot, Servo Driven, Plans for a Laser Cutter
#DARwIn-OP project [http://darwin-op.springnote.com/], an [[Open Platform Humanoid Project]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-puck_mobile_robot e-puck mobile robot], an open-hardware, education oriented, mobile robot.
#The [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Humanoid_Project Humanoid Project]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICub ICub]
#[[InMoov]], a [[Open Source 3D Printed Robot]]
#[[iRobot Create]]: preassembled mobile robot platform
#[[Open Βionics]]: an open-source initiative for the development of affordable, light-weight, modular robot hands and prosthetic devices, that can be easily reproduced using off-the-shelf materials
#[[Open Platform Humanoid Project]]: See DARwIn-OP project at http://darwin-op.springnote.com/ 
#[[Open Source 3D Printed Robot]]
#[[Open Source Humanoid Platform]]
#[http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:Open_Source_Robotic_Arm Open Source Robotic Arm]: A Laser-cut Robotic Arm
#[[Open Source Robotics]]
#[[Open Robotic Platform]] see: [[Romotive]]
#[[Open Source Underwater Robots]]; see: [[OpenRov]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenRAVE OpenRAVE]
#[[OpenRov]], a DIY telerobotics community centered around underwater exploration & adventure. 
#[http://openservo.com/ OpenServo] - creating a low cost digital servo for use with RC and robotics projects. 
#[[OpenTrons]]: 'Robots for Biology': Open-Source Rapid Prototyping for Biology [http://opentrons.com/]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orb_swarm Orb swarm]
#[[Poppy]], humanoid robot
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protei Protei], open-hardware shape-shifting Sailing Robot
#[[Raven]], an open source robotic surgeon
#[[Reachy Mini]]: "is an open-source desktop AI robot designed for research, education, and creative projects. This compact Reachy Mini features 6 degrees of freedom with Python programming and full community support." [https://reachy-mini.com/]
#The [[Robot Operating System]] of [[Willow Garage]] [http://www.ros.org/wiki/]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RobotCub RobotCub]
#[[Roboy]], open source robot
#[[Romotive]], an [[Open Robotic Platform]]
#[[Roomba]], hackable Vacuuming Robots
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spykee Spykee]
#[http://www.swarmrobot.org/tiki-index.php Swarm Robot]: "All of the hardware and software is open (in the GPL sense), including parts lists, circuit board and chassis designs, and software." [http://www.hizook.com/blog/2009/11/08/open-hardware-micro-robot-swarm-project]
#[[Willow Project]] [http://pr.willowgarage.com/], [[Open Source Robotics]]

=== Sensors ===

#[[AVR Butterfly Logger]]: uses the Atmel AVR Butterfly hardware and open source tools to create a cost effective stand alone datalogger for logging light, temperature, voltage or any general sensor value
#[http://www.cfree.com.au/ CFree]: high quality telescope optics
#[http://gainer.cc/ Gainer] - an environment for user interfaces and media installations to handle sensors and/or actuators with a PC on various programming environments.
#[http://muio.org/ Muio], a modular system for sensing and controlling the Real World  '''s,h'''
#[http://www.sensorica.co/ SENSORICA], optical sensing, now focused on optical fiber-based displacement/force sensing for biomedical applications and moving towards lab-on-a-chip bio-chemical sensing, for water and soil testing and food quality control and certification.
#[http://www.cmucam.org CMUcam], open source programmable embedded color vision sensors.

Common sensor parts [http://hardwareproductcanvas.com/]:

#Accelerometer (http://upverter.com/upn/6600989c41e088a1/)
#Optical Light Sensor (http://upverter.com/upn/951b5d6ab2f7927b/)
#Microphone (http://upverter.com/upn/902551c599b8ee7c/)
#Gyro (http://upverter.com/upn/917b6294e01cb2b8/)
#Humidity & Temperature (http://upverter.com/upn/47722395ea6d980b/)


===Storage===

Some common storage parts [http://hardwareproductcanvas.com/]:

#Flash Memory (http://upverter.com/upn/729e1c2a3a2e1593/)
#SD Card Slot (http://upverter.com/upn/2e36e2429e854117/)
#EEPROM (http://upverter.com/upn/4831c61fff13f9c1/)

=== Others ===

#[[Chumby]], a powerful little device with Wi-Fi, a 3.5-inch screen and an interface that you can customize '''s'''
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GEDA gEDA] - full GPL'd suite of Electronic Design Automation tools.
#[[iLiad]]: electronic handheld device which can be used for document reading and editing.
#[[Jaldi Battery Charger]]  '''s,h'''
#[http://www.neurostechnology.com/ Neuros LINK]: a TVPC that connects your TV to the Internet.
#[[Neuros Technology]] and its [[OSD Open Source Device]]
#[[Open Beacon]]: a free design for an active RFID device
#[http://openbios.info/ Open Bios], Open Firmware implementations
#[http://www.thirtysixthspan.com/openEyes/ Open Eyes]: an open-hardware open-source system for low-cost eye tracking
#[[Open FM]]
#[[Open GPS Tracker]]
#[[Open Micromanufacturing and Nanomanufacturing Equipment]]
#[[Open PCD]]: a free hardware design for Proximity Coupling Devices or [[Open RFID Reader]]
#[http://open-rtms.sourceforge.net/ Open-rTMS] - creating a low cost rTMS device and free software to go with it. 
#[http://okvm.sf.net/ OKVM Project], open source console and KVM management software / open source KVM hardware.
#[http://www.roku.com/community/gpl_nfp.php Roku Netflix Player] [http://www.engadget.com/2008/07/02/roku-serves-up-netflix-player-source-code/]
#[[Ronja]] by [[Twibright Labs]], optical point-to-point data link device
#[[Ybox]], an internet connected set-top box


===User Interface and Experience===

Some common user interface parts [http://hardwareproductcanvas.com/]:

#Indicator LED (http://upverter.com/upn/d8ba7ad75a8f7bc4/)
#Push Button (http://upverter.com/upn/a5274000247d2511/)
#SPST Switch (http://upverter.com/upn/bf5308f8da82bf1f/)
#Rotary Dial (http://upverter.com/upn/4ffffec955e73faf/)
#LED Matrix (http://upverter.com/upn/f20ecccf0f0e2bef/)
#LCD Screen (http://upverter.com/upn/289969963535eec4/)
#E-INK Display (http://upverter.com/upn/e9ee4d217dd43bb4/)
|}

{| style="font-size:90%; padding:5px 10px; background:#eee;"
|-
| colspan="2"|

= Open Products Directory: Other =

|- valign="top" 
    
|style="background: #FDF4F4;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

==='Ready to Use' Consumer Electronics===

* [http://antipastohw.blogspot.com/2010/01/top-5-consumer-open-source-hardware.html Top 5 Consumer Open Source Hardware Projects], i.e. 'ready to use':

#[[Chumby]]: "The internet-alarm clock-information-station does more than just run Linux. With a 3.5” touchscreen, an ARM9, integrated Wi-Fi, and an accelerometer, all wrapped up in a rotund, friendly enclosure, there’s no question that it’s a bona fide consumer gadget."
#[http://www.viaopenbook.com/ The VIA OpenBook] was a concept for an open source hardware netbook released in 2008. ''Unfortunately, while VIA has long since launched other netbooks, it seems like this was more a marketing attempt than a full-fledged project.''
#[http://www.qi-hardware.com/faq/ Qi Hardware NanoNote]: an open source hardware handheld mobile PC
#OpenMoko’s [http://us.direct.openmoko.com/products/neo-freerunner Neo FreeRunner]: open source smartphone

=== Agriculture, Development, Energy, Environment, and Sustainability ===
''Related categories:'' [[:Category:Agrifood|Agrifood]], [[:Category:Energy|Energy]].

For status updates, go here at http://www.open-innovation-projects.org/project-list/simple?start=0

#[https://www.twistedfields.com/copy-of-research Acorn Solar-Powered Precision Farming Rover]: "Acorn is a Precision Farming Rover (PFR) developed to advance modern farming practices. Acorn is solar-powered, light-weight, and open source."
#[[Agua Clara]], a project for [Open Design Water Treatment Plants]]
# algOS - [[Oil from Algae Open Source]] [http://www.oilgae.com/algae/oil/biod/research/os/algos.html]
#[[Appropedia Foundation]]; Website with wiki and forum on open sustainable hardware and related projects[http://www.appropedia.org] 
#[[GardenBot]], a [[Open Source Garden Monitoring System]]
#[[Global Village Construction Set]] by [[Open Source Ecology]]
#[[Good Stove]] Cost and energy efficient stoves for the use in developing countries [http://www.goodstove.com]
#[[FarmBot]] 
#[[HydroBot]] standalone [[Open Source Hydroponics Garden Controller]] built around Arduino Mega.
#[http://www.e5.org/opensource-cleantech Open Green Tech Database]: e5 interlinks Clean Tech companies, research institutes, actors from the Open Source movement, legal experts and development organisations
#[http://tim.cexx.org/?page_id=760 Mosquino]: a software-compatible derivative of the open-source Arduino platform that is designed for extremely low power consumption, operating from ambient (harvested) environmental energy sources such as heat, sunlight and vibration.
#[[Open Bug Farms]]
#[[Open Design Water Treatment Plants]]: see the [[Agua Clara]] project
#[[Open Photons]], [http://128.112.49.138/trac openPhotons] - An open access laser based sensor platform is a National Science Foundation sponsored program to develop better photonic sensing technology.
#[[Open-Source Automated Precision Farming Machine]], see: [[FarmBot]]
#[[Open Source Beehives Project]]
#[[Open Source Drinks]]
#[[Open Source Garden Monitoring System]] : [[GardenBot]]
#[[Open Source Mate]]
#[[Open Source Solar USB Charger]]
#[[Open Sustainability Network]]
#[[Open Shaspa]]: [[Social Energy Tracker]]
#[http://oscirrus.see-do.org/ OSCirrus], expandable, open source software weather station built on inexpensive hardware and weather sensors.
#[[Precious Plastics]]
#[https://sites.google.com/a/opensailing.net/protei/home Protei]  - An [[Open Hardware Oil Spill Cleaning Sailing Robot]] (funding stage at 3/2011)
#[http://www.sparkfun.com/search/results?term=gas+sensor&what=products SparkFun Gas Sensors] - SparkFun.com is an open source hardware, online retail store. They offer a handful of devices for gas detection 
#[http://www.ladyada.net/make/tweetawatt/ Tweet-a-Watt]]: [[Social Energy Tracker]]
#[[Your Green Dream]]: for diy renewable communities
#[http://wxmonitor.sourceforge.net/ WxMonitor], [[Open Source Weather Monitoring]]

====Energy====
#[http://absorberroof.com/ Absorber Roof]:low cost solar absorbing roofing material, details in the public domain 
#[http://worldproject9.org/algaefarm/ AlgaeFarm] project: an open source hardware project to design and build an automated small-scale photobioreactor for the cultivation of microalgae. The project aims "to create a safe, affordable, and multi-feature reactor that increases the viability of small-scale photobioreactors for school research and science fair projects, biofuel research and development, growing your own fish food, etc."
#[http://www.timnolan.com/index.php?page=arduino-ppt-solar-charger Arduino MPPT Solar charge controller]: an open source Arduino based MPPT 12v solar charge controller for lead-acid battery.
#[http://www.builditsolar.com/index.htm Build-It-Solar] - Plans and tools and information to do renewable energy and conservation projects.
#[[Canuckle]]: designed to be the LEGO of alternative energy. The first project is a highly accurate solar tracker
#[http://zininzelfdoen.ning.com/forum/topics/sun-tracker CleanInventors Solar Tracker]:Solar Tracker using Arduino.#[[Concentrated Solar Power Open Source Initiative]] ; (CSPOSI) - Project Archimedes: hybrid thermal solar collector for distributed power generation and water purification; Software and electronics hardware for concentrated solar power under GNU General Public License [http://www.csposi.org]
#[[DiVER]], i.e. [[Open Source Direct Current Low Voltage Electrical Grid]]
#[[EEmeter]]: an open source toolkit for implementing and developing standard methods for calculating normalized metered energy consumption (NMEC) and avoided energy use
#[http://www.freechargecontroller.org/ Free Charge Controller] project: an open source charge controller using MPPT  to maximize power delivery from alternative energy sources. In its current state, it is designed to interface a 60 watt solar panel to charge a battery, but alternative input sources and loads are planned.
#[[Gasifier Experimenter Kit]]: biomass gasifiers that are ready for everyday use, to serve distributed energy needs.
#KitRad [http://www.kitrad.org/] –   They build DIY wind turbines for decentralized power supply
#[[Onawi]]: [[Open Source Wind Turbine Designs]]
#[[Open Energy Monitor]]: [http://www.openenergymonitor.org/]a project to develop and build open source energy monitoring and analysis tools for energy efficiency and distributed renewable microgeneration.
#[[Open Smart Grid Platform]]
#[[Open Source Arduino Sun]], see [http://www.cerebralmeltdown.com/heliostatprojects/ Heliostat Projects]
#[[Open Source Biogas]]
#[[Open Source Direct Current Low Voltage Electrical Grid]], see [[DiVER]]
#[[Open Source Gasifiers]]
#[[Open Source Hardware Small Wind Turbines]]
#[[Open Source Solar Pocket Factory]]
#[[Open Source Solar Steam Engine]]
#[[Open Source Wind Turbines]]: To assist people in the developing countries, and hobbyists alike, several projects have been open-sourced, e.g. the Jua Kali wind turbine, Hugh Piggot's wind turbine, ForceField Wind Turbine, et cetera; see also the [[Open Source Wind Turbine Designs]] of [[Onawi]]
#[[Power Cube]]: a modular, universal, self-contained power unit
#[[SHPEGS Open Energy Project]] (Solar Heat Pump Electrical Generation System): open concept for a renewable base load power station for moderate climates, based on solar and geothermal heat [http://www.energytower.org]
#[http://solarfire.org/ SolarFire] project: An open source linear reflecting fresnel solar concentrator. It is intended to be used by small industries and agricultural purposes, replacing use of coal and wood fires.It is also being deployed by Open Source Ecology project.
#[[Solar Flower]]: an open source solar energy collector which can be made very easily from common recycled and salvaged materials [http://solarflower.org/]
#[http://openhardware.soulsiitb.in/SolarLamp.php Solar Lamp Without Mobile Charger]; see: [[Solar Ujra Through Localization for Sustainability]]
#[[Solar Ujra Through Localization for Sustainability]] (solar lamp project in India)
#[[SolaRoof]], open design of solar energy for households
#[http://ronja.twibright.com/exciter/ Twibright Exciter pedal-poweder Self-Excited Induction Generator] (SEIG) giving directly mains voltage based on cheap 3-phase induction motor
#[[Wireless Logging System for Sourcing Energy]]
#[[Wilssen Controller]]
#[[Zoetrope Open Source Wind Turbine]]

====Food and Agriculture====

*  Comprehensive directory here at: [[Collaboration and Interoperability of Open Food Projects and Systems]] ;  [http://openfoodfoundation.org/document/open-source-food-projects-list-wiki]

====Water====
#[[Agua Clara]]
#[[AKVO]], open source water and sanitation [http://www.akvo.org]
#[[Akvopedia]]: open database on smart and affordable water and sanitation technology, open to be contributed, edited and used
#[[CheapStat]], a [[Open Source Potentiostat]]
#[[FairCap]] - An Open Water Filter Project [http://www.faircap.org]
#[[Open Design Water Treatment Plants]] ; see: [[Agua Clara]]
#[[Open Source Potentiostat]], cfr [[CheapStat]]
#[[Open Source Water Quality Monitoring‎]] ; ;see: [[Open Water Project‎‎]]
#[[Open Source Water Quality Sensors]] 
#[[Open Water Project‎‎]] 
#[[Open Waters]]
#[http://showerloop.me/ ShowerLoop]: re-use water for showering, in real-time
#[[Urban Open Source Irrigation System]]

=== Building and Housing, Furniture  ===

* [[Open Structures Project]]

* [http://www.shareable.net/blog/20-open-source-furniture-designs 20 Open Source Furniture Designs]

#[[AtFab]] Digitally Manufactured Furniture
#[http://www.earth-auroville.com/?nav=menu&pg=auram&id1=7&lang_code=en Auram CEB Block System]] developed at Auroville India: This is the most advanced CEB block system in existence. Sort-of open in that they claim the technology is offered free to the world to use, but don't publish exact plans for anything 
#[http://www.hikinginfinland.com/2011/02/backcountry-boiler-power-of-myog-and.html Backcountry Boiler] - kickstarter supported long tail manufacturing of an ultralight outdoor kettle
#[[Contraptor]]: aiming to create an open-design construction set,
#[http://diymagicmirror.com/ DIY Magic Mirror] - An Arduino, open source based interactive Magic Mirror with home automation and Halloween features.
#[[Domeorama]]
#[[FOUNDhouse]], a [[Open-Source Mobile Microhouse‎]]
#[http://www.fragmentstore.de/ Fragment Store]]: modular self-combined fragments of design furniture
#[http://www.freebus.org/ Freebus]  - an [[Open Source Home Automation System]]
#[[Good Stove]], open source stove for the poor
#[[Grid Beam Building System]], reuseable parts for building
#[[Hexayurt]], an open source disaster relief shelter
#[[Ikea Hacker]] Do it yourself blog on the base of corporate products
#[http://knxathome.fh-deggendorf.de/wiki/index.php/KNXatHome KNX@Home] is an open source free building control server for everybody whose house has got an integrated KNX/EIB-Bus.
#[[Impulsive Furnishing Unit]], cnc machine on a plywood palette, miniature furniture factory
#Liberator, aka "[[Open Farm Tech]]'s Liberator Compressed Earth Block machine; [http://openfarmtech.org/index.php?title=CEB_Press#Step_3._Product_Definition] 
#[[Makerbeam]]
#[http://architecture.mit.edu/house_n/ MIT House-n 'chassis' system]
#[[Mmodulus]]: modular open source furniture system [http://www.mmodulus.com/]
#[[Movisi Open Design Furniture]]
#[http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:One_Day_Chair One Day Chair: Chair design for a CNC cutter
#[[Open Architecture Network]]
#[[Open Code Urban Furniture]]
#[[Open Desk]] is a collection of simple furniture, designed to be cut by a CNC machine
#[[Open Remote]], an [[Open Domotics]] community
#[[Open Sailing]]: modular marine architecture
#[[Open Source Cooling]]: KippKitts is designing open-source low-voltage (24V), high-efficiency (@2A) DC cooling units (air-conditioner/cpu cooler/refigeration) [http://www.sketching11.com/presentations/Kipp_Bradford_Sketching_in_Hardware_2011.pdf]
#[[Open Source Furniture]] ([http://www.shareable.net/blog/20-open-source-furniture-designs 20 Open Source Furniture Designs])
#[[Open Source Geopolymer Cast Stone Construction]]; eopolymer House blog [http://geopolymerhouses.wordpress.com/]
#[[Open Source House]]: 2 project; most recent is [http://www.os-house.org/english/os-house/About%20Us here]; more [[Open Source House Designs]]
#[[Open Source Induction Furnace Project]]
#[[Open-Source Mobile Microhouse‎]], see: [[FOUNDhouse]]
#[[Open Source Pedal-Powered Household Appliances]]
#[http://blog.spark.io/2014/01/17/open-source-thermostat/ Open Source Thermostat]
#[[Open Source Washing Machine]] [http://www.timelab.org/summercamp09/workshops/oswash/ OSWASH]
#[[Open Straw]] is an Open Source Prefab Strawbale House that can be built for $7k 
[http://openarchitecturenetwork.org/projects/openstraw]
#[[Open Structures Project]]; and other [[Open Source Construction Systems]]
#[[SketchChair]] is a free, open-source software tool that allows anyone to easily design and build their own digitally fabricated furniture.
#[[WikiHouse]]: fabricated from locally sourced plywood cut on a CNC mill from openly shared template files, and assembled with minimal skill by local people.

=== Entertainment, Fashion, Leisure and Learning ===

#[http://aibohack.com Aibo Hack]: for Sony's Aibo and some other pet robots, see http://www.aibohack.com/pleo/yapt.htm
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circuit_bending Circuit Bending]
#[[Clothing Printer]], see [[Open Knit]]
#[[DIY Book Scanner]]
#[[Lego Factory]], design your own kits, in the corporate framework
#[http://www.sparkfun.com/commerce/categories.php?c=135 Lilypad]: wearable microcontrollers and other electonic components,
#[[LugNet]], design your own Lego kits, outside the corporate framework
#[http://community.natronundsoda.net/ Natron und Soda]: German language sewing community
#[http://www.niketalk.com/ Niketalk]: open sneaker community
#[[Open Hardware Book Scanners]]
#[[Open Knit]]
#[[Open Source Camera]], Stanford University's 'frankencamera' platform
#The [[Open Source Embroidery]] project
#[http://libregraphicsworld.org/blog/entry/introducing-valentina-free-fashion-design-software Open Source Fashion Design Software]
#[[Open Source Knitting Machine]], see [[Open Knit]]
#[[Open Source Sewing Patterns]] such as [[Burdastyle]] 
#[[Pamoyo]], open source green fashion label
#[http://www.playmobeach.com/ PlaymoBeach]: Customizing of Playmobil					
#[http://www.pleoworld.com/ Pleo]: a toy dinosaur baby robot which is able to behave. The behavior is of course just software... The company producing Pleo is actively supporting community by making the product open for software. See also: http://www.aibohack.com/pleo/yapt.htm
#[[http://taskforge.njj.dk/product/001/ Pret a Printer]], TShirt Designs by Taskforge
#[http://www.ravelry.com Ravelry]: a knit and crochet community
#[[Zero Prestige]], has captured much of the kiteboarding market through a website for sharing the plans of kites
#[[Zoybar]]: an [[Open Design Guitar]]

=== Food, Drinks ===

#[[Aquapioneers]]
#Beer 2 Beer, Facebook group
#[[CandyFab Project]], do it yourself sugar printer
#Curto Cafe, open source coffee project in Brazil, with Sergio Venuto (Facebook group)
#[http://www.gabrielediamanti.com/projects/eliodomestico/ Eliodomestico] is a solar household still for the developing countries (purifies salted water to make it drinkable)
#[[Free Beer]]
#[[Open Club Mate]]
#[[Open Cola]] 
#[[Open Source Beehives]]
#[[Open Source Beer Brewing Control Systems]]; See BrewTroller at http://www.oscsys.com/projects/brewtroller
#[[Open Source Breath Analyzer]], DrinkShield Arduino
#[[Open Source Kitchen]]
#[[Open Source Water Boiler and Purifier]]
#[http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/The_Solar_Cooking_Archive_Wiki Solar Cooking]
#[[Wine Hacking]]



|style="background: #F4FDF6;border: 1px solid black;padding-left:1em;padding-right:0.5em;" width="50%"|

=== Health ===
''Related categories:'' [[:Category:Health|Health]]

#[[Ability Mate]] : '''= "An Open-Source Community Inventing Products For An Inclusive Society".''' [http://www.abilitymate.com/]
#[[BioBrick]]s: refer to a specific "brand" of open source genetic parts as defined via an open technical standards setting process that is led by the [[BioBricks Foundation]]
#[http://uzzors2k.4hv.org/index.php?page=coolidgexray Dental X-ray Machine]
#[[EyeWriter Project]], low-cost, eye-tracking glasses & free, open-source software that allows writers and artists with paralysis to draw and communicate using only their eyes
#[[InVesalius]], a [[brazil]]ian open source medical imaging 3D reconstruction [[:Category:software|software]]
#[[My Human Kt]]: open tech for the disabled
#[http://openprosthetics.wikispot.org/Open_Myoelectric_Signal_Processor Myopen Signal Processor]: Skin surface human interface device. Interpret muscle movements for video gaming, prosthetic control, robotic teleoperation and more. 
#[[Open Βionics]]: an open-source initiative for the development of affordable, light-weight, modular robot hands and prosthetic devices, that can be easily reproduced using off-the-shelf materials
#[[Open EEG]]
#[[Open Insulin Project]]
#[http://cocolico.info/design/this-solar-rechargeable-hearing-aid-is-open-source Open source solar hearing-aid charger] by [http://www.godisa.org/index.html Godisa Technologies]
#[[Open Source Pharma]]  (speculation)
#[http://www.osdd.net/ Open Source Drug Discovery (OSDD)]
#[http://transcenmentalism.org/OpenStim/ OpenStim]: The Open Noninvasive Brain Stimulator ([http://heybryan.org/~bbishop/docs/open-rtms/ see also])
#[[Open Prosthetics Project]]
#[[Open Source Computed Tomography Scanner]] ("open CT scanner")
#[[Open Source Dentistry]]
#[[Open Source Geiger Counter]] ; Geiger Maps Jp
#[[Open Source Insulin]]
#[[Open Source Medicine]]
#[http://openspirometry.org/ Open Spirometry]: low cost, open source spirometer
#[http://panvent.blogspot.com/ Pandemic ventilator] 
#[http://www.polonator.org/ Polonator]: the [[Open Source Genome Sequencer]]
#[[Raven]], an open source robotic surgeon
#[[Robohand]], customizable, open and hackable prostetics, incl. local affiliates such as [[Robohand Australia]]
#[[Whirlwind Wheelchair International]]

=== Mobility: Vehicles ===
''Related categories:'' [[:Category:Transportation|Transportation]].

====Cars====
* [[Open Source Car]]: overview page

#[[40 Fires Foundation]]: venture behind [[River Simple]]'s [[Hybran]] project
#[[Apollo Open Vehicle Certificate Platform]] ; "an open, reliable and secure software platform for its partners to develop their own autonomous driving systems" [http://apollo.auto/]
#C3 is the 100 mpg, [[Open Source Commuter Car]] being developed by [[Wikispeed]]
#[[C,mm,n]] [http://www.autoindetoekomst.nl/website/], Dutch [[Open Source Car]] project
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECorolla#eCorolla eCorolla] – Finnish electric car project
#[[EDAG Open Source Light Car]]
#[[Edit Open Source Self-Driving Electric Vehicle]]
#[http://www.instructables.com/id/Electric-Vehicle-A-simple-lightweight-EV-platform-/?ALLSTEPS Electric Vehicle - A simple lightweight EV platform], via Instructables
#EVProduction club ([http://evproduction.org/wiki/index.php?title=Main_Page]) is an organization with a wiki to design and produce open source electric vehicles and complements
#[[Fiat Mio]] - A [[Crowdsourcing|crowdsourced]] concept car [http://www.fiatmio.cc/en/]
#[[Freematics]]
#[[Local Motors]]: = maker of '''the Rally Fighter''', a car designed through [[Crowdsourcing]], first to go into production
#[[Open Source Green Vehicle]], an attempt to design an environmental friendly SUV using open source principles.
#[[Open Source Hydrogen Car]]: the [[Riversimple]] project
#[[Open Source Vehicle Telematics]] ; see: [[Freematics]]
#[[OpenOtto]]: he project's goal: "to provide complete free and open access to the networked electronic devices in an automobile."
#[[OSCar]]
#[http://cair.wikia.com/wiki/OSCav OSCav] : open source compressed air vehicle.
#[http://www.splitwheel.com/ Project Splitwheel] Venture involving Caterham Cars (put on hold due to credit crunch]. 
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riversimple_Urban_Car Riversimple] Urban Car
#[[Sahkoautot]], Electric Cars Now!, Finnish project
#[[Solar Vehicles]] [http://solarvehicles.org/home.html], an open-source project to build fuel-less solar energy transportation.
#[[Strati]]: first ever driving 3D printed car
#[[StreetScooter]], a $7,000 EV with a 74 mph top speed and an 80-mile range created by a collaboration of more than 50 companies
#[[Tabby]]
#[[Trexa]]: A modular platform for designers of battery-powered [[Open Source Electric Vehicle]]s
#[[Trev]], Two-Seater Renewable Energy Vehicle
#[http://www.electric-cars-are-for-girls.com/build-your-own.html Build Your Own Electric Car]
#[http://www.kiwiev.com/  Converting a Mitsubishi to electric] with step by step videos.
#[[Vehicle Design Summit 2.0]]: aims to create a 4-passenger, 200 MPGe, high-performance industry-standard car with minimal life cycle costs
#[[Wikispeed]]: 100 mpg sports car, followed by C3 commuter car

====Bicycles, motorbikes and scooters====

#[[Atomic Duck]]: '''= an [[Open Source Velomobile]]: “a velomobile—an enclosed, human-powered vehicle (HPV). “ in open design. [http://atomicduck.co.uk]
#[[DIY Cargobike]]
#[http://yty.net/c/Random_EV_does_Cagiva/Introduction.html eCagiva]: eCars Now related conversion project for the Cagiva Freccia C10 -89
#[[eMoped]]: light weight electric motorcycle from Letsevo in Brazil
#[[Open Bicycle Computer]]: to show and log data that are important when you are on the road with your bicycle
#[[Open Bicycle Jackets]]
#[[Open Moto X]]: TTXGP electric race bike.
#[[Open Source Scooter]], a project to make a Segway-type vehicle
#[https://www.mobotiq.com/ Open Source Trike]
#[[Open Source Velomobile]] and other [[Open Source Velomobile Development Project]]s
#[[Spaceframe Bikes]]
#[[Spine]]; = Modular and Customizable Electric Skateboard Kit Enabled by 3D Printing [http://www.faradaymotion.com/]
#[[Vélo M²]]
#[[Worldbike]], read [http://worldbike.org/what-open-source-bicycle-design What is open source bycicle design?]
#[[Xtracycle]]: open design for bicycle
#[[XYC Cargo]]

More:

#[http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-build-a-72Volt-electric-motorcycle/ How to build a 72Volt electric motorcycle]

====Airborne vehicles====
#[http://www.aeromodeller2.be AeroModeller2]: research into an autonomous self-generating hydrogen-based zero-emission low-cost low-tech nomad houseboat airship
#[http://aeroquad.com/ AeroQuad] is an open-source hardware and software project dedicated to the construction of remote controlled four-rotor helicopters
#[[Air Data Instrument]]: Arduino-based instrument which reads ambient air pressure, ambient air temperature, and differential air pressure, as well as incorporating a real-time clock.
#[[ARIA]], i.e. Autonomous Roadless Intelligent Array, an open source autonomous logistics infrastructure using drones, i.e. unmanned planes (see: [[Open Source Unmanned Aerial System]])
#ArduCopter: Arduino-based autopilot for mulitrotor craft, from quadcopters to traditional helis [http://code.google.com/p/arducopter/wiki/ArduCopter]
#[[ArduPilot]]: a family of open source autopilots based on the Arduino open source computing platform. It consists of a choice of ArduPilot Mega (APM) electronics and a range of free software versions for different vehicles [http://www.diydrones.com/notes/ArduPilot]
#[[DIY Drones]], amateur Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
#[[DIY Open-Source Aerial Surveillance]]
#[[Lisa S]]
#[[MakerPlane]]
#[http://mikrokopter.de/ucwiki/ Microkopter]: German 'quadrokopter' miniature helicopter community
#[[Open Pilot]] [http://www.openpilot.org/], diy drones?
#[[Open Source Aviation]]: see the [[MakerPlane]]
#[[Open Source Avionics]]
#[[Open Source Drone Autopilot System]], based on the Lisa/S chip
#[[Open Source MAVs]]
#[[Open Source Micro Air Vehicles]]
#[[Open Source Next Generation Multicopter]]: UAVP stands for "Universal Aerial Video Platform". It is a flying object, ideally suited for making aerial videos and photos (aerial photography [http://ng.uavp.ch/moin/FrontPage]
#[[Open Source Remote-Controlled Aircraft]]

====Space Transportation====

Background at: [[Open Source Spaceflight Hardware Movement‎‎]]

#[[ArduSat]]
#CisLunarFreighter/Open source tools [http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/CisLunarFreighter/Open_source_tools]
#[[DIY Rockets]]
#[[Libre Space Foundation]]
#[[Mach30]], [[Open Source Spaceflight Hardware]]
#NASA Will Tinker With [[Open-Source Rocket]] for Return to Moon [http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/air_space/4236758.html]
#[[Open Aerospace]]
#[[OpenLuna Foundation]]
#[[Open Source Spaceflight Hardware]]
#[[Open Space Movement]]
#[[SatNOGS]], Satellite Networked Open Ground Station
#[[UPSat]]: "the first open source hardware and software satellite". [https://upsat.gr/]
#[[Wikisat]]

For an updated directory, see also: [http://p2pfoundation.net/Open_Source_Spaceflight_Hardware_Movement#Directory]


'''Other Astronomy tools:'''

#qrpTracker is a satellite tracking program that works on the popular and easy-to-program Arduino
platform [https://sites.google.com/site/qrptracker/home]
#ISS Notify, "Lights up when the International Space Station is overhead",  [http://mechanicalintegrator.com/2011/iss-notify/]
#Mars Rover Curiosity Notify, mars.open-notify.org for RSS feeds of all the new images from the latest Mars rover Curiosity.
#[http://open-notify.org/ Open Notify], front end for some of NASA’s awesome data.
#Star Seeker Telescope Mount [http://people.ece.cornell.edu/land/courses/ece4760/FinalProjects/s2007/iq23_tg67/iq23_tg67/index.html]

====Watercraft====
#[[OpenROV]], a DIY telerobotics community centered around underwater exploration & adventure. [http://openrov.com/]
#[[Open Buoy]]
#[[Open Sailing]]
#[[Open Source Sailing Drone]]: see [[Protei]]
#[[Open Waterbike]] [http://www.openwaterbike.com/]
#[http://www.dansworkshop.com/2010/11/pine-strip-kayak/ Pine-strip Kayak]
#[[Protei]], an [[Open Source Sailing Drone]]
#[[Open Source Vessels]]
#[http://xmaran.org/ Xmaran]: a project to develop an open source sail cruiser that will form the basis for a modular floating community.

====Other====
#[[Do-it-yourself Electronic Fuel Injection]] [http://www.diy-efi.org/]
#[[Open Source Battery Project for Electric Vehicles]]
#[[LifeTrac]], tractor, also called OSTrac, the [[Open Source Tractor]]
#[[Open Source Satellite Initiative]], making D.I.Y. satellites [http://opensat.cc/] 
#[http://www.robotpower.com/osmc_info/ OSMC] - An open source Motor Control project, meant primarily for robotics but applicable to low-power electric vehicles and other uses
#[http://www.osgv.org/ Society for Sustainable Mobility] 
#[[Transportable Infrastructures for Development and Emergency Support]]: 7 critical infrastructures

=== Production/Machinery ===

#[http://wiki.openhardware.org/Catalog:Adafruit_Motor/Stepper Adafruit Motor/Stepper]: Full-featured motor shield that will be able to power many simple to medium-complexity projects.
#[http://www.taomaker.com/ AnniRouter], an open hardware CNC router
#[http://axrap.blogspot.com/ axCut] [http://hackaday.com/2014/01/16/axcut-an-open-source-laser-cutter/] ; open source laser cutter
#[http://www.3dreplicators.com/ Clanking Replicator Project] is a bootstrap 3D printer that can make you pretty much anything that can be made from plastic
#[[Contraptor]] [http://www.contraptor.org/]: a DIY open source construction set for experimental personal fabrication, desktop manufacturing, prototyping and bootstrapping. 
#The CubeSpawn Project, an Open Source, Flexible Manufacturing System
#[http://fab.cba.mit.edu/classes/MIT/863.07/11.05/fabaroni/ Fabaroni] is a homemade 3D printer
#[[Fab@Home]]: a project dedicated to making and using fabbers - machines that can make almost anything, right on your desktop	
#[[Filabot]], the [[Open Source Filament Maker]]
#[[Global Village Construction Set]]: A project to design open source versions of 50 different sustainability related machines.
#[http://www.dansworkshop.com/2008/03/homebuilt-electric-melting-furnace-2/ Homebuilt Electric Melting Furnace]; melt aluminium at home
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=LAOS_Laser&action=edit&redlink=1 LAOS Laser], another open-source laser cutter[
#[http://labs.nortd.com/lasersaur/ Lasersaur]: [[Open Source Laser Cutter]]
#[http://www.openfarmtech.org/index.php/LifeTrac LifeTrac], a tractor from the [[Open Source Ecology]] project
#[[Lulzbot]]: RepRap printers "committed to Free Software, Libre Innovation, and Open Source Hardware". [https://www.lulzbot.com/]
#[[Makerbot]], a project of [[RepRap]]; see also [[Makerbot Industries]]
#[http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MakerSlide&action=edit&redlink=1 MakerSlide], linear bearing system
#[[MakerScanner‎]], a completely open source 3D-scanner 
#[http://makeyourbot.org/mantis9-1 Mantis CNC]: CNC project
#[http://fab.cba.mit.edu/classes/MIT/863.07/11.05/3Dscanner_2/MAS863_scanner.html MAS863] - a simple home 3D scanner
#The [http://lumenlab.com/d/micro micRo universal fabricator] is a unique system which can be used for both additive (printing) and subtractive (milling, cutting) fabrication. It is a precise, modular tool which allows you to create complex objects out of wood, metal, plastic and more. From: [http://lumenlab.com/ Lumen Lab]
#[[Microfactories]], like oomlout's wire cutting system [http://blog.thingiverse.com/2009/02/11/new-year-new-things/]
#[[Multimachine]], all-purpose machine tool, an example of [[Multiple-Purpose Production Technology]]
#[http://oap.sourceforge.net/ Open Automation Project] engineers modular software and electronic components, from which it is possible to assemble an intelligent PC-based mobile robot suitable for home or office environments.
#[[Open 3DP]]
#[[Open Grasp]], an open source simulation toolkit for grasping and dexterous manipulation 
#[[Open Hardware Repository]] [http://www.ohwr.org/]
#[[Open Source 3D Scanner]], see [[MakerScanner]]‎
#[[Open Source Filament Maker]]: see [[Filabot]]
#[[Open Source Hardware Desktop CNC Milling Machine]]
#[[Open Source Integrated Circuits]]
#[http://opensourcemachine.org/ Open Source Machine] - Home of The MultiMachine, an all-purpose machine tool that can be built by a semi-skilled mechanic with just common hand tools.
#[[Open Source Powder-Based 3D Printer]]: [[Pwdr]]
#[[Open Source Torch Table]], see [[RepTab]]
#[http://buildlog.net/cnc_laser/xmos_controller.php Open Source XMOS Based CNC Laser Engraver Controller] 
#[http://www.pervado.org/ OSMIlling] , an open hardware milling machine project
#[[OSLOOM]] [http://www.osloom.org/], an open source thread controlled loom
#[[P3P]], see [[Open 3DP]], powder-based personal 3D printer student project [http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:815]
#Pervado: see OSMilling
#[http://tim.cexx.org/?page_id=704 Pick and Place Project]: To develop a low cost, reproducible, open-source pick and place system for automated SMT electronics assembly.
#[[Portable Open Source 3D Printer]]: Tantillus.org, [http://www.tantillus.org/Home.html]
#[[Pwdr]] is an open source powder-based rapid prototyping machine
#[[Recyclebot]]
#[http://reprap.org/ RepRap] - Replicating Rapid-prototyper is a self-copying 3D printer - a self-replicating machine.
#[[RepTab]]: a CNC plasma torch table (cuts through steel), by [[Open Source Ecology]]
#[[Ronen Kadushin Open Design]] - a practical repository of physical shape algorithms
#[http://www.shapeoko.com/ ShapeOko], another open hardware CNC router, desktop variety
#[[Tantillus]], home of the portable open source 3D printer [http://www.tantillus.org/Home.html]
#[[Thingiverse]] [http://www.thingiverse.com/]: This is a place to share digital designs that can be made into real, physical objects.
#[http://www.ultimaker.com/ Ultimaker], an open hardware 3D printer
#[http://code.google.com/p/lego-mindstorms-3d-printing-machine/ Lego3DPrintingMachine], an open-source and open-hardware Greek project


====CNC====

#[[Callooh]],  A free hardware CNC router project
#[http://oomlout.com/cnc1.html Desktop CNC router] - A three axis cnc machine that can be easily built using standard, home handyman level, tools.
#[http://diylilcnc.org/ DIYLILCNC]: CNC project
#[[Good Enough CNC]]: Affordable & useful open source CNC machines [http://goodenoughcnc.eu]
#[[Open Source CNC Milling Machine]]
#[[Open Source CNC Systems]]
#[http://redbluecnc.blogspot.com/ RedBlueCNC]: CNC project

=== Science ===

For Astronomy, tools see under Space Transportation!

#[[Bath Open INstrumentation Group]]: "The focus of the group’s research is making scientific equipment which is completely open source". [https://people.bath.ac.uk/js3214/]
#[http://www.cfree.com.au/ CFree]: high quality telescope optics, for astronomy
#CheapStat: An Open-Source, “Do-It-Yourself” Potentiostat for Analytical and Educational Applications [http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0023783#s4]
#[http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:1483 DremelFuge] - A One-Piece Centrifuge for Rotary Tools
#[[Open BCI]]: "Dedicated to open-source innovation of human-computer interface technologies".
#[[FLOAT Beijing]], an [[Open Source Air Quality Monitor Kite Project]]
#[[Handwave Skin Conductance Sensor]]
#[[LavaAmp‎‎]], open prc, dna diagnostic tool
#Motion Capture System Using Accelerometers [http://people.ece.cornell.edu/land/courses/ece4760/FinalProjects/s2005/Motion_Capture_KHY6_DCL34/Motion_Capture.htm]
#[[Open Gel Box]], produced by [[Pearl Biotech]], one of the [[DIYbio Companies]]
#[[Open-H20]], Open source hardware for the ocean.
#[[Open Optogenetics]]
#[[Open PCR]], a project to build one of the OpenPCR machines; an Open Source kitset based on an Arduino [http://openpcr.org/]; see also: [[Open qPCR Machine]]
#[[Open qPCR Machine]]
#[[Open rTMS Project]] = '''open 'god helmet' project''' [http://open-rtms.sourceforge.net/]
#[[Open Source Air Quality Monitor Kite Project]]
#[[Open Source Bio-Amplifier]], the [[Spiker Box]] from [[Backyard Brains]]
#[[Open Source Electrophysiology]]: see [[Open Ephys]]
#[[Open Ephys]]
#[[Open Source Human-Computer Interface Technologies]]: see [[Open BCI]]
#[[Open Lab Tools]]
#[[Open PCR]]
#[[Open Source Geiger Counter]] ; Geiger Maps Jp ; See also: [http://uzzors2k.4hv.org/index.php?page=geigercounter]; [http://uzzors2k.4hv.org/index.php?page=rs232geiger_counter]
#[[Open Source Microscope]]
#[[Open Source Ocean Hardware]]
#[[Open Source Photosynthesis Measurement Device]]; see [[Photosync]] at [http://www.photosynq.org]
#[[Open-Source Potentiostat]], see CheapStat: An Open-Source, “Do-It-Yourself” Potentiostat for Analytical and Educational Applications [http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0023783#s4]
#[[Open Source Spectral Data]]
#[[Open Source Thermocycler]]
#[[OpenROV]], a DIY telerobotics community centered around underwater exploration & adventure. [http://openrov.com/]
#[[OpenTrons]]: 'Robots for Biology': Open-Source Rapid Prototyping for Biology [http://opentrons.com/]
#[[Pearl Gel Box]], an Open Hardware Electrophoresis Gel Box (genetics) (from [[Pearl Biotech]]?)
#[[Photosync]]: a low cost, hand-held measurement device which researchers, educators, and citizen scientists can use to build a global database of plant health.
#Pranav Mistry, the SixthSense [[Augmented Reality]]system [http://singularityhub.com/2009/11/12/sixthsense-augmented-reality-device-goes-open-source/]
#[[Public Lab DIY Spectrometry Kit]]
#[http://uzzors2k.4hv.org/index.php?page=rs232geiger_counter RS-232 Radiation Logger]
#[[Spiker Box]], the [[Open Source Bio-Amplifier]] from [[Backyard Brains]]
#[[Tricorder Project]], '''open source handheld devices that can sense a diverse array of phenomena that we can't normally see'''

See also: 

#[[Open Science Hardware]]
#[[Open Hardware for the Environment]]


|}

=More Information=

#For update on new projects, we recommend this [http://www.open-innovation-projects.org/project-list/rss feed] from the [http://www.open-innovation-projects.org Open Innovation Projects] directory.
#To discuss this topic in portuguese, refer to this wave: [http://bit.ly/OpenManufactptbr Manufatura Aberta e suas Implicações].


[[Category:P2P Hardware]]

[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P_Hardware]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Design]]
[[Category:Manufacturing]]