
URL = https://github.com/sanctuarycomputer/studio

=Context=

Sanctuary Computer:

"At Sanctuary Computer, we believe there's a better work environment than the poles of freelancing, or working a fulltime job. We think that when talented and creative people can see the effects of their skill and ability effect the bottom line, and feel true ownership in their work, they will naturally make better decisions for clients, the studio, and themselves.

There's big impacts for the studio, too! As a company, we're able to offset risk by providing greater incentive for reward at the end of the year. We're able to lower stress and worry less, knowing that everyone on the team understands how our bottom lines work, and has empathy for the ups and downs of businesses. Transparency is a big thing for us.

We've always been about making Sanctuary an exciting alternative for creative people, and for that reason, we believe a profit share makes for an interesting and exciting way forward."

(https://profit.sanctuary.computer/)


=Description=

Sanctuary Computer:

"A really simple metric, designed to balance studio efficiency against profit.


1. Profit Share Units (PSU)

Teams are more efficient when they work together longer. Therefore, Profit Share Units are a bit like vested stocks. A team member earns one per month, (capped after four years at 48) and they correspond to a profit share at the end of the year.


2. Salary Cap @ 167k USD

All salaries at Sanctuary Computer are capped to 167k USD. A team member's ability to earn a full salary depends on how close they are to seniority, in addition to a few other non-technical points.


3.Paid in December

Sanctuary does the profit share calculations in November, to be paid out in December. This helps the studio dramatically lower any tax hit, and makes sure everyone's profit share hits early in January."

(https://profit.sanctuary.computer/)


=Characteristics=

==Calculated Metrics==

Sanctuary Computer:

The below metrics are key in calculating how profit is divided.

Raw Efficiency: A simple metric based on income vs expenses

NaN,i.e. Normalized Efficiency: This metric is normalized to be more insightful

NaN Payroll Buffer: Needed to safely make payroll for 0 months

Internals Budget: An allowance for upgrading the studio, etc

Gross Profit Share Pool: The money put aside for for profit sharing

Reinvestment Fund: Money remaining to do big things

FICA Withholding: The money we'll be charged in FICA tax

Profit Share Pool after FICA Withholding: The profit pool leaving our bank after FICA Withholding

Total PSU Issued: The total PSU issed across the team

Value per PSU: How much profit each PSU is worth this year."

(https://profit.sanctuary.computer/)



[[Category:Post-Corporate]]