

=Discussion=

Eric Hunting:

"I noticed the Zome system was mentioned in the thread. Two other related systems that might be worth considering are Universal Node System and Min-A-Max, though, like Zome, these have already been commercialized. UNS and Min-A-Max were developed by architect Peter Pierce as the basis of building systems with a minimum number of different components producing a maximum diversity of forms--hence the name. They are geometrically related systems, UNS being the core geometry and Min-A-Max an expansion to include more rounded dome-like forms. Min-A-Max was developed into a commercial space frame system based on plate joints nodes through a short-lived company Pierce setup chiefly to supply his own architectural products--which, of course, had the obvious flaw of relying mostly on his own projects as the primary market. However, the most famous--or infamous--use of it was for the Biosphere II project. UNS is actually the more interesting system, in my opinion, because of its ability to produce interesting contiguous free-form organo-crystaline structural forms from a small parts set and with some rectangular openings.

#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns1.jpg
#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns2.jpg
#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns3.jpg
#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns4.jpg
#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns5.jpg
#http://radio-weblogs.com/0119080/images/MinAMax/uns6.jpg

These are from Pierce's book Structure In Nature As A Strategy For Design. There was also a brief attempt to create a Zometools-like construction toy with UNS--many of the examples in the book made with a prototype of that--but this apparently fizzled-out for lack of follow-through.

Like most space frame systems such as geodesics, there's a basic efficiency problem in synching-up triangulated panel shapes to the rectangular shapes most stock materials are produced as and complications in creating weatherproof joints without having to resort to sophisticated methods like that of planar glazing systems. (in-situ injected silicon seams) The single-greatest engineering issue for truly modular structures is modularizing roofing because of the complication with making cladding that is both fully waterproof yet composed or relatively small mechanically assembled parts. This has long been the critical failure point for dome houses which could never really achieve this well with low-tech materials, ultimately sacrificing the skill savings of a modular structure. This is why we very often see yurt-like systems with many contemporary geodesic structures; where an internal or external space frame is used to support a 'skin' that is basically a single, large but light and foldable, monolithic prefabbed piece. (the products of the Pacific Domes company being a good example)

A recently introduced and very promising approach to this problem comes from the design group N55 with a system they call Spaceplates.

* http://www.n55.dk/MANUALS/SPACEPLATESG/spaceplatesg.html

This is a system similar to the 'fly's eye' domes of the past and uses folded plates joined by simple bolt-together seams with some kind of gasket to weather-proof them. This offers the potential for very sophisticated generative/procedural design systems producing complex structural topologies integrated to CAD/CAM for on-demand fabrication. This would well suit the production and development scheme Dante outlines. Though the system is demonstrated with domes, I don't think this is confined to such geometries. Even completely flat surfaces supported by conventional structures should work. Combinations of different materials also seem possible; aluminum, acrylic, different colors, SIP-like combinations. Integral appliances are also likely, particularly lighting, solar power, and the like. (we now have EL paints becoming available http://www.lumilor.com/ Imagine a dome where all the panels were independent computer-controlled lights) Adding mounts for interior finishing panels made of different materials also seems a simple addition. It's not entirely clear, though, just how waterproof these are and what sort of gasket materials are being used. N55 has this annoying habit of leaving certain critical details out of their descriptions… I particularly like the minimalistic appearance of the all-acrylic shells which could potentially be greatly reinforced by the simple additional of aluminum 'U' channel struts mounting over the seams as they're bolted together. Retrofit attachment to conventional space frames also seems possible, though probably only necessary where one wants to employ panels of very large unit area. Double and triple wall forms seem possible for insulation and one could readily employ simple panel inserts for insulation and selective seasonal shading. This is not using what you could call low-tech material, but could certainly be made with recycled materials of various kinds. (imagine this in the era of diamondoids…)

Such structures would be most suited to 'skybreak' architecture where one is using a largely independent shelter structure around a space in which other self-supporting but non-water-proofed structures flesh out the features of a home. This is exactly as Fuller originally imagined dome housing. Without a need for waterproofing or roof-load-bearing strength, materials choices are much less critical and modular design freer. Using T-slot and Grid Beam, for instance, would be easy. (though I still haven't found a good solution to the hole drilling for that myself)

I'd also like to point out my own pet project, Utilihab, which I've been trying to get to critical mass for some time.

* http://utilihab.wikia.com/wiki/Utilihab_Wiki

This may be too 'heavy' construction system for what is being discussed here, but it has many of the virtues proposed. Utilihab is an attempt to create a sophisticated open standard modular component system for housing based on the now common aluminum extrusion T-slot framing. It is based on a simple post-and-beam structural system using exclusively mechanically attached pre-finished elements. 


Examples of such housing include the iT House;

* http://www.dwell.com/house-tours/article/it-house-joshua-tree


The buildings of the Tomahouse company in Bali;

* http://www.tomahouse.com/


And the building of Kit Haus based on MHS framing system;

* http://www.kithaus.com/


The catch with these is that, in the case of the iT House, this technology was used only for an ad hoc one-off design while Tomahouse and Kit Haus seek to turn the more-or-less open T-slot framing into an exclusive proprietary system because of a belief in the old-fashioned notion that market share is only secured through propriety. Aluminum housing systems are actually quite old, one of the first going back to the immediate post-war period and developed by the notorious Jacque Fresco. But, historically, the only alternative building systems that have ever managed to reach mainstream use have been de-facto public domain since no one really wants to bank their home equity on single-source products and the vicissitudes of solitary companies--start-ups especially.

Utilihab is the result of my own effort toward low-toxic housing and the basic premise of it is to use modular component prefabrication to reduce the need for toxic interior finishing materials while facilitating sweat equity, repair, recycling, and customization by reducing structure to mechanically assembled demountable components of a scale easily handled by a solitary individual with a couple of hand-tools. It's intended to produce an industrial ecology like that of computers composed of many small manufacturers, developers, and service providers as opposed to the usual notion of a monopolistic central manufacturer. The basic business model is that of a 'marketplace' site that aggregates the parts and service market while serving as evangelistic marketing and offering procedural design 'configurators' to aid consumers. I've proposed it's use as the basis of 'seed' marine settlements, Bright Green/Ecotech eco-villages, and Maker-incubator 'ashrams'. Utilihab is also intended as an 'infill' construction system for the adaptive reuse of large scale urban macrostructures. (think turning abandoned car parks, commercial buildings, or purpose-built functionality generic urban superstructures into cohousing communities)

But this is a 'high tech' system that's not suitable in all economic situations. It better suits the western housing situation where labor costs far exceed materials costs as opposed to the developing world situation where that is reversed. My chief problems in developing it have been with illustration (because no one reads anymore), finding adequate workshop facilities (I live alone in a cottage in the desert), the continued reluctance of US companies to face the reality of a metric world, and the high cost of T-slot in small quantities because of the 'executive premium' added to many B2B products. (the compulsion to drastically over-charge for non-commodity products when companies think they are selling to corporate executives who never shop) There was some recent interest in employing Utilihab on the Sealand structure--where it would have well accommodated the logistical issues with construction there--but that never found enough supporters."


[[Category:Urbanism]]