

=Discussion=

From a discussion of the German social philosopher and christian author, EUGEN ROSENSTOCK-HUESSY, by Peter J. Leithart:

"The progressive remaking of the human race is central to Rosenstock-Huessy’s understanding of Christianity. In The Christian Future , he discusses the "resurrection of the body" in the context of the work of the Spirit, the third article of the creed. In the beginning, God made man in his image, and this means that the whole history is a "process of making Man like God." The new thing in Jesus’ resurrection and the gift of the Spirit of resurrection is that Christ "enables us to participate consciously in this man-making process and to study its laws." Following patristic sources, Rosenstock-Huessy calls this "anthropurgy," comparing the extraction of pure metal from ore with the process of purging the dross to purify and renew humanity.

One of the laws of anthropurgy is the resurrection of the body. For Rosenstock-Huessy, resurrection is about reproduction. Resurrection means not only that new kinds of human beings are made but that they can be reproduced: "A new soul, a fresh originality of the human heart, thereby survives the man or nation in which it came to birth and incarnates itself in a spiritual succession of typical representatives through the ages. For there are definite new phases of human existence never lived before . . . and, if they are genuine, they force themselves upon man’s plasticity with such impressiveness that they don the bodies of later men and women in turn, and shame them into the same time." Luther was an original, the first of a new type of man, but soon there are thousands of "Lutherans." And they really are Lutherans , little Luthers, stamped with the image of their leader!

This is not reincarnation, nor mere repetition of the earlier form of man. Rosenstock-Huessy uses St. Paul’s image of a "natural" seed that rises as a spiritual body to describe how a "new human type" arises when one seed of a new humanity is planted. His own example is St. Francis. Though Francis had no natural children, "Franciscan humanity has flourished ever since, and not only in his Order. The Franciscan way of life, immortally portrayed in The Imitation of Christ , became daily bread for the lives of countless Christians of all denominations, even the most radical Protestants." This even has political import, as the Franciscan way of life spread to the royal houses of Europe¯he mentions the Habsburgs¯and to America. Abraham Lincoln entering conquered Richmond in 1865 on foot without entourage is the political triumph of Franciscan mentality. Ruler and servant become one.

Rosenstock-Huessy also develops a kind of Trinitarian historiography and anthropology. He links the articles of the creed¯which moves from Father, Son, to Spirit¯with three millennia of church history. During the first millennium, the Church concerned with being body of Christ (Son); the second concentrated on restoring creation to its Creator, since after men restored to God, they could begin to purge the world of ungodliness (Father); the next millennium will be the age of the Spirit, which will concentrate on "revealing God in society" (Spirit).

Trinitarian patterns also shaped the development of Western individualism. He points out that the original meanings of the word individuum is "what cannot be subdivided" and is specifically used of the Trinity. Peace treaties from 800 to 1815 were concluded in nominee individuae Trinitatis . Applied to human existence, the word meant that the "individual" was made in the image of the individua trinitas : "Man, between 1500 and 1900, could be called an individuum because he participated both in God’s qualities and in the world’s qualities as well. In the middle between the atom and the Trinity, he boasted of ‘individuality.’ This individuum of the Renaissance boasted loudly in the fact of the whole world: ‘I am unbreakable! I am impregnable!’ And Renaissance Man intimidated the powers that be so that they honored his divine triune likeness to the Individua Trinitas !" As a result, "Genius has been given his berth, through patents, copyrights and many other individualistic laws"; and as the image of the Trinity, he "cannot move in any one field without moving at the same time in all others. If our mode of prayer changes, our modes of thinking cannot help changing also."
(http://www.firstthings.com/web-exclusives/2007/06/the-relevance-of-eugen-rosenst)



[[Category:P2P Theory]]