== About ==

This page shall become the draft of a programmatic statement for the creation of a world-wide user-controlled network based on a distributed architecture. The goal is a statement which can outline the benefits of distributed (communications) systems, increase awareness and co-operation between related projects and serve as a guideline on the development and implementation on distributed systems.

...producing some kind of summary programmatic statement, like the Franklin Street Statement, that determines exactly what are the minimum requirements to be recognized as truly distributed infrastructure, to avoid ulterior perversions like Meraki and a clear visual mapping that lets everyone see what is being done, what the current preferred leverage points are, what needs to be done, and how it all fits together. This can't be the project of one person, but needs to be carried and supported by a broader mass of people, capital (not necesseraliy or likely capitalistic capital) and resources. - [[Michel Bauwens]]

Since I compiled the [[Project Starfish]] Concept and came into contact with the P2P Foundation, it was considered appropriate for me to start this task. My idea is to take a fundamental approach in order to ensure that, if these goals are adhered to / steps are followed, a truly P2P distributed system can be established which is as resilient as possible. As all organisation, and 'non-mainstream' organisation in particular, is based upon modern communication technologies, a secure, effective and resilient communications network is essential for all related movements. We have seen in Egypt how easy it is to shut down/regulate the network (When attacked, centralized organizations tend to become even more centralized - [[Starfish_and_Spider]]). When this happens again, a distributed system should already be in place to take over immediately. The eventual statement should result in something at least as concise and more graphically appealing than the [http://bethesignal.org/blog/2010/08/20/franklin-street-statement-pdf/ Franklin Street Statement]. A rear side might be added which outlines distribution principles/guidelines/steps which can be applied to all types of systems (communications, social decision-making, resource allocation etc.). However, as distributed communications infrastructure (in my view) is the one most needed right now (as it is a requirement for all other forms of distributed systems), the one most easily achievable and the one which might gain mainstream acceptance most easily and quickly, the statement could focus on it.
Please join in and edit/discuss. - [[Raffael Kéménczy]]

=== Ideas/Mission ===

Use the statement to establish an attainable vision for the immediate future

Use the statement to gain media exposure and increase awareness and cooperation between related projects

Use the statement as the seed for a collaboration platform/extended mailing list/news exchange for related projects

Front page: Statement and Goals
Rear page: Principles and Guidelines (Links to resources, List of related projects)

As graphially appealing as possible (Font, Layout etc.)
Use of pictures

Creation of a short Video based on the Statement

=== Resources ===
* [[Project Starfish]]
* [[Starfish and Spider#8 Principles of Decentralization]]
* [[What Digital Commoners Need To Do]]
* [[Telekommunist Manifesto]]
* [[Defining True P2P Infrastructures]]

== Statement Draft ==

=== Goals ===

Enable the creation of a world-wide user-controlled network of both wired and wireless nodes based on a distributed architecture.

1.) Access and sharing

Enable all humans free, secure, equal and anonymous access to a world-wide network which integrates the means to share information, data and processing power as desired by the individual.
Such access facilitates freedom of speech as well as grass-roots initiatives and
provides protection against authoritarian influences such as censure. Additionally, this allows for the optimisation and productive usage of such resources.

2.) Social networks and local resilience

Provide a framework within the virtual environment which generates ad-hoc connections and facilitates real-world social interactions. 
This framework serves to expand a person's social network and to increase local resilience through the rediscovery and improvement of communication with neighbours.

3.) Network capacity and efficiency

Allow for the creation of a network with scope, capacity, features and efficiency surpassing current state of the art.
This drastically reduces infrastructure resource requirements and re-positions current infrastructure from a critical requirement to a fall-back option or even obsolescence.

4.) Ownership and contingency

Spread ownership of the physical network infrastructure and content to the individualusers. Individual user-based ownership increases the individual's sense of responsibility for the proper functioning of the network and allows for a contingency plan if traditional infrastructure fails or net neutrality is threatened.

=== Realisation ===

1.) Software

Develop software which enables the goals to be achieved on suitable hardware. Due to physical limitations, only parts of goal 1) and goal 2) can be implemented through software. Involves work on Open System Interconnection Model layers 3-7.

2.) Hardware

Develop and produce hardware devices which enables the achievement of all goals.
Involves work on Open System Interconnection Model layers 1 and 2.


[[Category:User_Owned]]