
=Description=

"F.cking Cancelled is a podcast with three aims. First, we analyze and critique a phenomenon on the left that we call the nexus: a synthesis of identitarianism, social media, and cancel culture. Second, we offer emotional, spiritual, and ethical insights into the process of rejecting and exiting the nexus. Third, we move toward a different vision for the left grounded in solidarity, freedom, and responsibility.

We are leftists who have spent many years inside the nexus. We have been too afraid to critique it and we have suffered the consequences of critiquing it. We know all too well the destructive impact the nexus has on our communities, our movements, our spiritual, emotional, and mental health, and our capacity to be responsible, ethical actors. We are also recovering addicts who live our lives by a set of spiritual and ethical principles which are starkly at odds with the rules of the nexus. We offer these principles as a guiding light toward a different left.

F.cking Cancelled is a podcast for anyone who feels stifled or trapped by the authoritarian, punishing culture that dominates the left. It’s a podcast for anyone who is too afraid to say what they really think. It’s a podcast for people who have been cancelled, who are afraid of getting cancelled, or who have taken part in the cancellation of others and wondered if it was right. F.cking Cancelled is a podcast for leftists who dream of a left grounded in solidarity, freedom, and responsibility, rather than coercion, authoritarianism, and punishment."
(https://fuckingcancelled.libsyn.com/principles-before-personalities-an-introduction-to-fucking-cancelled#)

=More information=

* The first podcast is at https://fuckingcancelled.libsyn.com/principles-before-personalities-an-introduction-to-fucking-cancelled

[[Category:Podcasts]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]