'''= people-powered company nutrition labels'''

URL = http://projectlabel.org/


=Description=

"Project Label strives to produce people-powered social nutrition labels. Just think food nutrition labels, but instead of only showing the impact on your health, our labels will show a company's social and environmental impact. Unlike many “green” labels out there, WE don't build these labels, YOU  do. Using the power of the Web, we provide simple tools to allow consumers, businesses, and organizations to add, discuss, and vote on credible news, media, and research to help build our labels.

Common food nutrition labels have revolutionized the way common consumers choose their food products. Providing the consumer with concrete numbers in which they can compare two similar products result in informed and healthy decisions. Nutrition labels also motivate a search for knowledge on what each element on the label means for their individual health. In response to this new breed of informed consumers and a high demand for healthy food products, food companies must undergo a goal shift to produce a product that will supply and fulfill their customers needs. The result is a new “equilibrium” based on a new set of values. Companies are no longer punished financially for spending more money to provide a healthy product to their customers... and of course, the customers are a whole lot more healthy.

Project Label will build off this model and strive to provide the consumer with a standardized way of comparing similar products in terms of the products' social impacts. We believe that if you give the consumer information in a clear and simple way, the consumer will listen. As with food nutrition labels, social nutrition labels will motivate consumers to learn about social issues in order to make more informed decisions when choosing between product A and product B. The result will be a high demand for socially nutritious products and thus a greater supply. Companies will no longer have to make a financial sacrifice to create a positive social impact since the value of social nutrition is much high... which of course, would result in a happier and healthier society and planet."
(http://projectlabel.org/index.php?content=guide_about)


=More Information=

#How it works, http://projectlabel.org/index.php?content=guide_tour


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Standards]]