'''= "We are working on medical devices, such as open source ventilators, to have a fast and easy solution that can be reproduced and assembled locally worldwide".'''

URL = https://www.projectopenair.org/? 

=Contextual Citation=

"The time is now. Join the fight against Covid-19.  
Humankind can and will take back control."

=More information=

*  any skills that you consider might help, join the Helpful Engineering group: https://www.projectopenair.org/?

* Ultimate Medical Hackaton for [[Open Source Ventilator]]

"What we need is a Nasal cannula-based NIV. This system humidifies air, mixes it with oxygen and then pushes a constant stream of it into people’s lungs. If we can design a simple and working system we can give those plans to factories around the globe and get these things made. If the factories fail us, let’s also have a version people can make at home.

If you aren’t sure if a ventilator is something you can work on there are other problems. Can you make algorithms to determine if a person needs a ventilator. Can we recycle n95 masks? Can we make n95 masks at home? Workers also require a negative pressure tent for housing patients. This will be especially useful if we need to build treatment facilities in gyms or office spaces. Lastly if you’re a medical professional, can you train people how to help?

Let’s beat this thing. The ultimate medical hackathon begins."
(https://hackaday.com/2020/03/12/ultimate-medical-hackathon-how-fast-can-we-design-and-deploy-an-open-source-ventilator/?)

[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:P2P Hardware]]
[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]