
'''= "facilitating a broad coalition to assemble and present the best available information on climate solutions in order to describe their beneficial financial, social and environmental impact over the next thirty years".'''


URL = http://www.drawdown.org/

=Project Description=

"Drawdown creates a realistic, optimistic and empowering view of our climate future. There are three paths to drawdown: reduce greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere through efficiency and resource productivity; replace existing energy sources with low carbon renewable energy; and bio-sequester carbon dioxide through innovative farming, grazing and reforestation practices.

Scientists have done an extraordinary job determining the impacts of what will happen if we don’t act to mitigate climate change. Now is the time to measure and calculate how we are responding so that we can amplify that response.

The climate “debate” today is similar to a decade ago. On one hand, the science is robust and unequivocal. Those who grasp the science are increasingly concerned by forecasts. The alarm bells have activated a dedicated core of organizations and activists. On the other hand, because of disinformation, polls show that fewer people are interested in climate science than ten years ago. The majority of Americans are confused or unsure of what to do. Thoughts about climate change understandably provoke feelings of fear, loss and threat. In order to mobilize larger portions of the population into constructive action and voting, this needs to change. Showing the diverse and beneficial implications of climate-focused solutions is key to reversing apathy.

To date, the full range and impact of climate solutions have not been explained in a way that bridges the divide between urgency and agency. Thus the aspirations of people who want to enact meaningful solutions remain largely untapped. Dr. Leon Clark, one of the lead authors of the IPCC 5th Assessment on solutions, wrote, "We have the technologies, but we really have no sense of what it would take to deploy them at scale." Together, let’s figure it out."
(http://www.drawdown.org/mission/)


=The Book=

"The Book

Drawdown describes how one hundred solutions deployed at scale can alter the composition of our atmosphere and forge a path toward carbon decline.

Each solution is given a two-page spread with enlightening graphics that detail its history, impact, path to adoption, how it works and where it is implemented. The goal of the book is to introduce solutions, provide the data that underpin them and show our readers what is possible.

Drawdown is the first book that describes the full gamut of substantive solutions, both technological and social. Along with familiar renewable energy solutions like solar and wind, we feature solutions that are unknown or less frequently talked about, such as conductive cooling, girls’ education and clean cookstoves. Our research reveals important and impactful surprises about land use solutions, reproductive rights and the sharing economy. Drawdown will arrive in the spring of 2016."
(http://www.drawdown.org/the-book/)


[[Category:Ecology]]