

=Discussion=

==Bernard Stiegler on Proletarianization==

Pieter Lemmens:

"Proletarianization, Stiegler argues with Gilbert Simondon and Karl Marx,
consists essentially in the loss of knowledge and know-how (savoir-faire)
in individuals and collectives. Whereas nineteenth-century capitalism
proletarianized workers by delegating their knowledge and know-how to
machines, reducing them to labor power, twentieth-century capitalism
has proletarianized consumers by depriving them of their own ways of life
and massively replacing them with preformatted and standardized ‘lifestyles’
fabricated and marketed on a worldwide scale by global corporations
exclusively driven by profit. In today’s service economies, consumers
are ‘discharged’ of the burden as well as the responsibility of shaping their
own lives and are reduced to units of buying power controlled by marketing
techniques. They have lost their ‘knowledge-how-to-live' (savoirvivre)
and become ultimately deprived of the joy of life (joie de vivre). The
much-heard slogan that our contemporary societies are ‘knowledge societies’
is a patent lie, according to Stiegler. In fact, today’s cognitive capitalism
implies the systematic destruction of knowledge and the knowing subject.

The phenomenon of proletarianization, that is put on the agenda of philosophical
reflection again by Stiegler, is not something that came up first
with the Industrial Revolution. In fact, it forms a constant threat to the
human as a being that continuously evolves through processes of technical
exteriorization that must necessarily be accompanied by processes of
interiorization and appropriation of technical prostheses and procedures.

This is particularly true since the exteriorization of memory and cognition
in so-called mnemotechnologies like writing and printing. What is
characteristic of our contemporary age, according to Stiegler, is the systematic
industrialization of human memory and cognition through digital technologies, a process with dramatic implications for individual human
psyches as well as collectives. In our hyperindustrial societies, even
the life of the mind is thoroughly technicized and industrialized and this
happens in the context of an increasingly totalitarian capitalism.

It is the systematic annexation of the new technical milieus of the mind
(first of all the network of digital information and communication technologies:
Internet) by capitalism that is the principal cause of the cognitive
and emotional proletarianization that affects all strata of contemporary
society. Capitalism today exploits the mnemotechnical milieu for capturing
the attention and desires of populations for the purpose of promoting
consumption and creating consumer subjects. This phenomenon is called
psychopower by Stiegler, in analogy to Michel Foucault’s notion of biopower.
Its ultimate result is the destruction of the libido and with it the
sublimatory capacities of humanity, which lie at the basis of every civilization.

Today’s cognitive and consumer capitalism is first of all a capitalism
focused on the control of libidinal energy – of consumers and employees
as well as financiers. Criticizing it presupposes the development of a critique
of libidinal economy."
(http://www.krisis.eu/content/2011-1/krisis-2011-1-05-lemmens.pdf)

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]