

=Description=

Promotor theory is based on the notion that the
success of innovation processes depends on overpowering
certain barriers; it requires promotors
who commit enthusiastically to specific innovation
projects and help overcome those barriers.

Witte (1973, p. 15) defined promotors as ‘individuals
who actively and intensively support the
innovation process’. With regard to barriers, Witte
(1977) differentiates between two kinds of specialisation,
the ‘power promotor’ and the ‘expert promotor’,
and assumes that there is a correspondence
between specific barriers and specialised roles. The
‘power promotor’ contributes through hierarchical
power and the ‘expert promotor’ contributes
through expert knowledge (Witte, 1973, p. 17).

Another assumption of promotor theory is that
the innovation process will be more successful if
both types of specialised promotors work closely
together (Hauschildt and Kirchmann, 1997, p. 68).
Witte’s original two-centre theory of power and
knowledge has been extended since its introduction
in the 1970s. In the 1980s, Hauschildt and
Chakrabarti (1988, 385f) described a third barrier
that can hinder economic progress: administrative
barriers. For this reason, they introduced the role
of a ‘process promotor’, who actively arbitrates
between the technical and the economic world by
means of organisational knowledge (Hauschildt,
1999, p. 174). Gemu¨ nden and Walter (1995)
developed a fourth type of specialised promotor:
‘relationship promotors’ actively encourage an
innovation process by means of innovation-related
business relationships inside and between
the organisation and its external partners. The
defining characteristic of relationship promotors
is their extensive network competence, i.e. powerful
relationships with other parties.

Promotor theory stresses that the different
specialised promotor roles do not have to be
played by different individuals, but can also be
combined in one person, the ‘universal promotor’.
Promotor theory offers a consistent and elaborate
base for describing and explaining the role of
transformational leaders in innovation processes;
its conceptual focus on a single organisation is,
however, too limited in scope (Fichter, 2005). 

For this reason, the original theory has to be extended,
by adding two new assumptions:

1. Cross boundary cooperation of promotors: In
cases of Open Innovation and complex technologies,
the innovation process will be successful if
universal or specialised promotors from cooperating
organisations work closely together.

2. Promotor roles on all levels of innovation systems:
Promotor roles are not limited to those organisations
involved in ‘producing’ the innovation,
but can also be played by innovation intermediaries
(Howells, 2006) or individuals from
organisations of the superstructure of an innovation
system (Lynn et al., 1996; Lynn, 1998).

The new construct of ‘innovation communities’
will draw on the concept of multi-level innovation
systems, because it helps to clarify and structure
cross boundary relationships and allows systematic
connections to the research on the ‘superstructures’
of regional, national and international innovation
systems (Lynn et al. 1996; Lynn, 1998)."
(R&D Management 39, 4, 2009 359)



=Source=

Innovation communities: the role of networks of promotors in Open Innovation. Klaus Fichter. R&D Management 39, 4, 2009.


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]