
=Description=

Via J.P. Morgan:

"Reputation" Another key factor in what makes us who we are is our standing in the world. 

A person’s online persona, the number of Twitter followers they have - the conferences they have attended, the fact that they were early adopters of some trend - all contribute to a person’s reputation and  digital identity. 

'''The Proof of Attendance Protocol (POAP) is one protocol that is commonly used within the Ethereum ecosystem to build an online reputation. It is specifically focused on creating a historical record of a person’s contributions to projects or attendance at events''' by enabling people to capture their virtual and in-person experiences in the form of NFTs, known as POAPs. POAPs are popular at many conferences, with POAP stations activated throughout for users to ‘mint’ and receive a POAP badge to commemorate their experience, akin to collecting used ticket stubs. POAPs can also be awarded to attendees in digital spaces for attending a Twitter space talk, being a Discord member, contributing to a DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organization), attending a Metaverse concert and more. The amalgamation of these ‘certificates’ contribute to a person’s reputation and standing in their community. POAPs are built using the ERC-721 NFT standard, which means they are portable, immutable and transferable in nature. Some may argue that the transferability of a POAP may result in it losing its essence, as it may be sold to the highest bidder. Nevertheless, POAPs are a powerful tool for individuals to collect memorabilia in their wallet and further showcase aspects of their digital identity."

(https://www.jpmorgan.com/onyx/documents/Digital-identity-assessing-web3s-building-blocks.pdf)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]