
= an accelerator for open source sustainability

URL =  http://poc21.cc [https://www.facebook.com/groups/669466016485419/]

Status: this project has not been officially announced yet. Thanks for your patience.


=Description=

Benjamin Tincq:

"an accelerator for open source sustainability, whose pinnacle will be a 5-week camp in the countryside 40min from Paris, bringing together 50 open hardware innovators with world-class mentors and experts, to prototype the most functional and replicable cell of a sustainable society, and bring it to the world ahead of COP21 (which is scheduled in december 2015 in Paris)


=Discussion=

Transcript of the slideshare presentation:

"Transcript

1. POC21 | Proof Of Concept 21 accelerating open source sustainability

2. Global warming, resource depletion, species extinction. Growing inequality, social stratification, political dead-end. Isolation, burnout and despair. We sign petitions, eat organic, recycle and drive hybrids – and yet the overall negative trends keep accelerating. Scientists say our civilization is nearing collapse, advancing into a perfect storm of combined crises. Since the COP15 climate conference in 2009, little has changed: political leaders seem to be going in circles, and protest culture lacks a clear blueprint for the future. In 2015, it is time to move from protests to prototypes. Instead of a Conference Of Parties, we propose a Proof Of Concept. We call it POC21

3. “Open Source means that anyone can freely access, use, modify and share the knowledge, code, designs or data of a project, for any purpose.” (adapted from the Open Definition)

4. THE POWER OF OPEN SOURCE a networked production and distribution model for solutions to the challenges of the 21st century THE OPEN SOURCE MODEL MAXIMIZES Shared Innovation (building on each other’s efforts) Diffusion and Replicability (free, global knowledge) Adaptability and Flexibility (local context, needs and budgets) Sustainability (needs-driven, repairability, economies of scope) Cost Efficiency (no rents, no need to reinvent the wheel)

5. “If the Internet teaches us anything, it is that great value comes from leaving core resources in a commons, where they're free for people to build upon as they see fit.” Lawrence Lessig, founder of Creative Commons

6. OPEN SOURCING SUSTAINABILITY FOR MAXIMUM DIFFUSION Imagine people and communities producing their own energy, food, goods and housing. Using local resources, accessible tools and open source blueprints. Connected with each other across the globe, sharing their discoveries in a global commons of knowledge for the transition.

7. MANY PIONEERS HAVE ALREADY STARTED TO BUILD THIS FUTURE. Here are a few of them. They truly inspire us.

8. Piggott Wind Turbine : wind turbine for personal or small community use. Created by Hugh Piggott. image by Hugh Piggott

9. Bio-photovoltaic solar panel using bacteria to produce electricity. Created by the Valldaura Green Fab Lab in Barcelona. image by Quentin Chevrier - MAKERY

10. P2P Food Lab : greenhouses outfitted with low-cost sensors that monitor and share environmental data within a community of users image by P2P Food Lab

11. LifeTrac Tractor by Open Source Ecology. One of the prototypes of the Global Village Construction Set. The GVCS is a set of 50 open source, low-cost and self-replicable machines for community resilience. image by Open Source Ecology CC BY SA

12. Wikihouse open source construction system : print your own high-performance, low-energy house. image by WikiHouse Foundation CC BY ND

13. Micro-bio-architecture - mushrooms take the shape of structures modeled in reclaimed cardboard and harden into resilient building. Created by the Valldaura Green Fab Lab in Barcelona image by Quentin Chevrier - MAKERY

14. THE VISION Building the most functional and replicable cell of a truly sustainable society. Open Source everything. Spread. Adapt. Multiply.

15. ENTER POC21

16. POC21 IS AN ACCELERATOR FOR OPEN SOURCE SUSTAINABLE LIFESTYLES 5 weeks of co-making and co-living camp in the countryside (45 min from Paris) 12 projects. 50 participants. 25 mentors. hundreds of supporters. 1 goal: open sourcing sustainability. POC21 will bring high-potential open source projects together with world-class mentors and experts in the fields of energy, housing, food, water, waste, digital fabrication and much more. Every physical prototype developed during the POC21 process can be used autonomously, or integrated with the others into one coherent vision of a sustainable lifestyle. POC21 will catalyze the scale, impact, and widespread adoption of these projects.

17. POC21 will unfold in three phases between December 2014 and December 2015, when the 21st U.N. Conference Of Parties (COP21) on climate change takes place in Paris. PHASE ONE RESEARCH & PREPARATION dec 2014 → jul 2015 PHASE TWO CAMP aug → sept 2015 (5 weeks) PHASE THREE MASSIVE DIFFUSION sept → dec 2015 and beyond! → Research and outreach on open source sustainability → Selection of projects who will participate to the Camp → Camp preparation → Community building and awareness raising for POC21 → 50 participants, 12 projects, co-making and co-living during 5 weeks of intense prototyping → mentoring from world-class experts on tech, sustainability, business, communication → closing celebration event, open to the public → massive diffusion of the Camp outputs (prototypes, catalog of solutions, …) ahead of and beyond COP21 → outreach to media, funders, policymakers, academia and mainstream users

18. PHASE ONE | december 2014 to july 2015 RESEARCH & PREPARATION PRODUCING KNOWLEDGE → working with academic partners to research the potential of open source projects to address sustainability and climate issues → publishing content before the Camp BUILDING THE COMMUNITY → online community building and management → awareness-raising events across the globe → establishing media partnerships → speaking at global conferences SELECTING THE PROJECTS → leveraging our networks to connect with the best open source projects for sustainability → call for projects (jan/feb 2015) to select the POC21 Camp participants FINE-TUNING THE CAMP PROGRAM → pre-Camp workshops to prototype and test parts of the POC21 Camp experience → reaching out to experts who will mentor projects → logistics and organization of the Camp and the closing public conference/festival

19. PHASE TWO | aug - sept 2015 5-WEEK CAMP WEEK 2-4: DEEP DIVE 4 main session formats : prototyping, mentoring, peer-to-peer learning, and checkouts Our goal is to help projects reach their maximum potential through: ● mentoring from world-class experts in technology, sustainability and business models ● continuous cross-fertilization with other participants throughout the Camp ● integration of each autonomous module (project) into a coherent lifestyle vision ● communication campaigns and stories for the media, to reach out to the mainstream ● connections with potential partners and funders WEEK 1: OPENING team building , inspiration and concept/envisioning WEEK 5: WRAP-UP prototypes finalization, storytelling, celebration

20. PHASE THREE | sept to dec 2015 and beyond MASSIVE DIFFUSION MAINSTREAM MEDIA: Stories of the creators, their projects, the Camp, and our comprehensive vision for the future on TV, film, video, radio, print and online PARTNERS & FUNDERS: scaling the POC21 projects through financing and strategic or logistical support from companies, investors, foundations ... POLICYMAKERS: facilitating public policies and government programs that support open source solutions (key message: maximum impact with low capital) ACADEMIA: conducting further research on open source sustainability, and integration in business, design and engineering schools OUTPUTS OF THE CAMP → The world’s best prototypes for open source sustainable lifestyles → A web and print catalog showcasing the best products and solutions 4 OUTREACH CHANNELS

21. A CATALOG FOR OPEN SOURCE SUSTAINABILITY Imagine an appealing, mainstream catalogue as ubiquitous as IKEA's, showcasing an open source sustainable lifestyle. That is our plan.

22. THE VENUE Château de Millemont This stunning French castle from the XVIth century is located only 45 min from Paris in the Yvelines area. Easily accessible by train from Gare Montparnasse or by car through the N12 motorway. Surrounded by undisturbed nature it is a dream location for project incubation and prototyping.

23. CO-PRODUCERS ACADEMIC PARTNERS University of Potsdam Chair for Innovation Management & Entrepreneurship Academic supervision and research on sustainable innovation Fraunhofer Institute Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI – Department Foresight Envisioning future technologies & assessing the impacts of POC21 University of Bozen Sustainable Design Institute Design research & product development University of Potsdam OuiShare is a think-tank, do-tank and global community of pioneers building a collaborative and open source society. Founded in 2012 in Paris as a non-profit, we now have 20+ local chapters in Europe, Latin America and North Africa. Open State is a laboratory for contemporary, sustainable living, founded 2012 in Berlin. At Open State designers and activists join forces to build fully operating, replicable cells of a future-proof society.

24. Benjamin Tincq Coordination Partnerships Justyna Swat Strategic Design Research Dominik Wind Strategic Design Partnerships Simon Kiepe Creative Director Communications Daniel Kruse Communication Partnerships MEET THE TEAM As a strategic designer and consultant, Dominik aims to develop futures worth living. Since 2009 he has facilitated more than 100 workshops lasting between 5 hours and 7 weeks, including Palomar5 which explored the future of work in Berlin during 6 weeks. Centuries ago he studied media education and finished a professional training as systemic coach. Architect and engineer with a work experience in renowned architectural practices, Justyna is now involved in open source and the collaborative economy, focusing on its impact on sustainable design, architecture and urban planning. Justyna’s expertise also include strategic design, new economies, and digital fabrication. Benjamin Tincq is a p2p strategist, and co-founded OuiShare in 2011. He is currently doing research on distributed fabrication and open source hardware, to understand and promote their potential for a better, sustainable and just future. Benjamin was trained as computer scientist, and worked as an innovation strategy consultant in a previous life. Bauhaus University made, Simon is a radical thinker and designer. Co-founder of 10hoch16 - a studio for conscious design projects, he invented the sustainable cardboard architecture for re:publica 13 in Berlin. Motivated by his insights about responsibility and the long-term effects of communication and design, he secretly loves to realize political art and activism. Daniel is co-founder of Wigwam, developing online campaigns for NGOs such as Caritas International, Terre Des Hommes or the german green party. He co-organized the Table of Free Voices, uniting 112 international personalities to collect their answers to the most urgent questions of our time. His experiences will bring us innovative campaigns.

25. POC21 IS A COLLABORATION FROM THE PRODUCERS OF OuiShare Fest is a leading international festival about the collaborative society, and the flagship project from the OuiShare community. 3rd edition is planned for May 2015. http://ouisharefest.com/ Palomar5 was the first innovation camp in Europe, organized in 2009 by the team behind OpenState. 30 young people under 30 lived and worked together for 7 weeks creating prototype solutions for "the future of work". http://palomar5.org/

26. 35% 15% PARTICIPANT CARE 35% 15% travel, hosting, food, drinks COMMUNICATION web, print and video production, community management CAMP LOGISTICS materials, supplies, machines, tools, logistics management, etc COORDINATION & RESEARCH materials, supplies, machines, tools, logistics management, etc

27. WHY BECOME A PARTNER? AS A PHILANTHROPIC ORGANIZATION You understand the urgent need for effective solutions to the interconnected global issues of climate, sustainability and human development. You embrace the potential of open source social innovations to scale and spread to people who need them the most. AS A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OR A REGION You are concerned about the local impacts of climate change and resource depletion. You are enthusiastic, or curious, about the power of open source solutions to bring a new wave of prosperity to your citizens. AS A COMPANY, LARGE OR SMALL You feel that your organization can be part of the solution, or you want to understand how it can be. You are enthusiastic about working with visionaries of the open source and maker movements. You understand that being part of this, will be a fantastic accelerator for your company’s transformation, thanks to the knowledge, experience and contacts it will bring you. Because you believe in our vision for a secure future. THANK YOU.

28. THANK YOU AND LET’S KEEP IN TOUCH For Partnership Inquiries: Benjamin Tincq benjamin@ouishare.net & Dominik Wind dominik@openstate.cc Follow us: http://poc21.cc @poc21cc"

(http://www.slideshare.net/OuiShare/poc21-accelerating-open-source-sustainability)


=More Information=

* Slideshare: http://bitly.com/POC21slidesEN 

*  a Facebook group for the POC21 community of contributors: https://www.facebook.com/groups/669466016485419/


[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]