
(interesting from a p2p/commons point of view because this is about a pluralistic understanding of value)

=Discussion=

About the concept in the economic work of institutional economist John R. Commons, '''by Hiroyuki Uni''' :

"In the 1927 manuscript, for the first time, Commons named a
concept himself: namely, “proprietary scarcity.” The origin of “proprietary scarcity” is
“scarcity of proprietors.”

For Adam Smith, scarcity was psychological and subjective, based on human
pleasure and pain. David Ricardo (1817) explained scarcity based on the strength of
nature’s resistance to human beings, as shown in the unproductiveness of land. His
scarcity was objective natural scarcity (Commons 1927, ch.7, 98). However, while
Commons’s scarcity is also objective, it is defined by the relationship between the
supply and demand in a particular society at a particular time. Commons emphasized
that, in the case of both general commodities and labor power, the ability of sellers to
limit or withhold supply has been authorized and strengthened historically by the
development of institutions of ownership and labor rights. Therefore, proprietary
scarcity is closely related to custom and sovereignty. 

...

Although the term “proprietary scarcity” first appeared in the 1927 manuscript,
Commons’s idea regarding the cause and regulator of value was constructed over
many years following the publication of his first theoretical book, The Distribution of
Wealth, in 1893. In it, Commons analyzed the behavior of suppliers, who profit by
withholding supply, and criticized the profit theory of Eugen Böhm-Bawerk from this
perspective. Moreover, Commons considered such supplier behavior led to wages that
exceeded subsistence levels, and criticized the wage theory of classical economists as it
could not explain the wages exceeding subsistence levels. However, Commons (1893)
did not clearly distinguish between reasonable and unreasonable monopoly privileges.
In Legal Foundations of Capitalism (1924), through analyses of historical changes in
customs and laws regarding rent bargain, price bargain and wage bargain, Commons
distinguished between goodwill and privileges based on whether any public purpose
was served by suppliers’ withholding supply.

However, in neither of these books did Commons use the term “proprietary
scarcity,” or any other expression that combined these two words. “Proprietary
scarcity” was a term Commons coined in the 1927 manuscript to clarify his criticism
of Smith’s subjective scarcity and Ricardo’s natural scarcity. This is the first
contribution of the 1927 manuscript, and the concept of “proprietary scarcity” would
become a key concept in Commons’s Institutional Economics."
(https://doi.org/10.1080/00213624.2018.1469886)

=Source=

* Uni Hiroyuki (2018) John R. Commons’s Criticism of Classical Economics,
Journal of Economic Issues, 52:2, 396-404, DOI: 10.1080/00213624.2018.1469886

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00213624.2018.1469886


=More information=

Commons, John. R. The Distribution of Wealth. New York, NY: Macmillan, 1893.
———. The Legal Foundations of Capitalism. New York, NY: Macmillan, 1924.
———. Reasonable Value. Madison, WI: Edwards Brothers, 1925.
———. Reasonable Value: A Theory of Volitional Economics. Manuscript, 1927. (Collection of the Kyoto
Prefectural Library. Call mark: /331.04/C85/, Material code: 1102508007).
———. Institutional Economics: Its Place in Political Economy. New York, NY: Macmillan, 1934.
———. The Economics of Collective Action. New York, NY: Macmillan, 1950

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Economics]]