
'''* Book: Propriété et communs. Benjamin Coriat. Mouvement Utopia, 2022.'''

URL = http://www.editions-utopia.org/portfolio-view/propriete-et-communs-idees-recues-et-propositions/


=Description=

"Between the private and the public, we are witnessing a resurgence of the commons all over the world. In reality, they never disappeared, and it is estimated that nearly two billion people apply the principle of commons for goods and services in their daily lives. The concept of the commons, which requires the coexistence of a defined resource, a determined community, and a collective mode of governance, reflects an awareness of the limitations of regulation by the market or by the state.

This resurgence of the commons has been energized by the emergence of informational commons (free software, Wikipedia, Creative Commons licenses...) fighting against the abuses of intellectual property, but also by the awareness of the dangers of the privatization of the world and life by transnationals or the wealthiest, generating conflicts, inequalities, and ecological destruction. It has also been invigorated by the failures of the all-encompassing state, often burdened with heavy and bureaucratic management.

Through ten preconceived ideas, this book examines the commons and revisits the taboo question of property and inheritance, and therefore, power relations. Because any extension of the domain of the commons challenges the powers granted to owners, whether they are private or public.

In its proposal section, this work, which is both educational and accessible, advocates prioritizing use value and establishing or expanding communal property in many areas, associated not with individuals but with a community."

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons]]

The commons: an alternative to a market-driven society, a response to the neoliberal offensive, a way to transcend capitalism and statism, a revolution of the 21st century? This book suggests that it may be a bit of all these things.""