'''* PhD thesis - "Property, Commoning and the Politics of Free Software". J. [[Martin Pedersen]]. Thesis submitted January 2010, Department of Philosophy, Lancaster University. Examined by Massimo De Angelis.'''

The thesis is a philosophical and political inquiry into the material nature of immateriality and was published as the first of a two volume Special Issue of [http://www.commoner.org.uk/?p=107 The Commoner] and also presented on [http://commoning.wordpress.com http://commoning.wordpress.com]

=Source=

Pedersen, J.M. (2010) The Commoner, Special Issue, Volume 14, Winter 2010, 

URL = http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/jmp-essay-full-the-commoner.pdf


=Abstract=

The enclosure of cyberspace constitutes a new frontier of capitalism. Yet the Internet continues to facilitate new forms of collaboration and co-creative social relations. Whether this tension will result in a consolidation of capital and its underpinning logic, or lay the
foundation for a world of voluntary cooperation, will depend on how these novel phenomena are conceptualised and organised.

This thesis argues that leading commentators on Free Software make two theoretical mistakes which threaten to have grave practical implications. 

First, they conflate private property (a particular form of property) with the concept of property in general. 

Second, they misconceive cyberspace – the intangible realm – as distinct from the material world – the tangible realm. 

Consequently, prevailing property relations in the tangible realm are left unquestioned, while the material underpinning of cyberspace is obscured. By contrast, the thesis aims to show the critical importance of recognising the materiality of the novel phenomena made possible by the Internet. In addition, an examination of concepts of private property in liberal jurisprudence reveals a number of distinct components and potential configurations
thereof. It is argued that all relations between people with regard to things can in fact be understood in terms of configurations of these same components. This allows for an understanding of commoning – collective action based on shared values and self-organisation – in terms of property. Free Software, on this model, can be understood as an autonomous commons that has constituted itself through the reconfiguration of a private property right, namely copyright.

Conceptualising the relational modalities of Free Software and commoning in terms of property thus feeds back into the concept of property. This
understanding can in turn be mapped back onto the tangible realm, reanimating debate about the range of possible property relations more
generally."



=Summary=

==Chapter 1 – Free Culture in context== 

is a critical discussion of
the way in which a number of key commentators are framing the
politics of cyberspace. I argue that their framing of the debate is
mistaken in two key ways. First, it conflates private property (a
particular configuration of property) with the concept of property
in general. Second, it relies on an untenable distinction between
the tangible and intangible realm, which I examine in detail with
reference to the commons of the land.


'''Section 1.2 – Beyond property''': promises of the networked
information society - introduces cyberspace in terms of
libertarian values, the techno-social promise of a “single
consciousness” in a “global village”, and the architecture of the
Internet. It then discusses a liberal, economistic conceptualisation
of the novel co-creative social relations that cyberspace
facilitates. The libertarian voices in cyberspace reject the
industrial age governments, who have “no sovereignty where we
gather”, and state that property does not apply to cyberspace,
because it is a space without matter. A brief technical overview of
the Internet reveals its end-to-end (E2E) architecture which
facilitates peer-to-peer (P2P) activities and ensures that all data
flows equally through the Internet: the network is “neutral”,
because all flows of data are equal before the law of the Internet.

Network “neutrality” and E2E + P2P is seen as the foundation
for a new mode of production of which the very successful
example of Free Software is most significant. In his
conceptualisation of Free Software, Benkler (2006) has coined
the term “commons-based peer production”, which is a specific
type of “peer production”, all of which he groups under the
umbrella term “social production”. In presenting Benkler's work

I also examine his sources of inspiration in order to locate his
contribution within economic thought and hence illustrate how
social production is framed and thus, to a significant extent,
given shape.


'''Section 1.3 – Information exceptionalism:''' protecting social
production and the Internet commons? - begins with a brief
overview of the politics of intellectual property, which has
become an important part of the global political economy. Next, I
return to the two-fold claim that cyberspace has no matter and
that property applies to matter only. It is a shared claim that
defines the Free Culture movement, which has been inspired by
the Free Software movement to protect the freedom to share and
cooperate in cyberspace. This position with regard to property I
refer to as “information exceptionalism”. While information
exceptionalism sets out to protect social production and the
cooperative potential of cyberspace, I argue that the insistence on
a distinction between the “tangible realm” and the “intangible
realm” has important political consequences. I show that
information exceptionalism partly rests on a mistaken contrast
between property and policy, and begin to develop the argument
that understanding Free Software in terms of property is a
recursive process through which the concept of property comes
to be seen in a new light.

'''Section 1.4 – Material foundations:''' on cables and machinery,
food and shelter – examines the material underpinnings of
cyberspace to exhibit the effects and scale of material and energy
use involved in information and communication technology. I
illustrate how exclusive control and decision making authority
over material foundations (given through private property rights)
facilitates an extraction of wealth from activities unfolding in the
intangible realm that is dependent on this materiality. I hence
argue that the intangible realm is threatened by enclosure in the
first instance not due to the expansion of private property rights
into the intangible realm, but because of the existence of capital
interests – based on private property rights – in the tangible
realm. I thus conclude that the threat of cyberspace enclosure
cannot be confronted simply by rejecting property rights in the
intangible realm, because their existence in that realm is
primarily an effect. It is also necessary to address the actual
cause of enclosure as it exists in the tangible realm, and which
arises from exclusive control over land, its resources, and the
means of production and distribution. Moreover, by positioning
themselves in this way, information exceptionalists fail to show
solidarity with the commons of the land, that is, the real
commons. The virtual commons are thus disembodied and left
vulnerable to the exigencies of the material realm. Consequently,
they are in perpetual need of a strong state for regulatory
intervention in order to continuously limit the reach of capital.


==Chapter 2 – The properties of property== 

is an analytical
disentanglement of property in particular (as in the form of
private property) from property in general (as social relations
with regard to things). The purpose is to provide a framework
within which the social relations of commoning can be
understood alongside other variants of property relations, such as
private or public property. The aim of this chapter is less
normative than it is analytical: property is made up of
components that can be configured in different ways.

Understanding the elementary structure of property facilitates its
reconfiguration. While providing mainly a structural account of
property, I nonetheless start from the normative assumption that
private property can only be justified for real persons and only
for a limited number of things. The institution of property
distributes decision-making authority over access to and use of
resources in societies. Private property invests such authority in
individuals and quasi-individuals, such as firms, authorising their
pursuit of self-interest. While private property as sovereignty
might develop personal autonomy and identity, enable open-
ended creativity, and constitute protection from external
interference, in capitalist democracy, it primarily legitimises
profiteering in the interest of shareholders. As against the popular
myth of the “tragedy of the commons”, I hold that care for things
such as land, its resources, and the means of production and
distribution is best achieved collectively.


'''Section 2.2 - Property in general, property in particular''' 

is an introduction to the complexity and elusiveness of the idea of
property. It presents and relativises the idea of property as
dominion: the absolute control of an individual over a thing of
the external world. While this conception runs deep in much
philosophical and everyday discourse, it is argued that no legal
system has ever instituted property relations that were absolute in
this sense. Limitations are part of all known property regimes. I
will introduce the work of James Harris in this section, who has
forcefully argued that despite the importance of limitations, the
conception of property as dominion is presupposed in all legal
systems.


'''Section 2.3 - Property as social relations''' is an explanatory,
gleaning journey through key texts and concepts in liberal
jurisprudence. I begin this section with an exposition of W. N.
Hohfeld's matrix of jural relations which correlates rights and
duties and powers and liabilities. Using an anthropological
application of that matrix, and support from within liberal
jurisprudence, I argue that property is normative protocols
guiding relations between people with regard to things. Next I
draw upon Harris's account of property as a mechanism for
distributing control powers and use privileges with regard to
resources. I adopt Harris's characterisation of private property as
authorising self-seekingness in one's use of and control over
things. While I agree with his view that all property relations in
capitalist democracy are developments of the fundamental idea
of dominion, I argue that it is crucial to begin an account of
property with the open-ended idea of social relations with regard
to things. To do so is to confront the hegemony of private
property in political and legal theory, as a corollary of its
confrontation in practice.


'''Section 2.4 - A framework for property as social relations''' –
introduces three core variables of property as social relations
with regard to things. The relating subject refers to the social unit
within which property relations hold and are performed, usually a
community; the related-to object refers to the thing or resource
with regard to which property relations hold and are performed;
and the relational modality refers to the way in which these
relations are shaped through normative protocols, by guiding the
behaviour of people with regard to one another and the use of
things. I discuss these variables and their possible extensions at
length, and argue that property relations are primarily about
actions, and property protocols hence about enabling or
constraining action. I also make the case that property protocols
inhere in customary practices and values as much as in legal
codes and otherwise articulated norms. This is important as I
want to be able to account for commons, and traditional relations
and practices of commoning, as property. I conclude that in order
to understand what it means to own something, an inquiry into
the relational modality of any given form of property is
indispensable.

'''Section 2.5 - Specification of property''': the configurations of
relational modality – is an examination of the elementary
structure of private property. Following Harris, I show that basic
private property consists of a collocation of legitimised control
power and use privileges. Control power is legitimised in the
sense that, short of contravening criminal and other law,
whatever decision the owner makes with regard to the use of a
thing is justified, simply by virtue of being her decision. I
provide heuristic diagrams in order to bring to the fore the
different elements which make up basic private property on the
one hand, and capitalist private property on the other. Capitalist
private property is characterised by a collocation of control
power not only with use privileges, but also with wealth effects,
or income rights. The collocation, however, is by no means a
necessary one. Moreover, a justification of one of the elements
(control power) does not amount to a justification of another
element (wealth effects). I show by way of illustrative examples
that changing the structure of private property, or reconfiguring
its specifications, even if only in small ways, can lead to
surprising transformations of the kind of community that this
relational modality gives rise to.


'''Section 2.6 - Property and commons''' – discusses the ways in
which common property forms are usually classified and
distinguished from private property, and the ways in which
commons can be understood as particular kinds of property
configurations. I note that the values underlying private property
are in important ways the common values of capitalist
democracy. This points towards the view which I further develop
later in this section, namely that capitalist democracy is, in some
not insignificant way, also a commons. A discussion of three
different accounts of common forms of property (Benkler,
Waldron, Harris), shows that the differences between different
property forms are all differences in the configuration of,
essentially, the same elements. The substitution of “social
interest” for “legitimate self-seekingness” is identified as the key
characteristic of non-private property forms. I argue that property
protocols, whichever way they may be expressed, all provide
answers to the question of who makes (or can make) decisions
over the actions of people with regard to things, and by reference
to what these decisions are legitimised. In order to develop an
idea of a self-constituted commons within capitalist democracy, I
use Harris's account of communitarian property, which he sees as
a form of resource-holding that is recognised by, yet autonomous
from, the wider legal system that surrounds it. I argue that the
articulation of property protocols facilitate such self-constitution.


==Chapter 3 – Free Software as property== 

is a detailed exposition
of the Free Software movement, its history, practices, and legal
innovations. I cast it as a commons that has autonomously
constituted itself. The aim of this chapter is to show how and
why it makes sense to understand Free Software as property. Not
only is the central achievement of the Free Software movement
the reconfiguration of core elements of copyright, that is, a
transformation of property relations, but conceptualising the
relational modalities of Free Software in terms of property also
feeds back into the concept of property: mapping this
understanding back onto the tangible realm reanimates debate
about the range of possible property relations more generally.
Section 3.2 – The nature of code – provides a basic account of
software in terms of how its code is written, developed,
commented upon and finally converted into executable
programmes that can be run on a computer. Because of the
inscrutability of binary code – readable only by machines – it
follows that access to the source code – readable by humans – is
a precondition for analysis, customisation and public scrutiny of
software. Without this access to the source code, software
represents a “black box” technology, the internal workings of
which are hidden, and hence uncertain. Given that software is
integral to many crucial systems, such as engines, brakes, flight
control, ambulance dispatch, power stations etc., the creation of
uncertainty constitutes not only a democratic issue, but a real
danger.

'''Section 3.3 – A brief history of Free Software and its imaginary, scientific and cultural origins''' – begins with an examination of
how the science of computing is embedded in the scientific
commons which predates the rise of modern science. I provide a
detailed account of the enclosure of the hacker commons that
began in the 1970s, the consequent resistance to this privatisation
which led to the establishment of the Free Software Foundation
(FSF) in 1985, and the political disagreements that led to the
formation of the Open Source Initiative (OSI). I argue that at the
heart of Free Software lies a principled philosophy of freedom
and community building, discarded as “ideology” by OSI.

Stripped of FSF’s political origins, Open Source is hence best
understood as an engineering methodology for a market-based
economy.


'''Section 3.4 – The Free Software movement as a recursive public'''
– discusses the main points of a recent study of Free Software
and its cultural significance. Free Software is understood as a
“recursive public” that is “vitally concerned” with the conditions
of and possibilities for its own coming into being (Kelty 2008).
While the Free Software movement remains a paradigmatic
example of a recursive public, I argue that its recursive nature
does not include the crucial recursive relation between the
tangible and the intangible realm, as noted in Chapter 1. The Free
Software commons remains ideologically and practically
separated from the commons of the land and its material
resources.


'''Section 3.5 – The GNU General Public License: copyright subversion and constitution''' – is an analysis of the software
license that articulates the common values around which the Free
Software community has emerged. The shared desire and need to
cooperate on computer code has been condensed into “four
freedoms” of Free Software. Using the framework developed in
Chapter 2, I show how this license, the GPL, is an articulation of
these common values in the form of sub-clauses to existing
copyright, which ensures that once a piece of software code has
been published under the GPL, it remains freely available for
anyone to use for any purpose except enclosure. This self-
articulated relational modality hence ensures reciprocity in
perpetuity and uses copyright subversively to both constitute the
software commons, and defend it against enclosure. The creation
and maintenance of a commons within capitalist democracy
necessitates an interfacing with its legal, political and economic
dimensions. The example of Free Software shows that the
articulation of property protocols on part of social movements
and communities can make innovative use of trespassory
protection provided by the overarching legal system through
conventional property rights, in a way that undermines rather
than strengthens the logic of capitalist private property. I also
argue that the GPL acts as a constitution of the Free Software
community.


'''Section 3.6 – Defending the GPL: a recursive public defends itself''' – reviews a small number of key legal proceedings which
establish that the GPL is indeed sanctioned by copyright law. I
show in this section how a self-defence mechanism has emerged
spontaneously within the Free Software movement,
complementing the protection that copyright affords. I maintain
that the Free Software example provides an embryonic model for
other voluntary associations to autonomously constitute and
defend themselves against enclosure.

Finally, I conclude that solidarity between the real commons of
the land and the virtual commons of cyberspace and a
recognition of the interpenetration of the tangible and intangible
realm, as well as an anti-capitalist vision of politics are necessary
elements in a defence against the enclosure of cyberspace.

In the rest of the introduction I want to present some notes first
on contemporary anti-capitalism, before turning to a social
history of the perennial resistance to capitalism."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-introduction.pdf)

=Excerpts=

Chapter by chapter availability at the Commoner:

Massimo De Angelis and J. Martin Pedersen - Preface / Volume 1 [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-preface.pdf PDF]

CHAPTER 0 — Introduction: Property, Commoning and the Politics of Free Software [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-introduction.pdf PDF]

CHAPTER 1 — Free Culture in Context: Property and the Politics of Free Software [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-chapter1.pdf PDF]

CHAPTER 2 — Properties of Property: A Jurisprudential Analysis [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-chapter2.pdf PDF]

CHAPTER 3 — Free Software as Property [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-chapter3.pdf PDF]

CHAPTER 4 — Conclusion: Property and the Politics of Commoning (including bibliography of the entire essay) [http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-conclusion-bibliography.pdf PDF]


==From the conclusion==

J. Martin Pedersen:

"The concept of property is obviously central to the essay. Here is an excerpt from the conclusion that sheds some light on the position developed in the essay with respect to the relations between property and cyberspace, as well as land, its resources and the means of production:

Cyberspace is disembodied not only in the sense of being technologically mediated, or virtual, but also because it is continuously represented as if it were not highly dependent on the material realm for machines and minerals and energy. Understanding the dynamics of cyberspace in terms of property – the language of social relations with regard to things – is a good starting point for exploring the concept of property. It is a recursive process that generates a new understanding of property, which in turn might facilitate the emergence of further permutated relational modalities. If the world were a commons and property an open-ended toolbox for the self-articulation of value practices, then commons would probably blossom. Property seen through the lens of spontaneously emerging social relations – whether in cyberspace or landless movements in Brazil – opens the black box of property and reveals building blocks that can be recombined in very many ways. With an enriched understanding of property, private property might – in line with the anti-capitalist hopes that have animated this essay – be limited to (something like) personal possessions. Rights of commoning can then be substituted for private property in land, its resources, and the means of production and distribution (p. 290)."
(http://commoning.wordpress.com/2010/12/31/from-the-conclusion-property-commoning-and-the-politics-of-free-software/)


==Yochai Benkler's conception of a [[Capitalist Commons]]==

J. Martin Pedersen:

""We have seen how Benkler's work contributes to an expansion of the
economistic framework that enables it to better capture the dynamics of
social production. These social relations he defines as outside the
market and property, which he otherwise considers very important
institutions:

“The rules of property are circumscribed and intended to elicit a
particular datum— willingness and ability to pay for exclusive control
over a resource. They constrain what one person or another can do with
regard to a resource; that is, use it in some ways but not others,
reveal or hide information with regard to it, and so forth. These
constraints are necessary so that people must transact with each other
through markets, rather than through force or social networks, but they
do so at the expense of constraining action outside of the market to the
extent that it depends on access to these resources” (Benkler 2006: 24).

Social production for Benkler, then, is the kind of social relations
that are currently not captured within “the market”, as that institution
is traditionally understood. Moreover, social production should not be
subjected to the private property and contract mechanisms that define
the market, because these mechanisms are considered unfit for the
intangible realm of information. Instead the economistic framework – the
language of marketeers, essentially – must be enlarged to be able to
systematically capture the dynamics of social production, while, and
this is the crux of the matter, private property and all the wealth
concentrated on that basis remains unquestioned. In other words, the
power amassed through the private property regime in the tangible realm
is left untouched, but as an organisational mode is rejected from the
realm of ideas; because the operation of existing powers in the tangible
realm needs a free flowing virtual commons in order to continually have
access to ideas, knowledge and information. The organisational mode of
the tangible realm, however, remains. That is to say that Benkler is
developing a framework with which to capture social production without
destroying it. It is the construction of “capitalist commonism”, to use
an oxymoron, that we see in the work of Benkler.

Capitalist commonism recognises that existing economic powers cannot
sustain themselves without a minimal degree of commonalty in the
intangible realm. In order for the operation of the industrial apparatus
to sustain itself it must refrain from enclosing in a traditional sense
the intangible realm, because it needs this realm of ideas to feed its
increasingly information dependent, but heavy, physical machinery of
electronic commodity production.

The dynamics of social production, however, are captured through
incorporation in the economistic framework. That permits those
institutions that organise themselves with such means – corporations,
states and many NGOs and PGOs (Pseudo-Governmental Organisations) – to
scientifically grasp those dynamics and thus extract the surplus value
that arises from the excess capacity embodied in relations between citizens.

The excess capacity, as we saw, is capacity in excess of basic
requirements, such as housing, food, time and skills. Housing and food
are tangible matters, while skills are transmitted most often through
tangible means in physical spaces, most of which is organised by means
of private property and thus – largely – remain in the hands of the few.
Excess capacity, then, by a small stretch of the imagination, can be
understood as positive externalities that cannot be internalised on the
basis of the usual mechanisms of enclosure, because these mechanisms
would destroy the commons once and for all. By analogy, such enclosure
is like overfishing: if you land all the fish they cannot reproduce
themselves and you have nothing to fish for any more. The virtual
commons must be defended, but ways to reap its positive externalities –
the economic potential inherent in the pooling and extraction of its
productive forces – are required for capital interest, confined to the
tangible realm, to be able to carry on its expansionary movement. The
information commons, therefore, becomes a capitalist commons and it is
Benkler's great achievement that he has begun to establish a framework
from within which tangible powers can extract wealth from the intangible
realm without destroying that realm. From a capitalist perspective this
is genius, because it resembles a sustainable fishing policy: we can
keep fishing, but the fish will remain available. From an
anti-capitalist perspective it is a domestication of the virtual commons
and consequently a separation of the virtual commons from the real
commons, conceptualised in terms that relies upon state power and in
turn justifies state power.

It is similar concerns that have led to Tiziana Terranova (2000) to
argue that in the phenomena that Benkler calls “social production” we
rather see an emergence of “free labor” that offer new ways for capital
to consolidate itself through extracting wealth from social relations
hitherto external to direct market relations. Not only is it free
labour, we may venture, but resistance-free labour. In her later work
she sees Benkler's conceptualisation of social production as offering
“liberal and neoliberal economics a refinement of its logic that does
not significantly break with its overall political rationality”
(Terranova 2009: 251-252). That reflects the argument I am making here.

In Benkler's presentation she finds that “[n]on-market production, in
fact, is based in social cooperation, but it becomes economically
effective, that is it achieves the status of an economic phenomenon”
(2009: 252), because, as Benkler says “it increases the overall
productivity in the sectors where it is effective ... and presents new
sources of competition to incumbents that produce information goods for
which there are now socially produced substitutes’ (Benkler 2006: 122).
In the networked information economy “[s]ocial life and economic life
would thus find a point of convergence where the former would no longer
find its expression exclusively within the reproductive sphere of civil
society but would become directly productive in the economic domain”
(Terranova 2009: 251). It is this economistic perspective that
domesticates social production - ties it to capital - and funnels the
wealth created through these non-market relations back into capital. I
am arguing in this essay for a social analysis of property relations for
exactly the reason that Terranova criticises Benkler's account."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-chapter1.pdf)


==Critique of Free Software and Free Culture==


Martin Pedersen:

"I develop a view on property that is
inspired by the phenomenon of Free Software. It is paradoxical because
the Free Software Foundation, the self-organised civil society
institution and social movement that defines Free Software, does not see
the concept of property as relevant for Free Software. They vehemently
reject the idea. In that sense I am standing outside the movement,
insofar as we understand the movement as the voice of its leaders. But
why should we?

Although I argue against their rejection of property, the main purpose
is not to advise the Free Software Foundation on matters of policy
strategy and tactics, but to provide the wider global network of social
movements working to (re-)create commons with a map and matrix of
property that can be used to advance their causes and to grasp just how
multi-faceted a concept property is. Understanding Free Software as
property is a very useful starting point for transcending existing
conceptions of property, because when understood as property, Free
Software opens the door for radically different configurations of
property. Importantly, Free Software is an example of a community
articulating their own relational modalities and thus defining how they
self-organise to make space for a realisation of their “needs, desires,
aspirations, affects and relations” (De Angelis 2005a). While it is
certainly an important victory for community based, self-legislation, it
is perhaps even more importantly a crack in property where the light
gets in: if we inscribe the relational modalities of Free Software upon
the concept of property, then the concept is forever changed. In other
words, its “framing effect” would be entirely different and informed
debate become possible.

Above I used the term paradox to avoid any association with
self-contradiction. It might be read as if I am contradicting myself,
declaring allegiance with social movements, then turning around to
conceptualise the dynamics of a social movement in terms that they
reject.  However, the contradiction is on their part.

The libertarian values that the Free Software and Free Culture movements
exhibit are not liberties that were won in the struggle for virtual
commons and the right to share digital information and cooperate on
software projects. The freedoms upon which the Free Software commons
rests – the liberties that make it possible for such a movement to act
and organise – are liberties won by struggling women and men, who with
their bodies fought for land and freedom.  The habeas corpus in which
virtual commoners find themselves is an outcome of a struggle that has
been unfolding for almost a millennia. Arguably, the leadership of the
Free Software and Free Culture movements are separating themselves from
the real commons. The commons of the land and the commons of the means
of production and distribution are the fundamental commons without which
virtual commons are merely lambs for the profit slaughter."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/N14/the-commoner-14-winter-2010-chapter1.pdf)



==Further Excerpts==

#[[Property as a Social Relation‎]]
#[[Free Software as Property‎]]


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]