
=Discussion=

* A proposal for a new public crypto network that functions like a truly novel monetary commons, by Yanis Varoufakis:

"what is the alternative? Suppose that US residents could download a Federal Reserve digital wallet from any app store. Imagine that they could then ask employers to deposit their pay into that wallet and even transfer money from their commercial bank accounts to take advantage of the Fed’s overnight interest rates as well as free transactions.


Using the same blockchain technology of stablecoin issuers, the Fed could guarantee that every payment or transfer is utterly private, while enabling everyone to see how much money sloshes around the system in aggregate, thereby preventing the authorities from creating new money without everyone knowing.


This would be the mother of all stablecoins, without any of the drawbacks. Speed, efficiency, and privacy would be combined with a higher interest rate on deposits (compared to commercial banks) and the copper-plated security that your digital tokens are 100% Fed-backed US dollars with none of the moral hazards or doom loops afflicting private stablecoins. Moreover, this public system comes with an additional advantage: it makes possible a trust fund for everyone.


Recall that, under the current system of fractional reserve banking, commercial banks create a lot more dollars from every dollar of deposits they receive (the so-called money market multiplier). Conversely, if the US Treasury is correct that $6.6 trillion of deposits are about to migrate from US banks to stablecoins, the overall supply of dollars is about to shrink dramatically. That will cause the Fed to raise interest rates substantially in order to allow banks to do likewise to stem the migration and the fall in the money supply—a disastrous outcome for the real economy.


By contrast, following a mass migration of bank deposits to Fed wallets, the Fed does not need to increase interest rates. All it needs to do is calculate by how much the money supply is falling and credit each resident’s wallet with whatever sum is necessary to keep the money supply steady. In essence, without the state having to raise new taxes or borrow a single cent, the Fed would be offering a substantial trust fund to everyone within this new public crypto network that functions like a truly novel monetary commons."

(https://savageminds.substack.com/p/defusing-the-stablecoin-time-bomb)


[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]