
'''Essay: Ronfeldt, David and Varda, Danielle,The Prospects for Cyberocracy (Revisited)(December 1, 2008).''' 

Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1325809

=Introductory comment=

Michel Bauwens:

David Ronfeldt has updated his seminal 1992 essay on cyberocracy, which offered at a time a pioneering and refreshing vision on the new influence of the networks, and predicted the rise of a cyberocracy, a new elite of the well-connected, but without versing in a prediction that it would be a ‘new class’.

David, now retired, has co-written an update with Danielle Varda, which, in my opinion, disappoints as it seems to totally overlook the specific emergence of peer production and peer governance. Their notions of networked governance and the nexus-state merely look at the new configuration of old actors, i.e. state, markets and nonprofits/NGO’s, and they do not at all see the new forms of production and organization emerging outside the already existing formal civil society.

This is the crux of my critique, in the form of short phrases in between the following summary.

\
=Abstract=

“The deepening of the information age will alter the nature of the state
so thoroughly that something new emerges: cyberocracy. While it is too early to say
precisely what a cyberocracy will look like, the outcomes will include new kinds of
democratic, totalitarian, and hybrid governments, along with new kinds of state-society
relations. Thus, optimism about the information revolution should be tempered by an
anticipation of its potential dark side. This paper reiterates the view of the cyberocracy
concept as first stated in 1992, and then offers a postscript for 2008. It speculates that
information-age societies will develop new sensory apparatuses, a network-based social sector, new modes of networked governance, and ultimately the cybercratic nexus-state as a successor to the nation-state.”


=Author’s Intro=

“Recent re-readings of an old paper about cyberocracy (Ronfeldt, 1992) indicated
that many of its points still read well and that the concept might be worth reiterating.
Undertaking a full revision and updating was not feasible, so we decided to abridge the
old paper and then add a postscript to update selected ideas and observations. This
derivative paper is the result.”


=Summary and Excerpts=

Pages 1 to 39 is a summary of the previous 1992 version of Cyberocracy and the post-script starts page 40, starting with developments that confirmed many of the predictions that it contained.

The author’s then go on to discuss four specific areas:


“Against this background, this Postscript extends the ideas in the original paper by
engaging in four new speculations about future trends. These speculations should be
added to the original six “next steps” for research listed earlier.

* The advanced societies are developing new sensory apparatuses that people
have barely begun to understand and use.

* A network-based social sector is emerging, distinct from the traditional
public and private sectors. Consisting largely of NGOs and NPOs, its rise
is leading to a rebalancing of state, market, and civil-society forces.

* New modes of multiorganizational collaboration are taking shape, and
progress toward networked governance is occurring.

* This may lead to the emergence of the nexus-state as a successor to the
nation-state."


Some details:

'''1.	The new sensory apparatuses:'''

“Many of the new apparatuses reflect the perception of perils. Crime and terrorism
are impelling new installations for watching cityscapes, monitoring communications,
and mapping potential hotspots. But sensor networks are also being deployed for early
warning and rapid response regarding many other concerns — disease outbreaks, forest protection, bird migration, and urban electricity spikes, to name a few. In addition,
environmental, human-rights, and other social activists continue to develop new media
— notably, IndyMedia — to keep watch and speed mobilization in case of a challenge
or abuse somewhere, say against the Zapatista movement in Mexico.88 In a sense, the
partisan blogospheres amount to a gigantic, reactive sensory apparatus in the American
body politic.”


The authors stress that such developments are not just beneficial to large corporations and business, and recognize the potential of sousveillance:

“It has become standard fare to speculate that such apparatuses mainly benefit
government and corporate actors, for good and ill. Less noticed, but we think equally
likely and significant, is that the apparatuses will aid the rise of civil-society actors, by
providing networked NGOs and NPOs with new tools not only for checking on the
behavior of government and corporate actors, but also for participating in collaborative
governance schemes with them. New mechanisms for attracting and combining diverse
viewpoints under the rubric of “collective intelligence” could help foster this.98 So
could the continued advance of principles favoring freedom of information, the right to
communicate, and open access.”


'''2.	The emergence of a new social sector'''

I find this part disappointing, as a third nonprofit sector already existed.

Here’s what they have to say:

“civil-society actors — NGOs and NPOs — are on the rise. Their numbers are mounting. The issues they care about — such as the environment, human rights, privacy, peace, health, poverty, consumer protection, disaster relief — are intensifying. The roles they play — as watchdogs, advocates, and service providers — are expanding, as are their abilities to affect the agendas of state and market actors. Civil-society actors also have a longer reach than ever; instead of standing alone, the usual case in the past, many now operate in sprawling collaborative networks that represent the rise of “global civil society”.”

They add that:

“the key factor behind the emergence of this sector is the rise of network
forms of organization and related doctrines, strategies, and technologies. These enable
myriad dispersed, often small actors to communicate, coordinate, and act conjointly as
never before, without a central command, while preserving their autonomy. Network
forms have existed for ages — they are as old as hierarchies and markets — but they are
only now coming into their own as a major societal organizing principle. To function
well on a large scale, multiorganizational networks require complex information and
communications systems — even more than do hierarchies and markets — and those
systems are finally afforded by the Internet and other new digital technologies.
The continued rise of networks as a distinct mode of organization, plus the new
strength this is imparting to NGOs and NPOs, is one of the most important trends
affecting the prospects for cyberocracy since the original paper was written.”


What is incomplete in this picture is the emergence of peer-governed civil-society networks, that do not take the form of NGO’s or nonprofits, (or for whom the legal face is accessory, as it is for us at the P2P Foundation). Surely that is the great innovation of the last decade, and NOT just the growth of already existing organized nonprofits.




'''3.	Progress Toward “Networked Governance” and “Government by Network”'''

“To this end, networked governance is emerging in several arenas. It is a goal of
regional integrationists in the European Union, where “joined-up government” and
“multilevel governance” have become abiding themes. In North America — the United
States, Canada, and to a degree, Mexico — the emphasis is less on regional integration
and mainly on constructing collaborative networks that span the public, private, and
nonprofit (social) sectors in selected issue areas, mostly within but also between these
nations.111 In addition, networked governance is not just a matter for governments. It is
progressing, albeit hesitantly, in the efforts of some corporations and civil-society NGOs
to collaborate on matters of mutual concern, partly as a reflection of rising ideals about
corporations having social responsibilities.”

This section offers a useful overview of networked governance concepts, noting two families of interpretations, depending on ‘narrow’ or ‘broad’ definitions of what a network is. But here again, this updates disappoints as peer governance and the reality of the governance of peer production networks seem totally to escape their attention.

The authors write, and it is easy to see their top-down bias:

“As networked governance goes, so go the prospects for cyberocracy. This may take decades to unfold, for it is not just a matter of reinventing government, reforming bureaucracy, and wiring the state with new computers — the hierarchy-altering notions of the 1990s. It is mainly a matter of getting a potent new form of organization right. And getting information-age networks right is as difficult and complex a job as getting hierarchies or markets right — it’s a job for generations.

Networked governance depends on government and nongovernmental actors
collaborating better. Learning to work with and through NGOs and NPOs to create
new governance schemes for addressing social problems is the cutting edge of policy
and strategy. And multiorganizational networks — not hierarchies or markets — offer
civil-society actors the most appealing mode for partnering with government actors.”

All of this is of course true, and even important, but they also miss the most important story of the age.




'''4.	Emergence of the Nexus-State:'''

“What will make the nexus-state so transformative is the rise of “government by
network.” But as discussed above, our notion of it differs somewhat from others. Yes,
as many analysts reiterate, it involves linking actors from anywhere into web-like
collaborations. But that notion alone is so broad it can encompass matters that are
better viewed as variants of government by hierarchy or by market, or as hybrids.122 In
our view, the essence of “government by network” is — and increasingly will be —
recourse to the NGOs and NPOs comprising the network-oriented social sector
discussed earlier, in ways that are distinct from government by hierarchy or by market.
Outsourcing to private businesses pertains mainly to “government by market,” though
some analysts presently categorize it as “government by network.”

Finally, if not first of all, the nexus-state will rest partly on the most ancient mode
of governance: “government by tribe” (and clan). All states do this to some extent, for
example by favoring some aristocratic families over others in past eras, by drawing on
figures from “the establishment” in modern eras, and in all eras by benefiting business
cronies and ideological partisans.123 The nexus-state will not — indeed, cannot — be
immune to government by tribe; it is too normal and useful to discard. But what will
distinguish the nexus-state is the formation of a new generation of professional cadres
— a kind of memetic tribe with its own convictions and esprit de corps — of forward-,
outward-looking cybercrats who believe in advancing government by network, even
more than by hierarchy and market. And they will appear in all sectors, replacing older
generations of administrators, managers, bureaucrats, and technocrats.

A nexus is a juncture, an intersection, a site
of linkage and convergence. It is a meeting-place for communication and coordination.
It may be a clearinghouse for initiatives that take place elsewhere, but it may also be a
center where initiatives are taken. The term normally means a network is present, not a
hierarchy or a market — but a nexus can also involve hierarchies and markets (not to
mention tribes). This definitional range assures the term’s appropriateness here.

The nexus-state, then, will be centered around what states are always centered
around: a set of hierarchical institutions. Yet it will have all four modes of governance
at its disposal, and it will be deeply embedded in society — more so than older types of
the state. Moreover, that society will be characterized as much by the information-age
network as by the other, older forms — it will have a networked sensory apparatus and
a network-based social sector. Thus the nexus-state will be more robust and resilient
than previous types of the state, but it will also be more circumscribed and interwoven
with society. It will have more instruments for wielding control, but its strength will
also stem from its capacity for decontrol to other actors. It will have to be effective at
both orchestrating and delegating — at both knowing more and doing less by itself, in
part because it attracts reliable private-enterprise and civil-society partners who know
even more. In a sense, to use metaphors currently in play, the cybercratic nexus-state
may thus be both “thicker” and “hollower” than the modern nation-state has been.

Furthermore, the nexus-state may well be more democratic, but some instances may
also turn out to be more authoritarian than ever — all in innovative ways that we just
don’t foresee yet. Indeed, the idea of “consultative dictatorship” enabled by advanced
information technology continues to have stronger allure than liberal democracy in
parts of the world.

These points may sound contradictory, but the history of social evolution bears
them out. ”


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]