

=Description=

Ignacio de Castro Arribas:

"As Weber (2004, pp. 72–73) ascertains “Open source software users
are not consumers in the conventional sense (...). Users integrate
into the production process itself in a profound way.” This is the
confirmation of the early Toffler (1984, p.267)´s perception of
the “(...) blurring of the line that separates producer from
consumer”. Users´ production entails consumption (hedonic rewards)
and frequently consumption entails production as well. In peer production
users are indeed both consumers and producers, or
prosumers as introduced by Toffler (1984) and later adopted by
Tapscott and Williams (2008) in the context of peer-production.

The idea of prosumption is by no means new, as Senior already
observed more than a century and a half ago “Economists have in
general opposed consumption to production” (Senior, 1836, p.53)
although there are productive and unproductive consumptions.

"Productive consumption is that use of a commodity which occasions
an ulterior product" (Ibid., p.54): there is a positive
externality to consumption. Differently from network effects, it
is not just the utility of other users what is positively
affected, it directly affects production. Like in the rural path
case, extra users do not only entail network externalities, there
is also an externality that affects positively the production of
the rural path. A new user joining the path implies network
effects: because the rural path net expands (to cover her
location) increasing the utility of the rest of the users (as a
result of the expansion of the net). Simultaneously the
incorporation of this extra user entails a productive externality:
the user contributes to the production of the path with the mere
consumption he does by walking it. Differently from the network
effect, this “prosumption effect” increases production rather than
utility. A differentiation should be made between network effects
and prosumption effects. While they might reinforce each other
they are essentially different, not only because the former
affects utility while the later affects production, but because
for prosumption effects to take place a network is not necessary.
Even if there is only one person in the world she can still give
raise to prosumption effects when contributing with her walking to
the creation of a rural path of which she is the only user.
Conversely for a network effect the size of the network must be
greater than one.

The novelty of peer-production relies on its capacity to
internalize these consumption externalities, both network and
prosumption effects. Effectively aggregating small and disperse
contributions to production and hence incorporating use as a
productive factor."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf)


=Source=

* Paper: Productive Paradigms in the Digital Era. Ignacio de Castro Arribas. Contribution for the 3rd Free Culture Research Conference, 8 and 9 of October, 2010

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Arribas-Paper.pdf