'''= "a research, development, and deployment lab for network protocols".'''

URL = https://protocol.ai/

"Protocol Labs is focused on researching and developing better tools for collaboration and public goods and commons funding." [https://research.protocol.ai/blog/2022/what-are-public-goods-and-commons/]


=Discussion=

==Web3: a new public goods and commons paradigm==

"The internet gave rise to “digital public goods” most commonly in the form of open-source software (e.g. linux) and knowledge distribution (e.g. wikipedia). Open source software has created an enormous amount of value for society. The development and maintenance of foundational internet protocols such as TCP/IP, HTTP, FTP, and SMTP have brought free, non-excludable, and non-rivalrous access to information to a global community.

With the lack of a central “internet government”, the mechanisms to fund these technologies has primarily been community driven philanthropy or by the emergence of large organizations / companies that accrue enough value to subsidize the development.

We believe Web3 presents an opportunity to develop new public goods and commons paradigms because of 1) new value capture systems enabled by the underlying technology and 2) the presence of a community willing to experiment and dedicate resources to improving societal good.

In the past, public goods have created enormous value but haven’t had a value-capture method to be self-sustaining. When viewed from the lens of Web3 ecosystems, mechanisms such as tokenization and protocol design can both define new value capture pathways and ensure optimal allocation of value captured towards public goods and commons.

The focus on community, collective intelligence, and resilience in web3 has led to development of new community resource allocation mechanisms such as quadratic voting, retroactive public goods funding and impact markets. Beyond this, a willingness to rapidly experiment and collaborate in a transparent environment can accelerate the development of mechanisms needed to scale public goods and commons funding.

Web3 is a great testing ground with structures that allow for new economic models to develop rapidly and at scale. Models that are closer to self-assembly are now possible, where decentralized planning and coordination brings together the mechanisms, experts, and funding that are necessary to sustain both public and common goods. In time, they could become a boon to open source development as well as research and science, and quickly scale beyond Web3 to broader society.

Protocol Labs is focused on researching and developing better tools for collaboration and public goods and commons funding. If you’re interested in being a part of this, be sure to join the community for the first in-person Funding the Commons event at the New York Historical Society on June 24-25. Registrations are open. To learn more about Funding the Commons, you can watch recordings from past events."

(https://research.protocol.ai/blog/2022/what-are-public-goods-and-commons/)

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]