'''= "investigates and prototypes civic protocols and emerging technologies that enable collective life to flourish—in tomorrow’s polis, networks, and habitats".'''

URL =


=Description=

About Protopolis Lab:

"Protopolis” fuses “proto” and “polis,” evoking the iterative prototyping of civic protocols within the
city-as-commons—a public realm of governance, reciprocity, and collective imagination. The
physical and digital are increasingly collapsing into a single, responsive fabric. In an era of
self-writing code, multiple accelerating intelligences, eroding institutional trust, and cascading
shocks—from global pandemics to climate risks—our coordination mechanisms must evolve as
quickly as the crises they address. Guided by classical notions of the polis alongside
contemporary philosophies of distributed agency, co-constitution of nature and artifice, and
solarpunk imaginaries of commoning, the Lab treats the polis as a living prototype whose rules
are adapted and written in an open-ended way.

Unconstrained by any single discipline, Protopolis Lab operates in an omnidisciplinary mode,
fluent in the vocabularies of designers, engineers, scientists, philosophers, artists, and social
scientists alike. Through a blend of rigorous inquiry of both big data and small data,
on-the-ground experimentation, and speculative design, the Lab catalogs and interprets
emerging phenomena in the protocolized polis while also building civic toolkits, governance
playbooks, and open-source protocol libraries—resources that empower communities to
co-create more resilient ways of living together. Beyond academic papers and conference talks,
Protopolis Lab is dedicated to producing a range of other outputs—including digital and physical
prototypes, open-source toolkits and datasets, audio-visual storytelling, exhibitions and
installations, participatory workshops, and curriculum development."


=Research=

Sentient Networks and Intelligence as Commons:

"Treating intelligence itself as a shared commons rather than a proprietary asset, we examine
the ontological foundations and governance challenges of AI in pursuit of a more equitable
protopolis. As development shifts from centralized stacks to decentralized paradigms, our
research maps the architectures and governance logics of distributed AI—on-chain inference
layers, self-sovereign agents as a form of artificial life, and permissionless computation—and
evaluates protocols that keep these systems non-extractive and publicly accountable. In
parallel, we draw on Eastern philosophical traditions—especially Buddhist ideas of impermanent
embodiment—to question the mind–body assumptions embedded in contemporary AI alignment
debates. The pillar equips scholars and practitioners with evidence-based pathways toward
plural, accountable, and commons-oriented intelligence infrastructures."


=More information=

Publications:

● Rong, H.* Governing the Commons in Web 3.0? A Social Network Analysis of CityDAO and the Myth of
Decentralization of Blockchain-Based Governance.

● Rong, H.* Fractional Property Ownership and Collective Governance in Local Development: A Conceptual
Framework. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4353724.

● Tan, JZ., Merk, T., Hubbard, S., Oak, ER., Rong., H., Pirovich, J., Rennie, E. ... Open Problems in DAOs.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19201.

● Rong, H.*, Hollander, J. Blockchain-Based Civic Participation: Web 3.0 Technologies in Action.

● Rong, Helena and David Dam. “From Community Currency to Crypto City Tokens: Potentials, Shortfalls, and
Future Outlooks of New Old Ideas.” June 15, 2023. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs. (link)

● Rong, Helena and Zeslene Mao. “Deep-Dive into CityDAO: An Experiment in Collective Land Ownership
and Decentralized Governance.” June 14, 2023. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs. (link)

● Rong, Helena and Er Li Peng. “Connected Digital Society: Paving Ways for Country-Scale Digital
Interoperability in Estonia.” June 14, 2023. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs. (link)

● Rong, Helena. “When URL Meets IRL in Web3: Lessons for Decentralized Trust-Building Technologies in
Democratic Governance.” May 3, 2023. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs. (link)

● Rong, H.*, Yang, J. and Qian, W.J. (2020). Enabling Participatory Actions in Community Design and
Management: A Collective Intelligence Digital Platform in Ang Sila, Thailand. Landscape Architecture
Frontiers, 8(4), pp.126-139. https://doi.org/10.15302/J-LAF-1-040017

● Rong, H.*, Yang, J., Chegut, A. Identifying and Measuring Architectural Design Features for Financial Asset
Valuation. Journal of Sustainable Real Estate, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/19498276.2025.2475641.

● Chegut, Andrea, Minkoo Kang, Helena Rong, and Juncheng Yang (2025). Value of Design: Creating Agency
Through Data-Driven Insights. Applied Research + Design/ ORO Editions.

● Rong, H., Chen, J. “Cyberbuddhism”: Framing Artificial Intelligence from a Eastern Philosophical
Perspective.

● Hu, BA., Rong, H.*, Tay, J. Is Decentralized Artificial Intelligence Governable? Towards Machine Sovereignty
and Human Symbiosis. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=5110089.

● Hu, BA., Liu, Y., Rong, H.* Trustless Autonomy: Understanding Motivations Behind Deploying
Self-Sovereign Decentralized AI Agents on Blockchain and Trust Execution Environments.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.09757.

● Hu, BA., Rong, H. Spore in the Wild: Case Study on Spore. fun, a Real-World Experiment of Sovereign
Agent Open-ended Evolution on Blockchain with TEEs. https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04236.

● Hu, BA., Rong, H. On the Day They Experience: Awakening Self-Sovereign Experiential AI Agents.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14893

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:China]]