* see also: [[Protocol Cooperativism]]

=Description=

Morshed Mannan:

"An early proponent of such cooperatives is Michel Bauwens, who refers to them as
‘protocol cooperatives’. In P2P Accounting for Planetary Survival, a report co-authored
with Alex Pazaitis, he defines protocol cooperatives as:

- “global open source repositories of knowledge, code and design, that allow humanity
to create infrastructures for the mutualization of the main provisioning systems (such
as food, habitat, mobility), and that are governed by the various stakeholder involved,
including the affected citizenry” (Bauwens and Pazaitis, 2019, p. 9).

Bauwens envisions protocol cooperatives as being a global organizational structure
that enables such mutualization, with cities, businesses and individuals as members
(Bauwens and Niaros, 2017, pp. 20, 53). He is of the view that the creation of such
secondary cooperative entities, with municipal governments championing such efforts,
will help prevent wasteful efforts at duplicating technology across cities and countries
(p. 62). The crux of this argument is that it is not possible to build or overlay a digital
‘commons’ on a privatized infrastructure (Mejias, 2013). As a shared infrastructure,5
these protocols should be managed as common goods (Frischmann, 2014, pp. 3–4),
with the cooperative structure providing the requisite governance rules and norms. The
sense in which protocol is used is thus deliberately technologically neutral and instead,
denotes a particular “management style” (Galloway, 2004, p. 3) that emanates from
the technological infrastructure used. This is an acknowledgment of the fact that while
protocols, such as blockchain and distributed ledger protocols, may be the technological
infrastructure that is collectively built and used, other organizational technologies
may complement or supplant them.

Relatedly, by referring to protocols as a form of
management, it brings to the fore the fact that it is humans, and not only machines, that
are organized by a network. It also highlights that technology and organizations mutually
shape each other (Luhmann, 2018, p. 302). Attempting to change protocols, from being
centralized to being decentralized or distributed, is mirrored among human beings in
how they organize and collaborate, such as through the use of federations, franchises,
alliances, joint ventures and cooperatives. Conversely, efforts at creating a constellation
of horizontal or distributed organizational structures are likely to lead to the adoption of
technological infrastructures that reflect these principles, as seen in earlier community
radio networks, local internet mesh networks, libre software communities and the
contemporary interest in distributed ledgers (Baig et al., 2015; Barlow, 1988; Cammaerts, 
2009; Selimi et al., 2018). In short, the protocol and the cooperative ‘mirror’
each other.

Furthermore, in Bauwens’ view, protocol cooperatives should operate on a not-for-profit
basis and be dedicated towards the benefit of its member institutions and individuals
(Bauwens and Pazaitis, 2019, p. 24). There are, arguably, already cooperatives that match
such a definition. One notable example is OCLC—a global library cooperative—that
stewards WorldCat, the world’s largest library database, which was founded in Ohio
in 1967. The OCLC cooperative is a firm comprised of 17,983 library-members in 123
countries, a distributed governance structure and a nonprofit corporation, OCLC, Inc.,
dedicated to the development of technological infrastructure for the benefit of its library members. This structure has been carefully developed over time, with Arthur D. Little, Inc., a management consultancy firm, recommending the combination of a “tightly held,
nonprofit corporation” and a “network cooperative” in 1978 (Arthur D. Little, 1978, p. 81;
Hanawalt, 1998, p. 12); a structure that bears a strong resemblance to the cooperatives
that are the focus of this study.

What is important to note from Bauwens’ description is that the use of the term
‘cooperative’ is intended to be evocative and generic rather than in reference to the
cooperative legal entity form that exists in many countries. While this may be off-putting
for those who have a narrower view of what a cooperative is, it is necessary to note that
cooperative law academics such as Hagen Henrÿ have also written that (registered)
cooperatives may have to cooperate and form novel types of “private-public entities”
with other cooperatives, civil society actors and public institutions, as a means to address
the systemic challenges presented by the power of data-driven tech businesses (Henrÿ,
2017, p. 125). Hence, and as shown in this study, shared-services platform cooperatives
may manifest as different legal entities and network structures. Beyond the issue of
organizational form, the technology that is to be cooperatively owned is left deliberately
open-ended, so as to include a wide-variety of projects and initiatives, from clientserver protocols (e.g. email transfer protocols such as SMTP) to distributed ledgers
(e.g. forks of the EOS chain) to distributed computing technologies (e.g. Holochain).

Thus, any conceptualization of shared-services platform cooperatives has to be
technologically agnostic."

(https://ia801707.us.archive.org/9/items/morshed-mannan-single-web/Morshed%20Mannan_single_web.pdf)


=Example=

* [[Partago]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]