
'''* Article: The right to infrastructure: a prototype for open source urbanism. Alberto Corsín Jiménez. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 2014, volume 32,''' 

URL = http://www.envplan.com/abstract.cgi?id=d13077p


=Abstract=

"This paper develops an analytical framework to place the rise of open source 
urbanism in context, and develops the concept of the ‘right to infrastructure’ as expressive 
of new ecologies of urban relations that have come into being. It describes, first, a 
genealogy for open source technology, focusing in particular on how open source urban 
hardware projects may challenge urban theory. It moves then to describe in detail various 
dimensions and implications of an open source infrastructural project in Madrid. In all, the 
paper analyses three challenges that the development of open source urban infrastructures 
is posing to the institutions of urban governance and property: the evolving shape and 
composition of urban ecologies; the technical and design challenges brought about by 
open source urban projects; and the social organisation of the ‘right to infrastructure’ as a 
political, active voice in urban governance. In the last instance, the right to infrastructure, 
I shall argue, signals the rise of the ‘prototype’ as an emerging figure for contemporary 
sociotechnical designs in and for social theory."


=Excerpt=

"What would a city look like if its infrastructures were designed, built, certified, and managed 
by its residents? Cities worldwide are witnessing today a transformation of their infrastructural 
and material landscapes. In the name of ‘open technology’, ‘open hardware’, or, more 
broadly, ‘open source urbanism’, citizens are wiring the landscape of their communities with 
the devices, networks, or architectures that they deem worthy of local attention or concern. 
From community urban gardens to alternative‑energy microstations or Wi‑Fi networks, 
open source hardware projects wireframe the city with new sociotechnical relations. Such 
interventions in the urban fabric are transforming, and even directly challenging, the public 
qualities of urban space. Public spaces become technomaterial artefacts that citizens take 
upon themselves to service and maintain.

This paper develops an analytical stance to place the rise of open source urbanism in 
context. It does so by surveying, first, the genealogical and conceptual purchase of the open 
source movement. Next, it moves to explore the concomitances of an open source urban 
hardware project in the city of Madrid, developing in the process a theoretical space for the 
novel epistemic work that such ‘prototypes’ (as I shall henceforth refer to them) are seen to 
be doing. 


In brief, the argument focuses on three challenges that the development of open 
source urban infrastructures is posing to the institutions of urban governance and property:

(1) Conceptually, projects in open source urbanism are populating urban ecologies with 
novel—digital and material—entities and interfaces whose emergence destabilises classical 
regulatory distinctions on what were hitherto deemed public, private, or commercial property 
forms, technologies, and spaces. Who and what is urban space made up of when its equipment 
and infrastructures are open source?

(2) Technically, open source urban projects are built on networks of expertise and skills that 
traverse localised boundaries. Decentralised communities working in open source projects 
have to reach prior consensus over the methods, protocols, and standards to be applied. These 
decisions often generate new designs, techniques, and rules for certification.

(3) Politically, open source projects are transforming the stakes in and models of urban 
governance. In an open source project a community assumes political and expert management 
over its infrastructures. Such assumption by local communities of the governance of 
infrastructures is straining the social contract that state administrations have traditionally 
subscribed to as overseers of urban equipment.


Building on recent developments in social anthropology, social studies of science and 
technology, and urban studies, here I aim to offer an original analytical framework for the 
study of open source urbanism as a novel expression and assemblage of public and collective 
action, one which I tentatively name a ‘right to infrastructure’.

I have coined the term ‘right to infrastructure’ to echo deliberately Henri Lefebvre’s 
famous notion of the ‘right to the city’ (Lefebvre, 1996), which has become more recently an 
emblem of urban social movements worldwide (Mitchell, 2003; Purcell, 2013). However, as 
I develop it here, the right to infrastructure is neither a human‑centred ‘entitlement’, part of 
what may be thought of as human‑rights approaches to urban social justice; nor an object or 
device whose novel (say, sensor or network) capabilities ‘claim’ recognition in an urban 
ecology. It is neither a right to infrastructure, nor an infrastructure made right. Rather, the 
right to infrastructure allows us to escape the human–nonhuman and epistemology–ontology 
dichotomies altogether by opening up the agential work of infrastructures as a source (an 
open source) of possibilities in their own right.

Central to this idea of open source urban hardware projects as expressive of a right to 
infrastructure is their status as ‘prototypes’. The prototype, as I shall refer to it here, is an 
emerging sociomaterial design for our contemporary whose main quality is its permanent ‘beta’ 
condition; that is, whose social and material components retrofit each other as being in mutual 
suspension (Corsín Jiménez, 2013). The example par excellence of a sociotechnical prototype 
is free software, where the infrastructure (code) is self‑grounded by the very collaborative 
effort that sets it in motion (Kelty, 2008). I shall return to the notion of the prototype later again 
in the argument. For the time being, let me note that this peculiar ‘prototyping’ status of open 
source hardware projects also offers a provocative port‑of‑call for documenting the emergence 
of novel ecological assemblages in urban contexts, in particular the work of ‘expressive 
infrastructures’ mediating digital, material, and social relations (Thrift, 2012). The analysis of 
open source infrastructures allows thus for an original approach to the study of the technical 
and social assemblages that have come to be known as ‘sentient’ or ‘cyborg’ cities (Gandy, 
2005; Shepard, 2011a). Furthermore, open source urban hardware projects also offer a novel 
point of entry into ongoing debates about the status of intellectual property and patent forms 
under rapidly shifting regimes of informational capitalism (Biagioli et al, 2011), in particular 
as they affect claims over emerging ‘urban commons’ (Harvey, 2012).

The rest of the paper is in three parts. In the first part I briefly situate the ascent of 
open source hardware within the larger genealogy of the free and open source (F/OS) 
movement, in particular the rise of F/OS software. Here I do not aim so much to produce 
a deep historical or comparative survey of developments to date as to point to some of the 
key debates surrounding the political and technical implications of open source projects, for 
some of these questions affect profoundly how urban ecologies are modulated by certain 
infrastructural developments.

In the second part of the paper I describe different dimensions of an open source urban 
project in Madrid. This is based on over two years of ethnographic fieldwork with a variety 
of self‑described open source architectural collectives in the city. The description includes a
recent turn of events where I have myself participated in a reinscription of certain open source 
infrastructural projects as educational initiatives in the city. Overall, I place the project within 
a recent current in urban studies that pays attention to the wiring of novel sensor capabilities 
and network capabilities into emerging ambient and sentient ecologies, and I inquire into 
how these ecologies may be modulated when the processes through which they are inscribed 
and wired remain open ended.

I bring the argument to a close in the last section by outlining some of the challenges and 
disruptions that thinking with and through open source infrastructures is likely to pose to 
urban and social theory at large."


==[[Open Source Infrastructures]]==

Alberto Corsín Jiménez:

"The open source movement has drawn considerable attention of late. ‘Openness’ has become 
a favoured slogan for describing the epistemic pressures and transformations undergone by 
the political economy of knowledge and technoscience in the age of informational capitalism. 
Thus, whilst some authors have argued that the structure of digital information—in particular 
the negligible costs of reproduction—instantiates a de facto regime of superabundant 
or ‘open knowledge’ (Foray, 2006, pages 172–179), others have drawn attention to the 
enclosure of such informational commons by existing proprietary regimes (Boyle, 2008). 

However, as Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom have pointed out, it is worth remembering that 
access to information depends to this day on the maintenance and management of complex 
infrastructural facilities. Their suggestion is to think of information not as a superabundant 
commons but as a common‑pool resource (Hess and Ostrom, 2003): a resource that requires 
storage and preservation, and over which one must define rights and rules of access, extraction, 
exclusion, and alienation (Hess and Ostrom, 2006, page 7).

Whilst the economic and political underpinnings of open knowledge are on the whole 
well understood, there are fewer studies of the cultural practices and social organisation 
characteristic of such initiatives. In this regard, the aspects of the new economy of open 
knowledge that has received most commentary to date is its grounding in novel organisational 
forms, in particular so‑called peer‑to‑peer networks of collaboration (Benkler, 2006). The 
common view here is that peer‑to‑peer decentralised networks are blurring traditional 
distinctions between production, distribution, and consumption of informational forms. In 
this economy, users themselves become producers of content (so‑called ‘prosumers’), and 
cooperation becomes the economy’s main, if not only dynamo (Benkler, 2011).

Although the organisational qualities of F/OS software projects have been much 
commented on (Ghosh, 2005), in‑depth or ethnographic studies of F/OS cultures are 
much harder to come by. Chris Kelty’s (2008) historical and ethnographic account of the 
development of free software has already become a classic in the field. Kelty has suggested 
that communities of free software developers may be conceptualised as ‘recursive publics’: 
a form of public sphere where the architectural framework for debate and exchange is self‑
grounded in the very activity of writing, editing, patching, or recompiling the infrastructure 
(code) that programmers work with. In a recursive public, technology is deployed “as a kind 
of argument, for a specific kind of order: [free software developers] argue about technology, 
but they also argue through it. They express ideas, but they also express infrastructures 
through which ideas can be expressed (and circulated) in new ways” (Kelty, 2008, page 29, 
emphases in the original). The notion of a ‘recursive public’ offers, then, a very useful 
analytical framework with which to rethink the nature of politics when the infrastructures of 
participation are themselves open to (self‑)modulation.

Gabriella Coleman’s recently published ethnography of the ethics and aesthetics of hacking 
similarly draws on long‑term anthropological engagement with free software programmers 
(2012). Whilst Kelty draws attention to the structural innovation that ‘recursivity’ brings to 
public sphere theories, Coleman focuses instead on the cultures of liberalism that hacking 
enacts. According to Coleman, the toils and pleasures of hacking reveal a contradictory 
and tense relationship with (American) traditions of political liberalism. Hacker attitudes and 
work routines simultaneously challenge and take residence within liberal conceptions 
of freedom, labour, and intellectual property. Thus, whilst some hackers work towards 
protecting individual autonomy from intrusive corporate behaviour, others promote an 
experience of autonomy and freedom that rejoices in the virtues of sharing and learning. And 
yet other programmers take pleasure in the culture of transgression that characterises certain 
underground hacker practices (see also Coleman and Golub, 2008).

These innovative ethnographies of F/OS projects have shown how interventions in the 
domains of technology and property may also be conceptualised as interventions in the domains 
of collaboration and social and political invention; indeed, how these in fact subtend all politics 
as infrastructural politics. There is a historical lesson worth briefly rehearsing here, about the 
proprietorial and sociological frameworks and traditions that such infrastructural politics has 
contributed to exposing. According to Fred Turner (2006), digital utopianism, hacker ethics, 
and the political economy of peer‑to‑peer collaboration are long‑term developments from 
Norbert Wiener’s interdisciplinary postwar experiments in cybernetic philosophy (1989), and in 
particular from the do‑it‑yourself, environmental, and ‘homebrew’ computing countercultural 
movements inspired by cybernetics. In this reading, the philosophy of cybernetics is deemed 
responsible for laying the conceptual ground for talking of ‘informational exchanges’, virtual 
communities, or digital economies of cooperation more broadly. It has contributed to the 
understanding of open source information as a political technology.

It is hardly coincidental, therefore, that the original impetus and advocacy for free 
software as a nonproprietary technology took root in the context of such countercultural 
movements. For indeed what first sparked the creation of free software licences—and 
has remained the most important cultural and political innovation in free and open source 
(F/OS) projects over the past thirty years—was the status of ‘openness’ as a proprietary 
object. The creation of the GNU General Public Licence (GPL) by Richard Stallman in the 
1980s, which is the original and archetypical licence on which F/OS software programmes 
run, marked the first time that copyright law was hacked by the invention of a ‘copyleft’ 
licence (Kelty, 2011). But the controversy surrounding its original development is echoed 
today in almost all debates concerning the legal status of digital objects (Gillespie, 2007). 

These include discussions about the intangibility, materiality, and legal agency of software 
and digital objects; the distinction and/or breakdown of the idea–expression dichotomy; and 
the ensuing problem of adjudicating between creativity, collaboration, and shared practice 
in software development. What is a copyrightable object (code, firmware, binaries)? Who 
are the (collective, individual, relational) subjects of rights? And how do these various 
distinctions map onto political, social, and ethical categories (the public domain, freedom, 
the commons)? These are all controversial debates that have been sparked anew by the digital 
revolution (Biagioli et al, 2011).

The study of open source urban hardware projects is part of these debates, posing a 
formidable challenge to—and spurring considerable innovations in—property forms and 
law. For in most countries the licensing of designs in open hardware projects falls under the 
jurisdiction of patent law, not copyright law.

Unlike F/OS programmes, open source hardware projects produce tangible outputs—
artefacts, devices, machines. According to the Open Source Hardware Definition and 
Statement of Principles, what makes a piece of hardware ‘open’ is its design process (OSHW 
Draft, “Definition of free cultural works”, http://freedomdefined.org/OSHW). It is the design, 
not the object qua object that remains open. This makes open source hardware fundamentally 
different from F/OS software, in that design and output do not coincide in the same object. 

In software the code is the design and the infrastructure; in hardware, the tangible output is 
assembled from the design. In other words, the source of openness in open source hardware 
is the design.
The design of an open source hardware project encompasses therefore both the design of its 
hardware and software and the documentary record of its design process. That is, one needs to 
make explicit how (in what formats, files, stages, languages) the process of design is described, 
documented, and published. Step by step such documentary registry spells a methodology of 
design. Hardware design documentation includes, for example, mechanical drawings, circuit‑
board layouts, photographs, and descriptive texts. There are many layers to a design, and open 
source hardware projects require that every native component of a design be rendered ‘open’, 
or that if a portion of the design is not released under a F/OS licence it be made clear.

An important consequence of the role played by the methodology of design in the 
standardisation of an open hardware project is its legal affordances. Open source hardware 
licences are generally limited to controlling the circulation of design documents and have no 
purchase over manufactured objects. In open source hardware, then, the method of design 
is turned into a social form with proprietary effects: that is, the organisation of the network 
of collaborators; the material qualities of components, formats, and layers (photographs, 
sketches, code); and the methods of description and documentation are all entangled in the 
social process of making or hacking property. Property is not the outcome or output of a design 
process, but the very design process itself. The question of what is open—and how the process 
of opening it up is carried out—when the underlying object is hardware rather than software, 
remains, therefore, a hotly contested issue, and one about which little is known to date."



[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Articles]]