'''= PONAR, proposal for the establishment of a universal protocol for reporting online abuse'''

URL = http://civilities.net/PONAR

=Description=

Proposal by Jon Garfunkel of http://civilities.net

“This series proposes the establishment of a universal protocol for reporting online abuse. The intention of the protocol is to handle the entire lifecycle, from the initial complaint to resolution; it should specify a standard data structure which would allow for outside reporting.

Consider: it seems obvious today that a telephone system should have a standard dialing pattern for reaching emergency services. The first general deployment was in England in 1937 with "999" as the emergency code. It took another thirty years for the United States to begin to deploy 911 service.

It would be audacious to describe this project as a "911" for the web: Internet users are generally not in immediate physical danger. Furthermore, this system does not suppose a central authority for doing anything more than serving as the system of record; it would be for private parties to do the investigation and remediation.
That said, when a party finds their name or reputation being abused online, they should expect a standard series of buttons for recourse

In this day and age of "Web 2.0," aggrieved parties still need to navigate tools like WHOIS, which sometimes, but not always, yields a hint as to the identity of the article's publisher; they also might need to figure out how to muster enough social pressure to bring about a remedy if one is needed. That's like telling users they need to open up the phone book to find out how to dial 911. We can do better than that.”
(http://civilities.net/PONAR)

=More Information=

Technical details at http://civilities.net/PONAR

[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Standards]]
[[Category:Relational]]