
=Description=

Oswald Spengler:

"By the term “historical pseudomorphosis” I propose to
designate those cases in which an older alien Culture lies so
massively over the land that a young Culture, born in this
land, cannot get its breath and fails not only to achieve pure
and specific expression-forms, but even to develop fully its
own self-consciousness. All that wells up from the depths of
the young soul is cast in the old moulds, young feelings
stiffen in senile works, and instead of rearing itself up in its
own creative power, it can only hate the distant power with
a hate that grows to be monstrous."

(https://archive.org/details/oswaldspenglercr0000hugh/page/98/mode/2up)


=Discussion=

H. STUART HUGHES:

"This was the case in the decades just before the birth of Christ,
“in the countries between Nile and Tigris, Black Sea and South
Arabia,” where the “Magian soul” awoke to life.12 Everywhere
the political power of Rome, the cultural prestige of Hellenism
dominated the minds and activities of men. The new way of feel¬
ing could find expression only by twisting to fresh purposes the
established forms of art and society. Thus, Spengler argues, in the
first four centuries of our era, two ways of life existed side by side
in overlapping territories: the “civilization” of the aging classical
world, and the thwarted springtime of the new Magian culture.

Most, in fact, of what the conventional histories have called “late
Roman” —Neo-Platonic philosophy, the dome of the Pantheon,
the government of Diocletian and Constantine — Spengler redefines as manifestations of the Magian spirit.
Yet the center of gravity of the new feeling lay in the eastern
part of the empire, and it was in an area outside the control of
Rome—in South Arabia—that the Magian spirit was eventually
to find an entirely independent embodiment. Although Spengler
describes as Magian even most Western achievements of the first
millennium of our era, he defines the spirit of Magian culture in
terms that a European would consider characteristically “eastern.”

To the most diverse historical creations of the eastern Mediterranean he ascribes an underlying spiritual unity. In Spengler’s reorganization of history, the Byzantine Empire, the art of the Arabesque, the three great monotheistic religions—the Hebrew, the
Mohammedan, and the Christianity of the early Church — all
figure as the works of Magian man. And the final unification of
the Magian world through the overlordship of Islam—and, along
with it, the definitive break with the West—come, fittingly
enough, at the moment when Europe itself has nearly finished
its period of preparation and is about to undertake the creation
of its own characteristic forms of cultural life.

Close to the Magian world in spirit and inheriting from
Byzantium its primitive patterns of art and religion is another
culture—the Russian—that has suffered under the distorting
weight of pseudomorphosis. Yet the Russian case represents a
slightly different form of pseudomorphosis from the Magian. In
Eastern Europe, Spengler finds, there existed no aging civilization to crush and thwart the growth of a new culture. It was rather
the prestige of a neighboring culture, the Western, still in the full
vigor of creativity, that awoke to premature activity the slumbering Russian spirit. This was the legacy of Peter the Great, whose
brutal work of Europeanization permanently distorted the course
of Russian development. 

“And thus,” Spengler concludes, 

- “a nationality whose destiny should have been to live without a history for some generations still was forced into a false and artificial history that the soul of Old Russia was simply incapable of understanding.” 

In viewing Russia as a nation of the future with a destiny
separate from that of Western Europe, Spengler’s theory closely
parallels that of Danilevsky and the Slavophils. It is far more
likely to find a sympathetic hearing today than it was at the time
Spengler originally conceived it. Then most educated Europeans
simply assumed that Russia belonged with the West. Today—
with the Western world and Russia arrayed against each other in
hostile coalitions—the same people would doubtless assume the
very opposite. For this reason, the further discussion of Spengler’s
theory of Russian history should be postponed until we come to
assess the present-day relevance of his predictions about our own
society.

In general, the concept of pseudomorphosis has not proved
popular with professional historians. It has alarmed them nearly
as much as the unfortunate chronological charts. Thrown off by
the obvious violence to “facts” that the construction of a Magian
concept entails, they have failed to appreciate its suggestive possibilities and imaginative power. Here again the characteristic
literal-mindedness of Spengler’s critics has prevented them from
accepting even in part the guidance and illumination that he can
offer."

(https://archive.org/details/oswaldspenglercr0000hugh/page/98/mode/2up)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]