

=Discussion=

Kevin Kelly:

"Imagine 50 years from now a Public Intelligence that was a distributed, open-source, non-commercial artificial intelligence, operated like the internet, and available to the whole world. This public AI would be a federated system, not owned by any one entity, but powered by millions of participants to create an aggregate intelligence beyond what one host could offer. Public intelligence could be thought of as an inter-intelligence, an AI composed of other AIs, in the way that the internet is a network of networks. This AI of AIs, would be open and permissionless: any AI can join, and its joining would add to the global intelligence. It would be transnational, and wholly global – an AI commons. Like the internet, it would run on protocols that enabled interoperability and standards. Public intelligence would be paid for by usage locally, just as you pay for your internet access, storage, or hosting. Local generators of intelligence, or contributors of data, would operate for profit, but in order to get the maximum public intelligence, you need to share your work in this public non-commercial system.

For an ordinary citizen, the AI commons of public intelligence would be an always-on resource, that would deliver as much intelligence as they required, or are willing to pay for. Minimum amounts would almost be free. Maximum amounts would be gated and priced accordingly. AI of many varieties will be available from your own personal devices, whether it be a phone, glasses, in a vehicle, or in a bot in your house. Fantastic professional intelligence can also be bought from specialty AI providers, like Anthropic and DeepSeek. But public intelligence offers all these plus planetary-scale knowledge and a super intelligence that works at huge scales."

(https://kevinkelly.substack.com/p/public-intelligence)


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Public Services]]