=Directory of Research Articles in English=

Publications since 2016:

==A==

'''Alakavuklar''', O. N. (2017). Labour of becoming a (critical) management scholar: Ambivalences, tensions and possibilities. Ephemera, 17(3), 641-651.

Alakavuklar, O. N. (2018). [Book review] Anti-capitalist entrepreneurship: Lessons about and for the multitude. Counterfutures: Left thought & practice Aotearoa, 2018 (6), 175-183

Alakavuklar, O. N. (2018). [Book review] Living in the new dark ages: Is there a hope? Organization, 25(5), 681-683. Doi: 10.1177/1350508417753027

Alakavuklar, O. N. & Alamgir, F. (2018). Ethics of resistance in organisations: A conceptual proposal. Journal of Business Ethics, 149(1), 31-43. Doi:10.1007/s10551-017-3631-2

Alakavuklar, O. N. & Dickson, A. (2016). [Editorial] Social movements, resistance and social change in Aotearoa/New Zealand: An intervention for dialogue, collaboration and synergy. Kōtuitui: New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences Online, 11(2), 83-88. Doi: 10.1080/1177083X.2016.1192047

Alakavuklar, O. N., Dickson, A. & Stablein, R. (2017). The alienation of scholarship in modern business schools: From Marxist material relations to the Lacanian subject. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 16(3), 454-468. Doi:10.5465/amle.2015.0004

Alamgir, F. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2018). Compliance codes and women workers’ (mis)representation and (non)recognition in the apparel industry of Bangladesh. Journal of Business Ethics.  DOI: 10.1007/s10551-018-4080-2

'''Araujo''', E. (2016). Consensus decision-making as a research method for generative justice: Empirical practices from a money-less economy in Chiapas, Mexico. Teknocultura, v.13(2)

Araujo, E. (2016). Collective exchanges: Reflections from a decolonial feminist moneyless economy in San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico. International Journal on Sociology and Social Policy

Araujo, E. (2016). What do we resist when we resist the State? In Lopes de Souza, M; White, RJ; and Springer, S. (eds.). Theories of resistance: Anarchism, geography and the spirit of revolt. Rowman and Littlefield International

Araujo, E. (2017). Resource-full organized communities undermine systems of domination: How the poor rise up in San Cristobal de las Casas. In Truscello, M. and Nangwaya, A. (eds.) Why don't the poor rise up? AK Press. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/34243158/Resourceful_Organized_Communities_Undermine_Systems_of_Domination_How_the_Poor_Rise_up_in_San_Cristobal_de_las_Casas 


==B==

Barca, S. (2017). Book Review: In defense of degrowth. Opinions and manifestos/ Doughnut economics. Seven ways to think like a 21st century economist. Local Environment, http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13549839.2017.1399997 

Barron, E.S. (2017). Who cares? The human perspective on fungal conservation. In White Jr., J.F. and Oudemans, P. (eds.) The fungal community: It’s organization and role in the ecosystem (4th ed.). London: CRC Press

'''Bergeron''', S. (2017). Transgressing development: Beyond smart economics. In Dinerstein, A.C. (ed.). Social Sciences for an other politics: Women theorizing without parachutes. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 65-77

Bergeron, S. and Barker, D. (2017). Marxism, Feminism and the Household. In Brennan, D., Mulder, C. and Olson, E. (eds.), Handbook of Marxian Economics. London and New York: Routledge 

Blencowe, C., Bresnihan, P. and Dawney, L. (eds.). (2017) Problems of Hope. Bristol, UK: ARN Press

Bogadóttir, R. and Olsen, E.S. (2017). Making degrowth locally meaningful: The case of the Faroese. Journal of Political Ecology, v.24, 504-518 

Borowiak, C., Safri, M., Healy, S. and Pavlovskaya, M. (2017). Navigating the fault lines: Race and class in Philadelphia’s solidarity economy.  Antipode. DOI: 10.1111/anti.12368

Braun, B., Oßenbrügge, J. and Schulz, C. (2018). Environmental economic geography and environmental inequality: Challenges and new research prospects. Journal of Economic Geography, v.62, 120-134

'''Bresnihan''', P. (2017). The (slow) tragedy of improvement: Neoliberalism, fisheries management and the institutional commons. World Development. DOI:10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.09.017

Bresnihan, P. (2019) Water, our relative: trauma, healing and hydropolitics, Community Development Journal, 54(1): 22–41


==C==

Crosby A, Fam D, Mellick Lopes A. (2018), ‘Transdisciplinarity and the 'Living Lab Model': food waste management as a site for collaborative learning’, In: Fam, D., Neuhauser, L. & Gibbs, P (Eds.) Transdisciplinary Theory, Practice and Education: The Art of Collaborative Research and Collective Learning, pp.117-131. Springer International


==D==

'''Davies''', A. R., Edwards, F., Marovelli, B., Morrow, O., Rut, M., and Weymes, M. (2017). Creative construction: Crafting, negotiating and performing urban food sharing landscapes. Area. DOI: 10.1111/area.12340

Davies, A. R., Edwards, F., Marovelli, B., Morrow, O., Rut, M., and Weymes, M. (2017). Making visible: Interrogating the performance of food sharing across 100 urban areas. Geoforum, v.86, 136–149.  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001671851730266X

DeFilippis, J., Stromberg, B. and Williams, O. (2018). W(h)ither the community in Community Land Trusts? Journal of Urban Affairs. DOI:10.1080/07352166.2017.1361302

Dickson, A. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2016). (Un)ordering intellectual freedom. Continental Thought & Theory: A Journal of Intellectual Freedom, 1(1), 58-61. https://ir.canterbury.ac.nz/bitstream/handle/10092/12073/Dickson_Alakavuklar_Issue1.pdf?sequence=1

'''Diprose''', G. (2016). Negotiating interdependence and anxiety in Community Economies. Environment and Planning A, v.48 (7),1411-1427 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298901657_Negotiating_interdependence_and_anxiety_in_community_economies 

Diprose, G. (2017). Radical equality, care and labour in a community economy. Gender, Place & Culture, v.24(6), 834-850. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317550126_Radical_equality_care_and_labour_in_a_community_economy 

Diprose, G., and Dombroski, K. (2016). Diversifying and moving through the hidden city. In The Occasional Journal, Enjoy Gallery. http://enjoy.org.nz/publishing/the-occasional-journal/local-knowledge/diversifying-and-moving-through-the-hidden-city#article 

Diprose, G., and Hill, A. (forthcoming, 2019) ‘A community economies perspective for ethical community development’, In S. Banks and P. Westoby (eds) Ethics, Equity and Community Development, Bristol: Policy Press. Chapter 10.  https://policy.bristoluniversitypress.co.uk/ethics-equity-and-community-development

Diprose, G., K. Dombroski, S. Healy and J. Waitoa. (2017). Community Economies: Responding to questions of scale, agency, and Indigenous connections in Aotearoa New Zealand. Counterfutures, 167-184. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321265062_Community_Economies_Responding_to_questions_of_scale_agency_and_indigenous_connections_in_Aotearoa_New_Zealand

'''Dombroski''', K. (2016). Hybrid activist collectives: Reframing mothers' environmental and caring labour. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, v.36(9/10), 629-646. http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/IJSSP-12-2015-0150 

Dombroski, K. (2017). Learning to be affected: Maternal connection, intuition and “elimination communication”. Emotion, Space and Society. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320093323_Learning_to_be_affected_Maternal_connection_intuition_and_elimination_communication

Dombroski, K. (2018). Thinking with, dissenting within: Care-full critique for more-than-human worlds.  Journal of Cultural Economy, v.11(3), 261-264. DOI:10.1080/17530350.2018.1427614.

Dombroski, K. and Healy, S. (2018). Surviving well together. Tui Motu, v.223, 4-5. http://tuimotu.org/a/643RuCs

Dombroski, K., S. Healy and K. McKinnon. 2018. "A Postcapitalist Politics of Care". In Feminist Political Ecology and the Economics of Care: In Search of Economic Alternatives, edited by C. Bauhardt and W. Harcourt. Routledge.

Dombroski, K., Healy, S. and McKinnon, K. (2018). Care-full Community Economies. In Harcourt, W. and C. Bauhardt, C. (eds.) Feminist Political Ecology and Economies of Care. London: Routledge

Dombroski, K., McKinnon, K., and Healy, S. (2016). Beyond the birth wars: Diverse assemblages of care. New Zealand Geographer, v.72(9), 230-239. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nzg.12142/abstract 

Dombroski K., Watkins A-F., Fitt H., Frater J., Banwell K., Mackenzie K., Mutambo L., Hawke K., Persendt F. and Turković J. (2018). Journeying from “I” to “we”: Assembling hybrid caring collectives of geography doctoral scholars. Journal of Geography in Higher Education, v.42(1), 80-93. DOI:10.1080/03098265.2017.1335295

Dörry, S. and Schulz C. (2018). Green financing, interrupted. Potential directions for sustainable finance in Luxembourg. Local Environment, v.23, 717-733.

Drake, Luke. 2018. Surplus Labor and Subjectivity in Urban Agriculture: Embodied Work, Contested Work. Economic Geography.  DOI:10.1080/00130095.2018.1492875

== F ==

'''Fisher''', J. and Nading, A. (2017). Zopilotes, alacranes, y hormigas (Vultures, scorpions, and ants): Animal metaphors as organizational politics in a Nicaraguan garbage crisis. Antipode. DOI: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/anti.12376/full

Fisher, J. (2018). In search of dignified work: Gender and the work ethic in the crucible of fair trade production. American Ethnologist. DOI: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/amet.12600/full

== G ==

'''Gabriel''', N. (2016). Mending fences: Constituting the urban through environmental stewardship. In Bezdecny, K. and Archer, K. (eds.). Handbook of cities and the environment. London: Edward Elgar Publishing

Gabriel, N. (2016). No place for wilderness: Urban parks and the assembling of neoliberal urban environmental governance. Urban Forestry and Urban Greening, v.19, 278-284. https://www.academia.edu/25028916/_No_place_for_wilderness_Urban_parks_and_the_assembling_of_neoliberal_urban_environmental_governance 

Gabriel, N. (2016). Visualizing urban nature in Fairmount Park: Discipline, economic diversity, and photography in nineteenth-century Philadelphia. In Braddock, A. (ed.), A Greene Country Towne: Art, culture, and ecology in Philadelphia. Penn State University Press

Gabriel, N. (forthcoming). Paradox and possibility: Voluntarism and the urban environment in a post-political era. Social and Cultural Geography. DOI:10.1080/14649365.2018.1474376

Gabriel, N. and Campbell, L. (2016). Editorial: Power in urban social-ecological systems: Processes and practices of governance and marginalization. Urban Forestry and Urban Greening, v.19, 253-254

'''Gibson-Graham''', J.K., Cameron, J., Dombroski, K., Healy, S. and Miller, E. (2017). Cultivating Community Economies: Tools for building a liveable world. In Alperovitz, G. and Speth, J.G. (eds.) The Next System Project. Available at:  http://thenextsystem.org/cultivating-community-economies/ 

Gibson-Graham, J.K., Cameron, J., Healy, S. & McNeill, J. (2019). Roepke Lecture in Economic Geography – Economic Geography, Manufacturing and Ethical Action in the Anthropocene. Economic Geography. DOI:10.1080/00130095.2018.1538697

Gibson-Graham, J.K., Cameron, J., Healy, S. & McNeill, J. (2019). Economic Geography and Ethical Action in the Anthropocene: A Rejoinder. Economic Geography. DOI: 10.1080/00130095.2018.1538696

Gibson-Graham, J.K., A. Hill and L. Law, (2016). Re-embedding economies in ecologies: resilience building in more than human communities’, Building Research & Information, 44:7, 703-716

'''Gibson''', K., A. Hill and L. Law. (2018). ‘Community economies in Southeast Asia: a hidden economic geography’, In A. McGregor, F. Miller and L. Law (eds) Handbook of Southeast Asian Development, London: Routledge. pp 131-141

Gibson, K. Rini, A., Carnegie, M., Chalernphon, A., Dombroski, K., Haryani, A-R., Hill A., Kehi B., Law L., Lyne I., McGregor A., McKinnon K., McWilliam A., Miller F., Ngin C., Occeña‐Gutierrez D., Palmer L., Placino P., Rampengan M., Than Wynn, L-L., Wianti Nur I. and Wright. S. (2018). Community economies in Monsoon Asia: Keywords and key reflections.  Asia Pacific Viewpoint v.59(1), 3-16. DOI:10.1111/apv.12186

Giovannini, M. and Vieta, M. (2017). Cooperatives in Latin America. In Michie, J., Blassi, J. and Borzaga, C. (eds.), The Oxford handbook of mutual, co-operative, and co-owned businesses. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 335-347

Gordon, R. (2018). Food sovereignty and Community Economies: A Spanish case study. In Shevellar, L. and Westoby, P. (eds.). The Routledge handbook of community development research. London: Routledge

'''Grabel''', I. (2016). Capital controls in a time of crisis. In Arestis, P. and Sawyer, M. (eds.) Financial liberalisation: Past, present and future, Annual Edition of International Papers in Political Economy. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 177-223  

Grabel, I. (2018). Reflections on the economics profession, the neoliberal conjuncture, and the emerging democratic crisis: An analysis in the spirit of Albert O. Hirschman.  Forum for Social Economics, Papers and Proceedings from the ASSA 2018 conference, 47(2), 173-83. DOI: 10.1080/07360932.2018.1451761

Grabel, I. (2018). Toward a pluripolar global financial architecture? The Bretton Woods institutions and the new landscape of developmental finance. Review of Radical Political Economics. Papers and Proceedings from the ASSA 2018 conference. DOI: 10.1177/0486613418761894

Gritzas, G., Kavoulakos, K. I. (2016). Diverse economies and alternative spaces: An overview of approaches and practices. European Urban and Regional Studies, 23(4), 917–934


==H ==

Harcourt, W. (2016). Gender and sustainable livelihoods: Linking gendered experiences of environment, community and self. Agriculture & Human Values. Available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10460-016-9757-5 

Hart, G., Healy, S., Lake, R., Shaw Crane, E. and Roy. A. (2017).  Territories of poverty: Rethinking North and South. Progress in Human Geography, v.41(3), 395-402

'''Healy''', S. (2017). Why the Ecocity needs to be a just city. The Conversation. Available at: https://theconversation.com/why-the-ecocity-needs-to-be-a-just-city-80676

Healy, S. 2018. “Basic Income and Postcapitalist Imaginaries: From Surplus Humanity to Humanity’s Surplus.” ARENA. 51/52.
Healy, S. (2018). Beginning with care, touching feminist materiality. Journal of Cultural Economy. DOI. 10.1080/17530350.2018.1433706

Healy, S. 2018. “Commoning in the City: Discerning a Post-Capitalist Politics Now and Here.” Review symposium on A. Huron (2018) Carving out the Commons. Environment and Planning A. http://societyandspace.org/2018/10/16/commoning-in-the-city-discerning-a-post-capitalist-politics-now-and-here/

Healy, S.  (2018). Corporate enterprise as Commonwealth. Journal of Law and Society, v.45, 46–63.  DOI 10.1111/jols.12078
Healy, S., Borowiak, C. Pavlovskaya, M. and Safri, M. (2018). Commoning and the politics of solidarity: Transformational responses to poverty. Geoforum. DOI: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.03.015

Healy, S., McNeill, J., Cameron, J. and Gibson-Graham, J.K. (2018). Pre-empting apocalypse? Postcapitalism as an everyday politics. Australian Quarterly, v.89(2), 28–33

Heras, Ana I. (2017). Revisiting Sándor Ferenczi in light of current educational practices. Estudos e Pesquisas em Psicologia 17 (3), 1162-1180

'''Hicks''', J. (2018). Community Power: Understanding the outcomes and impacts from community-owned wind energy projects in small regional communities (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis). University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. Available at: http://unsworks.unsw.edu.au/fapi/datastream/unsworks:50964/SOURCE2?view=true

Hicks, J., and Ison, N. (2018). An exploration of the boundaries of ‘Community’ in community renewable energy projects: Navigating between motivations and context. Energy Policy, v.113, 523–534

Holland, P.  & Alakavuklar. O. N. (2017). Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) reporting and seeking legitimacy of Māori communities: A case from Aotearoa New Zealand Energy Sector. In Camilleri, M. A. (ed.) CSR 2.0 and the New Era of Corporate Citizenship (pp. 123-146). IGI Global. Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. Doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-1842-6.ch007. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312136989_Corporate_Social_Responsibility_CSR_reporting_and_seeking_legitimacy_of_Maori_communities_A_case_from_Aotearoa_New_Zealand_Energy_Sector

'''Hossein''', C.S. (2016). ‘Big Man’ politics in the social economy: A case study of microfinance in Kingston, Jamaica. Review of Social Economy, v.74(2), 148-171

Hossein, C.S. (2016). Going local in downtown Kingston, Jamaica: Using qualitative methodologies in complex urban settings. The Politics of Hard Times, v.16(4), 345-361

Hossein, C.S. (2016). Money pools in the Americas. The African diaspora’s legacy in the social economy. The Forum of Social Economics, v.45(5), 309-328

Hossein, C.S. (2016). Politicized Microfinance: Power, Money and Violence in the Black Americas. Toronto: University of Toronto.

Hossein, C.S. (2017). A black perspective on Canada’s Third Sector: Case studies on women leaders in the social economy. Journal of Canadian Studies, v.51(3)

Hossein, C.S. (2017). Fringe banking in Canada: A study of rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs) in Toronto’s inner suburbs. Canadian Journal of Nonprofit and Social Economy Research, v.8(1), 29-43

Hossein, C.S. (2017). Living Garveyism in the social economies of the African diaspora in the Canada and in the West Indies. National Political Science Review, 19(1), 169-186.

Hossein, C. S. (Ed.). 2018. The Black Social Economy in the Americas: Exploring diverse community-based alternative markets. New York City: Palgrave Macmillan

Houtbeckers, E. (2018). Framing Social Enterprise as Post-Growth Organising in the Diverse Economy. Management Revue, 29(3), 257–280. DOI:10.5771/0935-9915-2018-3-257. https://www.nomos-elibrary.de/10.5771/0935-9915-2018-3-257/framing-social-enterprise-as-post-growth-organising-in-the-diverse-economy-jahrgang-29-2018-heft-3?page=1

Hudson, L. (2018). New York City: Struggles over the narrative of the solidarity economy, Geoforum. DOI:10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.04.003    

Hwang, L. (2017). Butler’s tourism area life cycle and its expansion to the creative economy. In Lowry, L. (ed.), The Sage international encyclopedia of travel and tourism. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, pp. 202-208

== J ==

'''Jerne''', C. (2016.) Performativity and grassroots politics: On the practice of reshuffling mafia power. Journal of Cultural Economy, v.9(6), 541-54. DOI: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17530350.2016.1214849

Jerne, C. (2016). Book Review: Post crisis perspectives: The common and its power. García and Ydesen (eds.). Social Alternatives, v.35(1), 64-66

Jerne, C.  (2018). The syntax of social movements: Jam, boxes and other anti-mafia assemblages. Social Movement Studies, v.17(3), 282-298. DOI:10.1080/14742837.2018.1456327

Johanisova, N. and Fraňková, E. (2017). Chapter 49: Eco-social enterprises. In Spash, C. (ed.) Routledge handbook of ecological economics: nature and society. London: Routledge, pp. 507-516


== K ==

Kennedy, M. (2018) Beyond branding: The role of Book Towns in building a relational marketplace. In Frost, W. and Laing, J. (eds.) Exhibitions, trade fairs and industrial events. London: Routledge 

Krueger, R., Schulz, C., Gibbs, D. (2017). Institutionalizing alternative economic spaces? An interpretivist perspective on diverse economies. Progress in Human Geography. DOI: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0309132517694530?journalCode=phgb  

== L ==

'''Labaeye''', A. (2017). Collaboratively mapping alternative economies: Co-producing transformative knowledge. NETCOM, v.31(1-2), 99-128. DOI:10.4000/netcom.2647 

Labaeye, A. and Mieg, H. (2018). Commoning the city, from digital data to physical space: Evidence from two case studies. Journal of Peer Production, v.11: CITY

Lahiri-Dutt, K. (2018). Between the plough and the pick: Informal, artisanal and small-scale mining in the contemporary world. Canberra: ANU Press. DOI:10.22459/BPP.03.2018

'''Lepawsky''', J. (2018). Reassembling rubbish: Worlding electronic waste. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. (companion website for the book: www.worldingelectronicwaste.xyz)

Lepawsky, J., Araujo, E., Davis, J-M. and Ramzy K. (2017). Best of two worlds? Towards ethical electronics repair, reuse, repurposing and recycling. Geoforum, v.81, 87–99. DOI: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016718517300313 

Loh, P. and Agyeman, J. 2019. Urban food sharing and the emerging Boston food solidarity economy. Geoforum 99, 213-222

'''Lyne''', I. (2017). Social enterprise and the everydayness of precarious indigenous Cambodian villagers: Challenging ethnocentric epistemologies. In Essers, C., Dey, P,. Tedmanson, D. and Verduyn, K. (eds.) Critical perspectives on entrepreneurship; Challenging dominant discourses. London: Routledge 

Lyne, I., Ngin, C. and Santoyo-Rio, E. (2018). Social enterprise, social economy and local social entrepreneurship in rural Cambodia. Journal of Enterprising Communities: People and Places in the Global Economy, v.12(3), 278-298


== M ==

'''McKinnon''', K., Dombroski, K. and Morrow, O. (2018). The Diverse Economy: Feminism, capitaloccentrism and postcapitalist futures. In Elias, J. and Roberts, A. (eds.) The handbook of international political economy of gender. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar

McKinnon, K., S.Healy and K. Dombroski. (2018). “Surviving well together: post development, maternity care and the politics of ontological pluralism.” In Postdevelopment as practice, edited by Elise Klein & Carlos Eduardo Morreno.  Routledge

McNeill, J. (2017). Enabling social innovation assemblages: Strengthening public sector involvement. (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis). Western Sydney University, Australia. Available at: https://researchdirect.westernsydney.edu.au/islandora/object/uws%3A41460

'''Mellick''' Lopes, A. (2017). How people can best make the transition to cool future cities. The Conversation. July 13, 2017. https://theconversation.com/how-people-can-best-make-the-transition-to-cool-future-cities-80683

Mellick Lopes, A., Healy, S., Power, E., Crabtree, L., Gibson, K. (2019), Infrastructures of care: opening up “home” as commons in a hot city, Human Ecology Review, vol.24, no.2

'''Morgan''', B. (2018). Telling stories beautifully: Hybrid legal forms in the new economy. Journal of Law and Society, v.45(1), 64-83. DOI:10.1111/jols.12079

Morgan, M. (2018). The Sharing Economy, Annual Review of Law and Social Science, v.14, 351-366

Morgan, B., Bai, S., and Bhaskar, J. (2018). Competitive neutrality and the challenge of social enterprise. Competition and Consumer Law Journal, v.25(3) 

Morgan, B. and Kuch, D. (2016). The socio-legal implications of the new politics of climate change. UNSW Law Journal, v.39(4). Available at:  http://www.unswlawjournal.unsw.edu.au/sites/default/files/394-17.pdf

Morgan, B. and Kuch, D. (2017). Sharing subjects and legality: Ambiguities in moving beyond neoliberalism. In Higgins and Larner (eds.). Assembling Neoliberalism. London: Palgrave Macmillan. Available at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057%2F978-1-137-58204-1_11

Morgan, B., and Thorpe, A. (2018). Introduction: Law for a new economy: Enterprise, sharing, regulation. Journal of Law and Society, v.45(1), 1-9. DOI:10.1111/jols.12075

'''Mullen''', M. (2017). The 'diverse economies' of applied theatre. Applied Theatre Research, 5(1), 7-22

Mullen, M. S. (2018). Applied Theatre: Economies. London: Bloomsbury. Available at: https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/applied-theatre-economies-9781350001718/

Mullen, M. S., Freebody, K., Walls, A., & O'Connor, P. (2019). Who is Responsible? Neoliberal Discourses of Well-Being in Australia and New Zealand. NJ Drama Australia Journal. DOI: 10.1080/14452294.2019.1572432

Mullen, M., & Thomas, K. (2016). ‘Collaborative creativity in community settings’. In P. O'Connor (Ed.), The possibilities of creativity (pp. 117-134). Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. Available at: http://www.cambridgescholars.com/the-possibilities-of-creativity


== N ==

Naylor, L. (2018). Fair trade coffee exchanges and Community Economies. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space. DOI:10.1177/0308518X18768287

North, P. (2018). Alternative currency movements as a challenge to globalisation? A case study of Manchester’s Local Currency Networks (e-book ed.). London: Routledge. Available at https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9781351163071


== P ==

'''Parker''', B., and Morrow, O. (2017). Urban homesteading and intensive mothering: (re) gendering care and environmental responsibility in Boston and Chicago. Gender, Place & Culture, 24(2), 247-259

Parker, J. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2017). Social movement unionism in New Zealand and the UK. In M Seal (ed.) Trade Union Education - Transforming the World (pp. 78-99). Oxford: Workable Books.

Parker, J. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2018) Social Movement Unionism (SMU) as union-civil alliances - a democratizing force? The New Zealand case. Revue Relations industrielles/Industrial Relations, 73(4), 784-813

Parker, M. (2016). Towards an alternative business school: A school of organizing’. In Czarniawska, B. (ed.) A research agenda for Management and Organization Studies. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 147-154

Parker, M. (2017). Alternative enterprises, local economies, and social justice: Why smaller is still more beautiful.’ M@n@gement, 20(4), 418-434

Parker, M (2018) Epilogue: Necessity, organization and politics. In Boeger, N. and Villiers, C. (eds.) Shaping the corporate landscape: Towards corporate reform and enterprise diversity. Oxford: Hart Publishing, pp. 375-381

Parker, M. (2018). Shut down the Business School: An insider’s account of what’s wrong with management education. London: Pluto Press

Parker, M., Cheney, G., Fournier, V. and Land, C. (2017). Organizing is politics made durable: Principles and alternatives.’ In Spicer, A. and Baars, G. (eds.) The corporation: A critical interdisciplinary handbook. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 538-545

Parker, S. and Parker, M. (2017). Antagonism, accommodation and agonism in critical Management Studies: Alternative organizations as allies. Human Relations, 70(11), 1366–1387

'''Pavlovskaya''', M. (2017). Class. In Richardson, D., Castree, N., Goodchild, M., Kobayashi, A., Liu, W. and Marston, R (eds.). The international encyclopedia of Geography: People, the earth, environment, and technology. New Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons

Pavlovskaya M. (2016). Digital place-making: Insights from critical cartography and GIS. In Travis, C. and von Lünen, A. (eds.) The digital arts and humanities: Neogeography, social media and big data integrations and applications. New York: Springer, pp. 153-167

Pavlovskaya, M. (2017). Chapter 5: Ontologies of poverty in Russia and duplicities of neoliberalism. In Schram, S. and Pavlovskaya, M. (eds.) Rethinking neoliberalism: Resisting the disciplinary regime. London: Routledge, pp. 84-103

Pavlovskaya, M. (2017). Qualitative GIS. In Richardson, D., Castree, N., Goodchild, M., Kobayashi, A., Liu, W. and Marston, R (eds.) The international encyclopedia of Geography: People, the earth, environment, and technology. New Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons

Pavlovskaya, M. (2018). Critical GIS as a tool for social transformation. The Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe Canadien. In special issue on Speculative and Constructively Critical GIS. Thatcher J, Bergmann L, and D O’Sullivan, guest editors. DOI:10.1111/cag.12438

Pearson, G. and Parker, M. (2016). Is small always beautiful? A dialogue. Business and Society Review, v.121(4), 549–567

'''Pierce''', J. and Williams, O. (2016). Against power? Distinguishing between acquisitive resistance and subversion. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, v.98(3), 171–88

Pierce, J., Williams, O. and Martin, D. (2016). Rights in places: An analytical extension of the right to the city. Geoforum, v.70, 79–88

Pietrykowski, B. (2017). The return to caring skills: Gender, class, and occupational wages in the U.S. Feminist Economics, v.23(4), 32-61. Available at: http://www.tandfonline.com/eprint/TqSxjjqpMzJkj4ks7Pky/full

Preller, B., Affolderbach, J., Schulz, C., Fastenrath, S., and Braun, B. (2017). Interactive knowledge generation in urban green  building transitions. The Professional Geographer, v.69(2), 212-224. DOI: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00330124.2016.1208104 

'''Prichard''', C. & Alakavuklar. O. N. (2019). Changing the critique: from critical management studies to activist scholarship. A. Sturdy, S. Heusinkveld, T. Reay, D. Strang (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Management Ideas (pp. 473-491). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Prichard, C., Alakavuklar. O. N., Dickson, A., Wilson, S. & Alamgir, F. (2018). ‘Having an Impact’: Qualitative research traditions in the Critical Study of Management and their modes of influence. In: C. Cassell, A. Cunliffe, G. Grandy (eds.) The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Business and Management (pp. 69-85). London: Sage. 

Puawai Collective. (2019). Assembling Disruptive Practice in the Neoliberal University: An Ethics of Care. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/04353684.2019.1568201



== R ==

Raatikainen K.J. and Barron, E.S. (2017). Current agri-environmental policies dismiss varied perceptions and discourses on management of traditional rural biotopes. Land Use Policy, v.69, 564-576

'''Reiter''', B. (2017). The crisis of liberal democracy and the path ahead. London: Rowman & Littlefield International

Reiter, B. (2017). Alternatives to representative democracy and capitalist market organization: The Wintukua, Guardians of the Earth. Anarchist Studies, v.25(1), 68-93

Ribeiro, B. (2019). "From Food Consumption to Eating Awareness," Focus, Vol. 15, Iss. 1, Article 14. Available at: https://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/focus/vol15/iss1/14

Ruggeri, A., Antivero, J., Polti, N., and Vieta, M. (2018). The University of Buenos Aires’s Programa Facultad Abierta: Reflections on a collaborative and political–academic university extension initiative with Argentina’s self-managed workers. Alberta Journal of Educational Research, v.64(2), 194-201

'''Ruth''', D., Wilson, S. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2016) The pursuit of excellence: Can academics join the dots? Organizational Aesthetics, 5(2), 96-102. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/307858213_The_pursuit_of_excellence_Can_academics_join_the_dots

Ruth, D., Wilson, S., Alakavuklar, O. N. & Dickson, A. (2018) Anxious academics: talking back to the audit culture through collegial, critical and creative autoethnography. Culture and Organization, 24(2), 154-170. Doi: 10.1080/14759551.2017.1380644
S


== S ==

Safri, M., Healy, S., Borowiak C., and Pavlovskaya, M. (2017). Putting Solidarity Economy on the Map. Journal of Design Strategies, v.9(1), 71-83

Sarmiento, E. (2017). The affirming affects of entrepreneurial redevelopment: Architecture, sport, and local food in Oklahoma City. Environment and Planning A. DOI:10.1177/0308518X17743506

Schmid, B. (2018). Structured Diversity: A Practice Theory Approach to Post-Growth Organisations. Management Revue, 29(3), 281–310. DOI:10.5771/0935-9915-2018-3-281

'''Schram''', S. and Pavlovskaya, M (Eds.). (2017). Rethinking Neoliberalism: Resisting the Disciplinary Regime. London: Routledge

Schram, S. and Pavlovskaya, M. (2017). Chapter 1: Introduction. In Schram, S. and Pavlovskaya, M. (eds.) Rethinking neoliberalism: Resisting the disciplinary regime. London: Routledge

Schulz, C. and Krueger, R. (2018). Diverse alternatives: empirical evidence from German-speaking scholarship. Local Environment, v.23, 675-679

'''Sharp''', D. (2018). Sharing cities for urban transformation: Narrative, policy and practice. Urban Policy and Research. DOI:10.1080/08111146.2017.1421533

Sharp, D. and Balwani, K. (2017). Chapter: Work. In Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. San Francisco: Shareable. Available at: https://www.shareable.net/sharing-cities/downloads 

Sharp, D. and Quaglia, M. (2017). Chapter: Waste. In Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. San Francisco: Shareable. Available at: https://www.shareable.net/sharing-cities/downloads

Sharp, D and Ramos, J. (2017). Commons transition action pathway. In Candy, S., Larsen, K., Twomey, P., McGrail, S., and Ryan, C. (eds.) Pathways 2040. Results from visions and pathways 2040: Scenarios and pathways to low carbon living. Melbourne, Australia: CRC Low Carbon Living. Available at: http://www.visionsandpathways.com/news/final-report-release/

Sharp, D. and Ramos, J. (2018). Design experiments and co-governance for city transitions: Vision mapping. Journal of Peer Production. Available at: http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-11-city/peer-reviewed-papers/design-experiments-and-co-governance-for-city-transitions/ 

Sharp, D. and Salter, R. (2017). Direct impacts of an urban living lab from the participants’ perspective: Livewell Yarra. Sustainability, v.9(10), 1699

Sharp, E.L. (2016). (Intra-) activity of alternative food: Performing a hopeful food future. Geopolitics, History, and International Relations, v.8(2), 7-21

Sharp, E.L. (2017). (Re)assembling foodscapes with the crowd grown feast. Area. DOI: http://rdcu.be/vzvf


Sharp, E.L. (2018). Enacting other foodworlds: Affective food initiatives performing a care-full politics of difference. (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis). University of Auckland, New Zealand. 

Sharp, E.L. (2019). Fields of Care: (Auto)ethnography of the Politics of Pregnancy and Foodwork in Aotearoa New Zealand. In Maternal Geographies: Mothering In and Out of Place, Demeter Press. Available at:  http://demeterpress.org/books/maternal-geographies-mothering-in-and-out-of-place/

Sharp, E.L., Schindler, E., Lewis, N. and Friesen, W. (2016). Food fights: irritating for social change among Auckland's alternative food initiatives, Kotuitui: New Zealand. Journal of Social Sciences Online. DOI: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/1177083X.2016.1158197 

'''Smith''', T.S.J. (2017). Of makerspaces and hacklabs: Emergence, experiment and ontological theatre at the Edinburgh Hacklab, Scotland. Scottish Geographical Journal, v.133(2), 130-154. DOI: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14702541.2017.1321137?journalCode=rsgj20

Smith, T.S.J. (2018). Sustainability, wellbeing and the posthuman turn. London: Palgrave

Smith, T.S.J. (2019). Therapeutic taskscapes and craft geography: cultivating well-being and atmospheres of recovery in the workshop, Social & Cultural Geography, DOI: 10.1080/14649365.2018.1562088

Smith, T.S.J. and Reid, L. (2017). Which 'being' in wellbeing? Ontology, wellness and the geographies of happiness? Progress in Human Geography. DOI: https://doi-org.ezproxy.uws.edu.au/10.1177/0309132517717100


== T ==

'''Taylor''' Aiken, G. (2017). Permaculture and the social design of nature’. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography. Available at: http://hdl.handle.net/10993/31095 

Taylor Aiken, G. et al. (2017) Researching climate change and community in neoliberal contexts: An emerging critical approach. WIREs: Climate Change. Available at:  http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/112824/ 

Taylor Aiken, G. (2017). The 2+n ecosophies. Geografiska Annaler Series B: Human Geography, v.2, 107-113

Taylor Aiken, G. (2017). The politics of community: togetherness, transition and post-politics. Environment and Planning A. DOI:10.1177/0308518X17724443

Templer Rodrigues, A-I. (2018). Rethinking the creative economy: The Diverse Economies of artists and artisans in rural Massachusetts. (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis). University of Massachusetts: Amherst. Available at: http://communityeconomies.org/sites/default/files/2018-05/Templer%20Rodrigues%20Dissertation.pdf


== V ==

'''Vieta''', M. (2016). Marcuse’s “transcendent project” at 50: Post-technological rationality for our times. Radical Philosophy Review, v.19(1), 145-174

Vieta, M. (2016). Autogestión: Prefiguring the “new cooperativism” and “the labour commons.” In DuRand, C. (ed.) Moving beyond capitalism. London: Routledge, pp. 55-63

Vieta, M. (2016). B: Workers’ buyout. In Bernardi, A. and Monni, S. (eds.), The co-operative firm: Keywords. Rome: Università degli Studi Roma Tre Press, pp. 23-38

Vieta, M. (2017). Inklings of the great refusal: Echoes of Marcuse’s post-technological rationality today. In Wolfson, T., Lamas, A. and P. Funke, P. (eds.), The great refusal: Herbert Marcuse and contemporary social movements. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, pp. 258-282

Vieta, M. (2018). Recuperating and (re)learning autogestión in Argentina’s empresas recuperadas worker cooperatives. Journal of Cultural Economy. DOI:10.1080/17530350.2018.1544164.

Vieta, M. (2018). New co-operativism in Latin America: Implications for Cuba. In S. Novkovic & H. Veltmeyer (Eds.), Cooperativism and local development in Cuba: An agenda for democratic social change (pp. 51-81). Leiden: Brill.

Vieta, M., Depedri, S. and Carrano, A. (2017). The Italian road to recuperating enterprises and the Legge Marcora framework: Italy’s worker buyouts in times of crisis. Research Report No. 015|17. Trento, Italy: European Research Institute on Cooperative and Social Enterprises. Available at: http://www.euricse.eu/publications/italys-worker-buyouts-in-times-of-crisis/

Vieta, M., Quarter, J., Spear, R. and Moskovskaya, A. (2016). Participation in worker co-operatives. In Horton Smith, D., Stebbins, R.A. and Grotz, J. (eds.), Palgrave handbook of volunteering, civic participation, and nonprofit associations. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 436-453


== W ==

'''Williams''', M. J. (2017). Urban commons as more-than-property. Geographical Research. DOI: 10.1111/1745-5871.12262

Williams, O. (2016). Book Review: Collective courage: A history of African American cooperative economic thought and practice by Jessica Gordon Nembhard. Southeastern Geographer, v.56 (2), 248–50

Williams, O. (2016). Book Review: DIY Detroit: Making do in a city without services by Kimberly Kinder. H-Net Citizenship. Available at: https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=46929

Williams, O. (2017). Book Review: Theories of resistance: Anarchism, geography, and the spirit of revolt by Marcelo Lopes de Souza, Richard J. White and Simon Springer (eds). Antipode. Available at: https://radicalantipode.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/book-review_williams-on-souza-et-al.pdf

Williams, O. (2017). Book Review: The spirit of revolution: Beyond the dead ends of man by Drucilla Cornell and Stephen Seely. Gender, Place, and Culture, v.24 (1), 150–1

Williams, O., DeFilippis, J., Martin, D., Pierce, J., Kruger, R-E. and Hadizadeh, A. (2018). Controlling land collectively: The CLT groundlease reimagined. Shelterforce.  Available at: https://shelterforce.org/2018/05/02/controlling-land-collectively-the-clt-ground-lease-reimagined/

Williams, O. and Pierce, J. (2016). Iterative parallelism as research praxis: embracing the discursive incommensurability of scholarship and everyday politics. Area, v.48(2), 222–28

Williams, O. and Pierce, J. (2017). Inserting scales of urban politics: The possibilities of meso-urban governance shims. Urban Geography, v.38(6), 795–812.

Wood, B., & Mullen, M. (2016). Rangi Ruru Walk: Social and spatial connections through hybrid intermedial practices. Research in Drama Education: The Journal of Applied Theatre and Performance, 21(3), 406-412

== Y ==

Yamak, S., Ergur A., Özbilgin, M. & Alakavuklar, O. N. (2016) Gender as symbolic capital and violence: The case of corporate elites in Turkey. Gender, Work and Organization, 23 (2), 125-146. Doi: 10.1111/gwao.12115

Yamashita, A., Gomez, C., and Dombroski, K. (2017). Segregation, exclusion and LGBT people in disaster impacted areas: Experiences from the Higashinihon Dai-Shinsai (Great East-Japan Disaster). Gender, Place & Culture, v.24(1), 64-71. DOI:   http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0966369X.2016.1276887?journalCode=cgpc20   

== Z ==

Zanoni, P., Contu, A., Healy, S. and Mir, R. (2017). Post-capitalistic politics in the making: The imaginary and praxis of alternative economies. Organization, v.24 (5), 575-588


= More Information =
* [[Community Economies Research Network]]

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Community Economics]]