
=Example=

==[[Vilawatt Project for Community Solar Energyin Viladecans]]==

Christian Iaione et al. :

"An example of a community-led financial solution
to expand the community production of solar energy ... is
the Vilawatt project carried out by the city of Viladecans, which implemented
an innovative approach with EU support through the Urban Innovative Action
program, part of the Regional Development Fund.

It foresees the implementation of a public-private-citizen partnership for energy governance, starting
with an experiment in the Montserratina District. The transition will begin
with the creation of an Innovative Public-Private-Citizen Governance
Partnership at Local level (PPCP) that will manage the new local tools for
the transition: energy supply, energy currency, energy savings services, deep
energy renovation investments and renewable energy production. Members of
the entity will be the municipality together with the local businesses and the
citizens of Viladecans, and it will create a local energy operator who will be
the local energy supplier and the renewable energy producer, and an energy
savings company, offering energy savings services and energy renovation
investment to all the members. The project also provides for the creation of
energy engaged communities, citizen funded initiatives focused on the deep
energy retrofit of buildings, still not mature at the current stage of the
development of the project. The latter aspect is clearly the project’s existing
challenge and the most promising experiment reviewed by this Article. A
governance model for tech-enabled energy self-production would require the
creation of a neighborhood community micro-grid that would make the district self-sufficient. Through incentives, therefore, the community will be able
to install photovoltaic systems that will be owned and managed by the
community itself. The energy produced might also be able to support the
creation of a community network so that the local community can selfmanage and share the energy."
(https://doi.org/10.1515/lehr-2019-2008)

[[Category:Cases]]
[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]