
'''* Article: Publication Fees in Open Access Publishing: Sources of Funding and Factors Influencing Choice of Journal. By David J Solomon and Bo‐Christer Björk.'''

URL = http://www.openaccesspublishing.org/apc/preprint.pdf


=Abstract=

"[[Open Access]] (OA) journals make their full text content available for free on the
Web and use other means than subscriptions or access charges for funding the
publication process. Publication fees or article processing charges (APC)s have
become the predominant means for funding professional OA publishing. We
surveyed 1,038 authors from seven discipline categories who recently published
articles in 74 OA journals that charge APCs. Authors were asked about the
source of funding for the APC, factors influencing their choice of a journal and
past history publishing in OA and subscription journals. Additional information
about the journal and the authors’ country were obtained from the journal
websites. A total of 429 (41%) authors completed the survey. There were large
differences in the source of funding among disciplines. Journals with impact
factors charged higher APCs as did journals from disciplines where grant funding
is plentiful. Topical fit, quality, and speed of publication where the most
important factors in the authors’ choice of a journal. Open accessibility was less
important but a significant factor for many authors in their choice of a journal to
publish. These findings are consistent with other research on OA publishing and
suggest, that if OA journals meet normal quality standards, authors and their
employers and funders are willing to pay reasonable APCs, the acceptable levels
of which are dependent on the field of science and the quality of the journal in
question."
(http://www.openaccesspublishing.org/apc/)



[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]