
'''* Book: The Public Bank Solution: From Austerity to Prosperity. Ellen Brown. Third Millenium Press, 2013'''

URL = http://ellenbrown.com/books/the-public-bank-solution/

=Description=

"Shock waves from one Wall Street scandal after another have completely disillusioned us with our banking system; yet we cannot do without banks. Nearly all money today is simply bank credit. Economies run on it, and it is created when banks make loans. The main flaw in the current model is that private profiteers have acquired control of the credit spigots. They can cut off the flow, direct it to their cronies, and manipulate it for personal gain at the expense of the producing economy. The benefits of bank credit can be maintained while eliminating these flaws, through a system of banks operated as public utilities, serving the public interest and returning their profits to the public. This book looks at the public bank alternative, and shows with examples from around the world and through history that it works admirably well, providing the key to sustained high performance for the economy and well-being for the people."
(http://ellenbrown.com/books/the-public-bank-solution/)


=Review=

Gar Alperovitz:

"This is a must read! Ellen Brown is the leader of the public banking movement and this masterful work is certain to become the go-to book for anyone interested in transcending the speculation-driven global financial system—and helping lay sound foundations for the fast-emerging New Economy."
(http://ellenbrown.com/books/the-public-bank-solution/)



=Excerpts=

* Foreword by Hazel Henderson [http://www.publicbanksolution.com/forward-by-reed-simpson/]

* Chapter 1: From Bail-Outs to Bail-Ins: A Banking Dinosaur On Life Support [http://www.publicbanksolution.com/chapter-1/]

* Chapter 14: The Reconstruction Finance Corporation: The Little-Known Public Financial Institution That Reversed the Depression and Funded World War II [http://www.publicbanksolution.com/chapter-14/]

* Chapter 25: Latin America: Breaking the Taboos of the Neoliberal Agenda [http://www.publicbanksolution.com/chapter-25/]

* Chapter 36: Toward A New Theory of Money And Credit [http://www.publicbanksolution.com/chapter-36/]


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Books]]