
URL = http://www.purpose.com/

=Description=

"Purpose creates 21st century movements. We deploy the collective power of millions of citizens and consumers to help solve some of the world’s biggest problems. We develop and launch our own social and consumer movements using our model of movement entrepreneurship, and we work with organizations and progressive companies to help them mobilize large-scale, purposeful action.

Purpose was born out of some of the most successful experiments in mass digital participation. Our principals are co-founders of Avaaz, the world’s largest online political movement with more than 15 million members operating in 14 languages, and the creators of Australia’s GetUp!, an internationally recognized social movement phenomenon with more members than all the country’s political parties combined. Purpose has helped to create significant new efforts to fight cancer, eliminate nuclear weapons and change our food culture. We’ve recently launched All Out, a global movement to win historic rights and cultural acceptance for LGBT people.

Technology is unlocking transformational new forms of political participation and social engagement. Purpose works at the frontier of these changes – and our global team is pioneering new ways to allow people to combine their power as citizens, consumers and cultural agents. Our movements are deploying huge numbers of people, online and on the ground, to influence the political process. At the same time, we are working to create the consumer demand and behavioral shifts required to bring about the kind of change that politics alone cannot."
(http://www.purpose.com/about-purpose/who-we-are/)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]