
= a [[Quality Assessment of FOSS]] methodology


=Description=

"QualOSS provides a high-level methodology for benchmarking the quality of FOSS. Main
quality focus for the benchmarking are the “Evolvability” and “Robustness” of FOSS
(Deprez et al., 2008):

• “Robustness” is defined to be the capability that the FOSS endeavour displayed/-s
in solving past and current problems.

• “Evolvability” is defined to be the capability that the FOSS endeavour will likely
display in solving future problems.

QualOSS uses the term “FOSS endeavour” instead of FOSS project. A FOSS endeavour
is defined by the following four elements: 1) A set of work products, 2) the FOSS community
creating, updating and using these work products, 3) the tools used to act on
these work products or to build or run the software product, and 4) the set of development
processes executed by the community, these processes include rules and a division
of labour accepted and followed by community members when interacting and creating
work products” (Ruiz and Glott, 2009). The third element has so far not materialised into
QualOSS.

Figure 5.2 illustrates the structure of the QualOSS Standard Assessment Method, starting
with the defined quality focus (robustness and evolvability) as the root node, further
decomposed into the FOSS endeavour elements (software product, community members,
software process), and ending up with a set of subgoals as the leafs. Various metrics are
further associated with each of the leaf characteristics.

The overall purpose is to evaluate the degree of risk for selected (or all) leaf characteristics,
related to a selected context with specified viewpoints. The QualOSS Standard Assessment
Method represent one specific predefined configuration, context (Usage=integration
in a product, Mode=product comparison, Collaboration=full FOSS collaboration)
with a set of viewpoints (long term management viewpoint, short term management
viewpoint, long term technical viewpoint, short term technical viewpoint). The intension
behind the possibility of making configurations is to “tune” the measurement to specific
business cases. Depending on the configuration, only the most relevant metrics will be
used. But since only one standardised configuration exist,the QualOSS Standard Assessment
Method, more details regarding configurations will not be pursued in any more
depth here."
(http://publications.nr.no/Compendium-INF5780H11.pdf)


[[Category:Peerproduction]]