=Discussion=

Karen L. O’Brien:

"Quantum social theory introduces a perspective
that can contribute insights on social transformation
from both naturalistic and interpretivist perspectives. It challenges some of the basic assumptions
about the physical and social world, potentially (re)
introducing personal experience into physical science. It is distinct from other social theories in that
it raises deep metaphysical and ontological questions
about what is really real. Quantum theory or
mechanics, considered the most successful theory in
physics for describing molecular, atomic, and
subatomic-scale systems, has raised such questions
since it was developed over a century ago. Quantum
mechanics recognizes that elements can exist as both
waves and particles, and it relates the collapse of the
wave function to measurements. Quantum entanglement describes particles that interact nonlocally without communicating. These particles cannot be
described separately, and instead must considered as
one system, at least until measurement is made. The
probability of observing different outcomes in experiments can be predicted by a mathematical formalism
known as Schrödinger’s equation.

The idea that quantum phenomena, characterized by nonlinearity, nonlocality, and potentiality,
are relevant to macroscale systems has traditionally
been dismissed, if not ridiculed. This is because quantum coherence apparently cannot be maintained in
contexts that favor random scattering, vibration, and
motion. Nonetheless, recent research in quantum
biology suggests that some processes, such as photosynthesis, bird navigation, and sense of smell, are
quantum rather than classical, and that relatively
small numbers of highly ordered particles can make a
difference through processes such as quantum tunneling.13 In other words, it is increasingly argued that
‘the division between the quantum and classical
worlds appears not to be fundamental’.

What are the implications of quantum theory for
society? This question is drawing increasing interest
and attention, particularly as technologies such as
quantum computing and quantum cryptography develop."
(https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58727b5a9de4bbf0b38db631/t/5ee526caf25ac108a910546b/1592075979057/Climate+change+and+social+transformations-+is+it+time+for+a+quantum+leap.pdf)


=Example=

Karen L. O’Brien:

"For example, a transdisciplinary dialogue on
the societal implications of quantum theory has been
initiated through ‘Project Q: Peace and Security in a
Quantum Age.’ This dialogue embraces quantum
social theory, which can be described as an emerging
field of research that considers the wider, macroscale
social implications of quantum theory. As with quantum theory itself, there are numerous interpretations
of quantum social theory, and no consensus as to its
significance. Some interpretations include the conjecture that we live in a world where quantum effects
such as entanglement are relevant not only at the
molecular, atomic and subatomic scales, but also in
biological systems and potentially social systems. 10,16
Other interpretations make no such claim, yet still
argue that the implications of quantum theory are
important for social research."
(https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58727b5a9de4bbf0b38db631/t/5ee526caf25ac108a910546b/1592075979057/Climate+change+and+social+transformations-+is+it+time+for+a+quantum+leap.pdf)

=Source=

* '''Article: Climate change and social transformations: is it time for a quantum leap? By Karen L. O’Brien. WIREs Clim Change 2016. doi: 10.1002/wcc.413'''

[[Category:Science]]