
'''=  QMP is a so called free firmware, a Linux based operating system for network devices.'''

URL = http://qmp.cat/Home


=Description=

"Quick Mesh Project (qMp) is a system for easily deploying Mesh/MANET networks using Wi-Fi technology.
qMp has been designed for being used in any scenario such as free community networks, corporative networks, large social events, quick network deployments, etc.

The qMp firmware, based on OpenWrt, works on many embedded WiFi network devices. To start deploying a qMp node, you can get the software for your device at the download page.

All the qMp source code is public, free and open, and can be accessed from the development website. If you want to join the project and contribute with your code, check here about how to start contributing on qMp.

=Discussion=

Penny Travlou:

"When I came to Barcelona in July 2014, I was thrilled to see that as part of the EU funded research project Confine a project was under way to develop Quick Mesh Project (QMP). QMP is a so called free firmware, a Linux based operating system for network devices. Many people now have at home wireless routers. When you buy Internet access from a provider, you often also get a box that allows to wirelessly connect to the net. QMP would replace the operating system of such a device with a much improved version, one that speaks the language of mesh network protocols. To give a simple example, if in a street of apartment blocks everybody who owns a wireless router replaces the firmware with QMP and the puts the router on the window sill, all those machines would automatically connect and build a network without using any cables or other hardware from commercial providers. It would make it easy and simple to connect without having to go deep into system settings. This has now changed from being a faraway utopian goal to something that is literally around the corner.

It may or may not succeed. One problem with that is that it resembles what Saskia Sassen described as an engineer's utopia. Techies, weather they are academically trained computer scientists, telecommunications engineers or self-taught hackers, tend to believe in the unlimited potential of technology. They see the potential of a technology. There is nothing that speaks against that, on the contrary. It needs such people who are capable of dreaming a different future based on creative bending and twisting of technologies. The problem, however is, that far-sighted techies tend towards a linear extrapolation of technologies into the future without considering other factors, such as politics, the economy, the fundamental differences between people in class based societies and so on and so forth. In this way, the highly productive mesh network dispositif gets turned into the dreamworld of the Internet cornucopia. The technology gets imbued with characteristics that are actually outside it and depend on factors beyond the influence of creative technologists."
(http://www.thenextlayer.org/node/1231)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]