

=Quotes=

===Daniel Christian Wahl on [[Salutogenic Design]]===

Daniel Christian Wahl:


'''1.'''

"In 2006, my doctoral research concluded that if the basic intention behind all human design was salutogenesis, we would be able to facilitate a local and global shift towards sustainability (Wahl, 2006b).

Valerie Brown lists two criteria that should guide human behaviour if we hope to avoid serious damage to the natural processes that maintain systemic health. We need to i) “consume nature’s flows while conserving the stocks (that is, live off the ‘interest’ while conserving natural capital” and ii) “increase society’s stocks (human resources, civil institutions) and limit the flow of material and energy” (Brown et al., 2005). Both are central aspects of a regenerative culture. Salutogenic design aims to facilitate the emergence of health at and across all scales of the whole. It recognizes the inextricable link between human, ecosystem and planetary health. Rather than primarily focusing on the relief of symptoms of disease or ill-health, this approach tries to promote positive health and a flourishing of the whole. In other words, the aim of salutogenic design is to support healthy individuals in healthy communities acting responsibly in healthy societies to nurture and maintain healthy ecosystem functioning as the basis for healthy bioregions and ultimately a healthy biosphere. Scale-linking, salutogenic design aims to create resilient and regenerative systems at and across all scales."
(https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/scale-linking-salutogenic-design-for-resilience-1485a0005e00)


2.


""To regenerate the Earth and her people all our designs will have to express our interbeing with life as a planetary process. All of us are unique expressions — emergent properties if you will — of this planetary process. At the same time we are all co-creators manifesting the future potential of the present moment through how we show up and what we activate through our attention and intention today — now! It is time for an evolutionary leap, for our species to become healers rather than violators and have a regenerative rather than degenerative impact on the wider community of life and each other. We can learn from life and as life itself we can know how to meet human needs while stewarding ecosystems health and the life supporting processes of the biosphere. We need to reconnect and embody our intimacy with an animate Earth — Gaia — if we hope to chart the humble path of geo-therapy rather than running headlong into the hubristic one way street of geo-engineering. The generations alive today can no longer be spectators but have to become protagonists of unprecedented cooperation. Our deep care for all life can inform our co-creative redesign of the human presence and impact on Earth."
(https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/regenerating-the-earth-and-her-people-76987ec8cd0)


===Marcin Jakubowski on open access to digital design===

'''open access to digital design – perhaps in the form a global repository of shared open source designs - introduces a unique contribution to human prosperity. This contribution is the possibility that data at one location in the world can be translated immediately to a product in any other location. This means anyone equipped with flexible fabrication capacity can be a producer of just about any manufactured object. The ramifications for localization of economies are profound, and leave the access to raw material feedstocks as the only natural constraint to human prosperity.''' 

- Marcin Jakubowski


===Shared Design is essential to transform the world===

"When intellectual problems become distributed, the search for solutions becomes collaborative and the research agenda is driven not by multinational shareholders but by the passions of the participants, you get not just better results, you get different results."

- Alec Steffens [http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/008469.html]


===Linus Torvalds on [[Open Peer to Peer Design]]===

"“I think the real issue about adoption of open source is that nobody can really ever “design” a complex system. That’s simply not how things work: people aren’t that smart - nobody is. And what open source allows is to not actually “design” things, but let them evolve, through lots of different pressures in the market, and having the end result just continually improve."
(http://www.openp2pdesign.org/blog/archives/43)


"don’t EVER make the mistake that you can design something better than what you get from ruthless massively parallel trial-and-error with a feedback cycle. That’s giving your intelligence _much_ too much credit."
(http://kerneltrap.org/node/11)


===Agroblogger on a [[Appropriate Technology]] [[General Public License]]===

"Let us imagine an active online community participating in vibrant discussions and sharing of [[Appropriate Technology]] plans and experiences. '''Let us imagine the AT equivalent of a sourceforge.net, a place where designers and field workers can go to download plans of greenhouses, beehives, water pumps, animal traction implements, and biodiesel equipment. And, within the legal framework of an AT General Public License (GPL), those plans can be used freely, modified, and republished under the same AT GPL.''' IRC channels dedicated to specific programmatic areas could serve as a dynamic forum where "newbies" can gain wisdom and insight from experienced field practitioners."
(Agroblogger [http://www.agroblogger.com/tag/appropriate-technology])


===Karim Lakhani on Communities driving Manufacturers out of the design phase===

"for any given company - there are more people outside the company that have smarts about a particular technology or a particular use situation then all the R&D engineers combined.  So a community around a product category may have more smart people working on the product then the firm it self.  So in the end manufacturers may end up doing what they are supposed to - manufacture - and the design activity might move to the edge and into the community."
(http://www.futureofcommunities.com/2007/03/25/communities-driving-manufacturers-out-of-the-design-space/)


===Kevin Kelly and Terry Hancock on nearly-free material production===

"'''Material industries are finding that the costs of duplication near zero, so they too will behave like digital copies'''. Maps just crossed that threshold. Genetics is about to. Gadgets and small appliances (like cell phones) are sliding that way. Pharmaceuticals are already there, but they don't want anyone to know. It costs nothing to make a pill."
(http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2008/01/better_than_fre.php)


'''Both the capital and marginal cost of making products has trended consistently and rapidly down as manufacturing tools become both cheaper and more versatile, so that the capital cost of an object is increasingly not in the capital equipment required to manufacture it, but in the effort required to design it.'''


- Terry Hancock [http://www.freesoftwaremagazine.com/articles/free_matter_economy]

===Vinay Gupta on Open Source Design for Development===

"An open library of designs for refrigerators, lighting, heating, cooling, motors, and other systems will encourage manufacturers, particularly in the developing world, to leapfrog directly to the most sustainable technologies, which are much cheaper in the long run. Manufacturers will be encouraged to use the efficient designs because they are free, while inefficient designs still have to be paid for. The library could also include green chemistry and biological solutions to industry challenges, for example enzymatic reactions that could be used in place of energy, and chemical-intensive processes or nontoxic paint pigments for cars and buildings. This library should be free of all intellectual property restrictions and open for use by any manufacturer, in any nation, without charge."
(http://www.guptaoption.com/5.open_source_development.php)


===Steve Bosserman outlines what is most appropriate for local distributed manufacturing===

"strong candidates for a locally distributed manufacturing approach include ANYTHING
that is agriculturally- based like food, feed, fiber, and biofuel production,
much of housing and building construction including the manufacturing of
inputs used in that industry, localized electric power generation using
non-bio sources like wind, solar, and geothermal, and production /
manufacturing of materials, components, and assemblies that use locally
sourced raw materials and draw upon open-source, relatively easy to learn,
appropriate technologies that can be applied in a wide range of
situations-- not just a single product."


===Marcin Jakubowski on [[Neosubsistence]]===

"Neosubsistence  is the term we apply to a lifestyle where people produce tangible (physical) wealth, as opposed to dealing with information in the information economy. We are talking about basics: '''even though we live in the information economy, we cannot deny the reality that human prosperity is founded on the provision of physical needs upon which the meeting of all higher needs is predicated'''. ''Neosubsistence is related to the information economy in that the information economy is a foundation for neosubsistence''"


===John Thackara on the importance of design for sustainability===

"Eighty per cent of the environmental impact of today's products, services and infrastructures is determined at the design stage. Design decisions shape the processes behind the products we use, the materials and energy required to make them, the ways we operate them and what happens to them when we no longer need them."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/007654.html)


===Eric von Hippel on Manufacturing around User Innovation Communities===

"Threadless has tapped into a fundamental economic shift, a movement away from passive consumerism. One day in the not-too-distant future citizen inventors using computer design programs and three-dimensional printers will exchange physical prototypes in much the same way Nickell and cohorts played Photoshop tennis.

Eventually, Threadless-like communities could form around industries as diverse as semiconductors, auto parts, and toys. Threadless is one of the first firms to systematically mine a community for designs, but everything is moving in this direction. 

He foresees research labs and product-design divisions at manufacturing companies being outstripped by an "innovation commons" made up of tinkerers, hackers, and other devout customers freely sharing their ideas. The companies that win will be the ones that listen."
(quotes and paraphrased by Inc.  [http://www.inc.com/magazine/20080601/the-customer-is-the-company_Printer_Friendly.html])


===Frank Piller on [[User Manufacturing]]===

"User manufacturing is enabled by three main technologies: (1) Easy-to-operate design software that allows users to transfer their ideas into a design. (2) Design repositories where users upload, search, and share designs with other users. This allows a community of loosely connected users to develop a large range of applications. (3) Easy-to-access flexible manufacturing technology. New rapid manufacturing technologies ("fabbing") finally deliver the dream of translating any 3-D data files into physical products -- even in you living room. Combining this technology with recent web technologies can open a radical new way to provide custom products along the entire "long tail" of demand.

User manufacturing builds on the notion that users are not just able to configure a good within the given solution space (mass customization), but also to develop such a solution space by their own and utilize it by producing custom products. As a result, customers are becoming not only co-designers, but also manufacturers, using an infrastructure provided by some specialized companies."
(http://mass-customization.blogs.com/mass_customization_open_i/2007/11/webinar-the-nex.html)



===Jeff Bezos on User-Manufacturing Everything===

"Before long, “user-generated content” won’t refer only to media, but to just about anything: user-generated jeans, user-generated sports cars, user-generated breakfast meals. This is because setting up a company that designs, makes and globally sells physical products could become almost as easy as starting a blog - and the repercussions would be earthshaking. "
(http://www.usatoday.com/tech/columnist/kevinmaney/2006-11-21-amazon-user-generated-products_x.htm)


===Flexible Manufacturing and the Maker Movement===

"Two future forces, one mostly social, one mostly technological, are intersecting to transform how goods, services, and experiences— the “stuff” of our world—will be designed, manufactured, and distributed over the next decade. An emerging do-it-yourself culture of “makers” is boldly voiding warranties to tweak, hack, and customize the products they buy. And what they can’t purchase, they build from scratch. Meanwhile, flexible manufacturing technologies on the horizon will change fabrication from massive and centralized to lightweight and ad hoc. These trends sit atop a platform of grassroots economics—new market structures developing online that embody a shift from stores and sales to communities and connections."
(http://iftf.org/node/1766)

[[Category:Design]]