'''= see our material on: [[Reporting 3.0]], the [[Reporting 3.0 Platform]] and the proposed [[Global Thresholds and Allocations Council]]. R3.0 is essentially a rebranding of these inititiatives on a revamped digital platform'''

URL = https://www.r3-0.org/

== Description ==

"r3.0 promotes Redesign for Resilience and Regeneration. As a global common good not-for-profit platform, r3.0 crowdsources open recommendations for necessary transformations across diverse fields and sectors, in response to the ecological and social collapses humanity is experiencing, in order to achieve a thriving, regenerative and distributive economy and society.

r3.0 catalyzes the transformation to a regenerative and inclusive global economy by: 

# Crowd-sourcing expert inputs on Blueprints with recommendations on their redesign for next generation practices in the fields of 
## reporting, 
## accounting, 
## data and 
## new business models; 
# Supporting the piloting of these recommendations to prove their viability; and, 
# Scaling up these new practices through Dissemination Programs and Solutions building. 


Our different activities are bundled in a work-ecosystem to enable a continuous exchange of feedback and cross-pollination.

r3.0 aligns its level of ambition not to ideology, but to the transformation needs dictated by science and ethics. r3.0 is a non-profit initiative, independent from standard setters and regulators and focused on a holistic view to system change. We achieve our objectives through a global network of 6,000+ individuals who pursue constructive engagement with influential actors as a means of activating the necessary shifts.

We envision a world of universal well-being, fueled by a regenerative and distributive economy that supports all humans’ potential to thrive individually and collectively, and society’s potential to prosper from wise stewardship of earth’s bounty.

We believe that reporting has the potential to leverage necessary transformation of the global economy. We believe that transparency drives accountability, both reactively to amend degenerative practices, and proactively to activate regenerative practices in better informed markets.

We believe that reporting has the potential to leverage necessary transformation of the global economy. We believe that transparency drives accountability, both reactively to amend degenerative practices, and proactively to activate regenerative practices in better informed markets."
(https://www.r3-0.org/about-us/#about3)

== Status ==

"Starting in 2013 with our first phase of development, r3.0 initiated its inquiry into the adequacy of current reporting to achieve a transformed economy. Through convening five international conferences, two Transition Labs, four Regional Roundtables, six Blueprint Working Group Meetings, and 12 virtual dialogues, we engaged more than 1,500 experts to confirm the inadequacy of current reporting for spurring the changes required, thus positioning r3.0 to fill this void. As a result, we initiated our Blueprint work-ecosystem, including processes to promptly incorporate feedback of various constituencies, and launched a set of Dissemination Programs to pilot proof-of-concept projects that can then swiftly scale up next-generation reporting practices.

r3.0 used the year 2018 to consolidate what has been achieved to date, finalize the first iteration of the Blueprints and launch Dissemination Programs to end Phase I after the 5th Conference. The subsequent start of Phase II will begin with a second round of Blueprint content creation and extension of piloting, along with setting the foundation for a multi-stakeholder Global Thresholds & Allocations Council (GTAC) and developing the necessary training materials. This will set the ground for 2019 – 2021, during which dissemination, further content development and solution building will be the focus. r3.0 will strengthen the implementation of recommended solutions and tools through its Transformations Journey Program. Successful content development practices will be replicated during the second iteration round for the Blueprint developments. The results thereof will be presented at the Annual Conferences in 2019, 2020, and 2021."
( https://www.r3-0.org/about-us/#about3 )

== More information ==
* [[Reporting 3.0]]
* [[Reporting 3.0 Platform]]
* [[Global Thresholds and Allocations Council]]

* Read their 2020 '''Whitepaper: [[From Monocapitalism to Multicapitalism]]: 21st Century System Value Creation''' [https://www.r3-0.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/r3-0-White-Paper-1-2020-From-Monocapitalism-to-Multicapitalism.pdf]

* OnCommons gGmbh/ r3.0
: Alexanderstrasse 7, 10178
: Berlin, Germany

* Support: hello@r3-0.org

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]