

=Research=

Coleman Hughes:

four careful studies have done this —

* one by Harvard economist Roland Fryer, 

* one by a group of public-health researchers, 

* one by economist Sendhil Mullainathan, and 

* one by David Johnson, et al. None of these studies has found a racial bias in deadly shootings.


==1==

* Research: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN POLICE USE OF FORCE. Roland G. Fryer, Jr. NBER, Working Paper 22399

URL = http://www.nber.org/papers/w22399 [https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w22399/w22399.pdf]

"This paper explores racial differences in police use of force. On non-lethal uses of force, blacks
and Hispanics are more than fifty percent more likely to experience some form of force in
interactions with police. Adding controls that account for important context and civilian behavior
reduces, but cannot fully explain, these disparities. On the most extreme use of force – officerinvolved shootings – we find no racial differences in either the raw data or when contextual factors are taken into account. We argue that the patterns in the data are consistent with a model
in which police officers are utility maximizers, a fraction of which have a preference for
discrimination, who incur relatively high expected costs of officer-involved shootings."


==2==

'''* Research: Perils of police action: a cautionary tale from US data sets. By Ted R Miller, Bruce A Lawrence, et al.'''

URL = https://injuryprevention.bmj.com/content/injuryprev/23/1/27.full.pdf

"To count and characterise injuries resulting
from legal intervention by US law enforcement personnel
and injury ratios per 10 000 arrests or police stops, thus
expanding discussion of excessive force by police beyond
fatalities.

...

US police killed or injured an estimated 55 400
people in 2012 (95% CI 47 050 to 63 740 for cases
coded as police involved). Blacks, Native Americans and
Hispanics had higher stop/arrest rates per 10 000
population than white non-Hispanics and Asians. On
average, an estimated 1 in 291 stops/arrests resulted in
hospital-treated injury or death of a suspect or
bystander. Ratios of admitted and fatal injury due to
legal police intervention per 10 000 stops/arrests did not
differ significantly between racial/ethnic groups. Ratios
rose with age, and were higher for men than women.

Healthcare administrative data sets can
inform public debate about injuries resulting from legal
police intervention. Excess per capita death rates among
blacks and youth at police hands are reflections of
excess exposure. International Classification of Diseases
legal intervention coding needs revision."


==3==

* Police Killings of Blacks: Here Is What the Data Say. New York Times, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/18/upshot/police-killings-of-blacks-what-the-data-says.html


==4==

* RESEARCH ARTICLE: Officer characteristics and racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings. By David J. Johnson, Trevor Tress, et al. PNAS August 6, 2019 116 (32) 15877-15882; first published July 22, 2019; [https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903856116 doi]

URL = https://www.pnas.org/content/116/32/15877.short

"There is widespread concern about racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings and that these disparities reflect discrimination by White officers. Existing databases of fatal shootings lack information about officers, and past analytic approaches have made it difficult to assess the contributions of factors like crime. We create a comprehensive database of officers involved in fatal shootings during 2015 and predict victim race from civilian, officer, and county characteristics. We find no evidence of anti-Black or anti-Hispanic disparities across shootings, and White officers are not more likely to shoot minority civilians than non-White officers. Instead, race-specific crime strongly predicts civilian race. This suggests that increasing diversity among officers by itself is unlikely to reduce racial disparity in police shootings."



=Discussion=

Colemn Hughes:

"On the other hand, the basic premise of Black Lives Matter—that racist cops are killing unarmed black people—is false. There was a time when I believed it. I was one year younger than Trayvon Martin when he was killed in 2012, and like many black men, I felt like he could have been me. I was the same age as Michael Brown when he was killed in 2014, and like so many others, I shared the BLM hashtag on social media to express solidarity. By 2015, when the now-familiar list had grown to include Tamir Rice, Laquan McDonald, Sandra Bland, Freddie Gray, and Walter Scott, I began wearing a shirt with all their names on it. It became my favorite shirt. It seemed plain to me that these were not just tragedies, but racist tragedies. Any suggestion to the contrary struck me as at best, ignorant, and at worst, bigoted.

My opinion has slowly changed. I still believe that racism exists and must be condemned in the strongest possible terms; I still believe that, on average, police officers are quicker to rough up a black or Hispanic suspect; and I still believe that police misconduct happens far too often and routinely goes unpunished. But I no longer believe that the cops disproportionately kill unarmed black Americans.

Two things changed my mind: stories and data.

First, the stories. Each story in this paragraph involves a police officer killing an unarmed white person.

...

You might agree that the police kill plenty of unarmed white people, but object that they are more likely to kill unarmed black people, relative to their share of the population. That’s where the data comes in. The objection is true as far as it goes; but it’s also misleading. To demonstrate the existence of a racial bias, it’s not enough to cite the fact that black people comprise 14 percent of the population but about 35 percent of unarmed Americans shot dead by police. (By that logic, you could prove that police shootings were extremely sexist by pointing out that men comprise 50 percent of the population but 93 percent of unarmed Americans shot by cops.)

Instead, you must do what all good social scientists do: control for confounding variables to isolate the effect that one variable has upon another (in this case, the effect of a suspect’s race on a cop’s decision to pull the trigger). At least four careful studies have done this—one by Harvard economist Roland Fryer, one by a group of public-health researchers, one by economist Sendhil Mullainathan, and one by David Johnson, et al. None of these studies has found a racial bias in deadly shootings. Of course, that hardly settles the issue for all time; as always, more research is needed. But given the studies already done, it seems unlikely that future work will uncover anything close to the amount of racial bias that BLM protesters in America and around the world believe exists."

(https://www.city-journal.org/reflections-on-race-riots-and-police)