

=Description=

Victor Pickard:

"This framework draws from several threads of radical
democratic theory. Broadly speaking, democratic theory in the United States and
Europe has undergone a quiet sea change over the last few decades. With Marxist
class analysis having fallen out of favor (Hauptmann, 2001), much scholarly attention
in the 1990s focused on liberal democratic theory categorized under rubrics such as
the political liberalism of Rawls (1993) and the deliberative democracy of Habermas
(1989). These foci have led to scholarship centered on deliberative forums, public
spheres, and efforts towards revitalizing civic engagement (Gastil, 2000).
Contemporaneously, oppositional models based on more radical theories and
practices have emerged. These models are inspired by a focus on participatory politics
(Polletta, 2002), post-structuralist conceptions of power (Laclau & Mouffe, 1985),
and concerns about global social justice (Della Porta, 2004). Unlike traditional
Marxism, these models conceive power and resistance in ways that refuse to privilege
the contestation of certain power hierarchies (such as class) over others (gender, race,
and sexuality). While many activists adhering to these radical democratic models are
adamantly opposed to corporate capitalism, they are loath to subscribe to what they
often see as another totalizing grand narrative and instead favor radically nonhierarchical
and decentralized structures*/hallmarks of radical democracy.

Laclau and Mouffe’s (1985) conception of radical democracy consists of celebrating
difference in political subjectivities and identity formations; focusing on discursive
formations of power; and distrusting civil society’s ability and commitment to
advance democratic practices. Two books titled Radical Democracy, both published in
1996, similarly call for a more radical project that breaks from liberal values of
rational deliberation, enlightened self-interest, individuality, and private property to
confront power in all of its complex and subtle guises (Lummis, 1996; Trend, 1996).
Lummis (1996) equates radical democracy with a radically empowered people
contesting all forms of centralized power. His conception is similar to Barber’s
‘‘Strong Democracy’’ which has citizens actively involved with all levels of political
decision-making. These analyses trace the failures of democracy to the failures of
liberalism and its general uneasiness with participatory democracy. In Trend’s edited
volume, Aronowitz (1996) argues that radical democracy should replace stigmatized
socialism as the political program of the left. Fraser, also critical of a lukewarm
liberalism that leaves status quo inequities intact, advances a radical modification to
Habermas’s original formulation that allows for multiple overlapping public spheres,
especially for marginal groups, which she refers to as ‘‘subaltern public spheres’’
(Fraser, 1992)."
(http://www.victorpickard.com/upload/rcsm157052.pdf)


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]