
'''= studying the roots of human evolution'''


URL = http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org

=Description=

"The Radical Anthropology Group started in 1984 when Chris Knight’s
popular ‘Introduction to Anthropology’ course at Morley College,
London, was closed down, supposedly for budgetary reasons. Within
a few weeks, the students got organised, electing a treasurer, secretary
and other officers. They booked a library in Camden – and
invited Chris to continue teaching next year. In this way, the
Radical Anthropology Group was born.

Later, Lionel Sims, who since the 1960s had been lecturing in
sociology at the University of East London, came across Chris’s PhD
on human origins and – excited by the backing it provided for the
anthropology of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, particularly on
the subject of ‘primitive communism’ – invited Chris to help set up
Anthropology at UEL. During the 1990s several other RAG members
including Ian Watts, Camilla Power, Isabel Cardigos and Charles
Whitehead completed PhDs at University College London and Kings
College London, before going onto further research and teaching.
For almost two decades, Anthropology at UEL retained close
ties with the Radical Anthropology Group, Chris becoming
Professor of Anthropology in 2001. He was sacked by UEL’s
corporate management in July 2009 for his role in organising
and publicising demonstrations against the G20 in April.

While RAG has never defined itself as a political organization, the
implications of some forms of science are intrinsically radical, and
this applies in particular to the theory that humanity was born in a
social revolution. Many RAG members choose to be active in Survival
International and/or other indigenous rights movements to defend the
land rights and cultural survival of hunter-gatherers. Additionally,
some RAG members combine academic research with activist
involvement in environmentalist, anti-capitalist and other campaigns."


=More Information=

For more, see www.radicalanthropologygroup.org


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Movements]]