
=Discussion=

Gaetano Sabetta

"We have seen that the context in which a new methodology of religious 
encounter arises is the pluralistic character of reality. 

But pluralism can create problems with the cultural encounter, such as 
when one culture or world-view begins to claim monopoly over the other and 
seek to reduce every other culture to its own. Or when one culture begins to 
assert its own self-sufficiency or autarchy. 


Panikkar presents the problem in  this way: 

- ''“The problem of pluralism arises when we face an insoluble conflict of ultimate  values,” ... when “we feel – we suffer – the incompatibility of different world  views and are at the same time forced by the praxis of our factual coexistence to  seek survival''.” 

 
We cannot logically overcome a pluralistic situation without breaking the 
very principle of non-contradiction, namely, if I am right it implies that you 
are wrong or denying our own set of codes: intellectual, moral, and so forth. 
Pluralism occurs when tolerance has no more room. 

The very notion of pluralism denies a universal theory of intelligibility. 

Metaphysical universalism as a neutral and universal framework able to 
decipher the whole of reality is unacceptable. The fact that this tool has been 
identified in the Western philosophy, at least from Descartes onward, with 
reason (universal tool of intelligibility) is the crux of the problem for 
Panikkar. Against this he affirms a diversity of metaphysics. 

There are many metaphors used by Panikkar to explain his understanding 
of pluralism. I will briefly point out to one of them: the window. 
We see through the window the entire world ( pars pro toto effect ), in this 
sense no religion is satisfied with a partial truth if that truth had to be saving 
truth. But that is not the whole of the world, it is simply the totum in parte 
(the whole in the part). We are not aware that we are seeing through our 
window, our myths: the unquestioned truth of the world-view in which we 
live. Pluralism simply acknowledges the existence of other windows. 


He defines pluralism as:

- ''“That fundamental human attitude which is critically aware both of the factual  irreducibility of different human systems purporting to render reality  intelligible, and of the radical non-necessity of reducing reality to one single  centre of intelligibility, making thus unnecessary an absolute decision in favour  of a particular human system with universal validity – or even one Supreme  Being.”'' 

Of course Panikkar’s idea of pluralism cannot be a universal theory and the 
consequences is that the truth itself is pluralistic. 

Pluralism is not  relativism, although it implies perspectivism and relativity. Relativism 
destroys itself when it affirms that all is relative and thus also the very 
affirmation of relativism. Relativity, on the other hand, asserts that every 
human affirmation is relative to its own parameters and that there cannot be 
absolute truth. Truth is always relational; it needs other elements, as in the 
case of truth and goodness. As St. Thomas noted centuries ago: “Things 
known are in the knower according to the mode of the knower.” 


Knowing is in itself a relational activity, a unifying relationship between the knower and 
the known. The knower is essentially involved in the very act of knowing. All 
knowing is necessarily related to the knower. 

Finally, pluralism is rooted both in the belief that no group embraces the 
totality of the human experience and in the cosmic confidence for a 
coexistence between ultimate human attitudes, religions, cultures. The secret 
remains the transformation of the differences in creative polarities and this 
can be done creating room also for the mythos , not only logos , in the fabric of 
reality."

(https://www.academia.edu/9828052/Panikkars_Intercultural_and_Inter-religious_Challenge)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]