'''= Raoul Victor is a French Marxist author who writes about free software, market relations and the possibility of radical social change. He was born in Venezuela and lives in Paris.''' 

URL = http://raoulv.perso.neuf.fr/

==Bio==

"Raoul Victor is a French Marxist author who writes about free software, market relations and the possibility of radical social change. He was born in Venezuela. He has been living in France since 1966. From 1968 to 1996 he was a member of an internationalist Marxist organisation for which the so called "communist" countries were state-capitalists regimes and the "western" democracies only efficient mechanisms of capitalist governance. From 2003 to 2013 he participated to the [[Oekonux]] project."

==Publications==

''' - Raoul Victor, on Free software, the sharing culture, and Marxism'''

'''The Visibility of the Revolutionary Project and New Technologies'''

URL = http://raoulv.pagesperso-orange.fr/

Raoul is the pen name of a French socialist activist. His thesis is that the widespread emergence of sharing practices makes possible a visioning of what a non-capitalist future would look like, something hitherto impossible, and on of the key sources for the failure of radical social change efforts. This is a key text from within the Marxist tradition.


'''Free Software and Market Relations'''

http://www.oekonux.org/texts/marketrelations.html

This essay defends the idea that free sofware is a germ of what the future society may look like, and is translated from a debate within a French Marxist group.


'''Free Software and Marxism'''

http://raoulv.pagesperso-orange.fr/MarxismFS.rtf

The author examines three questions: 1) To which extent is Marxism confirmed by the reality of free-software? 2) To which extent is Marxism questioned by this reality? 3) Which relation between class struggle and free-software? 


'''Free Software and social movements '''

http://raoulv.pagesperso-orange.fr/FS_social.rtf

==More Information==
* [[Money and Peer Production]]
* [[Raoul Victor on Money and Peer Production]]
* [[Raoul Victor on Naming the Peer Production Society]]


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]