
'''= "A small, powerful and lightweight ARM-based computer".'''

URL =  https://www.raspberrypi.org

==Description==

[[DiDIY]]:

"The Raspberry Pi is a series of small single-board computers developed in
the United Kingdom by the Raspberry Pi Foundation to promote the
teaching of basic computer science in schools and in developing countries.
The original model became far more popular than anticipated, selling
outside of its target market for uses such as robotics. The first version was
distributed in 2012."

==Aspects==

[[DiDIY]]:

===Community===
The community organises through a plethora of online spaces, being the
official website the most prominent one. It consists of the official
documentation and learning resources, a community forum, blog and
download section.

Community gatherings and hackatons are organised as “Pi Jams”, while
also many Raspberry Pi meetups and educational workshops are
organised.

===Licensing===

The Raspberry Pi designs itself are proprietary and exclusively owned by
the foundation, although the diagrams have been published. Only partners
are allowed to manufacture the products.

The software is mostly free software: the official Raspbian operating
system is derived from Debian Linux (GPLv2). However proprietary
drivers are included free of charge for the Broadcom chipset.

The documentation is under a free license: Creative Commons Attribution
ShareAlike.

===Indicators of impact===

• Sales: According to the Raspberry Pi Foundation, over 5 million
Raspberry Pis have been sold before February 2015, making it the
best-selling British computer. By the 9th of September 2016 they
had sold 10 million.
• Google Incoming Links (raspberrypi.org): 4.140.000.
• Alexa Global Rank (raspberrypi.org): 2.963.

Other Although RPi is low-cost and a non-profit community project and most of
its software and documentation under free licenses, the hardware designs
themselves are non-free and not open source. This fact was observed for
example by South-Corea based manufacturer Hardkernel interested in
bringing a modified version (called Odroid) on the market with certain
enhancements: more features in a much smaller board14. RPi works with
chipmaker Broadcom who decided to stop providing Hardkernel with the
Broadcom System-on-a-Chip. This forced Hardkernel to stop the sale of
Odroid."

==Business Model==

[[DiDIY]]:

Revenue models:

• Royalties from hardware sales through contract manufacturer RS
Components11 and its distributor network.
• Donations
• Education and training programme through the PiCademy.

==Modes of production==

[[DiDIY]]:

"The hardware is designed by the foundation and produced and distributed
by contract manufacturer RS Components. The Foundation runs a
distributor network.

The software is mostly developed by the community, on top of the Debian
Linux operating system. On top of that the community designs and shares
shields, or ‘HATs’ (Hardware Attached on Top)."

==Governance models==

[[DiDIY]]:

"The project is owned and governed by the Raspberry Pi Foundation,
which in turn is governed by a Board of Trustees, supported by
members."

==More Information==

* [[Product Hacking]]


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Technology]]