=Typology=

* see: [[Economic Rationalism]]

* [[Meta-Rationality]]
** [[David Chapman on Meta-Rationality]]

=Discussion=

Recommended:

* [[Post-Modernism Has Destroyed the Bridge to Rationality]]. By David Chapman.

* The [[Transition from Intellectual-Mental-Rational to Postformal-Integral-Planetary]]. By Jennifer Gidley.

* [[Higher Reason vs Lower Reason]]. John Uebersax.


==RATIONALISM ACCORDING TO GELLNER==

Michal  Buchowsk:

"Traces of rational thinking can be found in ancient philosophy and in the theological thought of the Middle Ages. In a sense, ‘rationalism looks as if it might be the offspring of monotheism: a single and exclusive deity led us to the notion of a unique and homogenous fount of truth’ (RC: 57). Nevertheless, the real history of rationalism starts with René Descartes. He anticipated the spirit of the modern European, scientific vision of the world. The driving engine for Descartes' intellectual endeavor was the freeing of reason from ‘custom and example’; in other words, the freeing of our concepts from our culture. Tradition constraints thought and obliterates the critical view. In this sense, ‘Culture and Reason are antithetical’ (RC: 2). For Descartes, reasoning would liberate the individual: ‘Culture [would] be transcended by the cognitive Robinson Crusoe’ (RC: 14).

This pure rationalism was criticized by David Hume. However, conventional opinion to the contrary, his empiricism does not have to be seen as an inherent rival of rationalism. For Hume, the universal features of the human mind organize our sensory experience. In this way, he ‘fell back on the custom’ (RC: 21), this time the custom of mind. But the Humean universe is still an orderly one; the question is how we happened to construct it. It was up to Kant to vindicate the active role of man in cognition. The capabilities of our mind form the cornerstone of a rationally cognizable world. Laws exist not in things, but in us.

Descartes, Hume, and Kant provided us with a philosophical blueprint for the modern world. Some of their findings have proven to be still valid. None, however, was able to explain why, despite generic properties universal to the human mind, there are different systems of belief. Their ethnocentric concern was their own European culture. To solve this problem sociology stretched out a helpful hand. Emile Durkheim advised that conceptual compulsion does not reside in the individual mind but is instilled in us by society, largely through ritual. If this were not the case, Hume's associationism would lead to cognitive entropy. Confusion is avoided thanks to rituals which impose upon our minds categories present in collective representations. ‘Associations are born free, but are everywhere in chains’ (RC: 34). Ritual forces upon us mental and moral discipline. Thus, ‘religion... made us human’ (RC: 37). In this way European thought has made a full circle: from Descartes who wanted to liberate us from culture to Durkheim who claimed that it is thanks to culture that we think as we do.

Durkheim was unable, however, to account for the fact that some systems of belief are more rational than others. It was Max Weber who provided us with the best available account of the process of rationalization. His analysis of Protestantism and the birth of capitalism describes by what contingencies of history the scientific ethos was born in modern Europe. Durkheimian sacred compulsion has been substituted with Weberian desacralized compulsion, in which the general principles of systematic reasoning prevail. The attitude of respect to selected ideas entrenched by religion is no longer dominant. Instead, only ideas honoring formal qualities, evenhandedly applied to all phenomena are recognized. The roots of this ethos are, paradoxically, in religious pietism, and in this meaning ‘there was nothing rational about rationality. ...Reason was born from Unreason’ (RC: 47). The rational world we live in now ‘does not commit us to any... specific set of concepts; it commits us to a sober and symmetrical... treatment of whatever notions we handle’ (RC: 52).

Reason defined as such has many ‘natural’ antagonists on Earth. Tradition was already mentioned as one. Any form of authoritarianism cannot sustain rational criticism and the rationalist always acts as social critic. Empiricism runs against Reason only as a contender for the position of ultimate judge of our cognitive statements. Pragmatism, with its piecemeal procedure of trial and error, does not accord with the rationalistic desire for general principles of cognition. Transcendental rationality has had many foes in philosophical tradition: Hegel, Marx, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Freud. All of them found constraints other than Reason to be the primary driving forces of the human condition: History, Will, and the Unconsciousness. Reason also has many maladies. It is, for example, assumed to be a product of Providential Coincidence, which means that we should be content with what we have at hand because it is harmonious with nature (pragmatists) or most accessible at a given time (Hegel). Rational thinking itself also produced a view that undermines the position of transcendent Reason. Reason cannot justify its unique position. In this way, paradoxically, Reason commits suicide. More mundane forces like Will, Instinct, and so forth, replace Reason. For some thinkers, Reason also seems impotent insofar as its own validation is concerned; it cannot rationalize its own procedures.

In recent times, Reason has been undermined by relativists. The ideas of Kuhn and Wittgenstein decidedly contributed to this coup d'état. The notion that we can apprehend reality exclusively via paradigms excludes comparison of different theories on the ground of this reality. The concept of ‘language games’ leads to the stand that: ‘cultural idiosyncrasy becomes King’ (RC: 119). Reality cannot be explained but only described. Local community is vindicated and again raised to the prominence of being supreme judge for all things. Thus: ‘custom and example are sovereign after all’ (RC: 123). In this sense, the Wittgensteinian conception ‘is one of the most bizarre and extreme forms of irrationalism of our time’ (RC: 121). Even Chomsky's linguistic theory, commonly regarded as Cartesian in spirit, has irrationalist taints. When one accepts that rules which govern our thought and language are implicit and unintelligible to us, then one is breaking Descartes' principle that we should be able to check our ideas (formal principles of logic included) and decide whether they are sound.

Kuhn and Wittgenstein paved the way for extreme relativism, ergo irrationalism. In anthropology, as in many other disciplines, contemporary proponents of relativism christened themselves as ‘postmodernists’ and became fashionable. The direct intellectual roots of anthropological postmodernism may be sought not only in Geertz's interpretivism, as Gellner asserts, but also, I think, in symbolic interpretations of the so-called Oxford School. However, postmodernism pulled the pendulum to the edge of irrationalism. What main characteristics of these orientations, if any, can be grasped in this murky trend? Briefly, no methodology, no epistemology, no objectivity, no verifiability, and no clarity. Postmodernists are mostly interested in meanings, cross-cultural understanding, and the translation of meanings into our own categories. The hunt for meaning, in turn, leads most of them to a conceptual impasse. Because postmodernists are so preoccupied with the distortion of meanings encountered in other cultures, they achieve little more than ‘subjectivity and navel-gazing’ (PRR: 41). Postmodernists ‘agonize so much about their inability to know themselves and the Other, at any level of regress, that they no longer need to trouble too much about the Other’ (PRR: 45). All this leads not merely to cognitive relativism, but to cognitive paralysis.

Now, we can outline the scene. There are three main actors on the stage. First, there is Religious Fundamentalism, of which modern Islam is a conspicuous example. The absolute authority of a god fortifies certain absolute presuppositions, which cannot be put on trial. Second, there is Relativism, which holds that there is no knowledge beyond culture and morality, custom and example. The authority of a particular tradition serves as final judge of the truth of a given claim. Third, there is an Enlightenment Rationalist Fundamentalism, of which Gellner is an advocate. Let us examine the main characteristics of this latter stance.

According to Gellner, Descartes' aspiration that we can totally free ourselves from culture is absurd. Nevertheless, in cognition this is an aspiration which should direct our activity, and which, at least in some sense, is attained. Knowledge acquired in science is independent of the particular cultures in which scientific inquiry takes place. The results of these investigations are checked against reality and measured by the practical effects of their application. In this sense scientific knowledge becomes universal and, willy-nilly, conquers societies which entertain different styles of life. ‘Experience, or rather, controlled experimentation, constitutes an effective, socially independent court of appeal for all cognitive claims’ (RC: 167). The experiments and data acquired are systematized, thanks to the ordered, disciplined, patterned and exact practice, which is called ‘rational attitude’. The rationalist procedure entails empiricism; Descartes and Hume are matched. The method itself can be boiled down to the atomization of experience and its reassembly in theories about the world. The routine of atomization applies to every idea, to every theory or statement. In this way culture, also, as Descartes recommended long ago, is put on trial.

Gellnerian rationalism shares with Religious Fundamentalism the ‘belief in the existence of a unique truth’ (PRR: 84). Unlike religious dogmatic ideology, however, it does not make exceptions for any concept. Rationalist empirical method is symmetrically applied to every issue, and the content of each belief should be rationally assessed. The only absolute value is the formal principle of the scrutinization of everything. Rationalist Fundamentalism does not accept the relativistic idea that there can be as many truths and standards of rationality as can be determined by different ‘life forms’. However, paradoxically, along with relativism, it does not permit the accessibility of ultimate knowledge. Nevertheless, relativism, and postmodernism as its ephemeral mutation, is a real peril for rational cognition. We should not allow it to prevail because too much is at stake. Postmodernist discernments can be valuable in art and entertainment but not in substantial aspects of our life. ‘Serious knowledge is not subject to relativism, but the trappings of our life are’ (PRR: 95).

This, in brief, is the main thesis of Gellner's works. The synoptic character of my account cannot render the richness of thoughts offered. There are several ideas, which are innovative. One is the exegesis of postmodernist parallels with romanticism on the one hand, and the intellectual threads leading to Marxism and the Frankfurt School of Herbert Marcuse and Theodore Adorno, on the other (PRR: 31–36). Another is the interpretation of Wittgenstein as expressed in his earlier and later works: two opposite visions of society existing in Habsburg Austria – respectively, universalistic Gesellschaft and parochial Gemeinschaft (CR: 116–124). Altogether, both books present a brilliant tale for everyone interested in intellectual history, the rationality versus relativism debate, postmodernism, philosophy and anthropology. The above description has been meant to outline some major aspects of Gellner's ideas."

(https://www.sociostudies.org/journal/articles/140486/)

* Source: '''The Social Condition of Knowledge: Gellner and the ‘Postmodernist Menace’ The Social Condition of Knowledge: Gellner and the ‘Postmodernist Menace’. Buchowski, Michał. Social Evolution & History. Volume 2, Number 2 / September 2003'''



=More information=

* For a comprehensive tribute to the range and fertility of Gellner's ideas see the book edited by Hall and Jarvie (1992) and entitled Transition to Modernity: Essays on Power, Wealth and Belief.


==Bibliography==

Gellner, E.

1974. Legitimation of Belief. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1984. Rationality and the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1992a. Reason and Culture: The Historic Role of Rationality and Rationalism. Oxford: Blackwell.

1992b. Postmodernism, Reason and Religion. London: Routledge.

[[Category:Intelligence]]