
=Discussion=

==Overview of the Technologies Involved: [[Raw Materials Needed for the Fourth Industrial Revolution]]==

Hannah Pilgrim:

What technologies are needed to
connect the “things”, and what metals
are processed?


Industry 4.0 or the Industry of Things do not
describe one type of technology but refer to a 
combination of dif ferent knowledge-based information systems and technologies. Central to
Industry 4.0 are Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), as
they combine the physical production process
with the virtual world. Materials, devices and
other components in the production chain are
connected to the internet via small computers
which are equipped with sensors and actors.

A 2016 study by the German Mineral Resources
Agency (DERA) examines the probable demand
for raw materials caused by different future technologies.
 
According to the DERA study, in 2035,
the examined 42 future technologies will require
the quadruple of the present lithium production,
a threefold increase in heavy rare earths and one
and a half times increase in light rare earths and
tantalum. It is furthermore estimated that, due
to the increased use of electronics, the global demand for copper will grow between 231 and 341
percent until 2050.

In the following, we will introduce a few of the
technologies examined by the DERA study that
are essential for digitalized production processes:


* Sensors are a key technology. In the production
process, sensors can measure the position or
temperature of machines, product components,
etc. In the past years, the use of sensors sharply
increased. Although it is difficult to make scientifically valid statements about the future
demand of sensors, it is clear that metals are
used for the production of sensors, such as tin,
tungsten, tantalum and platinum.


* Radio Frequency IDentification-Tags (RFID-Tags)
are another type of sensors. RFID-Tags enable the
localization of objects through radio waves. They
are used in the supply chain management. Calculations indicate that, in 2035, up to 85 trillion
RFID-Tags could be sold per year. Compared with
6.3 billion in 2014, this is a huge increase. Metals
needed for the production of RFID-Tags are silver,
copper and aluminum.

* The digitalization of production also depends on
flat screens and touch screens. They consist of
indium tin oxide, which in turn mainly consists
of indium oxide. According to the DERA study, in
2035, up to 34 percent of the worldwide indium
production may be used solely for the production of displays.
Industrial robots are machines capable of working autonomously in the production process.

They consist of a manipulator (robotic arm),
control instrument and the effector (gripper
or tool). Robots are increasingly equipped with
different sensors. Research of the International
Federation of Robotics shows that global sales
in industrial robots has increased in the past
years. According to the International Federation
of Robotics, in 2020, more than three million robots will probably work in industrial production.

The metal-, plastic- and electronic industry in
particular rely on automated production. Robots  – which are also equipped with a number
of sensors – primarily consist of steel, copper, tin
and silicon.

* High-performance microchips are mainly used
for mobile phones and WLAN chips. However,
they are now being integrated in more and more
devices. Within the context of Industry 4.0, the
extended use of wireless communications in spacious production facilities will certainly increase
the quantity of chips needed. Compared with
‘traditional’ chips, high-performance microchips
are smaller, more ef ficient and can also be used
at high temperatures. They consist primarily of
gallium."

(https://ak-rohstoffe.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/PS_FS_Digitalization.pdf)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Articles]]