
=Bio=

'''1.'''

"I am a freelance Economic change­maker and writer, specialising in economic development R&D. My
focus is the establishment of rentier­free experiential economic zones in different countries, to restart the
real economy on a national and international basis, including through the establishment of a new
International Monetary System, in the form of a Civil Society public service. I am an autodidactic
generalist who makes extensive use of strong analytical skills, in combination with intuition and creativity,
to identify opportunistic solutions to challenging problems. I have had an eclectic career path, ranging
from Police intelligence and special operations relating to serious and organised crime, through to
ecological engineering for the treatment of industrial effluents and sludges of high volume and toxicity. I
am currently translating from French into English "Dépolluer l'économie ­ Tome 1: Révolution dans la
monnaie" (Decontaminate the Economy ­ Volume 1: A monetary revolution), by Michel Laloux (2014).
This book represents breakthrough thinking for the establishment of a self­financing international
monetary system, based on sovereign subsidiarity and without dependency on bondholders, central
bank liquidity, commercial bank reserves or foreign investors. I live in Andalusia, Spain, with my French
wife."


'''2.'''

"Research and development of a project for sustainable socio-economic development
Since the apparition of the 2008 financial crisis, I have been researching viable solutions to address the root causes of the catastrophic socio-economic and ecological breakdown that humanity is facing. My perspective is that the paradigm of the historical political-economy is no longer tenable in the context of technological progress. Maintaining “business as usual” through the palliation of social and environmental symptoms is literally a dead end. We have to address fundamental dysfunctions within the interrelated domains of: (1) a globalised economy, (2) human rights, and (3) human development. My aim is to network with others who are likewise engaged, so as to combine our capacities to evolutionize a new paradigm appropriate to the challenges facing humanity in the 21st century.”
(http://www.raymondaitken.com/profile)


=More Information=

* For more information, see my LinkedIn profile at: https://es.linkedin.com/in/raymondaitken


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Money]]