
6-minute video “Re-imagine the Future” via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uA1Ri3LvIRs

The video is based on a series of interviews with participants in a June workshop called “Operationalising Green Governance.


=Description=

David Bollier:

"When faced with the massive crises of our time, the most logical response is paralysis.  What can an individual possibly do about something so massive and complex?

But what if people could manage to imagine changes that matter within their own lives, and then to grow and federate them? My colleague Anna Grear, a law professor at Cardiff University, and I wanted to focus on some of the positive, practical steps that anyone can take in dealing with the terrible challenges of our time.  


One result is a six-minute video that we are releasing today. The video is based on a series of interviews with participants in a June workshop called “Operationalising Green Governance.”  Held at a lovely retreat center north of Paris, a handful of participants – international law professors, human rights advocates, activists – were interviewed on camera by Ibby Stockdale, Director of a British film production company, Five Foot Four.  Ibby brilliantly distilled hours of interview footage and crafted a succinct, beautifully produced message. 

In six minutes, it’s difficult to cover too much ground – so in the closing frames of the film, we provide links to two dedicated webpages – Anna’s  and mine -- to provide resources, organizations, essays, books, etc. for those interested in exploring the film’s themes more deeply."
(http://bollier.org/blog/new-video-%E2%80%9Cre-imagine-future%E2%80%9D)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Conferences]]