

=Summary Stats=

Via [http://twiangulate.com/search/p2p_foundation-mbauwens/biggest_followers/table/my_friends-1/ twinangulate.com] :

Measured on December 27, 2014

* @P2P Foundation account has 5,390 followers and 1,093 friends
   
* @mbauwens account, Michel Bauwens has 8,979 followers and 1,197 friends

* @P2P_Foundation’s 50 biggest followers have a combined reach of 2,957,183

* @mbauwens’s 50 biggest followers have a combined reach of 4,702,270

* @mbauwens and @P2P_Foundation share 18 big followers who have 962,697 followers

* @mbauwens has 65 big followers who have 4,524,253 followers

* @P2P_Foundation has 17 big followers who have 1,729,594 followers

=Listings=

==Top Ten Individuals in Descending Reach==

1. stevenbjohnson ; Author. (Nine books.) Now TV host. (How We Got To Now, on PBS/BBC.) 

2. dbravo ; Abogado especializado en derecho informático y propiedad intelectual.

3. jeffjarvis ; @BuzzMachine blogger; author of Public Parts, What Would Google Do?

4. paulmasonnews ; Economics editor, Channel 4 News. Journalist. Novelist. Postcapitalist

5. EricAllenBell ; Writer

6. ioerror ; Ethics enthusiast

7. gharbeia ; cairo, egypt

8. dtapscott ; Media theorist, author (most recently of The Digital Economy

9. evgenymorozov ; internet critic

10. tiffanyshlain ; Filmmaker. Founder of The Webby Awards

Also: profdavidharvey ; stacyherbert ; Falkvinge ; NafeezAhmed ; santisiri


==Top Five Organizations in Descending Reach==

1. WWFFrance ;  la première organisation mondiale de protection de la nature 

2. UnitedHumans ; calling up for #Inclusiveness

3. AlternEconomics ; redefining economic theory starting from the initial question of what economics today is..

4. actionhappiness ; Movement of people committed to building a happier society by making positive changes 

5. Partido_X ; Una Red Ciudadana para acabar con la corrupción y conseguir #DemocraciayPunto


==Top Ten Media in Descending Reach==

1. TheHackersNews ; oldest & most trusted Hacking & Information Security News Portal

2. netzpolitik ; Markus Beckedahl

3. Philanthropy ;  Chronicle of Philanthropy's official Twitter page, dispensing news, advice, and commentary

4. Mindsdotcom

5. Architizer Empowering architecture through sharing and transparency.

6. TheBitcoinNews ; Decentralised #Bitcoin and #Crypto #News
 
7. ilmanifesto ;  Italian national newspaper 

8. OWNI ; “Société, Pouvoirs & Cultures Numériques”

9. SustainBrands ; News, Views, Events and Community surrounding the field of Sustainable Brand building.

10. Truthdig


==Top Five Businesses in Descending Reach==

1. Acumen (social venture fund ?)

2. shapeways ; marketplace & community where you can make, buy and sell 3D Printed products

3. PureEnergiesUS ; one-stop shop for solar


[[Category:P2P Foundation]]