
'''= an encounter of young activist who are creating new narratives in democracy and sociopolitical paradigm shift in Bolivia.'''

URL = http://reactivxs.culturadered.com

'''The New Faces of Latin American are ACTIVATED from Bolivia'''

Latin America is undergoing a process of building new paradigms of social, political and economic shift. It is a time of change where democracy has returned to where it came from, the streets. And the young people are who, from the underground and under the cover of the new information technologies, are driving movements that challenge and question systems that do not respond to citizen demands. They are also leading these online crowds revolutions that are shaping a new way of thinking and creating democracy.

From 17th to 19th April, transformers protagonists of these movements will meet in La Paz to give life to Reactivxs - New Faces of Change in Latin America -. The meeting, organized by Hivos Foundation, will bring together young cultural, politic and digital activists groups and organizations from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Spain / Syria, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.

REactivxs will enable Latin American social activists share knowledge about their backgrounds, their mechanisms of action and social mobilization, and design common strategies to promote social change.

This three-day meeting will provide opportunities (and an open process) for the exchange, dialogue and co-creation between delegates from Latin American organizations, social development experts and academics to reflect on these issues and inspire others

The reflections arising will be openly shared with the community. On April 18th, in the morning, the National Museum of Ethnography and Folklore (MUSEF) will open its doors for the public to join and enrich the discussions and debates of Reactivxs. Also, all communication and registration of the participants during the three days of the meeting will be shared in an open and live, thereby encouraging the contribution to glocal digital dialogue.

Reactivxs - New Faces of Change in Latin America - is a unique opportunity to get close and absorb the movements that are shaping new societies.

==== In few words ====

'''What is REactivxs?''' There will be a meeting from 17th to 19th april in La Paz of social activists from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Spain / Syria, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela in the encounter REactivxs - New faces of change in Latin America - with the will to open a process of dialogue and shared knowledge.

'''What are the objectives and logics within?''' This will be a gathering of young cultural, political and digital collective activists from Latin American organizations, gathered to exchange knowledge on their contexts, mechanisms of mobilization and social action, as well as common design strategies for social change.

'''As a process:''' From joint action strategies and open participation, REactivxs is a process that adds actions, learning, ways of doing, logics, new narratives, forms of citizenship for collaboration and coordination of youth movements in Latin America. After April 19th, this has only just begun.

'''How do I participate?''' 

* Open Meeting: The second day of the meeting will be open to anyone who wants to join MUSEF approaches (venue of the meeting) and participate.
* Open Process: As an inclusive process with all of Latin America, we feature several platforms and forms of participation:
** Mapping: [http://datea.pe/#mapeo/92 Reactivx Mapping] your organization / group / movement.
** Real-time coverage: During the event, the networks ([https://www.facebook.com/REactivxs Facebook] and [http://www.twitter.com/REactivxs Twitter]) and the wiki ([http://reactivxs.culturadered.com reactivxs.culturadered.com]) will be updated each time so you can keep the entire match. And you can see the entire match in the channel streamed through Pos-TV.
** Why are you REactivx?: We know that you too are REactivx, which is why we encourage you to edit the graph that you can [https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B9uhBpIn0Kx8VjJGUG9LN0liM1k/edit?usp=sharing download from here] telling us why you, your group or organization are Reactivxs. If you want you can leave a message here and we'll do from here to edit the graph.
** What actions do you consider REactivxs: we suggest you to edit pictures of everyday actions and attitudes that you consider REactive, including you the text "We are Reactivxs because ..." or "We are Reactivxs when" . [https://www.dropbox.com/sh/dyrfsstl7h6jw5z/V5BqjCRZuf#/ Here are some examples].
** Write: Tell us your position on the youth reactive scenario, analyzed from different points of view, tell us how your organization / collective actions and processes involved Reactivity, and also you can feed the Wiki that, in fact, is yours. [https://docs.google.com/a/martadero.org/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dC16SU0xUGROREw0THZJbmpEZURXU0E6MQ Write from here].


Spread, share and comment: It is very important to colaborate so the REactivxs experiences can be opened and have a great scope. Being a work process in which social transformation strategies are being worked, we need to inform, communicate and spread the logic, reactive attitudes and actions.

=More Information=

You can openly participate via the wiki create for this process and other platforms we share here:

'''Communication platforms'''

* '''WIKI''' - http://reactivxs.culturadered.com

* '''FACEBOOK''' - https://www.facebook.com/REactivxs?ref=hl

* '''TWITTER''' - https://twitter.com/REactivxs

* '''FLICKR''' - http://www.flickr.com/groups/2205228@N21/

* '''YOUTUBE''' - http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL3cGdGeTlP5ogGjL7ZBWxu10tB6lPpGZf
Send your videos to info@martadero.org

* '''MAPPING''' - Mapeo REactivo: http://bit.ly/mapeoREactivo
Datea.pe guidelines: http://www.blog.datea.pe/2012/guia-datea/

* '''LINKS OF INTEREST'''
· Colaborative communication: http://bit.ly/coberturareactivxs

· Say it freely: http://bit.ly/SoyREactivx


[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Bolivia]]