

=Bibliography=


Aernouts, Nele, and Michael Ryckewaert. 2017. ‘Beyond Housing: On the Role of Commoning in the Establishment of a Community Land Trust Project’. International Journal of Housing Policy 0 (0): 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/19491247.2017.1331592.

Bunce, Susannah. 2016. ‘Pursuing Urban Commons: Politics and Alliances in Community Land Trust Activism in East London’. Antipode 48 (1): 134–50. doi:10.1111/anti.12168.

Cabré, Eduard, and Arnau Andrés. 2017. ‘La Borda: A Case Study on the Implementation of Cooperative Housing in Catalonia’. International Journal of Housing Policy 0 (0): 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/19491247.2017.1331591.

Czischke, Darinka. 2018. ‘Collaborative Housing and Housing Providers: Towards an Analytical Framework of Multi-Stakeholder Collaboration in Housing Co-Production’. International Journal of Housing Policy 18 (1): 55–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/19491247.2017.1331593.

Fernández Arrigoitia, Melissa, and Kathleen Scanlon. 2015. ‘Co-Designing Senior Co-Housing: The Collaborative Process of Featherstone Lodge’. Urban Design 136. (available here)

Hodkinson, Stuart. 2012. ‘The New Urban Enclosures’. City 16 (5): 500–518. doi:10.1080/13604813.2012.709403.

Larsen, Henrik Gutzon, and Anders Lund Hansen. 2015. ‘Commodifying Danish Housing Commons’. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography 97 (3): 263–74. doi:10.1111/geob.12080.

———. 2016. ‘An End to Housing as a Common Good? Housing Reforms in Denmark and Sweden’. Geographische Rundschau.

Marcuse, Peter, and David Madden. 2016. In Defense of Housing: The Politics of Crisis. Verso Books.

Noterman, Elsa. 2016. ‘Beyond Tragedy: Differential Commoning in a Manufactured Housing Cooperative’. Antipode 48 (2): 433–52. https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12182.

Sevilla-Buitrago, Alvaro. 2015. ‘Capitalist Formations of Enclosure: Space and the Extinction of the Commons’. Antipode 47 (4): 999–1020. doi:10.1111/anti.12143.

Thompson, Matthew. 2015. ‘Between Boundaries: From Commoning and Guerrilla Gardening to Community Land Trust Development in Liverpool’. Antipode 47 (4): 1021–42. doi:10.1111/anti.12154.

Vasudevan, Alexander. 2015. ‘The Autonomous City: Towards a Critical Geography of Occupation’. Progress in Human Geography 39 (3): 316–337. (available as e-print here)


=Source=

* The above are selected from a "A preliminary reading list on commoning housing", at http://commoninghousing.net/resources/

=More information=

* [[Commoning Housing]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Articles]]