
'''* Book: Fuchs, Christian. 2016. Reading Marx in the Information Age. A Media and Communication Studies Perspective on Capital, Volume 1. New York: Routledge.''' 

URL = http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9781138948563/


=Description=

"This book is a comprehensive guide to Marx’s most important and groundbreaking work. Christian Fuchs provides a thorough, chapter-by-chapter introduction to Capital Volume 1 that assists undergraduate and postgraduate readers in making sense of Marx in the information age, exploring Marx’s key concepts through the lens of media and communication studies via current-day phenomena like the Internet, digital labour, social media, the media industries, and digital class struggles. Discussion questions and exercises at the end of each chapter help readers to further apply Marx’s work to a modern-day context."


=Contents=

Introduction Part I: Commodities and Money 1. Prefaces, Postfaces and Chapter 1: The Commodity 2. The Process of Exchange 3. Money, or the Circulation of Commodities Part II: The Transformation of Money into Capital 4. The General Formula for Capital 5. Contradictions in the General Formula 6. The Sale and Purchase of Labour-Power Part III: The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value 7. The Labour Process and the Valorization Process 8. Constant Capital and Variable Capital 9. The Rate of Surplus Value 10. The Working Day 11. The Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value Part IV: The Production of Relative Surplus-Value 12. The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value 13. Co-operation 14. The Division of Labour and Manufacture 15. Machinery and Large-Scale Industry Part V: The Production of Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value 16. Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value 17. Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value18. Different Formulae for the Rate of Surplus-Value Part VI: Wages 19. The Transformation of Value (and Respectively the Price) of Labour-Power into Wages 20. Time-Wages 21. Piece-Wages 22. National Differences in Wages Part VII: The Process of Accumulation of Capital 23. Simple Reproduction 24. The Transformation of Surplus-Value into Capital 25. The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation Part VIII: So-Called Primitive Accumulation 26. Part VIII: So-Called Primitive Accumulation 27. Appendix: Results of the Immediate Process of Production 28. Conclusion Appendix 1: Thomas Piketty’s Book "Capital in the Twenty-First Century", Karl Marx, and the Political Economy of the Internet Appendix 2: Knowledge, Technology, and the General Intellect in the Grundrisse and its Fragment on Machines


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]