
'''= RealTimeFarms.com’s goal; make it fun and easy to know where your food comes from and find food you feel good about eating.''' [http://www.foodandtechconnect.com/site/2011/09/29/karl-and-cara-rosaen-on-hacking-the-food-system-find-food-and-feel-good/]

URL = http://realtimefarms.com/

a crowdsourced food guide


=Description=

Karl and Cara Rosaen, founders:

"Real Time Farms romances the everyday eater with stories, images, and information.  We’re connecting people to each other, allowing them to follow the tomato on their plate at a restaurant (e.g. Casa Mono) or home back to pictures and info about the farm that grew it. We also woo people by making it possible for them to share what they know. When people can affect change, they want to do it more. Our Food Warriors, 15-20 interns around the country, are helping spark contribution in cities nationwide, by priming the pump with video, stories, and growing practices of their regions farms and food artisans. Their contributions bring the guide to life, and inspire others to contribute further.

...
Our dream: You visit RealTimeFarms. You trace your food back to the farm it came from. You find farms you love. You know how to find their food – at your local restaurant, at 2 local supermarkets, 4 neighborhood farmers markets, and 3 online food hubs. You go to one of these places and shop. You cook. You feel good."

(http://www.foodandtechconnect.com/site/2011/09/29/karl-and-cara-rosaen-on-hacking-the-food-system-find-food-and-feel-good/)


[[Category:Agrifood]]