
* Article: The Real World of the Decentralized Autonomous Society. By J.Z. Garrod. Triple C, Vol 14, No 1 (2016)

URL = http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/692

=Abstract=

"Although it is still in early stages, many commentators have been quick to note the revolutionary potential of next-generation or Bitcoin 2.0 technology. While some have expressed fear that the widespread application of these technologies may engender the rise of a Terminator-style Skynet, others believe that it represents the coming of a decentralized autonomous society (DAS) in which humans are freed from centralized forms of power through the proliferation of distributed autonomous organizations or DAOs. Influenced by neoliberal theory that stresses privatization, open markets, and deregulation, Bitcoin 2.0 technologies are implicitly working on the assumption that 'freedom' means freedom from the state. This neglects, however, that within capitalist societies, the state can also provide freedom from the vagaries of the market by protecting certain things from commodification. 

Through an analysis of 

(1) class and the role of the state; 

(2) the concentration and centralization of capital; and 

(3) the role of automation, 

I argue that the vision of freedom that underpins Bitcoin 2.0 tech is one that neglects the power that capital holds over us in both organizing the structure of our lives, and informing our idea of what it means to be human. In neglecting these other forms of power, I claim that the DAS might be a far more dystopian development than its supporters comprehend, making possible societies that are commodities all the way down."
(http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/692)


=Excerpts=

JZ Garrod:

" I argue that by adhering to a neoliberal subjectivity, some supporters of
the DAS have an obscured vision of: (1) class and the role of the state; (2) the concentration
and centralization of capital; and (3) the role of automation. As I hope to make clear, the vision
of freedom that seems to underpin Bitcoin 2.0 tech is one that neglects very significant
forms of power and coercion; in particular, the power that capital holds over us in both organizing
the structure of our lives, and informing our idea of what it means to be human. In neglecting
these other forms of power, I claim that the DAS might be a far more dystopian development
than its supporters comprehend, making possible societies that are, as Fraser
(2014, 5) calls them, “commodities all the way down.”

Admittedly, my comments and reflections are anticipatory, as little of what is discussed
has come to pass, nor is it likely to come to pass in exactly the way in which I've presented it.
There are real issues of scalability, infrastructure, and regulation that must first be overcome
before Bitcoin 2.0 tech can be widely adopted in the manner that DAS proponents suggest
(Higgins 2015; Scott 2014). As de Sousa Santos (2004, 241) notes, however, a sociology of
emergences is one that inquires “into the alternatives that are contained in the horizon of
concrete possibilities.” By taking account of the “knowledge, practices and agents” (Ibid) involved
in the development of new technologies, it becomes possible to “identify therein the
tendencies of the future (the Not Yet) upon which it is possible to intervene so as to maximize
the probability of hope vis-à-vis the probability of frustration” (Ibid). Consider this, then,
my normative strategic intervention into the development of new types of societies. By offering
some suggestions as to how we might better use these technologies to secure and mediate
the commons (both digital and material), I conclude by arguing that there exists the possibility
to create a more sustainable—and possible—future for all."


==The [[Decentralized Autonomous Society]]==

JZ Garrod:

"While the prospect of a washing machine that can order its own detergent is intriguing, the
true draw of Ethereum is its potential to remake the social world. The central institution that
makes this possible is the decentralized autonomous organization, or DAO. As the name
suggests, DAOs are essentially digital organizations that manage themselves: “long-term
smart contracts that contain the assets and encode the bylaws of an entire organization”
(Buterin 2014, par. 2). Depending on how they are structured, certain members of the DAO
might be able to spend its funds, or modify its code.

Buterin (2013, par. 2) has described DAOs as an attempt to extend the logic of the industrial
revolution upwards. Where that revolution allowed us to “start replacing human labour
with machines,” it only automated the bottom half of the equation, “removing the need for
rank and file manual labourers.” DAOs are thus an attempt to see if it is possible to “remove
management from the equation, instead.” With such technology, it becomes possible for selfdriving
cars to autonomously make micro-payments to each other for the right-of-way, or to
share data plans via mesh networks, making much of the internet infrastructure unnecessary
(Pollen 2013).

For many true believers, however, smart contracts, blockchains, and the DAOs that might
stem from them, are the building blocks of something much bigger: the decentralized autonomous
society (DAS). While there are competing versions of this possible future, the predominant
theme is a society in which technological development has disrupted the centralized
and hierarchal forms of the nation-state system.8 In this society math, perfect information,
and market mechanisms are supposedly able to solve the problem of organizational
politics by removing humans from politics altogether.

Viewed as inherently corruptible creatures, the thinking goes that it is far more sensible “to
base a future economy on the mathematical laws of the universe, outside the grasp of human
error and manipulation” (Patron 2014, 102).9 Through DAOs, it is claimed, we might be
able to augment human autonomy by automating the governance of all organizations, since
DAOs can run “without any human involvement under the control of an incorruptible set of
business rules” (Larimer 2013, par. 2). And since the code simply runs itself, these DAOs
could run forever, making politics a simple problem of engineering.

Inherent in this view is the idea that political elites have too much power, and are a hamper
on freedom. Billionaire Peter Thiel, for instance, writes that he no longer believes “that
freedom and democracy are compatible” (as cited in Frank 2015, 27). Perhaps it could exist,
“he imagined, in cyberspace, in outerspace, or on high-seas homesteads, where individualists
could escape the 'terrible arc of the political.'” Similar remarks have been made by Roger
Ver, the prominent Bitcoin investor, who argues that such technologies “will prevent governments
from being able to just print money at will and then use that to buy tanks and guns and
bombs to murder people around the world” (as cited in Dodd 2015, par. 4). While not all cryptographers
share these views, Karlstrøm (2014, 29) notes that there has always been “a
strong current of libertarian sentiments in the discussions about cryptography.” Indeed, the
popular economist Paul Krugman (2014, par. 1) has confessed that his own uneasiness with
Bitcoin stems from the fact that it is “intimately tied up with libertarian anti-government fantasies.”

Many, however, claim that these anti-government fantasies are unrealistic. More likely,
claims Kosner (2014), is that DAOs intermingle with other, more traditional, centralized organizations,
with each focusing on what it scales best to (Kosner, 2014). This point is echoed
by De Filippi and Mauro (2014, par. 22) who suggest that it is more plausible to see a future
in which “decentralized organizations with distributed models of governance, independent
legal systems, or perhaps even autonomously governed communities . . . compete with both
governments and corporations.”
(http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/692)


==Conclusion==

JZ Garrod:

"Outside of the real world issues that I have examined, there is good reason to question the
utopian narrative of the DAS. While the example of a washing machine ordering its own detergent
is sufficiently domestic to obscure other uses of this technology, it is important that
we recognize the destructive potential. With the coming of autonomous machines, we might
soon live in a world where drones hire other machines for military purposes, or where in-body
nano-technology autonomously negotiates with other technology outside your body (and
perhaps, without our consent). Indeed, prominent individuals in the science and tech industry
such as Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and Steve Wozniak, have already called for a ban on
“offensive autonomous weapons” (Asaro 2015, par. 1).24 There is certainly no denying the
potential of Bitcoin 2.0 tech, but it is this dark side that concerns me because it is necessarily
opaque and hard to predict. Taken to its logical conclusion, however, the DAS can only appear
as a utopia if one has totally expunged power and coercion from their analysis of social
reality.

This is not to suggest, however, that all supporters of the DAS share this libertarian vision.
There are many individuals who believe that Bitcoin 2.0 tech might better protect “the perimeter
of the commons” by “empowering commoners to decide their own fate” (Bollier 2015, par.
21; see also, Clippinger and Bollier 2014). While there is no techno fix to the inherent contradictions
of the capitalist mode of extraction, Bollier (2015, par. 22) notes that this technology
could be used to leapfrog “over some of the dysfunctional politics and bureaucratic treachery
that is rife in conventional institutions.” Furthermore, Bauwens and Kostakis (2014) note that
many of these technologies are able to scale up and down, making it possible to create distributed
collaborative organizations (or 'open co-operativism' as they call it) that could be
used to help smaller, regional areas protect their own commons—whether they be in the
form of healthcare, education, water, air, internet, knowledge, and so on.25 In other words,
we might be able to use DAOs to automatically manage common property resources—and
without many of the problems typically associated with those regimes.

While this world is still far off, I agree with Bollier (2015, par. 22) that it “is a rich horizon
worth exploring.” But I think that we can only explore this rich horizon if we expunge ourselves
(and the technology itself) from the type of thinking that views that state as an unnatural
outgrowth whose only function is to restrict our inherent propensity to exchange. This view
not only neglects that most technological innovation is state driven (Mazzucato 2014), but
that the state can also be used to protect certain things from commodification, thus guaranteeing
some of our freedoms against the tyranny of the market. 


Indeed, as Franklin (1999,100) notes,

- 'what turns the promised liberation into enslavement are not the products of technology
per se […] but the structure and infrastructures that are put in place to facilitate the use of
these products and to develop dependency on them'

To make certain that Bitcoin 2.0 tech provides the basis for progressive human development,
we must ensure that it is used to secure our social rights, as opposed to a means of avoiding
the state by escaping to digitally-mediated private spaces. Indeed, as Harvey (2015, par. 33)
notes, it is important that people on the left take this technology seriously to “make sure this
is not orchestrated as a right-wing gesture as happens with something like Bitcoin.” As he
continues: “Is there a way where we on the left can construct an alternative monetary system,
which is actually much more democratic and much more socially constructed?” Only
time will tell. But what is certain is that liberation will not come from a world subsumed by
exchange relations, as many DAS supporters currently claim. It is in this sense that we must,
as Franklin (1999, 133) writes, “protest until there is change in the structures and practices of
the real world of technology, for only then can we hope to survive as a global community.”
(http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/692)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Technology]]