'''Real Costs Firefox plug-in = awareness tool for carbone emissions data related to your travels'''

URL = http://therealcosts.com/


=Description=


""Real Costs" is a Firefox plug-in that inserts emissions data into travel related e-commerce websites.  The first version adds CO2 emissions information to airfare websites such as Orbitz.com , United.com, Delta.com , etc.  Following versions will work with car directions, car rental, and shipping websites. Think of it like the nutritional information labeling on the back of food... except for emissions.

The objective of the "Real Costs" is to increase awareness of the environmental impact of certain day to day choices in the life of the Internet user. By presenting this environmental impact information in the place where decisions are being made, it will hopefully create an impact on the viewer, encourage a sense of individual agency, start ongoing discussions, and provide a set of alternatives and immediate actions. In the process the user/viewer might even be transformed from passive consumer to engaged citizen.

Experience the project by installing the "Real Costs" plug-in into your Firefox application; the plug-in is available at http://TheRealCosts.com. Currently, this plug-in pulls the origination and destination information for each flight from the page, and then calculates and reinserts the CO2 produced. It compares the CO2 produced for that flight to making that trip by bus or train, and to the average CO2 produced per capita for the average US and world citizen. It is configured to work on the websites of the largest North American air carriers (major global air carriers are currently being added.) A list of these carriers and documentation of all scientific calculations is available on the project Wiki ( http://therealcosts.com/wiki).


=More Information=

Related projects: 

#Angie Waller's http://myfrienemies.com/
#Ben Engebreth's http://personal-kyoto.org/
#xtine hansen's http://delocator.net/ + http://yourneighborsbiz.com/


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Science]]


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]