'''* Book: he  Realm  of  Spirit  and  the  Realm  of  Caesar. By Nikolai  Berdyaev, 1952'''

URL = 


=Description=

"Nikolai  Berdyaev  categorized five historical periods on the relationship between humanity and nature. This meta-historical framework was articulated due to his concern about an obstructive imbalance between spirituality, materialism, and modern industrial technology. ... (It) ... predicts the transition  from  a  technical  industrial  society  to  one  based  around  autonomous  spheres  of  operation including the internet and artificial intelligence. The final stage of the fourth period, our current era, was predicted by Berdyaev to be marked by a new form of global subjugation – in  the  merging  of  technology  with  the  state  and  our  enslavement  to  our  own  discoveries.  Attention  is  also  given  to  a  future,  eschatological  fifth  period  in  which  Berdyaev  believed  a  spiritual   revolution   would   accompany   widespread   dissolution   of   state   power   and   the   emancipation of labor."


=Excerpt=

* [[Nikolas Berdyaev on the Five Historical Periods of Humanity, as Related to Nature and Technology]]


=Discussion=

By Alexei Anisin:

"Berdyaev projected that a later period of history would   feature   a   spiritual   awakening   that   would   see   the   divine   spiritual   characteristic  of  human  beings  come  to  fruition  during  a  spiritual  victory  over  age-old  governmental  institutions  and  concentrated  forms  of  coercive  social  organization. He referred to the latter as belonging to the Realm of Caesar.  This  projection  was  put  forward  in  his  last  book,  the  Realm  of   Spirit  and  the  Realm  of   Caesar(1952)  as  the  fifth  of  five  total  periods  of  the  history  of  human  beings’  relationship  to  the  cosmos.  Berdyaev  believed  that  what  had  been  referred to as “being” by existentialist philosophers of his epoch is not the “final depth of value,” and that a future spiritual transformation would enable human beings  to  experience  a  new  spiritual  life  (Berdyaev  1952,  18)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646) 


==Nicolas Berdyaev's role in the Cosmist movement==

Alexei Anisin:

"The  futuristic theme in the book under attention is where Berdyaev’s place in Russian Cosmism can be made intelligible. Cosmism was an intellectual movement that emerged in the late 19th century and was developed throughout the first third of the 20th century. Cosmists (the most prominent of which was Nikolai Fedorov) were in favor of technological development and viewed technology as a means to overcome  death  and  achieve  universal  salvation.  The  progress  of  science  was  viewed  to  be  indefinite,  and  with  science,  humans  can  become  immortal  and  even  reincarnate  old  historical  persons.  Eventually,  scientific  progress  would  enable human beings to be in control of the cosmos and to fulfil the biblical idea of resurrection. Today, Cosmism is gaining increasing ideological prevalence in technocratic  circles  in  Russia  (Faure  2021).  


Young  (2012)  defines  Russian  Cosmism in the following way, 

- ''“a highly controversial and oxymoronic blend of activist    speculation,    futuristic    traditionalism,    religious    science,    exoteric    esotericism, utopian pragmatism, idealistic materialism – higher magic partnered to higher mathematics” (Young 2012, 3).''

  
Russian Cosmism intersects between a heterogeneous collection of topics and in this “loose, diverse, and complex tendency,” (Young 2012, 11), Berdyaev’s work on the Russian soul (in his, the Russian Idea) is drawn upon by Young to describe Berdyaev’s eschatological ideas on the Russian soul and its position in achieving Russia’s  eschatological  destiny.  Interestingly  enough,  Young’s  (2012)  analysis  of  Russian  Cosmism  features  an  autobiographical  chapter  of  Berdyaev’s  life,  mentions his name 127 times throughout the book as a whole, but does not cite or engage with the Realm of Caesar and the Realm of Spirit and its five stages. This is significant because the historical time periods that are categorized in this work, especially the final (fifth) period, appear to share more similarity with Heidegger’s ideas   on   technology,   rather   than   with   the   technological   and   scientific   characteristics  shared  by  Cosmists.  

Young  (2012)  classifies  Berdyaev  into  the  “religious Cosmist” category. The religious type stands in contrast to the scientific type and figures as Tsiolkovsky or Chizhevsky, yet it would be farfetched to think that  Berdyaev  was  in  any  way  a  proponent  of  technological  advancement.  Similarly,  although  Young  acknowledges  Berdyaev  is  somewhat  different  than  other  Cosmists,  for  example,  in  explaining  the  collectivist  character  of  Russian Cosmists, Young notes that,  if  conflict  should  arise  between  the  interests  of  the  individual  particle  and  the  interests of the whole, the Cosmists would almost unanimously (Berdyaev being the possible dissident) prefer the interests of the whole. (Young 2012, 240). The issue in such a categorization is that there is too much evidence pointing to  Berdyaev’s  philosophy  as  being  incompatible  with  the  ultimate  aims  of  Cosmism.  In  Truth  and  Revelation  (1953),  Berdyaev  put  forward  a  number  of  additional  points  about  what  spiritual  transformation  and  an  era  that  will  be  dominated by spirit. The entire basis of Berdyaev’s projection of a future spiritual transformation is that it will take place in the demarcated realm of spirit, away from the realm of Caesar (Berdyaev 1953, 142). Specifically, “the era of the spirit can be nothing but a revelation of sense of community which is not merely social but also cosmic, not only a brotherhood of man, but a brotherhood of men with all cosmic life, with the whole creation” (Berdyaev 1953,149). This emancipatory transformation   will   free   human   beings   from   social   objectification   and   sociomorphisms   that   Berdyaev   identified   in   the   first   four   periods   of   his   framework.  

Berdyaev  most  likely  would  have  viewed  Cosmisist  ideas  of  space  colonization,  scientifically  prolonged  life  spans,  immortality,  and  resurrecting  figures of the past (beginning with Adam and Eve; Tucker 2017) to be a dangerous transgression  of  the  Realm  of  Caesar  because  such  attempts  constitute  human  efforts of replacing God.    Another  example  can  be  observed  in  Berdyaev’s  assessment  of  the  most  notable  of  Cosmists  (N.  Fedorov)  Berdyaev  described  Fedorov’s  framework  as  one that was undesirably projective because it shifted the sphere of existing to the sphere of necessity, into projectivism. This shift from what exists to what should exist is projectivism and can also be considered as constituting a brash form of normativity (Medzibrodszky 2014). While I will not problematize Young’s (2012) inclusion   of   who   can   be   considered   to   be   a   Russian   Cosmist   or   not   (Medzibrodszky  2014  identifies  several  inconsistencies  about  the  typology  as  a  whole),  it  is  worth  considering  that  Berdyaev  believed  the  spiritual  aspect  of  human  nature  would  take  precedence  over  the  technical  side,  specifically  that  spirituality  would  rid  society  of  technocratic  elites.  This  runs  counter  to  the  Cosmisists’  ideas  that  the  state  could  support  some  form  of  transformative  and  emancipative  future  in  which  science  and  technology  could  lead  to  universal  salvation  and  immortality.  Perhaps  the  most  powerful  statement  that  Berdyaev  put forward against scientific practice is as follows, [S]cientific  discoveries  and  technical  inventions  represent  the  terrible  danger  of  more  and  more  war.  The  chemists,  perhaps  quite  unselfishly,  discover  at  least  partial  truth,  but  the  result  has  been  the  atomic  bomb,  which  threatens  our  destruction. This goes on in the realm of Caesar. Salvation can come only by the light of integral Truth, which is revealed in the realm of Spirit. (Berdyaev 1952, 22)"

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646) 




=More information=

'''* Article: HUMANITY AND THE DISRUPTION OF THE COSMOS: HOW BERDYAEV FORESAW OUR RELIANCE ON MACHINES. By Alexei Anisin. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 17, no. 3, 2021''' 

URL = https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/916/1646

*In  his  final  work,  the  Realm  of  Spirit  and  the  Realm  of  Caesar  (1952),  Nikolai  Berdyaev  categorized five historical periods on the relationship between humanity and nature. This meta-historical framework was articulated due to his concern about an obstructive imbalance between spirituality, materialism, and modern industrial technology. This essay overviews the framework and considers it with relation to eras subsequent his passing. It finds that Berdyaev’s projection was not only theoretically plausible, but turned out to be remarkably accurate in predicting the transition  from  a  technical  industrial  society  to  one  based  around  autonomous  spheres  of  operation including the internet and artificial intelligence. The final stage of the fourth period, our current era, was predicted by Berdyaev to be marked by a new form of global subjugation – in  the  merging  of  technology  with  the  state  and  our  enslavement  to  our  own  discoveries.  Attention  is  also  given  to  a  future,  eschatological  fifth  period  in  which  Berdyaev  believed  a  spiritual   revolution   would   accompany   widespread   dissolution   of   state   power   and   the   emancipation of labor."

[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]