Video via http://vimeo.com/38500767#


=Description=

'''1.'''

"REAL ESTATE 4 RAN$OM outlines a genuine alternative to the global property speculation that forced so many into debt.

Doubling the pressure, the tax game has become just that, with tax havens a favoured option for the wealthy.

The result - we are taxing the wrong things, causing more problems whilst bankrupting once proud economies. A systemic change is essential if we are to avoid these damaging boom-bust-bailouts.

Co-Directors - Gavin Emmanuel (foregroundmedia.com/) & Karl Fitzgerald."


2.


"Real Estate 4 Ransom is a documentary about global property speculation and its impact on the economy. Real Estate 4 Ransom considers the changing motivations behind property investment and challenges the notion that the Global Financial Crisis was caused by bank lending alone.



Shot over 5 years, the film focuses an economics lens on many of the big picture issues world politics are grappling to deal with. The 40 min documentary looks at whether genuine freedom has been delivered by the democratic system.

We investigate the inefficiencies of the economic system and the impact this has on potential homeowners and small businesses. The documentary argues that with a simpler tax system, entrepreneurs have a better chance to succeed and the average Australian has a better chance of owning their own home.

What role did real estate play in the crashing of the global economy?

Co-Directors Karl Fitzgerald and Gavin Emmanuel have crafted a documentary which features high profile economists, international guests, local homebuyers and renters, all who discuss their take on the state of Australia’s economy.

Animations, music and a little humour are used to make economics interesting."
(http://realestate4ransom.com/film/)


=More Information=


#Footage - much from the vimeo community :)
#More details - realestate4ransom.com/film/
#Facebook - facebook.com/realestate4ransom



[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Economics]]