

=Description=

Frans van der Reep:

'‘Reality pull’ means leaving key
knowledge in the heads of your employees and
simply facilitating the process that brings the real
customer request in contact with the person who
can provide the solution.

Instead of starting with the internal structure of
the organisation and the ‘schedule push’, the
process begins with the competent employee and
relating him or her to the actual customer request.
The Internet links the customer directly to the
supplier of the solution, which means that you can
lose the coordinating mid-office and back-office
that makes the organisation rigid and expensive -
and you can use much cheaper software."
(http://www.inholland.nl/NR/rdonlyres/74EDE207-BD67-4D80-AC2B-527F52DA5225/0/EuropeanRetailDigest.pdf)


=Discussion=

Frans van der Reep:

"A typical example of old school ‘schedule push’
thinking is the Work Order through which the
manager or a central system allocates tasks each
day. In theory, the employee is being used
effectively but to get to this point the organisation
has already put in a lot of time and money to bring
all the information to one place, the back office,
and then a lot more time and money to create a
central schedule that divides the work amongst all
the people in the most efficient way according to
the system. Then it takes more time and money to
put the schedules right when, as usually happens,
the actual work had to be done differently, when
the customer is not satisfied by a standard
response. We all know the stories about the high
costs of the implementation of a central ERP
system and the way employees solve the problems
when the reality does not fit the system ‘ideal’.

But the Internet allows us to replace all this
expensive complexity with a much simpler ‘reality
pull’. Instead of guiding all the information
through a central system, we just allow the
employee to pick and choose in the same way they
buy groceries at the supermarket. The result of
this is that it is no longer the manager who
determines what needs to be done; it is the
customer who is making the choice. The work
order is replaced by a marketplace where the
employee can select his own work. This means
that an employee will coordinate and make his
own agreements with the customer without the
involvement of a back-office."
(http://www.inholland.nl/NR/rdonlyres/74EDE207-BD67-4D80-AC2B-527F52DA5225/0/EuropeanRetailDigest.pdf)


=Example=

Frans van der Reep:

"For example, Thuiszorg Stad Utrecht - TSU, a
Healthcare organisation in the Netherlands, has
implemented this approach for its workforce of
approximately 500 people, nursing very different
patients who stay in their own homes. They have
to travel to the homes and on location they can
exactly see what is necessary. In the old days the
employee would get his weekly schedule on
Monday morning at the office. In the new
situation, a team receives a box with the work to
be done that week. The team is responsible for the
nursing of their group of patients within a limited
time. The members of the team (the nurses) pick
their nursing jobs from that box by a smart phone
linked to the central system. The system gives a
signal when it detects that a patient will not be
nursed in time. When the nurse has finished the
job they give the information about time and other
remarks to the system by the smart phone and
everyone, colleges and manager, and see the
results and the remarks. So the system and the
manager can control the jobs afterwards. The
employee plans the activities according the needs
of the reality. And he can improve on a central
system. It is the professionals who can interpret
the reality in the best way and act as necessary
when he or she is on the customer’s side.
Besides the possibility to react based on reality,
there is another benefit. Employees who are in
control of their work have a higher level of
personal commitment and are more concerned
with the quality of what they produce. This means,
for example, that if the work takes longer than
expected to complete, they will more likely stay to
finish the job. In a time where competition is
growing and organisations need to be more and
more customer-focused, this direct interaction
between the employee and the customer could be
a great benefit.

In the TSU project, the employees’ satisfaction
has increased because they have more control
over their own work. And the clincher is that
management can send the bill on Friday afternoon
at the end of the same week whereas in the old
days it took an average of three weeks to reconcile
the planned schedule with the reality. And TSU is
making over 50% cost savings in the back-office.
The core of ‘reality pull’ is that an organisation no
longer plans ahead. They eliminate all the expense
and complexity of the intervening systems and
react to the actual demand."
(http://www.inholland.nl/NR/rdonlyres/74EDE207-BD67-4D80-AC2B-527F52DA5225/0/EuropeanRetailDigest.pdf)


=Source=

* Article: From Schedule Push to Reality Pull: Reality Pull prefers Retail. By Frans van der Reep. European Retail Digest.

URL = http://www.inholland.nl/NR/rdonlyres/74EDE207-BD67-4D80-AC2B-527F52DA5225/0/EuropeanRetailDigest.pdf


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]