

'''* Article: Interest Rates and Climate Change: Realigning our Incentives through the Power of the Commons. By James Bernard Quilligan. Kosmos Journal, Winter 2010.'''

URL = http://www.kosmosjournal.org/kjo2/library/kosmos-articles/interest-rates-and-climate-change.shtml 


=Excerpt=

'''1. Part 1: The Problem'''

Many local communities collaborate in
sharing the burden of resource protection. Whether their commons
are traditional (rivers, forests, indigenous culture) or emerging
(energy, intellectual property, internet), people are successfully
managing these common resources. But the failure of the 2009
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) discussions
underscores the need for a global framework that allocates the use
of the atmosphere and introduces incentives necessary to sustain
our natural life support systems. In searching for answers, society
is trapped in a false dichotomy: we believe that only markets and
governments are capable of providing solutions for climate
change, even though these institutions were never designed to internalize
the costs of negative externalities like carbon emissions.

There is another way to solve collective problems of this scale and
jurisdiction. The emerging framework of the commons brings the
monoculture of the Market State— the modern economic and governmental
superstructure—into sharp focus and provides the analytical
tools and predictive power to penetrate the deep dichotomies
of its operations and policies. The commons illustrate, for
example, how the major policy responses to global heating—cap
and trade (via the private sector) and carbon taxes (via the public sector)—
are more about the ideological debate on how much government
regulation should be permitted in the market economy than
about climate change itself. The commons reveal that this supposed
rivalry between market and state policies, which dominates
our politics and news headlines, is merely a procedural issue, diverting
attention away from the essential crisis of our shared atmosphere.
Both cap and trade and carbon tax are deeply flawed
because they fail to comprehend the very thing they are trying to
address—the essential value of the sky to the people of Earth.

…

These policy proposals (or some mixture of them) are presented
as the only options. But from a commons perspective, the narrowing
of climate policy to tradable permits and taxes presents us with
false choices, reflecting a profound dichotomy in the Market State:
an epistemological confusion between price and value. Carbon trading
and taxation both adhere to the behaviorist/structuralist principle
that truth can be found only in people’s language and
behavior—not through their mental capacities or intersubjectivity.

Both assume that the only way the world economy can integrate
lower carbon emissions into market calculations is by
punishing the bad behavior of emitting greenhouse gases into the
atmosphere, and rewarding the good behavior of reducing emissions
and conserving energy. Either way, through trading or taxing,
behaviorism would become the basis of a new policy
framework created exclusively to reduce carbon emissions, as
though CO2 were Earth’s most significant economic resource.

…

We must reexamine the claim that incorporating higher prices for
CO2 emissions into our activities is the only way to change human
behavior. Price may be a proximate cause of climate change, but it
is not the root cause. Price pertains only to the economy—not to
the greater flow of natural resources from the environment,
through the economy, and back to the environment as waste. The
price system cannot express the true risks and costs of extracting
and burning fossil fuels because it does not reflect the collective
value of our finite biophysical system. This is why global heating
will force the entire economic structure to transform. Without a
universal agreement on emissions stabilization based on an integrated
understanding of people’s needs for a system of value in
harmony with the biosphere, the Market State will continue to
generate ecologically and socially distorting subsidies and debt-based
financing, denying the difference between objective prices in
the marketplace and the subjective value (at least potentially) expressed
through our currencies. The political refusal to differentiate
price from value—the legacy of behaviorism, structuralism and
linguistic determinism—is creating an institutional and policy crisis
in the Market State. We know that market failure—the inability
to absorb the indirect costs of goods and services, value
ecological services, and maintain sustainable-yield thresholds—
has already caused the breakdown of the economy’s natural support
systems. Why then should we expect the market to solve the
very problems it created without restructuring the economy itself?

…

The precept time is money has
led society to speed up the physical flows of production, income
and consumption of commodities that deplete resources and destroy
the commons. It has also caused the Market State to slow
policy efforts to cap its stock of wealth, resulting in the underproduction
and under-consumption of commodities that conserve
resources and protect the commons. When social progress and
life are valued in increments of linear time and people’s lifestyles
shift into a faster rhythm, it’s easy to forget how the greater ecological
system of Earth, of which the economic system is simply a
part, renews itself at a much slower pace than interest rates. So, in
terms of green financing, it is not only the carbon price that is
problematic: the financial and monetary mechanism of interest
compounding through time will not support a self-renewing atmosphere.
Conversely, the carbon bubble is also a banking bubble: state
capitalism will not sustain its monetary reserve value by continually
multiplying the debt of a planet whose biological, chemical and physical
resources are constantly being withdrawn. The compulsion for
endless economic growth is smothering this planet. By continually
inflating financial assets through the expansion of public and private
debt and the relentless conversion of our commons into
money, we are borrowing time from the biosphere at punitive rates
of interest—and time is literally running out.


'''Part 2: The Solution'''

SO, WHAT THEN IS A COMMONS-BASED SOLUTION?: CAP AND RENT


While most of us are probably more aware of the prices of products
and services than the value of our currencies, the monetary
commons are still an essential part of our lives. Money provides us
with extraordinary benefit by storing the value of our labor, measuring
our purchasing power and holding the aspirations of our
families and communities. Yet under the present system—where
interest rates are the cost of renting the use of private money—we
are prevented from managing the value of our shared resources.


But what if we had such power? If credit creation were under democratic
control, money could be spent into circulation without incurring
interest by systematically transforming debt into co-credits
across all sectors of society. A group of scientists, economists, environmentalists
and other experts could continuously update an
index of the sustainability linkages among the various commons,
establishing a relative value for these co-credits. This
would express the scarcity and replenishability of the world’s key
resources through a sustainability rate—a real-time measure reflecting
the capacity of the global commons to provide and maintain
inclusive wealth for global society (see Kosmos: “People
Sharing Resources”, fall/winter 2009; and “The Commons of
Mind, Life and Matter”, spring/summer 2010). Money circulation
would thus support the production of goods and services in
response to social needs, ecological sustainability and energy
security, rather than the demand for commodities and profits
which must grow perpetually through debt-based currencies and
external prices in the marketplace.

The catalyst for this new kind of management and valuation of
natural and social assets is emerging from the third sector of society—
the commons. When the people of a resource community
organize, develop a social charter and create a commons trust,
they start from the premise of people’s—not the market’s—needs.
The commons trust is a legal and fiduciary entity for the preservation
and management of the resources inherited from past generations
on behalf of present and future generations. The trust
maintains these resources within the limits of their ecological capacity
through the principle of cap and rent: capping the capital
stock of common resources and renting the flow of matter and
energy through production, income and consumption.
First, the trust decides on a cap to conserve its common resources
by determining whether its capital stocks are maintaining or increasing
their value continuously so that their preservation value
does not decline over time. This requires a highly credible reporting
system to ensure that the cap is based on accurate, transparent
and verified sets of data. Second, when the cap is in place
and the preservation of resources is secured for the future, the
trust determines how much of the remaining resources may be
rented. The trust sets a rental fee on the apportioned resource
which is collected at the point of extraction or production. This
fee, denominated in co-credits, may be assessed for depletable
commons such as oil, minerals, technological hardware, aquifers
or the atmosphere. Private businesses can then extract, produce
and distribute these uncapped resources for profit. A percentage
of the rents collected by the trust is also paid in taxes to the state
and turned into social cohesion (or adaptation) funds for people
whose quality of life is negatively impacted by the extraction or production of a resource, and resource restoration (or mitigation)
funds for the repair or regeneration of these resources.
Hence, the long-term wealth guaranteed by commons trusts is
generated through the sustainability or preservation value of the
common assets they are managing, not through the potential financial
revenue of those commons. Unlike the interest rate, which
measures changes in the value of assets, the sustainability rate expresses
the value of changes in assets. This is a key distinction. Instead
of emphasizing the distribution of income and consumption
through greater quantities of output and consumption, the sustainability
metric stresses the distribution of the stock of wealth by ensuring
that renewable resources are created at the same rate as the
depletion of non-renewables. This will result in a wholesale transformation
of values, harmonizing the interests of the users of capital
with those of the producers of capital, and realigning the incentives
for both public and private investment toward zero-interest
energy sources and away from debt-fueled overproduction, overconsumption
and CO2 emissions.


'''3. Part 3: the larger context, i.e. commons-oriented policy-making'''

'''Intergenerational Wealth: Toward the Commons Economy'''


Nations are deeply divided over how to manage the global commons,
particularly the decarbonization of the atmosphere. Rich
states refuse to make major emissions cuts until large developing
nations like China, India, and Brazil also take radical steps. Poor
states argue that the industrial world, which has been producing
emissions for centuries, should provide the resources to help them
grow economically while they adapt to climate change and minimize
their own emissions. Yet the differences between rich and
poor nations cannot be resolved on the same terms that gave rise
to them. Our predominant vision of social justice—adaptation to
cope with the impacts of climate change through investment, aid
and technology—will not be realized through the current economic
structure. Adaptation to address present impacts and relieve
human misery and suffering is vital for obvious reasons; but
the catalyst that is needed to unify nations and transform the economic
system is mitigation—measures for limiting future damage
from climate change.

The 1987 Brundtland Commission Report called for “development
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” Thus far, the
world community has viewed sustainable development through
the lens of neo-liberalism and progress has been slight. But fully
honoring the principle that the future has value to the people who will
live in the future would adjust our fundamental patterns of economic
activity toward a more holistic system that will also benefit the
present generation. Ensuring that people in the far future have a standard
of living on a par with our own requires a new kind of international
planning based, not on geopolitical or corporate objectives,
but on global resource distribution relative to population growth
and ecological carrying capacity. Giving the same weight to future
generations’ welfare as we give to those now living obliges us to
increase the present wealth per capita—and this will transform the
balance of trade, finance and aid for the current generation.


But as long as our global plan for the well-being of future generations
is merely a quest to get prices right in the present, the value of
the commons will continue to be suppressed by the market. Far from
presenting a comprehensive alternative to climate change, carbon
emission permits and taxes are incomplete measures of the
sources of human incentives and collective worth within the
greater biosphere. Renewable energy and technology are essential,
but today’s green economics is merely another expression of the
market’s misalignment of incentives and risk, since green investment
is almost entirely dependent on subsidies, protectionism and
debt-financing, which shift social incentives only at the margin.
Nor is it adequate to address the problem of climate change by
discounting the future—spending more money now and living
with less global heating, or spending less money now and living
with more global heating. Mitigation to reduce global heating must
be measured, not by the scarcity-based instruments of interest or
bond rates, but through a value that balances claims of future wealth
with the economy’s power to generate that wealth sustainably today.


In a commons economy, the cost of failing to address climate
change is viewed as a function of the sustainability of the resources
that back our currencies. Thus, in computing the costs and benefits
of climate mitigation for the future, it is money itself—the
medium of exchange between buyers and sellers—that creates the
incentives necessary for the global adjustment of value. With a
commons reserve currency issued in co-credits, where the relative
value of present and future goods arises from the commons as
a collective expression of nature, society and culture, signals about
the actual scarcity of resources and the cost of environmental
damage and social disparities are conveyed directly through our
money. When global sustainability is expressed through the value of
currency, each of us will have much fuller and immediate realization
of the potential impact of our purchasing power in spending, saving
or investing, making it worth less to do ecological and social harm,
and worth more to be ecologically and socially restorative. Prices
will find the right level only after money is properly valued, breaking
the endless-growth imperative, balancing the interests of the
future with those of the present, and actualizing our incentives
through nature, society and the economy. To get prices right, we
need to get money right. This means getting energy right. And to
do that, we must first get the commons right."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]