
URL = http://reallyopenuniversity.org/

=Description=

Introduction:

"The Really Open University exists everywhere, it will not be a one-off event, but an ongoing process. It will be non-hierarchical, making a start at breaking down traditional student-teacher dichotomies. We wish to engage with other communities in Leeds, and beyond. This will form part of a transformation of everyday life.

We wish to create a university where people have a passion to get up and come in and engage in learning and knowledge production. We wish to break the process whereby education and knowledge production is linked to capitalist reproduction rather than towards the general social-good.

We wish to link up with other social struggles in Leeds (as well as globally), and transform the university from an insular self-serving institution to one that better serves the needs of everyone in Leeds. To this end we cannot let the struggle against cuts remain a university-based struggle. The current situation at the University of Leeds is just a window into the wider world – not just the cuts, far more than that, the mode of life they are based upon.

Part of the process of resisting the cuts and the neoliberal model of education is about demystifying the university, showing it for what it really is. The university is fundamentally based on a lie, that we will go out into the world and get great jobs. Michael Arthur (VC) is preparing the university based on political model, neoliberalism, which hasn’t got a future.

The ROU sets out to change the expectations that people have of university life, and by extension the rest of our lives. The multiple crises we face (higher education, neoliberalism, climate change), open a crack for other narratives, a long-standing refrain of the alterglobalisation movement was that ‘another world is possible’. We wish to reflect that here at the university, another university is possible. To this end we can see the university as a form of laboratory of subversion, where we can begin to collaborate and create collective solutions, asking questions about how we really want to live our lives.

The praxis of strike/occupy/transform is a form of direct action – directly making the changes we would like to see. We see this as one of the most empowering ways of engaging in politics. For too long university politics has been stale and boring. We wish to engage in creative-resistive tactics that reclaim space and put it to different ends, for example flashmobs, capture the flag and public assemblies. Through this process we hope to transform subjectivities. We wish to engage in affirmative and positive struggle, living life in different ways, even if it is only for a short time. To this end the ROU will be a series of Interventions, info different ways of living.

We want education to be more organic and more critical, more holistic, including the whole body, not just the mind. It is amazing what we can do differently in different contexts, using different parameters."
(http://reallyopenuniversity.org/)


Amy Clancy:

"The Really Open University (ROU) emerged towards the end of 2009 and represents an ongoing process of exploration and experimentation regarding the functioning of the university and its role in society. It is comprised of people from within and without the university who desire the realisation of a free and empowering education system where creative and critical thought is fostered. Having perceived the contemporary university system as increasingly being organised according to a self-perpetuating economic logic, one which advocates the reduction of knowledge to a commodity useful only to the extent it can provide returns on investment, the ROU does not wish to defend the university but radically transform the very rationale that currently dominates higher education.

To be clear, there is no alternative ROU product being peddled, nor any desire to compete with existing institutions through the creation of a new model institution. The ROU does not intend to prescribe an alternative system. Rather, the ROU seeks to understand the university and its role in society, to explore ways and means of reclaiming pedagogical space and the quest for knowledge towards the betterment of society and ultimately, to facilitate a multitude of transformations. To this end, the ROU has embarked upon a process of understanding and challenging the university in its present state by opening up spaces to critique, intervene and re-imagine.

Significantly, the ROU does not simply want to offer a critique of the university but to create dynamic examples of knowledge relations. So far, the ROU has hosted a three day event, Re-imagine the University, at the University of Leeds; collaboratively produced a journal by the same name with the Roundhouse Group; reclaimed space in empty retail units to host open discussions; and, spoken out against direct attacks within the University of Leeds through the publication of the regular newsletter, the Sausage Factory.

While the ROU has no blueprints for a future system, it has published three ‘reforms’ that place the university on a new trajectory with human and ecological welfare at the heart of knowledge sharing and research. Imagine the Abolition of all Fees and the Institution of a Living Wage; a Debt Jubilee for all past students; and, the Abolition of the Research Excellence Framework and the National Student Survey…. These ‘reforms’ are not the answer, but by explicitly targeting those factors, which encourage the development of economic rationality within higher education, they attempt to reclaim the production and dissemination of knowledge from an economic logic that restricts the potential of knowledge itself. They represent the ROU’s belief that we need to move beyond the reactionary defence of higher education and into a realm of progressive transformation."
(http://stirtoaction.wordpress.com/2011/08/15/dont-defend-the-university-transform-it/)

=More Information=

* see the article: [[Towards a University of the Common with the Really Open University]]

'''* Article: Pusey, A., (2017). Towards a University of the Common: Reimagining the University in Order to Abolish It with the Really Open University. Open Library of Humanities. 3(1), p.13.''' 

URL = https://olh.openlibhums.org/article/10.16995/olh.90/


[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Movements]]