
'''= European research project into [[Resource Efficient Business Models]].'''

URL = http://www.rebus.eu.com


=Description=

"Over the last couple of years, 30 different
organisations in the UK and Netherlands have been piloting new REBMs with the
support and expertise of REBus.

Why? Because the rate at which we consume raw materials is unsustainable and is
costing both the planet and organisations. European manufacturing firms already
spend around 40% of their total costs on raw materials. Unless business models
change, growing scarcity and volatility will have a substantial effect on business
profitability and resilience.

From Argos’s UK wide Gadget Trade-in Service, to ProRail’s circular procurement of office
furniture for the company’s new office in Utrecht in the Netherlands; from Globechain’s
online re-use platform, to IT4Kids re-use collections in the community, the innovative
pilot projects are wide-ranging but all designed to benefit the organisation, consumers,
and the environment.

The 30 pilot project case studies are being published on www.rebus.eu.com, and by
sharing the successes and lessons learned it is hoped that businesses and organisations
will be inspired to take action by adopting innovative business models and contributing
to a more circular economy.

Steve Creed, Director of Business Programmes at WRAP, the lead partner on the REBus
project, says: “We consume three planets worth of raw materials, which cannot
continue. With increased demand and diminishing resources, poorly designed products
wasted in landfill, a lack of information in the supply chain and among consumers, it is
now critical that collective action is taken globally.

“We need to become more resource efficient and find innovative solutions to combat
the global resource crisis. This is what REBus is all about, and the successful pilot
projects show how this can work in practice.”
(http://www.rebus.eu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/REBus-press-release_Case-studies-published_FINAL.pdf)


=More Information=

* access to case studies via http://www.rebus.eu.com/resources/case-studies/


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Ecology]]