
'''= " facilitates the development of a co-owned network of open co-operatives through ownership transfer, network building and co-operative accumulation".'''

URL = http://www.reciproka.cc/

Project under construction by Janosch Sbeih & Jérôme Birolini.


=Description=

"While several organizations already provide services for workers and communities to gain ownership over productive assets, we believe that a more systematic approach is required to create an ethical and federated counter-economy able to perpetuate itself on its own. 

'''A network of mutually-owned co-operatives federated around a common accumulation mechanism might just do the trick to instigate a self-propelling co-operative system.'''


'''* Reclaiming the commons'''

Traditional co-operatives tend to adopt the logic of their market environment by focusing on individual organisational gain rather than the build-up of an integrated, ethical economy. Reciproka functions as a structure to align interests by mutualising ownership of each co-operative under a common trusteeship legal structure.


'''* Reclaiming finance'''

To turn this federated coalition into a self-propelling co-operative system, it needs a mechanism to accumulate value for further expansion. Therefore, a share of each co-operative’s profits is pooled to feed a common internal investment fund designed to grow this ethical entrepreneurial coalition through further conversions."


=Characteristics=

"HERE IS HOW IT WORKS

Reciproka is a system that facilitates the development of a self-propelling, open co-operative movement through ownership transfer support services, network building and co-operative accumulation.


==Ownership transfer==

Reciproka acquires enterprises from retiring owners on behalf of their employees to transition them into “open co-operatives”. While ownership of each co-operative is mutually held between all of Reciproka’s members, governance of the individual enterprises remains with their workers.


==Network building==

Technical and process support is provided to the newly-formed open co-operatives via an internal team of mentors to help them adopt sustainable business models and integrate into a co-operative value chain network.


==Co-operative accumulation==

Reciproka pays its operational and financial expenses, finances new acquisitions of additional co-operatives and pays out an increasing income to its investing members by mutualising a share of each co-operative’s profits for a commonly held fund.

Financial and technical support facilitate individual enterprise conversions. Network building services and common ownership unite the co-operative ventures into a federated whole. The co-operative accumulation mechanism is the missing piece which makes the co-operative system integrated, competitive and financially attractive for outsiders to join."


=Status=

"We are currently in the early stages of designing Reciproka and building up alliances for collaboration once we start operating. 


If you are an experienced facilitator of co-operative ownership transfer, organisational transition, interested in funding Reciproka and/or want to discuss further possibilities to collaborate, please contact us at:

* jerome@reciproka.cc

* janosch@reciproka.cc


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]