
'''* Article: Reconstructing a public economics: markets, states and societies. Michael A. Bernstein.
real-world economics review, issue no. 84, 2018'''

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue84/Bernstein84.pdf [https://rwer.wordpress.com/comments-on-rwer-issue-no-84/ comments]

Part of a special issue on the same theme of 'public economics'


=Abstract=

"Liberating contemporary economic analysis from the straitjacket of mainstream neoclassical
theory is the animating theme of the essays assembled in this special number of the RealWorld
Economics Review (RWER). The authors of the works assembled here are all
committed to the idea that what is regarded by traditional economic theory as a set of
exogenous forces framed and deployed from outside the market mechanisms that are the
focus of the discipline – namely, the public sector – is in fact an integral agent that directly
affects the very issues and phenomena neoclassical theory claims to explain. Indeed, it is the
very failure of traditional economic thinking to account for the “public economy” in any
systematic and meaningful fashion that prevents it from explaining how societies actually
produce goods and services and, in compensation, constructs inapt and futile framings, such
as “market failures,” to explain why governments exist.

In contradistinction to prevailing doctrine, the following articles strive to reconstruct a public
economics by embedding the public sector intrinsically within economic models. Rather than
separate the “public sector” from economics, understanding collective action as something
distinct from the economy, a public economics views the entire economic system – the
“macroeconomy” as a whole – as comprised of multiple economic systems: of markets, of
public activities, and of domestic interactions."

=More information=

*  The public economy: understanding government as a producer. A reformation of public economics. By June Sekera. real-world economics review, issue no. 84, 2018

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue84/Sekera84.pdf

* see also: The [[Role of People-Responsive Bureaucracy in a Robust Public Economy]]


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Articles]]