
'''Article: Douwe van der Ploeg, Jan(2010) 'The peasantries of the twenty-first century: the commoditisation debate revisited', Journal of Peasant Studies, 37: 1, 1 — 30'''

URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03066150903498721


=Abstract=

"This article examines the re-emergence of the peasantry. It argues that farming is
increasingly being restructured in a peasant-like way. This restructuring is an
actively constructed response to the agrarian crisis that has grown out of five
decades of state-induced modernisation and is currently being accelerated by the
financial crisis and the generalised economic depression. Through a process of
restructuring that is both multi-dimensional and multi-level farmers are
reconstituting themselves into peasants (although important features of operating
as peasants have never been completely absent), a process that is occurring as
much in developed countries as in developing ones. At more or less the same time
theoretical concepts of the peasantry and the peasant way of farming are being
rediscovered and revisited. Earlier debates are highly relevant for understanding
the current situation of a generalised crisis and the responses that are being
triggered among farmers. The rediscovery of the peasant as theoretically
meaningful concept reflects the socio-material re-emergence of the peasantry,
and helps to explain the particular features of this process. The article concludes
by arguing that the reconstitution of the peasantry is strategic to future world
food security."



=Excerpts=


Jan Douwe van der Ploeg:

"In this respect the most telling reversal is that at present (due to the financial and economic
crises) relatively small scale, peasant-like farms are generating incomes that are often
superior to those of far larger, entrepreneurial farms.2 But such apparent paradoxes
are not restricted to this moment. They have been germinating for a long time and
provide a collective memory that increasingly orients farmers away from the
entrepreneurial trajectory and into the re-creation of a peasant trajectory.

Several decades ago, Harriss rightly asserted that ‘the process of commoditization
. . . or the linking of rural household producers with capitalist production in
various ways . . . is perhaps the dominant process of change in contemporary
agrarian societies’ (1982, 22). We are now again witnessing a major process of
change: a complex and sometimes contradictory re-adjustment of the balance
between commodity and non-commodity relations, in which specific forms of decommoditisation
play a key role.


==From Land to Ecological Capital==

"the beginning of the twenty-first century represents a clear
rupture: land is back again as major issue. This is evident in the way that land is once
again becoming the object of peasants’ struggles (Martinez-Alier 1995, 140) and of
‘land-grabbing’ (van der Ploeg 2006, 425–37, Borras 2009, 9). More than either of
these, it is also evident in the way in which land is now being considered as ecological
capital. Farming is again being understood, and practised, as co-production: the
interaction and mutual transformation of human actors and living nature. Farming
is not only based on ‘economic exchanges’, but also on ‘ecological exchange’ (Toledo
1992). The interaction with nature is not unimportant, nor marginal. A noncommoditised
exchange with nature allows the building of an important line
of defence: the more that farming is grounded on ecological capital the lower
the monetary costs of production will be. Ecological capital, if cared for, also
allows for patterns of growth that are independent of the main markets for
factors of production and non-factor inputs.

In synthesis: peasant farming moved from a situation in which the centrality of
land was self-evident (albeit politically highly contested) towards a situation in which
it is becoming central again, i.e. as ecological capital.6 While in this respect the
centrality represents a major continuity, there is also a major dissimilarity since what
was once a taken-for-granted-reality now emerges as the outcome of purposeful and
knowledgeable behaviour. In the past peasants were obliged to use their land as
ecological capital. There simply was no alternative. Today there are many,
sometimes seductive alternatives. In the new context, using (and further developing)
the land as ecological capital is increasingly a choice that reflects agency and
preference. The new peasants are not obliged to do so; they opt for it, even if it often
implies a tough struggle with the socio-technical regimes in which they operate.
Through revitalising and further unfolding of their ecological capital they both use
and enlarge their autonomy.

This major change, which has been theoretically elaborated in agro-ecology
(Altieri 1990, Sevilla Guzman 2007),7 is one of the main ways in which the
peasantries of the twenty-first century are reconstituting themselves.

It also helps to differentiate the new peasants from agrarian
entrepreneurs. Today’s peasants tend to ground farming, as much as possible, on
ecological capital, whereas agrarian entrepreneurs primarily develop their farming
activities by extending commodity flows. Entrepreneurial farming replaces natural
growth factors (e.g. soil biology, manure, varieties and breeds adapted to local ecosystems,
and multiple cropping as a means to suppress pests and plant diseases) by
artificial growth factors obtained from the market. When ‘living nature’ enters the
process of production it does so as a commodity.8 It is acquired through market
transactions and its use is governed by the logic of the market. In contrast to
agrarian entrepreneurs, the peasants of the twenty-first century put ecological capital
centre stage and actively unfold, strengthen, and use it. They reground farming on
nature, as Caporal and Costabeber (2007) describe for Brazil. This choice does not
imply a decline in production. On the contrary, it often augments productivity,
efficiency, income levels, and sustainability."


==From subsistence to self-provisioning==

"The classical peasant
household primarily produced to satisfy its own nutritional needs and only the
surplus was marketed. Today, however, the concept of self-provisioning embraces
the provisioning of all the resources required for the unit of production (as opposed
to the unit of consumption). In the past the supply of non-agrarian resources (i.e.
industrial and financial resources) was very limited, as was access to the relevant
markets. Hence, it was taken for granted that farm units provided themselves with
the objects of labour and instruments that they needed. This was either done directly
or through socially regulated exchange.

In peasants’ daily lives self-provisioning and resistance are closely tied together.
From the late 1980s onwards self-provisioning again gained significance in reshaping
considerable parts of the agricultural landscape. This was largely a response to the
decline of the previous mercantile industrial regime and the rise of the ‘imperial’ or
‘corporate food regime’ (van der Ploeg 2008, 256, McMichael 2009, 148) – a change
that led to a considerable sharpening of the ‘squeeze on agriculture’. Faced with this
squeeze many farmers responded by developing self-provisioning. In practice this
brings about an often considerable cost-reduction, but in a way which is
diametrically opposed to the entrepreneurial script (in which cost-reduction is a
function of scale increase). Self-provisioning (i.e. reducing dependency on external
resources while simultaneously enlarging and improving the stock of internal
resources, including ecological capital) is radically different: it reduces monetary
costs while overall levels of production are maintained or even slightly improved.
European farmers often describe this strategy as ‘farming economically’ (Kinsella
et al. 2002, van der Ploeg 2000); in developing countries it is often referred to as ‘low
external input agriculture’ (Reijntjes et al. 1992). Self-provisioning augments and
sustains autonomy as a central feature of both farm and farming.

Comparative research in seven European countries10 showed that 60 percent of
professional farmers are actively engaged in cost-reduction through greater self-provisioning.

In recent years European farmers have actively begun to reshape pluriactivity by
reallocating parts of their ‘plural activities’ into the heart of their farms. Currently
this is known as ‘multifunctionality’. From an analytical point of view, the
development of different expressions of multifunctionality (e.g. energy production,
agro-tourism, on-farm processing, direct selling, management of nature and
landscape, care-farms, etc.) composes yet another circuit of reproduction: it allows
the peasants of the twenty-first century to reproduce their existence in new and
original ways that are often very resilient."


==From partial integration to actively constructed distantiation==

"If ‘the chief unifying and distinguishing characteristic of the peasantry is partial
integration into markets’ (Friedmann 1980, 166), then from an analytical point of
view, a considerable proportion of European farmers should be viewed as
peasants.18 Their mode of farming is probably patterned in a far more peasant-like
way than that of most peasants in developing countries.

There are many different mechanisms that farmers can use to govern, adapt, and
change the balance of commodity and non-commodity relations. Augmenting self-provisioning
in, and of, the farm, and building upon ecological capital have already
been discussed. A wide range of social and material resources can be decommoditised,
especially when co-operation and reciprocity extend the process beyond
single farm households.

Sharing specific and expensive machinery
among groups of farmers brings down the monetary costs per farm (and through
reciprocity they might be lowered further) thereby significantly reducing the
penetration of commodity relations into the core of peasant agriculture.23 Hence,
‘use-value repeatedly takes precedence over exchange-value in the peasant’s
consideration’ (Shanin 1973, 70), which in turn makes partial integration into
markets into a distinctive feature.


==From fixed regularities and routines to co-production==

"the agro-ecological approach,
which basically views agriculture as co-production between man and living nature.
Growing (as a co-activity of humans and nature) is seen as central. Co-production
represents the ongoing combination, interaction, and mutual transformation of
social and material resources which constantly differentiates and transforms
agriculture.

Co-production feeds
back on the resources on which it is built. Farming is not simply based on ecological
capital, but also entails feedback effects through which ecological capital is unfolded
and improved in different ways. Co-production is intrinsically dynamic.

When the politico-economic
arrangements upon which entrepreneurial farming is grounded began to erode (due
to liberalisation), peasant agriculture re-emerged again as a far more resilient and
economically effective alternative."


==From subordination to multiple resistance==

"For a long time, resistance has been conceptualised as occurring outside labour
and production processes. This applies especially to those forms of resistance that
occur as overt struggle: strikes, demonstrations, road blocks, occupations, and goslows.
The same applies to covert resistance, the hidden and camouflaged resistance
described by James Scott (1985). Overt struggles and covert sabotage occur on the
margins of the labour and production processes. The latter are not altered; they are,
at most, interrupted or hindered. Neither are such alterations aimed for; the
objective of overt struggles mostly is an improvement of the exchange relations
within which the labour and production process are embedded. However, from the
1960s onwards new forms of resistance have been developed that are located within
spaces of production. These have been theoretically elaborated in the Italian
operaismo tradition (Holloway 2002). Such forms of resistance are actively used to
alter the techno-institutional structures of labour and production processes.
Routines, rhythms, patterns of co-operation, sequences, machines, their tuning,
and the mix of materials used are all altered so as to improve labour and production
processes and align them with the interests, prospects, and experiences of the
workers involved.

The central point here is that this third form of resistance – direct intervention in,
and alteration of, labour and production processes – is widespread in today’s
agriculture. It is present in the unfolding of organic farming, just as it is the main
driver of the many forms of endogenous rural development that we are witnessing in
Europe and in the new forms of production that are being developed in the
campamentos created by the Brazilian Movimento dos Sem Terra (MST) and in the
inlands of Chiapas (Veltmeyer 1997, Toledo 2000). Resistance, or ‘everyday politics’
(Kerkvliet 1993, 460) is encountered in a wide range of heterogeneous and
increasingly interlinked practices through which the peasantry constitutes itself as
distinctively different from entrepreneurial and capitalist agriculture. Resistance
resides in the fields, in the ways in which good manure is made, noble cows are bred,
beautiful farms are constructed, and fresh milk is delivered. As ancient and irrelevant
as such practices may seem when considered in isolation, in the current context they
are becoming vehicles through which resistance is expressed and organised.

An important feature of these new forms of resistance is that they entail searches
for, and constructions of, local solutions to global problems. Blueprints are
avoided.27 This results in a rich repertoire with the heterogeneity of the many
responses becoming one of the propelling forces that induce new learning processes.
This pattern reflects the new relations that prevail in many parts of the world:
direct confrontations are increasingly difficult and counterproductive, yet at the
same time global solutions are deeply distrusted. Hence, these new responses follow a
different road."


==From community to extended networks==


"over recent decades we have been witnessing the emergence of
new markets that have been constructed as a response to, and alternative (even if it is
a limited one) for, the global markets controlled by food empires. These are new
‘peasant marketplaces’30 that offer a range of qualities that are difficult for food
empires to meet (at least in a non-virtual way): short links and distances between
places of production and consumption, freshness, shared quality definitions, and
often direct social contacts, since peasant marketplaces are meeting points where
producers of food and consumers meet face to face and interact. The important
point is that these new circuits (or food networks) embody values that are shared by
producers and consumers and these values trigger and sustain the qualities
mentioned above. In this respect these new circuits represent a new kind of
community. They are, to quote Hobsbawn (1973, 7), ‘little worlds [that] may indeed
vary considerably in size, population and complexity’ and which ‘form part of a
much wider world’ (1973, 8). However, these new networks are no longer strictly
rural (as was the case in the past) – instead, they link the rural and the urban, as
Barros Nock (1998, 318–19) has documented among Mexican fruit-growers and
Morgan et al. (2006, 135–43) have recorded for the ‘alternative world of food in
California’. Public procurement (Morgan and Sonnino 2008) can enable a further
extension and institutional embedding of such new networks. This occurs not just in
the big cities of the North, but also in the South. For example in Brazil the PPA
(programme for food acquisition) provides direct links between peasant agriculture
and the Fome Zero programme tapping into (and stabilising) a newly emerging
market (Schneider et al. 2004) through the requirement that at least 30 percent of the
procured food is purchased from peasant producers.

From a theoretical point of view it is interesting to note the strong link between
the emergence of new peasantries and the construction of new food networks and the
embedded marketplaces. A key factor in this is that they contribute to the
construction of relative autonomy. This is partially related to the re-integration of
skills and competences (such as the arts of processing and marketing) that have been
externalised to (if not actively expropriated by) middlemen, agro-industries,
supermarkets, and, later, the large food empires. It is also related to the fact that
farmers can escape, in this way, from the asphyxiating effects of the squeeze imposed
by these empires.

The reach of this particular reversal, i.e. the rise of new food networks, is not to
be underestimated. The European research programme (discussed above) estimated
the contribution of direct marketing in seven countries to be worth 2.5 billion Euros
per year."


==Rebalancing commodity and non-commodity relations==

"If the different reversals are taken together, it turns out that the peasantry is
reconstituting itself through a complex, but consistent, reshuffling of the balance of
commodity and non-commodity relations. Farm units are actively pursuing decommoditisation
on the upstream side, while a seemingly opposite tendency is
observable on the downstream side, where the range of deliverable commodities is
enlarged with non-commodities, such as hospitality, nature, landscape, local
provisioning and care, being turned into commodities. However, the paradox is
only on the surface. The changes on the output side of the farms are intended to
resist (and/or to partially escape) the control that the food empires exert over the
main commodity circuits, and are congruous with increased self-provisioning on the
input side that aims to reconfigure relations with food empires. Both tendencies are
driven by peasant resistance and both aim for greater autonomy and improved coproduction.
There is an important internal consistency as well: the more the farm is
distantiated from the large upstream markets (and the imperial control rooted in
them), the larger the room for manoeuvre to construct the new alternatives on the
downstream side."



=Conclusion=


Jan Douwe van der Ploeg:

"The discussion so far allows for some general statements about peasant households
that are inductively derived through empirical generalisations. These are summarised
below.

(1) ‘Numerically, the size of the peasantry has increased rapidly [. . .] both in
absolute number and as share of the economically active population in
agriculture.’

(2) Worldwide, peasant agriculture continues to be characterised by poverty,
although there are many specific locations in time and space where peasants are
making material progress and improving their wellbeing. Despite this, many
parts of peasant agriculture are currently becoming reservoirs of despair.
Through newly introduced imperial relations the available labour force and local
resources, such as land and water are increasingly separated from each other and
falling idle.34 At the same time, considerable parts of peasant agriculture operate
as ‘a refuge sector’ (de Janvry et al. 1989), offering a last resort to the
dispossessed.

(3) The presence of the peasantry is not limited to the South and/or to generalised
conditions of poverty. From an analytical point of view, peasant agriculture is
present as much in developed countries as in developing countries as I have
argued throughout this paper (see also van der Ploeg 2008).

(4) When the most salient features of peasant agriculture of the twenty-first century
are compared to those of previous times, one cannot but conclude that peasant
farming has secured its continuity and its omnipresence through major
adaptations that follow the avenues summarised in Table 1. This reaffirms that
the peasantry is ‘a process within the broader framework of society yet with a
structure, consistency and momentum of its own: emerging [. . .], disintegrating
and re-emerging at times’.35 Hence, ‘the campesino of today is usually not the
campesino of even 15 years ago’ (Edelman 2008, 83). Today’s peasantries are
actively responding to the processes that otherwise would destroy, by-pass, and/
or entrap them. Through these responses, which often are multi-dimensional and
multi-level, considerable parts of the world’s agriculture are becoming more
peasant-like:36 autonomy is being systematically (and materially) built into the
resource-base, into the many networks in which farming is embedded, and into
the process of production itself.

By doing so, the peasantries of the twenty-first century are creating an important
new frontier that separates them from entrepreneurial farming.37 This frontier
embodies two interlinked forms of resistance. First, there is a persistent and multifacetted
resistance to the commoditisation of the resource base. This is matched by a
strong and richly-chequered resistance to the control that food empires exert over the
main commodity markets through which food and services are distributed.38 This is
contributing to a diversification and expansion of downstream commodity relations.

In synthesis peasant agriculture represents an important foundation for
persistence, i.e. the capacity to continue over long periods. Ecological capital
supplies the main natural resources, co-production allows for steady but ongoing
improvements in technical efficiency (the ratio between total production and the
resources used), and self-provisioning implies that all the technical and social means
required to convert natural resources into production are available. Through such
mechanisms food production can be sustained over long periods and steadily
enlarged. Following this pattern the capacity to respond to increased demand for
food is an endogenous quality: growth is not necessarily triggered by external
interventions.

The nature and logic of peasant production are at the core of this pattern.
Capitalist agriculture does not recognise the importance of value added, but is
primarily oriented towards profits and profitability – which are often increased by
reducing or containing total production (and the total amount of value added).45 In
entrepreneurial farming value added is important, but is more often realised through
the take-over of other units of production than produced from within the resource
base of an existing unit. This explains the seemingly contradictory situation of
rapidly expanding entrepreneurial farms combined with an overall stagnation of
production in the agrarian sector as a whole. In peasant agriculture the longing for
better incomes translates, both at the level of the single households and at the level of
the sector as a whole, into increased production. When all the relevant conditions are
the same, peasant farming produces more food in a given area than entrepreneurial
farming. Reliable comparisons of this have been made in Emilia Romagna (Italy). In
1971 peasant agriculture produced a total Gross Value of Production (GVP) that
was 15 percent above that of entrepreneurial agriculture. In 1979 this difference had
grown to 36 percent. And in 1999, the GVP of peasant agriculture was 56 percent
higher than that realised through entrepreneurial farming (van der Ploeg 2008, 122–
5).46 The same point has recently been made with regards to Brazil (Sabourin 2007,
28). In short: peasant farming not only allows for, but also needs persistence and
ongoing agricultural growth. And it needs it badly.

Whether peasant farming will be able to realise this depends, above all, on its
resilience, i.e. its capacity to provide a buffer against shocks and stresses in the short
and medium term. I argue that such resilience is increasingly grounded in the last
three reversals presented.


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Articles]]







[[Category:Agrifood]]