

* Article: RED PLENTY PLATFORMS. By Nick Dyer-Witheford. CULTURE MACHINE VOL 14 • 2013

URL = http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526


=Description=

From the introduction, by Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"This paper takes Spufford’s novel as a starting point from which to
embark on an examination of the computing platforms that would
be necessary for a contemporary ‘red plenty’. It is not a discussion of
the merits and demerits of hacktivism, digital disobedience,
electronic fabrics of struggle, tweets in the street and Facebook
revolutions, but of digital communism. This is a topic that has
already been touched on by the wave of rethinking life after
capitalism triggered by the 1989 implosion of the USSR, in
proposals for ‘participatory economics’ (Albert & Hahnel, 1991), a
‘new socialism’ (Cockshott & Cottrell, 1993), ‘twenty first century
socialism’ (Dieterich, 2006), or forms of ‘commonwealth’(Hardt &
Negri, 2009). Unlike some of these sources, however, this essay does
not aim to provide detailed, often competitive, ‘blue-prints’ for a
new society, but rather what Greig de Peuter, in a personal
conversation, once called ‘red-prints’- approximating orientations to
revolutionary possibilities.

In discussing computing and communism it is almost impossible to
escape accusations of abandoning struggles and subjects to a
machinic determinism. Certainly all automatic, teleological, and
evolutionary models, including schematic choreographies of forces
and relations of production, should be rejected. Just as important,
however, is the avoidance of a contrary humanist determinism,
which overstates the autonomy and ontological privilege of ‘man
versus machine’. Here, modes of production, and the struggles that
convulse them, are understood as combinations of human and
machine agents, entangled, hybridized and co-determined Deleuzo-
DeLandian ‘assemblages’ (Thorburn, 2013).

That is why the estimate sent to me by Benjamin Peters, historian of
Soviet cybernetics, that, compared with the machines available to
the planners of Red Plenty in, say, 1969, the processing power of the
fastest computer in 2019 will represent ‘roughly a 100,000,000,000
fold increase in operations per second’, is exciting, a factoid that is,
as Peters remarks, ‘not itself meaningful but still suggestive’. The
argument that follows explores this suggestivity. This article thus
looks at the most direct through-line from Soviet cybernetics’
continuing attempts to theorize forms of economic planning based
on labour time algorithms and super-computing. It then discusses
how concerns about authoritarian central planning might be affected
by social media and software agents, before going on to consider
whether planning is redundant in a world of automata, copying and
replication. In partial answer to that last question, ‘Red Plenty
Platforms’ scans the role of cybernetics in the planetary bio-crisis,
concluding with some general observations about cybernetics on
today’s ‘communist horizon’ (Dean, 2012)."


=Excerpts=

==The history of [[Cybernetic Planning]]==

Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"If central planning suffered from a
calculation problem, why not just solve it with real calculation
machines? This was precisely the point made by Hayek’s opponent,
the economist Oskar Lange, who, retrospectively reviewing the
‘socialist calculation’ debate, remarked: ‘today my task would be
much simpler. My answer to Hayek … would be: so what’s the
trouble? Let us put the simultaneous equations on an electronic
computer and we shall obtain the solution in less than a second’
(1967: 159). Such was the project of the cyberneticians featured in
Red Plenty, a project driven by the realization that the apparently
successful Soviet industrial economy, despite its triumphs in the
1940s and ‘50s, was slowly stagnating amidst organizational
incoherence and informational bottlenecks.

Their effort depended on a conceptual tool, the input-output table,
whose development is associated with two Russian mathematicians:
the émigré Wassily Leontief, who worked in the US, and the Soviet
Union’s Kantorovich, the central protagonist of Red Plenty. Inputoutput
tables – which, it was recently discovered, are amongst the
intellectual foundations of Google’s PageRank algorithm
(Franceschet, 2010) – chart the complex interdependence of a
modern economy by showing how outputs from one industry (e.g.
steel or cotton) provide inputs for another (say, cars or clothing), so
that one can estimate the change in demand resulting from a change
in production of final goods. By the 1960s such tables were an
accepted instrument of large scale industrial organizations:
Leontief’s work played a role in the logistics of the US Air Force’s
massive bomber offensive against Germany. However, the
complexity of an entire national economy was believed to preclude
their application at such a level.

Soviet computer scientists set out to surmount this problem. As
early as the 1930s, Kantorovich had improved input-output tables
with the mathematical method of linear programming that
estimated the best, or ‘optimizing’, combination of production
techniques to meet a given target. The cyberneticians of the 1960s
aimed to implement this breakthrough on a massive scale by
establishing a modern computing infrastructure to rapidly carry out
the millions of calculations required by Gosplan, the State Board for
Planning that oversaw economic five year plans. After a decade of
experimentation, their attempt collapsed, frustrated by the pitiful
state of the Soviet computer industry – which, being some two
decades behind that of the US, missed the personal computer
revolution and did not develop an equivalent to the Internet. It was
thus utterly inadequate to the task set for it. All this, alongside
political opposition from a nomenklatura that, seeing in the new
scientific planning method a threat to its bureaucratic power,
compelled abandonment of the project (Castells, 2000; Gerovitch,
2008; Peters, 2012).

This was not the only twentieth century project of ‘cybernetic
revolutionaries’; as remarkable was the attempt by Salvador
Allende’s Chilean regime to introduce a more decentralized version
of electronic planning, ‘Project Cybersyn’ (Medina, 2005). Led by
the Canadian cybernetician Stafford Beer, this was conceived as a
system of communication and control that would enable the
socialist regime to collect economic data, and relay it to government
decision makers, even while embedding within its technology
safeguards against state micro-management and encouragement for
many-sided discussions of planning decisions. This was an attempt
at socio-technical engineering of democratic socialism that today
perhaps seems more attractive than the post-Stalinist manoeuvres of
the Soviet computer planners. But it met an even more brutal fate;
Project Cybersyn was extinguished in the Pinochet coup of 1973.
In the end the failure of the USSR to adapt to a world of software
and networks contributed to its economic/military defeat by the
United States. Its disintegration, in which, as Alec Nove (1983)
demonstrated, information bottlenecks and reporting falsifications
played a major role, seemed to vindicate the Austrian economists.
Hayek’s praise of market catallaxy thus became central to the ‘neoliberal
thought collective’ (Mirowski, 2009) that led the subsequent
victory march of global capitalism.

The combined pressure of the practical disaster of the USSR and the
theoretical argument of the Austrian school exerted immense force
inside what remained of the left, pressuring it to reduce and reset the
limit of radical aspiration to, at most, an economy of collectively
owned enterprises coordinated by price signals. The many variants
on such ‘market socialist’ proposals have evoked rebuttals from
Marxists who refuse to concede to commodity exchange. Perhaps
because they grant to the market the automatic information processing
functions ascribed by the Austrian economists and
market socialists, they may address issues of technological
innovation or public data availability, yet do not seem to engage
deeply with the potentialities of contemporary computing.


Today, post-crash, claims that markets are infallible information
machines may seem less credible than they did a quarter of century
ago. The parasitic energy-theft that underlies price-signal
transmissions (exploitation at the point of production); the inability
of individual commodity exchanges to register collective
consequences (the so-called ‘externalities’); and the recursivity of a
chrematistic system that loops back on itself in financial speculation,
have all become more salient in the midst of global capital’s
economic and ecological implosion."
(http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)

==Contemporary schools of thought and the problem of [[Labour Algorithms]]==

Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"Despite the fall of actually-existing socialism, the idea of
computerized economic planning continued to be developed by
small groups of theorists, who have advanced its conceptual scope
further than anything attempted by Soviet cyberneticians. Two
schools have been of particular importance: the ‘New Socialism’ of
Scottish computer scientists Paul Cockshott and Alan Cottrell
(1993); and the German ‘Bremen School’, which includes Peter
Arno (2002) and Heinz Dieterich (2006), the latter an advocate of
Venezuelan-style ‘Twenty First Century Socialism’. These
tendencies have recently converged (Cockshott, Cottrell &
Dieterich, 2010). However, because little of the Bremen group’s
work is translated, the focus here will be on the New Socialism of
Cockshott and Cottrell.

The distinguishing mark of the New Socialist project is its classic
Marxist rigor. Accordingly, its twenty-first century super-computer
planning follows to the letter the logic of the late nineteenth century
Critique of the Gotha Program (Marx, 1970), which famously
suggests that at the first, ‘lower’ stage to communism, before
conditions of abundance allow ‘to each according to his needs’,
remuneration will be determined by the hours of socially necessary
labour required to produce goods and services. In the capitalist
workplace, workers are paid for the reproduction of the capacity to
labour, rather than for the labour actually extracted from them; it is
this that enables the capitalist to secure surplus value.
The elimination of this state of affairs, Cockshott and Cottrell
contend, requires nothing less than the abolition of money—that is,
the elimination of the fungible general medium of exchange that,
through a series of metamorphoses of money in and out of the
commodity form, creates the self-expanding value that is capital. In
their new Socialism, work would be remunerated in labour
certificates; an hour’s work could be exchanged for goods taking, on
a socially average basis, an equivalent time to produce. The
certificates would be extinguished in this exchange; they would not
circulate, and could not be used for speculation. Because workers
would be paid the full social value of their labour, there would be no
owner profits, and no capitalists to direct resource allocation.
Workers would, however, be taxed to establish a pool of labour-time
resources available for social investments made by planning boards
whose mandate would be set by democratic decisions on overall
social goals.

Labour time thus provides the ‘objective unit of value’ for the New
Socialism (Cockshott & Cottrell 2003: 3). It is at this point that its
proponents invoke the capacities of information technology. Such a
system would require an enumeration of the labour time expended,
both directly and indirectly, in the creation of goods and services, to
assess the number certificates for which these goods and services can
be exchanged, and to enable the planning of their production. The
basic tool of the input-output table reappears, with special attention
to labour time, both as an input necessary for the production of
goods, and as an output that itself requires the inputs of training and
education. However, here the New Socialists have to confront a
basic objection. Since the fall of the USSR it has been conventionally
accepted that the scale of information processing attempted by its
cyberneticians was simply too large to be feasible. Writing in the
1980s, Nove (1983) suggested that such an effort, involving the
production of some twelve million discrete items, would demand a
complexity input-output calculation impossible even with
computers. This claim was repeated in recent discussions of Red
Plenty, with critics of central planning suggesting that, even using a
contemporary ‘desktop machine’, solving the equations would take
‘roughly a thousand years’ (Shalizi, 2012).

Cockshott and Cottrell’s answer involves new tools, both conceptual
and technical. The theoretical advances are drawn from branches of
computing science that deal with abbreviating the number of
discrete steps needed to complete a calculation. Such analysis, they
suggest, shows their opponents’ objections are based on
‘pathologically inefficient’ methods (Cockshott, in Shalizi, 2012).

The input-output structure of the economy is, they point out,
‘sparse’—that is to say, only a small fraction of the goods are directly
used to produce any other good. Not everything is an input for
everything else: yogurt is not used to produce steel. The majority of
the equations invoked to suggest insuperable complexity are
therefore gratuitous. An algorithm can be designed to short-cut
through input-output tables, ignoring blank entries, iteratively
repeating the process until it arrives at a result of an acceptable order
of accuracy.

The time would be further reduced by massive increases in
computer processing speed yielded by Moore’s Law. Suggesting
high-level economic planning is done on a ‘desktop machine’ is
disingenuous. The issue is supercomputing capacity. According to
an email communication from Benjamin Peters, in 1969, the time of
Red Plenty, the ‘undisputed workhorse’ of the Soviet information
economy was the BESM-6 (‘bol’shaya electronicheskaya schetnaya
mashina’ – literally the ‘large/major electronic calculating
machine’), which could perform at an operating speed of 800,000
flops or ‘floating operations per second’ – that is, at 8 megaflops, or
10^6 flops. By 2013, however, supercomputers used in climate
modelling, material testing and astronomical calculations are
commonly exceeding 10 quadrillion flops or ten ‘petaflops’. The
holder of the crown at the time of writing is Cray’s Titan at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory achieving some 17.6 petaflops (10^15)
(Wikipedia, 2013). Supercomputers with an ‘exaflop’ capacity
(10^18 flops) are predicted from China by 2019 (Dorrier, 2012).
Thus, as Peters (2013) says, ‘giving the Soviets a bit generously 10^7
flops in 1969, we can find (10^18 - 10^7 = 10^11) . . . a
100,000,000,000 fold increase’ by today.

With these capacities, Cockshott and Cottrell’s suggestion that the
computer requirements for large scale economic planning could be
handled by facilities comparable to those now used for
meteorological purposes, seems at least plausible. The ‘calculation
problem’, however, involves not just data processing but the actual
availability of data; Hayek’s claim was not merely that central
planners cannot crunch economic numbers fast enough, but that the
numbers in a sense do not exist prior to price setting, which provide
an otherwise absent measure of production performance and
consumption activity. Again, Cockshott and Cottrell suggest the
answer lies in computers being used as a means of harvesting
economic information. Writing in the early 1990s, and invoking
levels of network infrastructure available in Britain at the time, they
suggest a coordinating system consisting of few personal computers
in each production unit, using standard programming packages,
would process local production data and send it by ‘telex’ to a central
planning facility, which every twenty minutes or so would send out a
radio broadcast of adjusted statistical data to be input at local levels.

This is a scenario too reminiscent of the ramshackle techno-futurism
of Terry Gilliam’s Brazil. To bring the New Socialists up to date we
should instead refer to Fredric Jameson’s iconoclastic vision of Wal-
Mart as ‘the shape of a Utopian future looming through the mist’
(2009: 423). His point is that, if one for a moment ignores the gross
exploitation of workers and suppliers, Wal-Mart is an entity whose
colossal organizational powers model the planned processes
necessary to raise global standards of living. And as Jameson
recognizes, and other authors document in detail (Lichtenstein,
2006), this power rests on computers, networks and information. By
the mid 2000s Wal-Mart’s data-centers were actively tracking over
680 million distinct products per week and over 20-million
customer transactions per day, facilitated by a computer system
second in capacity only to that of the Pentagon. Barcode scanners
and point of sale computer systems identify each item sold, and
store this information. Satellite telecommunications link directly
from stores to the central computer system, and from that system to
the computers of suppliers, to allow automatic reordering. The
company’s early adoption of Universal Product Codes had led to a
‘higher stage’ requirement for Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID) tags in all products to enable tracking of commodities,
workers and consumers within and beyond its global supply chain."
(http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)

==The ecological problem and contemporary cybernetic planning==

Nick Dyer-Witheford:

"An abundant communist society of high automation, free software, and in-home replicators might, however, as Fraise (2011) suggests, need planning more than ever – not to overcome scarcity but to address the problems of plenty, which perversely today threaten shortages of the very conditions for life itself. Global climate change and a host of interlinked ecological problems challenge all the positions we have discussed to this point. Bio-crisis brings planning back on stage, or indeed calculation – but calculation according to metrics measuring limits, thresholds and gradients of the survival of species, human and otherwise. Discussing the imperatives for such ecosocialist planning, Michael Lowy (2009) points out how this would require a far more comprehensive social steering than mere ‘workers control’, or even the negotiated reconciliation of worker and consumer interests suggested by schemes such as Parecon.

Rather, it implies a far-reaching remaking of the economic systems, including the discontinuation of certain industries, such as industrial fishing and destructive logging, the reshaping of transportation methods, ‘a revolution in the energy-system’ and the drive for a ‘solar communism’ (Lowy, 2009: np).

Such transformations would involve cybernetics along two major axes, as both contributors to the current bio-crisis and as potential means for its resolution. On the first of these axes, the ecological costs of nominally ‘clean’ digital technologies have become increasing apparent: the electrical energy requirements of cloud computing data-centres; the demands of chip manufacture for fresh water and minerals, the latter from large scale extractive enterprises; and the resulting prodigious quantities of toxic e-waste. Making every home a fab-lab mini-factory will only speed-up planetary heat death. Contrary to all idealistic notions of virtual worlds, cybernetics are themselves inextricably part of the very industrial system whose operations have to be placed under scrutiny in a new system of metabolic regulation that aims for both red and green plenty.

However, cybernetic systems are also a potential part of any resolution of the bio-crisis – or, indeed, of even fully recognizing it.

Paul Edward’s (2010) A Vast Machine analyzes the global system of climatological measurement and projection – the apparatus of weather stations, satellites, sensors, digitally archived records and massive computer simulations, which, like the Internet itself, originated in US Cold War planning – on which comprehension of global warming rests. This infrastructure generates information so vast in quantity and from data platforms so diverse in quality and form that it can be understood only on the basis of computer analysis. Knowledge about climate change is dependent on computer models: simulations of weather and climate; reanalysis models, which recreate climate history from historical data; and data models, combining and adjusting measurements from multiple sources.

By revealing the contingency of conditions for species survival, and the possibility for their anthropogenic change, such ‘knowledge infrastructures’ of people, artifacts, and institutions (Edwards, 2010: 17) – not just for climate measurement, but also for the monitoring of ocean acidification, deforestation, species loss, fresh water availability – reveal the blind spot of Hayek’s catallaxy in which the very grounds for human existence figure as an arbitrary ‘externality’. So-called ‘green capital’ attempts to subordinate such bio-data to price signals. It is easy to point to the fallacy of pricing non-linear and catastrophic events: what is the proper tag for the last tiger, or the carbon emission that triggers uncontrollable methane release? But bio-data and bio-simulations also now have to be included in any concept of communist collective planning. Insofar as that project aims at a realm of freedom that escapes the necessity of toil, the common goods it creates will have to be generated with cleaner energy, and the free knowledge it circulates have metabolic regulation as a priority. Issues of the proper remuneration of labor time require integration into ecological calculations. No bio-deal that does not recognize the aspirations of millions of planetary proletarians to escape inequality and immiseration will succeed, yet labour metrics themselves need to be rethought as part of a broader calculation of the energy expenditures compatible with collective survival." (http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)


==Conclusions: requirements for [[Cybernetic Communism]]==

Nick Dyer-Whiteford:

"A new cybernetic communism ... would, we
have seen, involve some of the following elements: use of the most
advanced super-computing to algorithmically calculate labour time
and resource requirements, at global, regional and local levels, of
multiple possible paths of human development; selection from these
paths by layered democratic discussion conducted across assemblies
that include socialized digital networks and swarms of software
agents; light-speed updating and constant revision of the selected
plans by streams of big data from production and consumption
sources; the passage of increasing numbers of goods and services
into the realm of the free or of direct production as use values once
automation, copy-left, peer-to-peer commons and other forms of
micro-replication take hold; the informing of the entire process by
parameters set from the simulations, sensors and satellite systems
measuring and monitoring the species metabolic interchange with
the planetary environment.

This would indeed be a communism heir to Lenin’s ‘soviets plus
electricity’, with its roots in red futurism, constructivism, tektology
and cybernetics, together with the left-science fiction imaginaries of
authors such as Iain M. Banks, Ken McLeod and Chris Moriarty. It
would be a social matrix encouraging increasingly sophisticated
forms of artificial intelligence as allies of human emancipation. For
those who fear the march of the machine it holds only this comfort:
whatever singularities might spring from its networks would not be
those of entities initially programmed for unconstrained profit
expansion and the military defense of property, but rather for human
welfare and ecological protection. Such a communism is consonant
with a left accelerationist politic that, in place of anarchoprimitivisms,
defensive localism and Fordist nostalgia, ‘pushes
towards a future that is more modern, an alternative modernity that
neoliberalism is inherently unable to generate’ (Williams & Srnicek,
2013). If it needs a name, one can take the K-prefix with which some
designate ‘Kybernetic’ endeavors, and call it ‘K-ommunism’. The
possibile space for such a communism now exists only between the
converging lines of civilizational collapse and capitalist
consolidation. In this narrowing corridor, it would arise not out of
any given, teleological logic, but piece by piece from countless
societal breakdowns and conflicts; a post-capitalist mode of
production emerging in a context of massive mid-twenty-first
century crisis, assembling itself from a hundred years of non-linear
computerized communist history to create the platforms of a future
red plenty."
(http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/511/526)

=More Information=

* see the book, [[Red Plenty]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]