
'''* Book: Red Tory: How left and right have broken Britain and how we can fix it. Phillip Blond. (London: Faber and Faber, 2010)'''


=Review=

Excerpt from Chris Sunderland, in: Sovereignty, Winter 2010:

"Blomd’s take on our history is important and exemplified by his review of the working class during the industrial age. He charts the move into cities and the vigorous grassroots activity that resulted in the formation of cooperatives, as well as political movements like the London Correspondence Society. It is when he gets to the welfare state that he becomes truly controversial. Some would see the welfare state as the pinnacle and a great triumph of the cooperative movement, but Blond argues that it was a false move, because it removed a sense of motivation through active involvement and fostered state dependency. This develops into a general critique of the collectivist policies of the doctrinaire left wing and their concepts of public ownership, because they undermine civil society. Others might argue that once you have chased the population off the land and into the cities, and developed an economic system which demands a certain level of unemployment, then you have created conditions whereby state-coordinated welfare systems are essential to any just culture.

Nevertheless, we may agree implicitly with the idea of a ‘Big Society’, but wonder how it can be implemented. We might see that it is needed. We might extol Edmund Burke’s ‘little platoons’ of diverse local groups and associations that make up an essential and enriching component of a good society and a balance against overweening state power. But how do we get from here to there?

The heart of Blond’s ideas in the ‘how to’ section of the book is to rebuild a culture of virtue. It is to pay attention to virtue as the means by which any good society holds open a conversation about what is really good. He invites us to honour people of virtue, who help us consider what we should be aiming for as a society. He speaks of the inspirational schoolteacher or energetic priest, who helps us to form our first ideas of what is good. Blond sees such virtue-based leadership as an essential component in a democratic society, encouraging people, through a process of ‘formation’ to the place where they can take part in a constructive democratic conversation. Such thinking may resonate with and affirm the role of those who try to articulate the faith and its application to society. Blond is also positively affirming of the role of faith in the process of school education. He writes, ‘religious ideas of a transcendent God seem to be uniquely able to achieve both a sense of objective truth and to sustain an educational balance between child and teacher’. This culture of virtue will be established, he says, by means of a wholesale redistribution of power from state to citizens.

In terms of economics, Blond commends an economic subsidiarity, with economic life being organised and provided at the most local level possible. He is radical here as well, pointing to models of community supported agriculture, to community land trusts and local finance initiatives as models for renewal of civil society. He looks for a diverse, local and values-based economy, where mutuality and values, like Fairtrade, work together with a concern for quality. And he denies that self-interest should be the only coordinator of economic activity.

I guess that I have written enough for readers to discern whether or not to read this book. I am not a Tory by inclination and hesitated in my appreciation of it, because it affirms so much of David Cameron’s thinking. Yet I found it truly enlightening and encouraging. It left me wondering where Phillip Blond came from? It turns out that he was a lecturer in Philosophy and Theology and did a PhD in theology with John Millbank. From a position of relative obscurity, his writings were noticed and he was suddenly launched into the full glare of public attention. Perhaps that is also a story in where true vision arises?"
(http://www.biblesociety.org.uk/products/1423/49/sovereignty_winter_2010_books_reviews/)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Policy]]