=Discussion=

S.A. Hamed and Barry K. Gils:

"Commons encompass more than just tangible entities such as common pool resources, public spaces, shared ownership, or commonwealth institutions. To avoid reductionism in understanding commons and commoning, the
Aristotelian theory of causation can be used. By applying the four causes to
the concept of commons, a more nuanced and comprehensive understanding can be obtained that recognizes the multiple dimensions and levels of commons and commoning. This includes the agential, ecological, and social
structural, as well as the iterative processes through which they are sustained
and regenerated.

A commons is a living ecosystem, or a complex ‘species-being’ in and
of itself, which – according to the Aristotelian doctrine of causality – consists of four constituting elements. 

Firstly, '''the efficient cause''' is the activities of the commoners (both human and non-human) and their subjectivities,
which include skills, knowledge, agency, experiences, and capabilities that
are actualized through the process of building and maintaining commons, as
well as their ‘organs as tools’ and ‘tools as organs.’6
 
Secondly, the '''material cause''' is a set of resources that are held in common, conserved, enhanced,
and governed collectively, as well as the flows of energy and mass in and
out of the commons as an open system. 

Thirdly, the '''formal cause''' is its structure, or what Marx would refer to as an ‘ensemble of social [ecological] relations,’ along with their corresponding forms of cooperation and conviviality
across a plurality of subjects, as well as the norms, rules, evaluative measures,
and mutual rights and responsibilities that regulate these relations and guide
actions toward the realization of the final cause. 

Finally, the '''final cause''' is the self-sustaining and life-regenerating function of the commons as a living
being seeking a good life through the transformative praxis of commoning by
the commoners (De Angelis, 2022; Mau, 2022).

A redefined notion of commons, informed by the Aristotelian theory of
causation, could provide several benefits when applied to understanding the
nature of human creative power."

(https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/290382/1/9781003805588.pdf)

[[Category:Commons]]