
'''= aims to improve the products and services around us by collectively rethinking bad products into better products and good ideas into great ideas'''

URL = http://www.redesignme.com/main


=Description=

"The website has two sections: Design Critique and RDM Challenges.

With Design Critique, RedesignMe collects the best product improvements based on the users input and communicates that back to the original product designers & producers. RedesignMe contacts the companies behind the products in question to show them the feedback and encourages them to reply directly to the users and eventually fix the problems. RedesignMe also encourages the companies to work more closely with their end-users by setting up RDM Challenges.

RDM Challenges are conceptual or design-driven challenges initiated by companies that want to involve their customers more closely into their product development process. In this way companies pay a fee to RedesignMe, which is the main source of income. RDM Challenges clearly describe a (design) problem and the users, the Redesigners, are rewarded for their feedback through the service’s RDM system. There is no reputation system in the service that moves the users; they redesign products in order to improve them and then to collect points (RDMs) which they can later convert into prizes in the RDM Shop.
The users’ feedback can be in form of a comment, sketch, set of pictures, mood-board, movie, prototype or total redesign."
(http://www.openp2pdesign.org/blog/archives/176)


[[Category:Design]]