= a refutation of the [[Tragedy of the Commons]] meme and myth, by [[Ian Angus]]


=Text=

"Will shared resources always be misused and overused?
Is community ownership of land, forests and fisheries a
guaranteed road to ecological disaster? Is
privatization the only way to protect the environment
and end Third World poverty? Most economists and
development planners will answer "yes" -- and for proof
they will point to the most influential article ever
written on those important questions.

Since its publication in Science in December 1968, "The
Tragedy of the Commons" has been anthologized in at
least 111 books, making it one of the most-reprinted
articles ever to appear in any scientific journal. It
is also one of the most-quoted: a recent Google search
found "about 302,000" results for the phrase "tragedy
of the commons."

For 40 years it has been, in the words of a World Bank
Discussion Paper, "the dominant paradigm within which
social scientists assess natural resource issues."
(Bromley and Cernea 1989: 6) It has been used time and
again to justify stealing indigenous peoples' lands,
privatizing health care and other social services,
giving corporations 'tradable permits' to pollute the
air and water, and much more.

Noted anthropologist Dr. G.N. Appell (1995) writes that
the article "has been embraced as a sacred text by
scholars and professionals in the practice of designing
futures for others and imposing their own economic and
environmental rationality on other social systems of
which they have incomplete understanding and
knowledge."

Like most sacred texts, "The Tragedy of the Commons" is
more often cited than read. As we will see, although
its title sounds authoritative and scientific, it fell
far short of science.


'''Garrett Hardin hatches a myth''' 

The author of "The Tragedy of the Commons" was Garrett
Hardin, a University of California professor who until
then was best-known as the author of a biology textbook
that argued for "control of breeding" of "genetically
defective" people. (Hardin 1966: 707) In his 1968 essay
he argued that communities that share resources
inevitably pave the way for their own destruction;
instead of wealth for all, there is wealth for none.

He based his argument on a story about the commons in
rural England.

(The term "commons" was used in England to refer to the
shared pastures, fields, forests, irrigation systems
and other resources that were found in many rural areas
until well into the 1800s. Similar communal farming
arrangements existed in most of Europe, and they still
exist today in various forms around the world,
particularly in indigenous communities.)

"Picture a pasture open to all," Hardin wrote. A
herdsmen who wants to expand his personal herd will
calculate that the cost of additional grazing (reduced
food for all animals, rapid soil depletion) will be
divided among all, but he alone will get the benefit of
having more cattle to sell.

Inevitably, "the rational herdsman concludes that the
only sensible course for him to pursue is to add
another animal to his herd." But every "rational
herdsman" will do the same thing, so the commons is
soon overstocked and overgrazed to the point where it
supports no animals at all.

Hardin used the word "tragedy" as Aristotle did, to
refer to a dramatic outcome that is the inevitable but
unplanned result of a character's actions. He called
the destruction of the commons through overuse a
tragedy not because it is sad, but because it is the
inevitable result of shared use of the pasture.
"Freedom in a commons brings ruin to all."


'''Where's the evidence?''' 

Given the subsequent influence of Hardin's essay, it's
shocking to realize that he provided no evidence at all
to support his sweeping conclusions. He claimed that
the "tragedy" was inevitable -- but he didn't show that
it had happened even once.

Hardin simply ignored what actually happens in a real
commons: self-regulation by the communities involved.
One such process was described years earlier in
Friedrich Engels' account of the "mark," the form taken
by commons-based communities in parts of pre-capitalist
Germany:

"The use of arable and meadowlands was under the
supervision and direction of the community ...

"Just as the share of each member in so much of the
mark as was distributed was of equal size, so was his
share also in the use of the 'common mark.' The nature
of this use was determined by the members of the
community as a whole. ...

"At fixed times and, if necessary, more frequently,
they met in the open air to discuss the affairs of the
mark and to sit in judgment upon breaches of
regulations and disputes concerning the mark." (Engels
1892)

Historians and other scholars have broadly confirmed
Engels' description of communal management of shared
resources. A summary of recent research concludes:

"What existed in fact was not a 'tragedy of the
commons' but rather a triumph: that for hundreds of
years -- and perhaps thousands, although written
records do not exist to prove the longer era -- land
was managed successfully by communities." (Cox 1985:
60)

Part of that self-regulation process was known in
England as "stinting" -- establishing limits for the
number of cows, pigs, sheep and other livestock that
each commoner could graze on the common pasture. Such
"stints" protected the land from overuse (a concept
that experienced farmers understood long before Hardin
arrived) and allowed the community to allocate
resources according to its own concepts of fairness.

The only significant cases of overstocking found by the
leading modern expert on the English commons involved
wealthy landowners who deliberately put too many
animals onto the pasture in order to weaken their much
poorer neighbours' position in disputes over the
enclosure (privatization) of common lands. (Neeson
1993: 156)

Hardin assumed that peasant farmers are unable to
change their behaviour in the face of certain disaster.
But in the real world, small farmers, fishers and
others have created their own institutions and rules
for preserving resources and ensuring that the commons
community survived through good years and bad.


'''Why does the herder want more?''' 

Hardin's argument started with the unproven assertion
that herdsmen always want to expand their herds: "It is
to be expected that each herdsman will try to keep as
many cattle as possible on the commons. ... As a
rational being, each herdsman seeks to maximize his
gain."

In short, Hardin's conclusion was predetermined by his
assumptions. "It is to be expected" that each herdsman
will try to maximize the size of his herd -- and each
one does exactly that. It's a circular argument that
proves nothing.

Hardin assumed that human nature is selfish and
unchanging, and that society is just an assemblage of
self-interested individuals who don't care about the
impact of their actions on the community. The same
idea, explicitly or implicitly, is a fundamental
component of mainstream (i.e., pro-capitalist) economic
theory.

All the evidence (not to mention common sense) shows
that this is absurd: people are social beings, and
society is much more than the arithmetic sum of its
members. Even capitalist society, which rewards the
most anti-social behaviour, has not crushed human
cooperation and solidarity. The very fact that for
centuries "rational herdsmen" did not overgraze the
commons disproves Hardin's most fundamental assumptions
-- but that hasn't stopped him or his disciples from
erecting policy castles on foundations of sand.

Even if the herdsman wanted to behave as Hardin
described, he couldn't do so unless certain conditions
existed.

There would have to be a market for the cattle, and he
would have to be focused on producing for that market,
not for local consumption. He would have to have enough
capital to buy the additional cattle and the fodder
they would need in winter. He would have to be able to
hire workers to care for the larger herd, build bigger
barns, etc. And his desire for profit would have to
outweigh his interest in the long-term survival of his
community.

In short, Hardin didn't describe the behaviour of
herdsmen in pre-capitalist farming communities -- he
described the behaviour of capitalists operating in a
capitalist economy. The universal human nature that he
claimed would always destroy common resources is
actually the profit-driven "grow or die" behaviour of
corporations.


'''Will private ownership do better?''' 

That leads us to another fatal flaw in Hardin's
argument: in addition to providing no evidence that
maintaining the commons will inevitably destroy the
environment, he offered no justification for his
opinion that privatization would save it. Once again he
simply presented his own prejudices as fact:

"We must admit that our legal system of private
property plus inheritance is unjust -- but we put up
with it because we are not convinced, at the moment,
that anyone has invented a better system. The
alternative of the commons is too horrifying to
contemplate. Injustice is preferable to total ruin."

The implication is that private owners will do a better
job of caring for the environment because they want to
preserve the value of their assets. In reality,
scholars and activists have documented scores of cases
in which the division and privatization of communally
managed lands had disastrous results. Privatizing the
commons has repeatedly led to deforestation, soil
erosion and depletion, overuse of fertilizers and
pesticides, and the ruin of ecosystems.

As Karl Marx wrote, nature requires long cycles of
birth, development and regeneration, but capitalism
requires short-term returns.

"The entire spirit of capitalist production, which is
oriented towards the most immediate monetary profits,
stands in contradiction to agriculture, which has to
concern itself with the whole gamut of permanent
conditions of life required by the chain of human
generations. A striking illustration of this is
furnished by the forests, which are only rarely managed
in a way more or less corresponding to the interests of
society as a whole..." (Marx 1998: 611n)

Contrary to Hardin's claims, a community that shares
fields and forests has a strong incentive to protect
them to the best of its ability, even if that means not
maximizing current production, because those resources
will be essential to the community's survival for
centuries to come. Capitalist owners have the opposite
incentive, because they will not survive in business if
they don't maximize short-term profit. If ethanol
promises bigger and faster profits than centuries-old
rain forests, the trees will fall.

This focus on short-term gain has reached a point of
appalling absurdity in recent best-selling books by
Bjorn Lomborg, William Nordhaus and others, who argue
that it is irrational to spend money to stop greenhouse
gas emissions today, because the payoff is too far in
the future. Other investments, they say, will produce
much better returns, more quickly.

Community management isn't an infallible way of
protecting shared resources: some communities have
mismanaged common resources, and some commons may have
been overused to extinction. But no commons-based
community has capitalism's built-in drive to put
current profits ahead of the well-being of future
generations.


'''A politically useful myth''' 

The truly appalling thing about "The Tragedy of the
Commons" is not its lack of evidence or logic -- badly
researched and argued articles are not unknown in
academic journals. What's shocking is the fact that
this piece of reactionary nonsense has been hailed as a
brilliant analysis of the causes of human suffering and
environmental destruction, and adopted as a basis for
social policy by supposed experts ranging from
economists and environmentalists to governments and
United Nations agencies.

Despite being refuted again and again, it is still used
today to support private ownership and uncontrolled
markets as sure-fire roads to economic growth.

The success of Hardin's argument reflects its
usefulness as a pseudo-scientific explanation of global
poverty and inequality, an explanation that doesn't
question the dominant social and political order. It
confirms the prejudices of those in power: logical and
factual errors are nothing compared to the very
attractive (to the rich) claim that the poor are
responsible for their own poverty. The fact that
Hardin's argument also blames the poor for ecological
destruction is a bonus.

Hardin's essay has been widely used as an ideological
response to anti-imperialist movements in the Third
World and discontent among indigenous and other
oppressed peoples everywhere in the world.

"Hardin's fable was taken up by the gathering forces of
neo-liberal reaction in the 1970s, and his essay became
the 'scientific' foundation of World Bank and IMF
policies, viz. enclosure of commons and privatization
of public property. ... The message is clear: we must
never treat the earth as a 'common treasury.' We must
be ruthless and greedy or else we will perish." (Boal
2007)

In Canada, conservative lobbyists use arguments derived
from Hardin's political tract to explain away poverty
on First Nations' reserves, and to argue for further
dismantling of indigenous communities. A study
published by the influential Fraser Institute urges
privatization of reserve land:

"These large amounts of land, with their attendant
natural resources, will never yield their maximum
benefit to Canada's native people as long as they are
held as collective property subject to political
management. ... collective property is the path of
poverty, and private property is the path of
prosperity." (Fraser 2002: 16-17)

This isn't just right-wing posturing. Canada's federal
government, which has refused to sign the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, announced in 2007 that it will "develop
approaches to support the development of individual
property ownership on reserves," and created a $300
million fund to do just that.

In Hardin's world, poverty has nothing to do with
centuries of racism, colonialism and exploitation:
poverty is inevitable and natural in all times and
places, the product of immutable human nature. The poor
bring it on themselves by having too many babies and
clinging to self-destructive collectivism.

The tragedy of the commons is a useful political myth
-- a scientific-sounding way of saying that there is no
alternative to the dominant world order.

Stripped of excess verbiage, Hardin's essay asserted,
without proof, that human beings are helpless prisoners
of biology and the market. Unless restrained, we will
inevitably destroy our communities and environment for
a few extra pennies of profit. There is nothing we can
do to make the world better or more just.

In 1844 Friedrich Engels described a similar argument
as a "repulsive blasphemy against man and nature."
Those words apply with full force to the myth of the
tragedy of the commons."

==Source==

T h e  B u l l e t  :  A Socialist Project e-bulletin
.... No. 133 .... August 25, 2008

== More Information ==
* [[Ian Angus]]
Ian Angus is editor of Climate and Capitalism
<http://www.climateandcapitalism.com> and an associate
editor of Socialist Voice <http://www.socialistvoice.ca>

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Commons]]