
'''= " weaves together a constellation of cosmo-local Web3 regeneration networks, including ReFi Local Nodes, Greenpill Chapters, BioFi, Ma Earth, Bloom Network, AgroforestDAO, and others". [https://gov.gitcoin.co/t/ethereum-localism-x-regen-coordination-gitcoin-3-0-sensemaking-report/21940]'''


=Description=

Monty Bryant:

“ Regen Coordination has been at the forefront of making Ethereum Localism real. From theory to practice.
Founded by ReFi DAO and Greenpill Network and supported by key partners CeloPG and Gitcoin, Regen Coordination is weaving across a constellation of cosmo-local regeneration networks — including ReFi Local Nodes, Greenpill Chapters, BioFi, Ma Earth, Bloom Network, AgroforestDAO, and others — with a mission to build shared tools, resources, and funding mechanisms that empower diverse regenerative communities through Web3.

A key philosophical foundation for this work comes from the idea of 'Coordi-nations' — a framework proposed by Jessy Kate Schingler and Primavera De Filippi of @BlockchainGov as an alternative to dominant narratives around "Network States". Coordi-nations envision a world where polycentric networks of communities come together through voluntary association and they exercise interconnected sovereignty based on shared values and governance rather than territorial control or centralized authority.”

(https://blog.refidao.com/ethereum-localism-x-regen-coordination/)


=Status=

==2025==

Monty Bryant:

“Over the past year, Regen Coordination has:

✅ Pioneered innovative regenerative funding rounds — Through initiatives like the Regen Coordination Genesis, Regen Citizens, and BioFi Pathfinders (the first-ever quadratic funding round focused on advanced bioregional organizing teams), Regen Coordination has raised and distributed over $370,000 to directly empower local communities, ecosystems, and cooperatives around the world.

✅ Built onchain proof-of-impact and capital allocation systems — Regen Coordination and its partners have researched, developed, and implemented a new onchain impact reporting and evaluation system tailored for decentralized community ecosystems. Leveraging the Common Approach Framework and integrating with Karma GAP to enable flexible and transparent tracking of activities, outputs, and outcomes. Using these foundations, Regen Coordination is pioneering the deployment of ImpactQF — a new model that blends quadratic funding with verified impact data for more equitable and effective capital allocation in public goods funding.

✅ Grown the ReFi ecosystem and impact culture — Regen Coordination has played a key role in supporting the broader regenerative finance movement, fostering the growth and development of ReFi Local Nodes, Greenpill Chapters, and other regen Web3 communities around the world.


'''In Motion''' 

Right now, Regen Coordination is helping to further grow the wave of Ethereum Localism through three active Gitcoin GG23 Localism-Themed Rounds:

1.	Regen Coordination Global — With a $96,000 matching pool, this round supports regenerative finance (ReFi) networks making meaningful contributions across the world. Building on the success of the GG21 Genesis Round, it brings together ReFi DAO, Greenpill Network, and other partners to continue growing a global movement leveraging Web3 for real-world impact.

2.	ReFi Mediterranean — The first quadratic funding round at localized bioregional scale, with a $10,000 matching pool. Sponsored by Ma Earth, Celo Public Goods, Kevin Owocki, the round empowers projects driving ecological and social impact across the Mediterranean bioregion.

3.	Regen Rio de Janeiro — Launched by Greenpill Brasil, Fabulosa Lab, and Regen Coordination, Regen Rio de Janeiro is a QF round focused on impactful local nonprofits — with $30,000 in matching spanning @glodollar, @MentoLabs’s cREAL (Brazilian stablecoin), and local @grassEcon commitment pools. Blending workshops, onboarding sessions, and community events, participating nonprofits are being equipped to harness the power of Web3.


'''What Next?'''

Building from current foundations, Regen Coordination seeks to further scale Ethereum Localism. Key areas of focus for the next phase include:

🔹 Cosmo-Local Capital Stacks & Partnerships — Blending Ethereum & Celo ecosystem grants with local philanthropic, cooperative, and municipal funding pools to create self-sustaining, regenerative funding engines. For example, Zazelenimo’s pilot for Urban Greening in Split, Croatia, where a 3:1 municipal matching model will fund community-driven greening projects using Ethereum-aligned infrastructure. Once proven, models like this can be adapted globally — helping cities launch participatory funding rounds, issue local stablecoins or governance tokens, and circulate Web3-based value within local economies.

🔹 Onchain Impact Infrastructure — Continue improving methods and tooling for tracking activities, outcomes, and value flows within local economies — Karma GAP, Hypercerts, Prosperity Passport, Proof of Impact NFTs and more.


A key next focus will be developing systems for tracking Total Value Flowed (TVF) — measuring how capital circulates through local Web3 networks (payment systems, QF rounds, credit pools, stablecoins) rather than being extracted into fiat. Tracking TVF will help allocate ecosystem grant capital more effectively, prioritizing communities that strengthen local impact and Web3 capital retention. For example, communities like @ReFiMedellin and Celo Colombia, who are supporting $cCOP (onchain Colombian Peso) adoption by developing localised payment solutions and onboarding local people, organisations and merchants.

🔹 Local ReFi Toolkits and Community Infrastructure — Creating and expanding practical toolkits, playbooks, and workshops that provide step-by-step guidance for communities to launch regenerative economies and initiatives using Web3 tools. These resources offer accessible frameworks for activities such as hosting empowering meetups, coordinating environmental projects, launching local credit pools, deploying regenerative digital infrastructure and more. Helping leaders turn Ethereum Localism into everyday action. The goal is to lower the barriers to entry, spread best practices, and empower a new generation of regenerative communities to build resilient local economies from the ground up.

🔹 Expanding Bioregional and Localized Funding Rounds — Scaling the network of bioregional and local ReFi nodes running their own local funding rounds. Building on the success of the Global, Mediterranean, and Rio de Janeiro rounds, expect many more localized rounds in GG24 and beyond.”

(https://blog.refidao.com/ethereum-localism-x-regen-coordination/)


=Directory=

Associated movements in the ecosystem [https://gov.gitcoin.co/t/ethereum-localism-x-regen-coordination-gitcoin-3-0-sensemaking-report/21940]:

ReFi DAO & Greenpill Network: Each support a global network of local nodes / chapters advancing regenerative finance and Ethereum Localism.

Ma Earth, Bloom Network, AgroforestDAO, Kolektivo: Each brings unique expertise in ethereum aligned ecological regeneration, community organizing, and decentralized funding.

EthereumLocalism.xyz : A community of practitioners and builders co-designing principles, tooling, and narratives for locally grounded Ethereum ecosystems.

[[OpenCivics]] & [[Ethereal Forest]]: Pioneers in protocol design, convening, and knowledge commons for decentralized governance and localism.

[[BioFi]] Project: Supports the design and implementation of [[Bioregional Financing Facilities]] (BFFs) to channel capital into regenerative economies at the bioregional scale.

Celo Regional DAOs: Autonomous, community-driven chapters that localize Celo’s mission—hosting events, incubators, mentorship, and local coordination hubs.

B<>rder/ess & Web3 for Universities Program: Cultivates Web3 developer ecosystems across African universities through tech clubs, hackathons, and curriculum support.

[[Collaborative Finance]] (CoFi): Hosts annual gatherings on financial mechanisms and systems including community currencies, obligation clearing networks, commitment pooling, etc.

[[Token Engineering Commons]] : Advances the science and practice of token engineering, with relevance for local economic design."

(https://gov.gitcoin.co/t/ethereum-localism-x-regen-coordination-gitcoin-3-0-sensemaking-report/21940)

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]