
= "the non-profit arm of Regen Network"

URL = https://regen.foundation/


=Description=

* "We build the Regen Commons. A global network of grassroots DAOs to ensure climate finance ultimately supports sovereign regenerative bioregional economies.

* Our flagship program is the EnDAOment Protocol

* As the non-profit arm of Regen Network. We pilot implementation level research in community ownership and governance in regenerative finance."


=Characteristics=

==New Commons and Networked Governance==

"Regen Foundation has a mandate to distribute 30% of the total pool of $REGEN tokens, earmarked for non-commercial stakeholders. This gives a voice to people (both human and non-human) who otherwise would not be heard.

Through a process of enDAOment, we donate tokens to groups of farmers, indigenous nations and other non-profit partners. They can use these tokens to vote in Regen Network governance, and help shape the future of the Regen toolkit. They will then receive more tokens as reward for their role in keeping the blockchain running. These tokens can be exchanged for money, which they can use to fund their operations.


==Decentralized Scientific Research==

We facilitate an open and collaborative process to produce scientifically robust, context specific protocols for the verification of ecological outcomes worldwide. We are committed to open source development and believe that open and shared protocols are a key driver for the acceleration of planetary regeneration and a re-establishment of a healthy commons.


==Education and Public Capacity Building==

Regen Foundation brings together a co-creative educational network focused on the scientifically proven practices and processes that lead to robust environmental resilience. Technological advances and emerging markets for ecosystem services can be challenging to navigate. Regen Foundation aims to demystify tools and concepts in a playful way, by creating learning spaces for a diverse range of users, including land stewards, community conservation groups, scientists and developers.

We dream of alternate institutions, built on an ethos of co-learning and mutualism.


==Emerging Economics==

Recoupling planetary wellbeing with economic wellbeing blurs the lines of social and ecological justice. Enfranchise an economy for all the planet’s people and species means understanding the climate crisis is an “intersectional” challenge. We work to develop programs through the Regen Commons which test the viability of alternative economic mechanisms.

In order to have scaled impact, we must ask how to replace corrupted systems of extraction with viable regenerative alternatives that bring a sound livelihood to communities of regeneration."

(https://regen.foundation/)


=Status=

[[Regen Network]]:

"As the largest token holder in the Regen Network ecosystem, the Regen Foundation has established various projects. One of the first initiatives was the delegation program, which involves staking tens of millions of $REGEN across a validator set consisting of 75 members. Delegations are recalculated on a monthly basis, taking into account factors such as validator-set prominence, governance participation, community participation, uptime, and carbon-neutral status. This approach aims to optimize decentralization and dynamism.

In early 2022, Regen Foundation granted its first locked token grants, known as “Community Staking DAOs.” Through this process, they realized the importance of creating an educational community around the “enDAOment” process. Consequently, Cohort 1 was launched in the fall of 2022, comprising seven organizations on a pathway to receive $REGEN tokens and participate in governance. Additionally, in 2023, Cohort 2 will be introduced specifically for groups interested in establishing methodologies and listing on Regen Ledger.

Regen Foundation is also a co-founding Limited Partner in the Regen/Cosmos Ecosystem Fund, managed by Cerulean Ventures. The foundation has received donations from Ripple and Biome Trust to further its mission to ensure climate finance ultimately supports sovereign regenerative bioregional economies."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]