

=Description=

Regen Registry Handbook:

"Regen Registry is an ecological service registry operating in the voluntary market that aims to support climate action by accelerating the adoption of nature-based solutions, which regenerate and restore natural ecosystems. Pulling on a combination of tools from Web3 and open source movements, Regen Registry aims to democratize and invigorate regenerative finance by empowering communities of Earth stewards, scientists, technologists, and climate entrepreneurs to govern the systems used to create new ecological assets."

(https://registry.regen.network/v/regen-registry-handbook)



=Status=

[[Regen Network]]:

"Regen Network also ventured into the realms of emerging standards in the voluntary carbon and ecosystem service market through the creation of Regen Registry, a community-driven ecosystem service registry that is pioneering standards to promote ecological regeneration. The Registry’s guidelines are governed and owned by the community of issuers, who are stakeholders responsible for producing public goods related to ecological health outcomes. Regen Registry has a growing and impressive array of methodologies and credit classes that have been developed and published, illustrating the platform’s credibility and conviction. Currently, there are over 40 methodologies in progress, with 3 methods already published and 2 credit classes ready for use."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)


=More information=

'''* Book: Regen Registry Handbook: A resource outlining the process of engaging with Regen Registry'''

URL = https://registry.regen.network/v/regen-registry-handbook

"The Regen Registry Handbook outlines the structure of Regen Registry, and details the frameworks stakeholders can use to create and issue ecological assets, known as ecocredits on the Regen Registry, in an open marketplace. The handbook also outlines the general requirements for the quantification, monitoring, reporting, verification (MRV), project registration, administration and issuance of credits, and governance of the registry standards. More specific legal requirements are found in the Regen Registry Program Guide. Regen Registry credits are nature-based solutions, which provide ecosystem integrity, including GHG emission reductions and removals, biodiversity/habitat protection, improvement in water quality, etc.  "

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Ecology]]