=Context=

Austin Wade Smith:

"We need to formulate a notion of prosperity which does not rely on a dualism of ecology and economy. What might we call that which stands outside this opposition?

Regeneration, as a philosophy and broader practice of systemic interrelation, offers a conspicuous path out. Long held as a core tenet of land stewardship and commonsing, the notion of regeneration has gained significant interest in the recent past among economic and decentralized finance circles. This movement, as well as the arguments of this piece, braid many lineages together, most notably the basic tenents of ecological economics. [[Regenerative Finance[[, or [[ReFi]] as many call is an attempt to reformulate our essential notions of value in order to leverage economic and market-based processes to heal a damaged planet.

We need to be talking about whether this is possible at all. If it is, we don’t have many chances to get this right."

(https://mirror.xyz/austinwadesmith.eth/1wdm8BNkLJWnnzwshtYEmHYlHaXxRF3bLEt4y4-9OE8)




=Description=

Open Probems in DAO's:

"Regenerative finance (ReFi) is a relatively new concept that seeks to address some of the inherent flaws in our existing financial system. The fundamental problem of ReFi is to build a more ecologically and socially sustainable alternative to prevailing, extractive economic models, which focus on taking resources for growth without adequately replenishing or sustaining those resources. Traditional finance and investment models are primarily concerned with maximizing shareholder returns, often at the expense of the environment and marginalized communities. The financial system frequently overlooks the need to invest in regenerative activities that rebuild natural capital, such as reforestation, or social capital, such as community development. This has resulted in substantial inequality, environmental degradation, and economic instability.

Leveraging advancements in computing, regenerative finance seeks to align financial practices and incentives with principles of regeneration, resilience, and abundance. These principles are applied not only to natural resources, but also to social and financial capital. The underlying concept of this approach traces its roots to "Regenerative Capitalism," a term first coined by economist John Fullerton in 2015 [CITE]. Though Fullerton did not originally link his concept to decentralized technologies, his eight principles of a regenerative economy have since been adopted by impact-oriented professionals within the Web3 space. These practitioners have used Fullerton's principles to construct systems that promote behaviors which enhance overall systemic health and discourage actions that cause its deterioration. A key distinction between extractive economic systems and regenerative economic systems is that while the former assigns value to the consumption of natural assets and increases profits for few individuals, the latter seeks to assign value to the protection of natural assets where profit is distributed evenly. 

In essence, the ReFi movement seeks to encourage ecological restoration, social justice, and economic resilience by aligning financial incentives with the principles of sustainability, equity, and justice. It endeavors to bridge the gap between the tangible world and the financial sphere through the creation, verification, and valuation of token-based representations of real-world assets. By facilitating the creation and utilization of novel asset types (like natural resources), ReFi propels economies towards progression based on environmental guardianship and conscientious resource administration."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LvqvarU951r9dHMif4dhXanmkq_eQ_k5xTZC5-t7lkM/edit#heading=h.81dsws61pnlo])


=Characteristics=

"Sustainability: Investments should lead to the regeneration of natural resources and ecosystems, contributing to the overall health and sustainability of the planet.

Equity: Resources should be distributed more equitably, reducing economic inequality and supporting marginalized and under-resourced communities.

Inclusive stakeholder engagement: Success should be measured not only by the returns it brings to investors but also by its impacts on all stakeholders involved and impacted. This includes workers, communities, customers, and the environment. Inclusion and engagement of these stakeholders in decision-making processes are key aspects of ReFi. 

Economic, social, and ecological resilience: The financial system should be resilient, capable of withstanding economic shocks and stresses while maintaining its functionality. Besides economic and financial systems, the overall practice of ReFi should also increase the resilience of social and ecological systems. This means that it should contribute to the capacity of these systems to absorb disturbances and reorganize while undergoing change.

Prosperity and human flourishing: Investments should not only focus on financial returns but also contribute to the overall well-being and prosperity of individuals and communities.
Scalability and replicability: A successful ReFi model should be scalable and replicable in different contexts and regions. The potential for wider adoption and system-level change is a key measure of success."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LvqvarU951r9dHMif4dhXanmkq_eQ_k5xTZC5-t7lkM/edit#heading=h.81dsws61pnlo])


=Typology=

RWA Report 2024:

==Tokenized Carbon Credits==

▪ "Protocols such as Toucan allow institutions
to tokenize their excess carbon credits,
which can be verified through digital
registries and on-chain.
▪ These protocols also host their own native
marketplaces for entities to purchase and
sell various types of carbon credits.
▪ Additionally, protocols such as Senken and
Fowcarbon also offer services for acquiring
and managing portfolios for carbon credits.


==Ocean & Marine Conservation==

▪ In efforts to reduce plastic pollution in the
oceans, projects such as ReSea and Plastic Bank
use blockchain-based systems to track and verify
the removal of plastic from the seas, where each
step of the cleanup process is recorded on-chain.
▪ Marine life is equally important as Fishcoin
focuses on on-chain seafood traceability, to
create a more transparent seafood industry and
promote sustainable fishing practices, while New
Atlantis DAO aims to protect marine biodiversity
through blue carbon credits.


==Renewable Energy==

▪ These platforms provide highly granular
24/7 tracking and sharing of verifiable onchain data on renewable energy.
▪ Since 2016, Powerledger has been
providing services for peer-to-peer
decentralized renewable energy trading.
▪ Reneum Labs allows institutions to
purchase tokenized renewable energy
credits (REC) which are used to scale
participating projects around the globe.


==Public Goods Funding==

▪ Beyond focusing on environmental aspects, ReFi
also encompasses open participation and fair
distribution of resources to make positive
impacts on the community.
▪ Gitcoin utilizes a quadratic funding mechanism to
match public donations, where the number of
donors matter more than the amount donated.
▪ Giveth and Tea Protocol incentivize contributors
of verified projects and developers of opensource software."

(https://assets.coingecko.com/reports/Research/RWA-Report-2024-Rise-of-Real-World-Assets-in-Crypto.pdf?)


=Status=

"ReFi also faces considerable challenges. Naveen Arunachalam (See: Rong, Peris and Jin, 2023) identifies three major open challenges with Web3 decarbonization efforts in an upcoming publication with MIT Center for Real Estate: (1) immature digital infrastructure with potential gaps in the chain of trust; (2) energy efficiency of blockchain operations which could counteract carbon savings; and (3) existing price discovery issues in the carbon market. DAOs, in their quest to solve liquidity issues, have faced failures due to a lack of cooperation and panic selling. The quality of the carbon credits used in several public blockchain projects has also been questioned. While tokenization has the potential to increase access to carbon markets and create a better record of transactions, it must be done correctly to build trust and avoid issues such as double counting.

Despite the challenges, however, the ongoing exploration of ReFi reflects its potential to bring about a significant transformation in our economic systems, aligning them more closely with environmental and social sustainability objectives."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LvqvarU951r9dHMif4dhXanmkq_eQ_k5xTZC5-t7lkM/edit#heading=h.81dsws61pnlo])


=Examples=

Primavera de Filippi et al. :

"We highlight a number of projects that are pioneering in the ReFi space, particularly in the area of carbon markets.

'''Agrotoken''': This platform turns biological assets into financial ones, using blockchain technology to provide proof of origin and redistribute risk. Its "green token" encourages farmers to pursue sustainable practices and instantly monetizes those efforts.

'''Open Forest Protocol''' (OFP): OFP demonstrates the blockchain's potential for promoting transparency and accessibility in the carbon credit creation process. It enables various entities to generate transparent, immutable, and verified proof-of-impact data. DAOs such as Solid World DAO which has partnered with OFP in mid-2022, could provide significant scaling opportunities for projects such as OFP. DAOs can offer innovative organizational solutions for actors involved in carbon sequestration who lack adequate support. Collaborating with a DAO could empower OFP to establish a unique and cutting-edge standard to verify carbon and open up new carbon market possibilities, a task that requires substantial resources. Through a partnership with Solid World DAO, OFP aims to develop an unprecedented infrastructure to minimize risk and generate actionable attention and support for projects within its network. This approach could significantly scale OFP's efforts, propelling a wider adoption and larger impact of their solutions.

'''Kolektivo''': A pilot ReFi initiative in Curaçao, Kolektivo aims to tokenize natural assets such as food forests and coral reefs to promote local self-reliance and economic resilience in marginalized communities. Using the ReFi-focused Celo blockchain and the Astral Protocol, Kolektivo creates a Decentralized Exchange Trading System (DETS) that bolsters environmental resilience and addresses interdependent financial and biospheric risks. Kolektivo's innovative approach incentivizes the preservation of natural resources and broadens access to carbon markets."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LvqvarU951r9dHMif4dhXanmkq_eQ_k5xTZC5-t7lkM/edit#heading=h.81dsws61pnlo])


=More information=

* [[Regenerative Economy]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]