
'''= "an interactive online platform for connecting any projects working on or interested in regeneration and regenerative agriculture".'''

URL = http://regenerationinternational.org/the-regeneration-hub

=Description=

"The Regeneration Hub, a collaboration between Regeneration International and Open Team, is an interactive online platform for connecting individuals, businesses, organizations, government agencies and any projects working on or interested in regeneration and regenerative agriculture.

The Regeneration Hub helps you research who is doing what in the regenerative movement, and where they are working.  You'll be able to search by location, keyword, project type, or climate region so you can connect directly with: others working in similar conditions, others studying or proving models that might be relevant to your research or beneficial to your business practices, others providing regenerative products and services, and other like-minded people who might be a good fit for your regenerative project team.

The Regeneration movement is building momentum worldwide. It's paramount that those in the movement be able to connect and exchange information about the best, most innovative ideas, practices and projects. We invite individuals, farmers, students, scientists, entrepreneurs, businesses, activists, educators, journalists and governments to join the platform to connect and exchange knowledge and resources."


'''2. About [[Regeneration International]]:'''

"Our work, supported by the Organic Consumers Association (OCA) and other founding organizations, is focused on the following:

* Engage the global scientific, agricultural, and activist communities in a narrative about the relationships between healthy soils, food and the climate.

* Identify, support and promote leading experts and success stories focused on the science and best practices that support regenerative organic agriculture as a viable means to reverse global warming through carbon sequestration.

* Aggregate, translate and disseminate the latest research linking the climate, food, natural health, environment, and economic justice movements to food and farming, and best practices for adapting regenerative techniques to different climates and cultures.

* Unify the global grassroots through a diversity of messages and campaigns to appeal to different segments of the global body politic, including consumers and environmentalists.

* Collaborate with universities and NGOs to train farmers in organic regenerative farming and land management techniques.

* Mobilize consumers, farmers, and environmentalists to pressure policymakers to create policies that advance organic regenerative farming and land management practices."
(http://regenerationinternational.org/about/)


=Discussion=

"A growing number of climate, food, environment, health and justice advocates are embracing and promoting a world-changing concept: regeneration.

Global food and farming can be divided into two categories: regenerative and degenerative.

Degenerative refers to systems that are toxic chemical-intensive, monoculture-based industrial agriculture systems that destabilize the climate, and degrade soil, water, biodiversity, health and local economies.

Regenerative practices are based on sound ecological principles that rejuvenate the soil, grasslands and forests; replenish water; promote food sovereignty; and restore public health and prosperity—all while cooling the planet by drawing down billions of tons of excess carbon from the atmosphere and storing it in the soil where it belongs.

There is a need for a global paradigm shift from degenerative to regenerative. The goal of The Regeneration Hub is to map and connect active regenerative food, farming and land use projects around the world to empower and inspire farmers, entrepreneurs, scientists, businesses, activists, educators, journalists, investors, policymakers and consumers to create a global paradigm shift from degenerative to regenerative."
(http://regenerationinternational.org/the-regeneration-hub)

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Movements]]