=Description=

Andrea Farias:

"A regenerative society goes beyond sustainability, which often focuses on minimizing harm or maintaining the status quo. Instead, it aims to actively restore and enhance the social and ecological systems upon which we depend. It's a vision of a world where human activities contribute positively to planetary ecosystems, where our technologies work in harmony with natural processes, and where our social structures promote well-being for all.

'''What does technology have to do with a Regenerative Society?'''

Technology determines how we organize our society. The technologies we develop and adopt create affordances and constraints that shape our social, economic, and political systems, as well as our relationships with the more-than-human world. The transition to a Regenerative Society involves co-evolving our technologies, social systems, and worldviews in ways that enable us to thrive within ecological systems."

(https://diome.xyz/0+%F0%9F%8C%9E+About/0.0+Technology+for+a+Regenerative+Society)


=Discussion=

Andrea Farias:

"From the perspective of '''[[Holistic Cultural Materialism]], building ''a Regenerative Civilization'' requires''' a systemic approach that recognizes and works with the interdependencies between these six elements. This involves:

Developing regenerative technologies and economic models (infrastructure) that support the health and resilience of human bodies, multi-species communities, and planetary ecosystems.

Designing social and political institutions (social structure) that promote equity, inclusion, and participation, while also ensuring the responsible stewardship of the living world.

Cultivating cultural narratives, values, and practices (superstructure) that celebrate the interconnectedness of all life and inspire a sense of shared responsibility for the well-being of the whole.

Promoting human health, well-being, and cognitive development (physiologic structure) through access to nutritious food, clean environments, and holistic education.

Fostering mutually beneficial relationships between human societies and other species (multi-species structure) through practices such as ecological restoration, sustainable agriculture, and interspecies communication.

Restoring balance to the Earth's climate, water, and nutrient cycles (planetary structure) through a rapid transition to regenerative production."

(https://diome.xyz/2+%F0%9F%8C%BF+Leaves/Cultural+Materialism)


=More information=

* [[Diome]]

[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]