* see: [[Regenerating a Carbon Drawdown Economy Through Reverse Mining and the Blockchain]]

=Description=

'''1.'''

"The aim of Regen Network is to imbue the economy with ecological sentience.

The model of production of ecological knowledge—what and how we know about
what is happening in a given ecosystem—is the foundation for achieving this
aim. Therefore, a community dedicated to maintaining a decentralized open
ledger of ecological health information to serve as the basis for conditional agreements between parties is an essential building block for a new phase of the global economy that accounts for ecological health and invests in ecological regeneration as the cornerstone of healthy business and governance. On top of this ledger, a new economy of ecological value will be built. 

The “Regen“ in Regen Network is short for regeneration. But what
does this mean? When we use the term, we‘re drawing on the work of business
development consultant and educator Carol Sanford. We refer to regeneration
as actions that increase the capacity, viability, and vitality of both the agent
and system being acted within or upon. As these concepts can be elusive, it
may be useful to ground our working definition in the sphere of regenerative
agriculture. As defined by our sister enterprise, Terra Genesis International,
regenerative agriculture is a system of farming principles and practices that
enhance ecological health [Ter19]. This could be contrasted with conventional
agriculture, which degrades ecological health. Public good outcomes of Regenerative Agriculture include carbon sequestration, clean water and biodiversity.
Private good outcomes include increased economic prosperity for land stewards
and other network participants."
(https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf)



'''2.'''

"Regen Network‘s token model creates a protocol-level incentive structure to
operate and maintain the key elements of a trusted and secure platform for reporting and sharing ecological data and making ecological claims. The native
token, $REGEN, is used for staking validators and oracles—the two foundational service providers in the network. Regen Network generates utility through
a protocol for making claims about ecological state and agreements based on
those claims. These agreements may result in the formation of cryptographic
tokens that are fungible or non-fungible, depending on the context and agreement. The token model of Regen Network secures the network against attack
and censorship making near perfect information about ecological state available
for the public and for users. Regen Network‘s aim is to bring ecological sentience
into the economy. A side effect of this will be the mainstreaming of ecological
accounting, making it pervasive and affordable. By doing so, this technology
creates a viable pathway toward the global recognition of ecological stewardship
and a pathway toward planetary regeneration."

=Discussion=

W. Szal et al. :

"The aim of Regen Network is to imbue the economy with ecological sentience.

The model of production of ecological knowledge—what and how we know about
what is happening in a given ecosystem—is the foundation for achieving this
aim. Therefore, a community dedicated to maintaining a decentralized open
ledger of ecological health information to serve as the basis for conditional agreements between parties is an essential building block for a new phase of the global
economy that accounts for ecological health and invests in ecological regeneration as the cornerstone of healthy business and governance. This paper outlines
the economics and governance of the community that will maintain this open
ecological ledger. On top of this ledger, a new economy of ecological value will
be built. We will explore the economics of this application layer in subsequent
papers. The “Regen“ in Regen Network is short for regeneration. But what
does this mean? When we use the term, we‘re drawing on the work of business
development consultant and educator Carol Sanford. We refer to regeneration
as actions that increase the capacity, viability, and vitality of both the agent
and system being acted within or upon. As these concepts can be elusive, it
may be useful to ground our working definition in the sphere of regenerative
agriculture. As defined by our sister enterprise, Terra Genesis International,
regenerative agriculture is a system of farming principles and practices that
enhance ecological health [Ter19]. This could be contrasted with conventional
agriculture, which degrades ecological health. Public good outcomes of Regenerative Agriculture include carbon sequestration, clean water and biodiversity.
Private good outcomes include increased economic prosperity for land stewards
and other network participants.

Financial capital is often created by liquidating ecological and social capital
(for more on this subject see [Sza19a]). For example, the vast majority of
palm oil plantations are sited on clearcut rainforest. Timber is often harvested
using clearcuts, and fisheries extract so many fish that the populations crash.

All this is driven by short-term profit. While it is clear that these processes
create some form of value (especially financial capital), it is also clear that there
is something important that has been lost along the way, and that the true
wealth of the system is undermined. As these losses keep adding up, we find
ourselves in a state of both societal and ecosystems collapse. If we want to
address ecological degradation systemically, we need to intervene somewhere
in the economic process. Regen Network aims to reinvent the economics of
agriculture, and land use more broadly by bringing ecological state information
to agreements and contracts to ensure rational choice and more efficiently price
externalities. Beyond rational choice and pricing externalities, ubiquitous access
to high quality ecological information will have an enormous impact on the
quality of the relationship between the human economy and the greater than
human living world.

Near real-time access to high-fidelity ecological state information is now possible. This capacity has not been a common part of the human experience since
the poorly-understood and nearly-forgotten evolutionary arc of small bands of
hunter-gatherer Homo sapiens. Early humans and intact cultural traditions
maintained (and sometimes still maintain) intimate individual and cultural connections to landscapes and ecosystems. We can now regenerate that missing
capacity to attune our human economy with the health of the ecosystems that
support us. Regen Network is making this leap possible.

How can we ground these grand aims in a tooling that brings these ethics into
an actionable sphere? Recent developments in blockchain architecture—such as
Byzantine-Fault-Tolerant Proof-of-Stake consensus algorithms—have enabled a
new form of decentralized governance in a data commons. To build on this foundation, we introduce a community staking model to even further decentralize
decision making and align it more deeply with the community of users. Built
on the Cosmos SDK, Regen Network is one of the first of a third generation of
blockchains that leverages the governance mechanisms and data provisions for
real world commons management."
(https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf?)


=Governance=

"Recent developments in blockchain architecture—such as
Byzantine-Fault-Tolerant Proof-of-Stake consensus algorithms—have enabled a
new form of decentralized governance in a data commons. To build on this foundation, we introduce a community staking model to even further decentralize
decision making and align it more deeply with the community of users. Built
on the Cosmos SDK, Regen Network is one of the first of a third generation of
blockchains that leverages the governance mechanisms and data provisions for
real world commons management."



=Status=

Gregory Landua:

"Regen Network joined [[OpenTEAM]] two years ago which is now composed of more than twenty organizations and led by Dr. Dorn Cox of Wolfe’s Neck Center for Agriculture and the Environment and the Foundation for Food and Agricultural Research (FFAR). OpenTEAM offers field-level carbon measurement, digital management records, remote sensing, predictive analytics, and input and economic management decision support in a connected platform that reduces the need for manual data entry and simultaneously improves access to a wide array of tools. Over the past few months, our science and engineering teams have been hard at work participating across the OpenTEAM working groups.

The team participated for the second year running in the [[Open Climate Collabathon]], a gathering of software developers, scientists, policymakers, students, and activists working together for a radically open climate accounting system. We focused our attention this year on presenting tools for accounting for and bringing to market our carbon plus credit class as well as showcasing the emerging Regen Ledger SDK and blockchain solution for open ecological accounting." 

(https://medium.com/regen-network/building-open-source-tools-for-the-regenerative-agricultural-revolution-1a87dfe48af6)


==2023: Looking Forward==

"We appreciate your journey with us thus far and are even more excited for what lies ahead. With over 2 million carbon and biodiversity credits expected to be issued in 2023 from the Regen Registry, along with more than 15 million hectares of land under ecological regeneration, the Regen Network community is just getting started in making a real-world climate impact possible.

In the upcoming phase, Regen Network Development PBC will focus on developing ecocredits and expanding the Regen Registry. The Regen Foundation will continue to guide the development of the Community Staking DAOs. Maintenance and development of the Regen Ledger will be community-driven, led by validators and partners.

The next chapters in the book of Regen Network will be authored by you. The platform is built, core features are ready, and the foundation is set. It’s time to envision how your institution or company can leverage Regen Network products to amplify impact, increase revenue, and regenerate our planet. Now is the time to actively participate in governing the world’s first public ecological ledger. As June Jordan once said, “We are the ones we’ve been waiting for”."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)


=History=

"The Regen Network project took its first steps between 2017 and 2018, stemming from Terra Genesis International’s pursuit of regenerative supply chain strategies. Co-founders Gregory Landua and Christian Shearer recognized the dire need for reliable ecological impact data, prompting them to birth the concept of Regen Network. This intersection of ideas led to a collaboration with GOLEM, a blockchain company that shared this same vision. Notably, Gregory’s appearance at Devcon 3 in Cancun garnered significant attention, underscoring the potential of the Regen Network concept.

In the whirlwind of crypto’s 2017 bull run, Regen Network’s core team, Regen Network Development, remained steadfast in refining their whitepaper, prioritizing substance over trends. Despite missing the ICO wave, the project’s commitment to a solid foundation led to its incorporation in the US. With $12.5 million raised in the initial token offering, the network began its mission to accelerate regeneration through a domain-specific ledger, high-quality data, verification protocols, and tradeable ecocredits.

Regen Network’s selection for Techstars’ sustainability accelerator program in 2019, in partnership with The Nature Conservancy, marked a pivotal moment. This platform facilitated connections and guidance, propelling the project forward. After three years of dedication, the launch of Regen Ledger in 2021 represented a monumental achievement. The launch event, featuring interviews with supporters and creators, was a testament to the community’s spirit. The network’s successful debut via Regen Ledger 1.0 underscored the culmination of meticulous planning, team growth, and collective determination.

In 2021, the Regen Foundation began its first year of operations with founding board members President Will Szal, Amanda Joy Ravenhill, and Dorn Cox with Revathi Kollegala serving as the foundation’s Executive Director. At mainnet launch, Regen Foundation was tasked with the stewardship of distributing 30% of $REGEN supply at launch to stakeholder groups such as smallholder farmers, indigenous peoples, rights of nature projects, and scientific researchers, has made substantial grants of locked $REGEN towards this end in the intervening period. Regen Foundation’s mission revolves around building ownership and governance around the public infrastructure and financial assets involved in eco-social systems.

Regen Network’s journey continued with the establishment of community funding programs, DAOs like OpenTEAM and Commons Stack, and the formation of Cerulean Ventures, an investment firm committed to catalyzing the $50 trillion natural assets industry. Core application-specific software evolved through multiple iterations, enhancing features such as credit classes, basket tokens, and data anchoring. The launch of Regen Marketplace in October 2022 empowered users to buy, sell, transfer, and retire digital carbon credits. Shortly thereafter, Regen and Toucan Protocol collaborated to create a bridge from Polygon for Nature Carbon Ton (NCT) with coinciding carbon liquidity pools on the Osmosis DEX platform.

Regen Network’s influence goes beyond its own platform. RND has been the lead maintainer of the Cosmos SDK, a development kit that enables L1 blockchains to seamlessly build within the Cosmos ecosystem using modular software components. Regen spearheaded significant releases such as Stargate, a set of upgrades that complete the original roadmap laid out in the Cosmos Whitepaper, as well as, version 0.43.0 and 0.46.0, demonstrating their ability to drive innovation both within and beyond the protocol-level.


==Pioneering Ecological Credit Standards with [[Regen Registry]]==

"Regen Network also ventured into the realms of emerging standards in the voluntary carbon and ecosystem service market through the creation of Regen Registry, a community-driven ecosystem service registry that is pioneering standards to promote ecological regeneration. The Registry’s guidelines are governed and owned by the community of issuers, who are stakeholders responsible for producing public goods related to ecological health outcomes. Regen Registry has a growing and impressive array of methodologies and credit classes that have been developed and published, illustrating the platform’s credibility and conviction. Currently, there are over 40 methodologies in progress, with 3 methods already published and 2 credit classes ready for use."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)


==[[Regen Foundation]] Operations and Initiatives==

As the largest token holder in the Regen Network ecosystem, the Regen Foundation has established various projects. One of the first initiatives was the delegation program, which involves staking tens of millions of $REGEN across a validator set consisting of 75 members. Delegations are recalculated on a monthly basis, taking into account factors such as validator-set prominence, governance participation, community participation, uptime, and carbon-neutral status. This approach aims to optimize decentralization and dynamism.

In early 2022, Regen Foundation granted its first locked token grants, known as “Community Staking DAOs.” Through this process, they realized the importance of creating an educational community around the “enDAOment” process. Consequently, Cohort 1 was launched in the fall of 2022, comprising seven organizations on a pathway to receive $REGEN tokens and participate in governance. Additionally, in 2023, Cohort 2 will be introduced specifically for groups interested in establishing methodologies and listing on Regen Ledger.

Regen Foundation is also a co-founding Limited Partner in the Regen/Cosmos Ecosystem Fund, managed by Cerulean Ventures. The foundation has received donations from Ripple and Biome Trust to further its mission to ensure climate finance ultimately supports sovereign regenerative bioregional economies."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)


==Market Traction and Impact==

To date, over 700,000 credits have been sold and 180,000 credits have been retired for carbon neutrality claims. In 2020, RND has sold 124,000 CarbonPlus Grasslands carbon credits to Microsoft for their ambitious moonshot goal, one of the largest soil carbon credit issuances ever in Australia. In 2021, we developed a carbon offset partnership with Sotheby’s for their Natively Digital Curated NFT. In 2022, the natural bodycare company All Good and Jack Johnson’s Meet the Moonlight tour offset became carbon neutral. In 2023, we led the ambitious cross-chain governance initiative Cosmos ZERO, where we supported major protocols and validators within the Cosmos network, including Osmosis, Stargaze, Evmos, Gravity Bridge, and Cheqd, in offsetting their carbon omissions.

There is a proposal to introduce Permissionless Credit Classes, which, if approved, would enable you to design and deploy your own credits for your community, company, or bioregion. This development has the potential to be a powerful catalyst for the rapid deployment of ecocredits across various industries. The introduction of permissionless credit class development would complement the existing Regen Registry, serving as a high-integrity standards body that utilizes the Regen Ledger.

Plans are also underway to introduce smart contracts to the Regen Ledger, unlocking creative possibilities for developers to innovate new applications using its core functionality with Cosmwasm. Additionally, the PoS token economics of the Regen Ledger are undergoing upgrades through a decentralized, community-driven process. A $REGEN tokenomics DAO has already raised $40k USD and aims to secure $100k USD in funding to expand the utility of $REGEN beyond network security and support network growth."

(https://medium.com/regen-network/the-evolution-of-regen-network-ae74febe1edf)

=Discussion=

==Ecosystem Service Markets and Agreements==

Gregory Landua et al.:

"Current ecosystem service markets such as carbon offset markets (voluntary
and compliance), are deeply flawed. We feel strongly that the foundation upon
which ecosystem service markets—as well as non-market agreements between
stakeholders to govern ecological commons in a sustainable, and if possible,
regenerative way—will depend on in infrastructure of trust that we refer to as
an ecological knowledge commons.

The layers of technology that generate security, durability and integrity
around data, compute functions and algorithms are the foundation for a trusted
monitoring and verification system of ecological state. This trusted monitoring
and verification system in turn is the foundation of any agreement between parties about ecological state. Agreements about ecological state are the foundation for the inclusion of ecological health into our financial system—an important
aim of Regen Network.

Currently, ecological health is not held on the balance sheet of any entity,
private or governmental. This means that financial decisions are blind to their
ecological impacts. This is starting to change in small ways; there is a global
payments for ecological services market. A conservative estimate puts the global
market size in 2016 at $36 billion annually [SBC+18]. One example of this would
be the Natural Resource Conservation Service (a branch of the United States
Department of Agriculture) paying farmers to plant riparian buffers around
streams that pass through their farms to improve the health of their waters.
We would like to build on these shifts in societal perception of farmers and
others interacting with natural systems. Rather than viewing farmers simply
as food producers, we would like to elevate their societal status to that of land
stewards. Agricultural use is the primary way (by land area) that humans interact with land, representing 37% of land globally [wor19]. Currently, the vast
majority of this activity is degenerative, but it doesn‘t need to be this way.

We do this through two fundamental instruments: Ecological State Protocols
(ESPs) and Ecological Agreements. ESPs are algorithms that, primarily utilizing remote-sensing data, determine the change in state of a specific facet of
ecological health. An example of this would be a soil carbon ESP, which would
track the change in soil carbon in a given piece of land over a given period
of time. Ecological Agreements are smart contracts tied to the outcomes of
Ecological State Protocols. For example, a rancher has demonstrated via a soil
carbon ESP that they‘ve sequestered one hundred tons of CO2 over the past
year in their ranch land. A carbon market, utilizing an Ecological Agreement,
could pay them automatically when this carbon sequestration is verified."
(https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf)


=Examples=

==[[Eco-Cacao]]==

K. Birchard et al. :

"Eco-Cacao is a cacao-producing farmer-cooperative in Esmeraldas Province,
Ecuador. These farmers steward agroforestry farms that border the
last remaining fragment of the Chocoan Rainforest of Ecuador. The Chocoan
Rainforest is of high ecological importance for a number of reasons, including
its role as a part of the hydrological pump that keeps the continent of South
America and the rest of the planet hydrated, and its phenomenal biodiversity.

Regen Network is working with a group of cacao buyers and Eco-Cacao to
verify regenerative land stewardship as a part of a price premium paid to farmers
who are successfully managing farms that mimic the native forest, generate high
carbon sequestration yields, and increase biodiversity on the farm.

In this case, the land health is being recorded on Regen Ledger to create an
open, transparent and public view of the ecological state of the larger region
and the relationship between that state and the management outcomes of land
stewards. The payment for ecological stewardship and land health of the plot
being stewarded are also recorded on the ledger. Eventually, direct payment will
be possible to land stewards. Layers beyond product premium such as carbon
payments and biodiversity payments will be added to the agreement matrix."
(https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf)


==[[Rainforest Foundation]]==

W. Szal et al. :

"The Rainforest Foundation is an organization that supports indigenous land
stewards to protect their ancestral forests. Regen Network is supporting Rainforest Foundation in leveraging the Global Forest Watch system of satellite
monitoring to give information to on-the-ground land stewards about potential
threats. Regen Network will serve as the public ledger for data and contracts to
streamline this operation and eventually payments will also flow through Regen
Network."
(https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf)

= Source =

* '''Economics whitepaper: Regen Network Economics Technical Paper. An Ecological Market-Commons, Secured by Proof-of-Stake. By G. Landua, K. Birchard, W. Szal. Version 0.2, November 14, 2019'''

URL = https://regen-network.gitlab.io/whitepaper/Economics.pdf

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]
[[Category:Ecology]]