'''= RegenCLT is a project of [[ReCommon]]'''


=Description=

ReCommon:

"At the core of our work, we create tools to reclaim, protect, and regenerate land through the use of the Regenerative Community Land Trust (RegenCLT) model of land tenure and governance. The RegenCLT model is designed to lower barriers to entry for communities seeking to acquire land through purchase or gift, and to develop a permaculture master plan for the site. This place-based plan takes into account the current state of the land, its future uses, its connection to the local and regional economy and community, and to the global community at large. The RegenCLT model is uniquely capable of acquiring all types of land, returning it to the commons, and managing it sustainably for future generations.

Conducting research and educating about the many facets of regeneration, including philosophies and techniques such as permaculture, natural building, alternative energy, web3 technology, and urban design, is integral to our mission. ReCommon will be a natural host for cutting-edge research in these fields, implementing solutions on appropriate scales based on ecological design fundamentals that can be applied globally.

ReCommon supports the development of resilient place-based communities to inhabit, enjoy and steward the land brought into common trust. We work directly with local communities to ensure that the land is properly used and protected, and that the appropriate design solutions are being implemented. These communities are organized bioregionally and are referred to as Nodes.

We use a distributed form of nested governance that empowers local community decision making within Bioregional Nodes while keeping them connected to the greater network and its happenings. Each Bioregional Node is its own autonomous Regenerative Community Land Trust and collectively constitutes the distributed commons network of ReCommon. Lastly, we fundraise and create sustainable income streams to support all of the above efforts.

(https://www.recommon.land/litepaper)


=More information=

* [[Bioregion]]









Our vision is a planetary network of sovereign, interconnected regenerative bioregional communities. "

[[Category:Open_Company_Formats]]
[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]