

=Context=

EM Burlingame:

"The following examples highlight instances where military factions played a crucial role in the overthrow of governments in Europe and North America over the past 500 years:

#English Civil War (1642-1651)
#French Revolution (1789-1799)
#Revolutions of 1848
#German Revolution (1918-1919)
#Russian Revolution (1917)
#Portuguese Revolution (1974)
#American Revolution (1775-1783)

(https://x.com/EMBurlingame/status/1803786364330352978)


=Directory=

Sources, listed by  EM Burlingame [https://x.com/EMBurlingame/status/1803786364330352978]:


Fall of the Western Roman Empire (476 AD)

- Heather, Peter. The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians. Oxford University Press, 2006.

- Gibbon, Edward. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Penguin Classics, 1994.


Fall of Constantinople (1453)

- Runciman, Steven. The Fall of Constantinople 1453. Cambridge University Press, 1965.

- Nicolle, David. Constantinople 1453: The End of Byzantium. Osprey Publishing, 2000.


French Revolution (1789-1799)

- Doyle, William. The Oxford History of the French Revolution. Oxford University Press, 2002.

- Schama, Simon. Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution. Vintage, 1989.


Russian Revolution (1917)

- Fitzpatrick, Sheila. The Russian Revolution. Oxford University Press, 2008.

- Pipes, Richard. The Russian Revolution. Knopf, 1990.


German Revolution (1918-1919)

- Haffner, Sebastian. Failure of a Revolution: Germany 1918-1919. Scolar Press, 1986.

- Jones, Mark. Founding Weimar: Violence and the German Revolution of 1918-1919. Cambridge University Press, 2016.


Iranian Revolution (1979)

- Keddie, Nikki R. Modern Iran: Roots and Results of Revolution. Yale University Press, 2006.

- Abrahamian, Ervand. A History of Modern Iran. Cambridge University Press, 2008.


Egyptian Revolution (2011)

- Ghonim, Wael. Revolution 2.0: The Power of the People Is Greater Than the People in Power: A Memoir. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.

- Kraidy, Marwan M., and Joe F. Khalil. Arab Television Industries. Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.


[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]