=Description=

Regional Cooperative of Westerkwartier

“Cooperating for the benefit of the region and the people living and working there.”

Next generation cooperative: The Regional Cooperative was founded in December of 2013 in the region of Westerkwartier (province of Groningen, Northern Netherlands). Its members are about 450 rural entrepreneurs, organised in diverse regional rural entrepreneurs’ associations, regional schools and universities of applied sciences – all supported by public bodies."
(https://gebiedscooperatie.info/english-introduction/)


=Characteristics=

"The Regional Cooperative is a social enterprise. It is
based on the main thoughts of the cooperative business
model: plough profits back in the business and pay dividend to its members. 

However, there are five important
differences as to the traditional understanding of the
cooperative enterprise:

1. The Regional Cooperative has a focus on the entire region and the regional economy, instead of concentrating on one single industry. It develops and stimulates economic activities with a benefit for the
region and the people who are living and working there.

2. Following from this, the members are from many different sectors, which makes it a so called multistakeholder alliance.

3. The members and stakeholders aim to establish a learning and innovating regional community. Cooperation between the various members and stakeholders is key, rather than competitiveness.

4. Thus, the Regional Cooperative of Westerkwartier links diverse sectors and connects entrepreneurs,
public bodies, educational institutions and civil society together in the region. Collectively they deal
with the challenges and prepare next generation business models based on circular economy, social inclusion and multi-stakeholders' engagement.
5. In addition, the Regional Cooperative stimulates communication and education towards a change in
attitude and behaviour. It raises awareness of various target groups and supports public and private
agencies and organisations, entrepreneurs, teachers and their students on how they can contribute to
and profit from the cooperative economic development model.

The reason behind this is that there are lots of changes in our regions. Businesses are closing down, authorities are shrinking budgets, talented and well-educated young people are leaving rural areas; many of
the over 50 are losing their jobs; social and social, cultural and health care facilities are being cut back – just
to mention some of them.

It is impossible to try to turn the tide throughout an entire region by applying just one uniform policy. However, a new business and economic approach is key. The Regional Cooperative’s focus is to adapt the
proven cooperative model (an evidently successful business model as to employment and turnover) and
prepare the next generation cooperative business models.

What are the Regional Cooperative’s objectives?


The Regional Cooperative aims to realise significant and sustainable regional social and economic development and progress. 


In particular, the focus is to:

• develop a usable next generation cooperative business
model;
• build capacity to understand and implement the cooperative next business models by educating and training teachers, students, entrepreneurs, agencies, (local & regional),
authorities and citizens;
• establish regional next generation cooperative businesses
and start-ups;
• create expertise in governance, legislation and finance;"

(http://www.gebiedscooperatie.info/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/2016-02-10-Factsheet-GBC-WK-EN.pdf)

[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Netherlands]]