=Description=

Kanishka Jayasuriya:

"One of the interesting elements of the crisis is the way in which new forms of
regional governance are being used to respond to the crisis — a process we describe as
‘regulatory regionalism’. Shahar Hameiri and myself have elaborated on this regulatory
regionalism framework in a recent Special Issue of the Australian Journal of International
Affairs (Hameiri 2009a; 2009b; and Jayasuriya, 2009). This has been expanded further in
a forthcoming special issue of the journal Globalisation, Societies and Education on the
topic ‘Regulatory Regionalism and the Governance of Higher Education’, which I have
edited with Susan Robertson of the University of Bristol (Jayasuriya and Robertson,
2010)."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


=Example=


Kanishka Jayasuriya:

"This is not simply a question of the global against the regional; it is about the
way in which the regional is layered onto global and national regulation in the
implementation of administrative rules. In the East Asian context, a particularly
important role has been played by the Asia Development Bank (ADB) in providing the
framework for financial and economic policy at the national and sub-national level. The
ADB has also played a significant role in regional financial initiatives. These changes
reinforce initiatives such as the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI), which provided emergency
funds for currency stabilization in the event of a financial tsunami sweeping through the
region, such as the 1997-98 Asian crisis (or the 2008 credit crisis). The initiative is limited
in scope as well as in terms of the volume of funds available for emergency funding.
However, the very fact that a currency stabilization scheme such as the CMI is on the
policy agenda is itself a major step away from the Asia-Pacific region’s traditional
emphasis on trade liberalization."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


=More Information=

* a comment from the same author on the [[Transnational Class]]


Bibliography:

Jayasuriya, K. & Robertson, S. 2010. Regulatory Regionalism and the Governance of
Higher Education. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 8(1): pp. 1-6.


---. 2009. Regulatory Regionalism in the Asia-Pacific: Drivers, Instruments and Actors.
Australian Journal of International Affairs, 63 (3): pp. 335-347.

---. 2010a. Learning By the Market: Regulatory Regionalism, Bologna, and Accountability
Communities. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 8(1): pp. 7-22.



[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Governance]]