

'''* Article: Regulating Bitcoin and Block Chain Derivatives. by Houman B. Shadab'''

URL = http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@aboutcftc/documents/file/gmac_100914_bitcoin.pdf

Written statement to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Global Markets Advisory Committee. Digital Currency Introduction – Bitcoin, October 9, 2014

=Summary=

"Bitcoins are scarce digital commodities that enable parties to transmit
messages over a network that serves as a universal public ledger. Bitcoins
fall within the definition of “commodity” under the Commodity Exchange
Act (CEA) such that derivatives contracts that reference bitcoins are subject
to regulation by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Like
other derivatives, Bitcoin derivatives would likely not be subject to the full
scope of regulation under the CEA to the extent such derivatives involve
physical delivery (as opposed to cash settlement) or are nonfungible and not
independently traded. In addition, Bitcoin swaps are currently too illiquid to
be subject to mandatory clearing. A growing number of firms are offering
Bitcoin derivatives, most of which are for retail traders. In addition to
derivatives that reference bitcoins, the Bitcoin (block chain) protocol can
potentially enable automated derivatives contracts that securely trade, clear,
and settle without the use of trusted intermediaries. The CFTC should
consider an exemption for block chain derivatives that meet its policy
objectives as a result of the rules that the underlying code embeds in the
transactions."

[[Category:P2P Law]]