

=Article=

'''* Article / Chapter: Reinventing civil society. Erik Borgman, Gabriël van den Brink & Paul Dekker. Chapter 12 in: Brink, G. van den red. (2016) Moral sentiments in Modern Society, Amsterdam: AUP, p. 393-409.'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/49570999/Reinventing_civil_society

"This underlines the astuteness of sociologist Paul Schnabel, 
former director of the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (Sociaal en Cultureel 
Planbureau), when he encapsulated the mental state of the Netherlands in the statement: ‘I'm 
fine, but we're in a bad way’ (Met mij gaat het goed, met ons gaat het slecht). The ultimate 
question is, of course, whether this state of affairs will persist. Will the lack of moral values in 
the public realm ultimately also corrode the moral sensitivity of individual citizens and 
professionals? Or is the reverse possible: will the vast reservoir of moral energy stored in a 
modern society such as that of the Netherlands sooner or later be translated into political 
terms?  We obviously do not know what will happen in the coming decades. Nevertheless, we 
can elaborate on some ideas that might help to realise the second option."



=Book=


'''Book: Reinventing Civil Society. David Green. 1993'''

==Citations==

Markets generate more prosperity, but `more goods' do not make a good society.

The challenge we face today is to
identify a sense of community or solidarity that is compatible with
freedom. Competitive markets coordinate the efforts of people who
may be self-interested, even selfish, but they do not create solidarity.

Contrary to the view attributed to Mrs Thatcher, that there is `no such
thing as society', there is indeed such a thing. But it is not synonymous
with the state. It is the realm of `activity in common', which is at once
voluntary and guided by a sense of duty to other people and to the
social system on which liberty rests.

==Introduction==

The author's motivation:

"This book began as an attempt to consider the lessons the former
communist countries of Eastern Europe might be able to learn from
Western experience of voluntary welfare provision. But, as the study
proceeded, it quickly became obvious that we in the West have done
almost as much harm to our own voluntary associations as the
communist countries, not as part of a deliberate effort to create a mass
society of individuals ruled by an elite, but as a result of the inadvertent
displacement effect of the welfare state. By narrowing opportunities
for personal idealism in the service of others, the welfare state has
eroded the sense of personal responsibility and mutual obligation on
which a resilient civil society rests.

As I began to think about how best we could re-invigorate our once
rich and varied voluntary, communal life it also became obvious that
the economic philosophy which had come to dominance in the 1980s
did not provide intellectual tools adequate to the task. This inadequacy
was particulary reflected in the social policies of the Thatcher years,
which were dominated by a hard-boiled economic rationalism which
failed to do justice to human character and potential.

We only have to look at our own language to discover the rich
variety of virtues that make a free society work and which describe the
obligations we all owe to one another. Good character, honesty, duty,
self-sacrifice, honour, service, self-discipline, toleration, respect, justice,
self-improvement, trust, civility, fortitude, courage, integrity, diligence,
patriotism, consideration for others, thrift and reverence are just a few.
Yet many of these words cannot readily be used today in ordinary talk.
To the modern ear, they have a ring of either antique charm or total
obsolescence.

The leading voices of Thatcherite philosophy invariably saw the
Thatcher revolution in moral terms. They hoped to restore what Shirley
Letwin, in her excellent book The Anatomy of Thatcherism, called the
`vigorous virtues' of self-sufficiency, energy, independent mindedness,
adventurousness, loyalty to friends and hardiness in the face of
enemies. The Thatcherite emphasis on the vigorous virtues was of
central importance in halting the pace of Britain's genteel economic
decline. And today, the superiority of robust market competition
compared with socialist planning is accepted across the political
spectrum. But, Thatcherism suffered from a missing ingredient. It is the
thesis of this book that the missing dimension was its inadequate
emphasis on the `civic virtues', such as self-sacrifice, duty, solidarity
and service of others.

Over twenty years ago in 1971 the IEA's Editorial Director, Arthur
Seldon, commissioned The Morals of Markets2 by the philosopher H.B.
Acton to examine the moral questions raised by competition. In the
heat of the subsequent battle to improve public understanding of
economic problems, the issues raised in that book were put to one side
but now, in recognition of its continuing relevance, the Liberty Fund
has republished The Morals of Markets. Reinventing Civil Society is an
attempt to refine and develop further our thinking about the moral
dimension of a free society."


==Excerpts==

===The tradition of [[Communal Liberalism]]===

"Liberty rests on people taking
personal responsibility for the maintenance of the institutions, morals
and habits fundamental to freedom.

This tradition of `communal liberalism' is not a utopian ideal of the
imagination, it was the lived reality of liberty for many long years until
well into the twentieth century. Most of this book is an attempt to
describe the day-to-day character of this tradition by re-assessing the
voluntary social institutions that had emerged under its influence by
the end of the last century, when their incomplete evolution was
prematurely halted by the march of socialism."


===The historic role of [[Friendly Societies]]===

"For liberty was not only an intellectual
ideal, it was the guiding philosophy of the common people who acted
out its values in their everyday lives. This reality is nowhere better
exemplified than in the work of the friendly societies, those
organisations for mutual aid which flourished in the eighteenth,
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and which were joined by the
vast majority of working men, far exceeding the membership of the
other characteristic organisations of the working classes, the trade
unions and the co-operative societies. (In 1910 there were 6.6m
registered members of friendly societies; 2.5m members of registered
trade unions; and 2.5m members of co-operative societies.)

The friendly societies are of additional interest for two other
reasons. First, the record of the friendly societies contradicts the wide
perception today that, although a market society is undoubtedly the
best way to generate prosperity, it provides inadequately for the health
and welfare of its citizens. As Chapters 3-10 relate, the historical reality
turns out to have been the opposite of the legend of welfare before the
welfare state widely believed today.

And second, the experience of the friendly societies shows that we
have under-estimated the displacement effect of the welfare state.
Thatcher Governments thought it an adequate response to defects in
the health service, for example, to introduce competitive tendering
within the state system. But this was to misunderstand the true
character of a free society. Competitive markets are a necessary but not
sufficient condition of freedom. The welfare state did not only suppress
the incentive system of the competitive market, it also suppressed those
institutions which served as proving grounds for men and women of
good character and which provided outlets for idealism, service and
achievement. We must therefore find new ways to re-energise `civil
society'."


===The role of [[Civil Associations]]===

"If Oakeshott is correct in identifying the absence of overwhelming
concentrations of power as the essence of liberty, how can we account
for the peculiar character of the state in Britain? According to Oakeshott,
modern European states can best be understood as torn between
two contradictory methods of association which are the legacy of the
medieval age. The first mode of association he calls `civil association'
and the second `enterprise' or `purposive association'.

An `enterprise association' is composed of persons related in the
pursuit of a common interest or objective. In the pure form of such an
association there are not several purposes, but one sovereign purpose.
The task of leaders is to manage the pursuit of this goal and to direct
individuals as appropriate. A nation might comprise many such
enterprise associations, including business corporations, but here I am
concerned with nation-states which take on this character.
In a nation of civil associates people are related to one another, not
because they share a concrete goal, or are engaged together in a
substantive task, but in that they acknowledge the authority of the
jurisdiction under which they live. Respect for the authority of the law
does not imply that every person supports every law. The law is a
changing phenomenon, and so what commands respect in a civil
association is both the law as it stands and the law-reforming process.
The laws specify the conditions to which every person subscribes
as each pursues his or her self-chosen life style. This type of association
is therefore a system of law and its jurisdiction. People are associated,
not because they share the same substantive wants, but because they
accept the same conditions in seeking to pursue their own goals as they
believe best.5 Each is under an obligation to act justly towards others,
and each person enjoys equal status under the jurisdiction. The
character of the laws is central. In both an enterprise association and a
civil association people are subject to rules of conduct, but in an
enterprise association the rules are instrumental to the pursuit of the
common aim. In the pure form of civil association, the laws are moral
stipulations, not instrumental commands.

Under a system of civil association the sense of solidarity of the
people as well as the legitimacy of the government derives from the
shared sense that the social system gives everyone their chance to do
the best they can in their self-chosen sphere of life and also from
popular awareness that the continuance of liberty depends on everyone
doing their bit. The sense of solidarity in an enterprise association,
however, derives from the belief that each person is part of a single
grand scheme, in practice either to modernise or develop the nation's
resources or to mould human character in a new direction. Thus, in a
nation organised as an enterprise association, individuals are instruments
of the government; whereas in a civil association the government
is an instrument of the people, charged with keeping in good order the
institutions which allow people to pursue their self-chosen ideals.
Historically, Oakeshott characterises the two types of association as
outcomes of medieval thought and practice. The enterprise association
approximates to `lordship' and the civil association to `rulership'. In
medieval times kings were lords of their domain or estate, and
therefore managers of their people. Kingship in the age of lordship was,
therefore, estate management. The King was lord of the manor."


===[[Civic Capitalism]]===


"This seventeenth-century antipathy to over-mighty government
developed in two directions, not always clearly distinguished. The first,
which I will call civic capitalism in the hope of avoiding confusion with
other related ideas, can be understood as an effort to prevent the king
from reverting to `lordship', in Oakeshott's language. The civic
capitalist ideal was a nation united as civil associates, not as instruments
of the king's will. This antipathy to the king was based on a
sense, entrenched since at least the thirteenth century, that English
subjects were governed by a ruler not by a lord, and that the law was
a moral and prudential code for living which no person, and certainly
no king, ought to defy. The Stuart kings were seen as usurpers
meddling with the centuries-old rights of subjects. Classical liberalism,
or civic capitalism, was therefore respectful of history. It saw England's
civilisation as worth preserving.

The other leading liberal tradition is commonly called rationalism.
It did not see the struggle against the Stuart monarchs as a restoration
of historic rights, but rather saw all tradition as suffocating, and barely
distinguished between custom and superstition. This tradition
originated with Descartes and, in its search for `clear and distinct' truth,
over-estimated the capacity of governments to re-arrange human
affairs.

How did the civic capitalists see the human condition? 

Essentially, they saw it as a struggle against human imperfection. Two particular
shortcomings concerned them, sinfulness and ignorance, and
consequently the practical task of the civic-capitalist thinker and
activist was to develop human civilisation by discovering or improving
those institutions which encouraged the opposites of sin and ignorance,
namely goodness and learning. The moral ideal underlying civic
capitalism is that human relations should, as far as possible, be based
on free mutual consent rather than force or command. Classical liberals
favoured this ideal because they believed it was more consistent with
human nature than rule by the `lord of the manor'. But it was also an
ideal in the sense that it challenged human character by setting a
standard to be aimed for. It presented people with an ideal way to live.
The particular combination of institutions that came to be supported
had taken reasonably mature shape by the time that liberals like
David Hume, Adam Smith, Josiah Tucker, Edmund Burke and William
Paley were writing in the eighteenth century. The character of civic
capitalism was elaborated further during the American constitutional
debates of the 1780s, not least by the authors of the Federalist Papers, by
Immanuel Kant and Wilhelm von Humboldt in Germany, by
Montesquieu in France and during the nineteenth century by Tocqueville,
J.S. Mill and Acton. During this century the tradition has been
developed still further by Friedrich Hayek and Michael Novak.
It is important to avoid one major source of modern confusion.

Liberty under law is not a doctrine which sees liberty as the absence of
all restraint, or freedom from all obstacles to our desires. The classical
liberals did not want `power', they wanted `liberty', that is they did not
seek the `power' to achieve their particular ambitions, they sought a
social order—a civilisation—which allowed every person the liberty
under law to contribute to their own good and the good of others as
each believed best. To repeat Acton's words: they treasured the liberties
of others as their own.

The ideal was liberty under law, not liberty to do as anyone
pleased. It was liberty guided by conscience rather than naked wants.
Nor was it relativistic. Liberty was valued, not because civic capitalists
thought that any individual's views or values were as good as anyone
else's, but because it is not possible for any authority to identify in
advance who will turn out to do the most good, or benefit humankind
to the greatest extent, or to judge which values, habits or institutions
will ultimately prove most conducive to human co-operation. Consequently,
they thought that every one should be free to contribute as
each thought proper, in the belief that we will recognise real progress
when we see it.

The view of thinkers such as Acton and Tocqueville must also be
sharply distinguished from another attitude often associated with
liberalism. It is the view, which derives from Rousseau, that people are
essentially good and that they are made bad by institutions, such as
bad laws or bad governments.

The law is intended, not only to punish wrong conduct, but also to
smooth the path of voluntary co-operation. Roughly speaking, criminal
law punishes moral wrongs, and civil law is the body of rules that
makes it easier to work with other people, as buyers or sellers,
employers or employees, and consequently to create wealth more
readily.

Thus, civic capitalism was a political philosophy based on a belief
in the possibility (but not the inevitability) of progress and how it could
best be achieved. In essence, civic capitalists have taken the view that
progress is the result of trial and error. As the distinguished turn-ofthe-
century economist Alfred Marshall argued, collectivism might seem
in the short run to deliver benefits, but this was only because it lived off
the fruits of earlier private initiative. In Marshall's view, if the springs
of progress were not to dry up, there was no substitute for the bearing
of risks at one's own expense.

The civic capitalists were first and foremost concerned to discover
those common institutions, both private and public, which, on the one
hand, encouraged individuals to become better citizens and which, on
the other, reduced the harm that would result when human behaviour
fell short of the ideal. Individuals are capable of great self sacrifice and
many have laid down their own life for the good of others, but they are
also capable of great wickedness. The civic capitalists were idealists
whose vision was tempered by their awareness of human fallibility. As
Professor Alfred Marshall wrote, `progress mainly depends on the
extent to which the strongest, and not merely the highest, forces of
human nature can be utilised for the increase of social good'.2
Unlike some conservative thinkers who have celebrated established
authority per se, civic capitalists did not forget that authority is a means
and not an end."

'''Summary:'''

I.

"The founders of civic capitalism saw the state as the protector of the
people from crime and oppression as well as the facilitator of human
ingenuity. They saw individuals as each struggling to understand the
world around them and to make the most of their own lives in mutual
concert with others. No less important, they saw people as united, not
in pursuit of a uniform goal, since all were free to pursue their own
objectives, but by the particular sense of solidarity that results from a
shared awareness of belonging to a civilisation that gives everyone
their chance. Solidarity is a term generally associated with egalitarianism,
or with the creation of cohesion through compulsory transfers of
cash—as exemplified by the European Community's `cohesion
fund'—but the solidarity associated with liberty is the sense of unity
that flows from being part of a culture that respects persons as fully
entitled to make the most of the opportunities available to them and
which expects each individual to uphold the values on which freedom
rests. To feel love for their country has been typical of free citizens, as
demonstrated by the high morale of the allied soldiers of World War

II.

Also central to the thinking of civic capitalists has been a commitment
to personal responsibility, partly for prudential and partly for
moral reasons. They thought it prudent for people to be free to pursue
their own lawful ends as their judgement dictated and at their own
risk, because better results in the interests of all were more likely. This
view was taken partly because, when decision makers spend other
people's money, they do not exercise the same care as when they
personally bear the cost of failure or reap the reward of success. In
addition, classical liberals believed that the personal bearing of risk
gave individuals a powerful reason to improve their knowledge, skills
and character. Morally, their view was based on the argument that
freedom will not work unless we all accept an obligation to treat others
with the respect due to fellow moral agents."


===The role of the medical establishment in destroying mutual aid===

David Green:

"The freedom to experiment during the period before the 1911 National
Insurance Act allowed consumers to protect themselves from the
demands of organised medicine and to encourage higher standards of
care. First, liberty enabled medical consumers to organise themselves
against the efforts of the medical profession to force up pay and free
doctors from accountability to patients for the standard of care. Second,
the absence of a public sector monopoly before 1911 enabled different
methods of paying for medical care to be attempted and threw up
valuable lessons from which others could learn and on which future
progress could be based. The 1911 Act led to the dismantling of these
arrangements by the state at the behest of the doctors, as Chapter 9
describes."

From chapter 9:

"The friendly societies were so successful that their arrangements for
social insurance and primary medical care formed the model for the
early welfare state.1 But this, ironically, was their undoing. The 1911
National Insurance Act was originally seen by Lloyd George, who
charted it through Parliament, as a way of extending the benefits of
friendly society membership to the whole working population. But on
its way through the House of Commons the original Bill was radically
transformed by powerful vested interests hostile to working-class
mutual aid. The organised medical profession had long resented the
dominance of the medical consumer, and particularly disliked
working-class control of medical `gentlemen'. The BMA was equally
anxious to obtain more pay and higher status for doctors. No less
important were the commercial insurance companies, which had long
disliked the competition of the non-profit friendly societies and saw the
1911 National Insurance Bill as a threat to their business. They were
organised in a powerful trade association, called the `Combine'.

The BMA and the Combine formed a temporary alliance to extract
concessions from the Government at the expense of the friendly
societies. The essence of working-class social insurance was democratic
self-organization, but amendments to the Bill obtained by the BMA and
the Combine undermined it. Doctors' pay had been kept within limits
that ordinary manual workers could afford, but under pressure, the
Government nearly doubled doctors' incomes and financed this
transfer of wealth from insured workers to the medical profession by
means of regressive flat-rate national insurance contributions.

The friendly societies had for many decades encouraged doctors to
improve the standard of their services through competition. In
addition, the friendly societies also evolved complaints procedures to
keep doctors on their toes.

The government also provided complaints machinery under the
1911 Act, but it was much inferior. As Professor Rudolf Klein has
argued, the 1911 Act `marked a giant step forward in the emancipation
of the medical profession from lay control'. The complaints machinery
of 1911 was introduced `not as an attempt to fortify the position of the
consumer but as a salvage operation designed to save something from
the wreck of lay control over medical services'. The 1911 deal represents
`the first rung in the ladder leading to the syndicalist system of
professional control over the health services'.

The friendly society tradition was based on the rules of natural
justice. There are two main principles: audi alteram partem, `hear the
other side'; and nemo judex in causa sua, `no man may be a judge in his
own cause'. Underlying this philosophy was the belief that both sides
had an equal right to have their case heard and that essential to the
process was the independence of those judging the issue. Friendly
society rules therefore provided for the appointment of arbitration
committees comprised of individuals with no axe to grind.
The view of the doctors was the opposite: no one should judge
professional conduct except the professional. Doctors have often
asserted that this notion is in the public interest, but without exception
it has been accompanied by an ethic of professional loyalty which
strongly frowned upon criticism of one's fellows."

(http://www.civitas.org.uk/pdf/cw17.pdf)


===1948: The Eradication of Mutual Aid===

From chapter 10:

'''The role of the medical establishment:'''

"The legislation of 1911 had incorporated the friendly societies into the
state national insurance scheme. The virtue of voluntarism is that a
variety of methods of provision can develop to meet the differing needs
of individuals and families. The affiliated friendly societies provided
one approach but they were not everyone's cup of tea and many
preferred the different systems of the more centralised societies like the
Hearts of Oak or the National Deposit Friendly Society. This very
variety, however, became a problem under the state scheme, for voices
began to complain that it was unfair that different benefits were
received for the same compulsory contribution.

The Beveridge Report of 1942 described what these differences had
come to mean by the late 1930s. Under the approved-society system
each society was valued at five-yearly intervals and after providing for
reserves a surplus or deficiency was calculated. The surplus could be
spent on additional benefits for members. The fifth valuation in 1938
allowed societies with 88 per cent of the insured men and 81 per cent
of the insured women to pay additional benefits. The surplus was
£5,850,000 when total expenditure was about £35m. Of this £5,850,000,
£2,200,000 was paid in additional cash benefits and £3,650,000 in
benefits in kind, largely dental and ophthalmic care, medical appliances
and convalescent homes. Additional sickness and disablement
benefits were paid by societies representing 63 per cent of insured men.
About £250,000 was spent on maternity benefits.

The Beveridge Report recommended a single contribution and a
single benefit agency to administer the scheme. However, Beveridge
was keen that friendly societies should be allowed to act as agents for
the payment of state benefit and to offer additional services to members
purchased with voluntary contributions.2 To Beveridge's great
disappointment his proposal was rejected by the Government.
The result was a monolithic state system for benefits and medical
care. The remainder of the chapter is devoted to an example of what
this meant in practice for the medical institutes and the medical aid
societies of the Welsh miners, which had proved their pioneering worth
despite the prolonged antipathy of organised medicine.

It is a detailed case study, but it is worth examination because it
reveals the mentality of the period, and in particular it shows how the
intellectual leaders of the day failed to understand the value of
diversity in allowing room for human progress. Beveridge himself
warned in The Times before the second reading of the National
Insurance Bill in February 1946, that it would be a costly mistake to
refuse the friendly societies a continuing role. To set up an `allembracing
State machine will be final', warned Beveridge, whereas to
admit the friendly societies would `leave room for experiment and
trial'. But his words were ignored.


Throughout the 1920s and 1930s the medical institutes had exercised a
restraining effect on medical fees to the advantage of the consumer. The
BMA seized the opportunity offered by the new National Health
Service to wipe out the medical institutes for good."


'''The choice for collectivism:'''

"Three very closely related, but unspoken, notions seem to have been at
the root of the Government's thinking. The first was a simple faith in
the superiority of government provision over market provision. Even
though developments in the health-care market outside the government
scheme were considerable, and often provided a model for
reformers intent on forcing everyone into a single government scheme,
freedom from government interference continued to be poorly valued.
By the 1930s, after some years of government intervention, all improvements
were taken by progressive opinion to be the result of the
government scheme and all problems the result of the continuing
inadequacy of the market-place or the unsatisfactory (but easily
remediable) nature of previous government intervention. Early
mistakes were not seen as inherent in government intervention as such,
but rather as arising from failures of personnel or programme. No
satisfactory effort was made to appraise the market as an alternative to
intervention. If the market was compared, it was the market before
intervention—as if no change would have occurred without government
interference. Nor was there any recognition that government
might inadvertently have stifled some beneficial changes.

Enthusiasts for a state monopoly passionately believed that the new
scheme was going to be the best, and therefore to allow any other kind
of organisation to continue in being was pointless. It was inconceivable
that any alternative would be better.

Closely allied to this simple faith in the superiority of government
was a second notion which Hayek has called the `synoptic delusion'.14
The notion is that a single person can hold in his mind all the facts
relevant to some social problem.

The third notion was that progress was inevitable. All thought was
being directed to creating what was intended to be the best health
service attainable. That some institutional structures are more amenable
to progress than others was not on the agenda in 1945 and 1946.
Even though the pioneering work of the medical institutes was freely
acknowledged, it appears to have been assumed that there would no
longer be any need for pioneering institutions. The state scheme would
take care of progress."

'''Conclusion:'''

"Before 1948 friendly society medical institutes and medical aid societies
provided much-needed competition in the supply of medical care. This
helped to contain prices in the non-government sector. Perhaps more
significant was the innovative role of medical institutes and medical aid
societies. As Aneurin Bevan acknowledged, they had pioneered new
services which it was hoped the NHS would make standard. Yet, under
the illusion that the political process can provide for innovation as
effectively as the market, all alternatives to the NHS monolith were
excluded. Due partly to government efforts to satiate professional
demands, but also to a misguided faith in the omniscience and
organisational capacity of government, the final vestiges of competition
in the supply of health care were driven out of existence."

(http://www.civitas.org.uk/pdf/cw17.pdf)

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Civil_Society]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]