
* Article: Learning at the Seafloor, Looking at the Sky: The Relationship 
Between Individual Tasks and Collaborative Engagement in Two  Citizen Science Projects. By Katie DeVries Hassman, Gabriel Mugar, et al.

URL = http://buildingthecommonsdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2013/08/cscl-2013-conference-proceedings-2013-hassman.pdf

=Abstract=

"In this study, we explore the relationship between individual and collaborative 
learning activities as they occur in two online citizen science projects, Seafloor Explorer and  Planet Hunters. Trace ethnography is suggested as a methodology suitable for investigating 
this relationship. Preliminary findings identify relationships between four types of activities  that emerge which support individual and collaborative learning activities and participation."


=Excerpt=

From the Introduction"

"Online citizen science projects provide tools and opportunities that support public engagement in scientific 
research processes, often involving large data sets (Wiggins & Crowston, 2011). 

The activities supported by  citizen science projects have the potential to lead to significant scientific discoveries and to also support 
participant learning opportunities (Bonney et al., 2009; Brossard, Lewenstein & Bonney, 2005; Wiggins &  Crowston, 2011). Until recently, research investigating citizen science projects has conceptualized learning as a 
potential consequence of individual participation. Expanding on previous research, we draw on the notion of 
learning from Lave & Wenger’s (1991) theory of legitimate peripheral participation and conceptualize learning 
not as an outcome, but rather as evolving forms of participation in a community of practice. We use this 
perspective to explore the relationship between individual and collaborative types of participation in online 
citizen science projects."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Relational]]