=Definition=
'''
"Relationship Equity = the strength of the relationship between the firm and its customers, as perceived by the customer"'''
([http://www.centralityjournal.com/archives/blogs_social_networking_sites_or_virtual_communities_alternative_paths_to_building_relational_equity_with_customers_part_2.html])


Contextual citation:

"Rust, Lemon and Narayandas in their book entitled Customer Equity Management (2005). Their framework suggests that firms should focus on building customer equity, a measure of return on investments in customers, by influencing three customer equity drivers: Value Equity (the objective evaluation that a customer makes about the products/services of a firm), Brand Equity (the subjective evaluation that a customer makes about the products/services of a firm, beyond product/service functionality) and Relationship Equity (the strength of the relationship between the firm and its customers, as perceived by the customer)."
([http://www.centralityjournal.com/archives/blogs_social_networking_sites_or_virtual_communities_alternative_paths_to_building_relational_equity_with_customers_part_2.html])



=Discussion=

By Constance Porter at the Centrality blog:


"While few have explored the notion that online-networks could drive customer equity, I believe that that they could. I propose that among the three online networking models, blogs have the greatest effect on value equity, social networking sites have the greatest impact on the brand equity driver and virtual communities have the greatest potential impact on relationship equity. Thus, each model has the potential to grow customer equity."
([http://www.centralityjournal.com/archives/blogs_social_networking_sites_or_virtual_communities_alternative_paths_to_building_relational_equity_with_customers_part_2.html])


Arguments:

From
([http://www.centralityjournal.com/archives/blogs_social_networking_sites_or_virtual_communities_alternative_paths_to_building_relational_equity_with_customers_part_2.html])


1) It is the benefit of marketing intelligence that uniquely positions blogs to drive value equity. Indeed, bloggers often discuss publicly their perceptions of value offered by marketers.

2) The (social network) sites provide a ready-made marketplace that savvy firms can use to target the lucrative youth-market that often cannot be reached via traditional media outlets. Through the power of Word Of Mouth, these sites provide new opportunities to build brand identity and equity with the youth market

3) firms have a unique opportunity to use such communities to build relationships directly with customers. My research shows that relationship-building efforts in virtual communities enhance trust and drive other beneficial outcomes such as a the willingness of a consumer to share information with marketers.


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Relational]]