
=Discussion=

Nina Simons:

"A more relational orientation is peeking over the horizon, in a wide range of domains and disciplines. Increasingly, research is revealing the value of whole body learning, proving that our entire neural networks and our emotions are profoundly involved in all thought and in how we relate to the world and create meaning. Increasingly, our sciences are evolving less linear, more holistic models of how things work.

New communications disciplines can offer a helpful framework through which to revisit our relational musculature. The emerging field of nonviolent communication, for example, suggests that, in situations of conflict, we track the emotions that lay beneath the content of the words.

By responding receptively to the emotional message--and not the verbal one--embattled moments can become swiftly and enduringly defused, creating a real opening for people to question their previous positions.

Promising relational social technologies are emerging in many fields. Thanks in large part to Candace Pert’s work on the "molecules of emotion," the study of emotional intelligence, or EQ, is expanding rapidly. People who have a higher "eq" tend to have happier, more productive and fulfilling lives. EQ is defined as "the ability to perceive emotions, to access and generate emotions to assist thought, to understand emotions, and to reflectively regulate emotions so as to promote emotional and intellectual growth." Cultivating our capacity to step outside of our emotional reactions, noting them more dispassionately, might offer the time and space needed to assess a number of possible responses to select the one that’s most relationally attuned.

With a history of relations that have reinforced hierarchy, domination, and disrespect as the norm, we have a lot of unlearning to do. To alter our orientation to one of partnership and reciprocity will require real commitment, practice and patience. But I believe that our biological orientation toward relationship, and what biologist E.O. Wilson calls biophilia--that innate affinity that life has for life--strengthens our likelihood of success.

As human beings, we’re built for relationship. Our young remain dependent far longer than most other creatures, and our neural systems and limbic brains are hard-wired for empathy, compassion, and connection. Furthermore, as naturalist Janine Benyus has noted, we’re a highly adaptable species, and truly excel as mimics.

Fortunately, we have an abundance of relational intelligence to learn from, if only we can humbly accept its tutelage. The natural world is resplendent with symbiotic long-term reciprocal relationship, between blossom and pollinator, moisture and mycelium, plants and herbivores. In nature, noone lives in isolation, and the sense of balanced interdependence is palpable in any thriving ecosystem. We can opt to be mentored by its mastery, if we can quiet ourselves long enough to hear, smell, feel, and learn from it. I believe our survival, as well as our joy, may depend on our making this shift, bringing a practice of relational learning to the center of our attention.

As the renowned biologist Humberto Maturana once said: "Love, allowing the other to be a legitimate other, is the only emotion that expands intelligence."

(https://earthlight.org/2005/essay53_simons.html)

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]