
URL = http://www.relationshipsfoundation.org

=Description=

"If it is our relationships that matter most to us in life, how come our entire global system, whether political, economic or technological, prioritises material and individual goals at the expense of relationships?  

Instead of placing material wealth, or individual rights and freedom, at the centre of our metaphysical solar system, should we place relationships at the centre?  And, if we did place relationships at the centre, not only of personal life but also of corporate, economic and political life, what changes would that bring about? 

First, we would have happier individuals and a happier society. For instance, rather than dismissing financial problems as an economic failure, or blaming educational shortcomings on a deficient curriculum, we would look at what lies at the root of these issues: twisted institutional relationships. We would see not only personal issues but also corporate and public policy through a relational lens, changing the goals, values and practices of organisations as well as national policy, which would transform public life e.g. in finance, business, education, healthcare, criminal justice and environmental issues. 

Second, Relational Thinking provides a practical agenda for taking the world towards sustainability (e.g. in relation to the environment, finance, economics, and business).

Third, there are tools such as the Relational Proximity Framework and the Relational Health Audit which apply a 5-dimensional framework (directness, time, knowledge, power, purpose) to measure the quality of relationships, and the impact of policies on relationships. These instruments do not focus on individuals, organisations or organisational divisions but rather on the connection between them, the dynamic of the relationship itself. That has not been examined in any systematic or robust way anywhere else. Earlier, there was a lack of categories and terms with which to evaluate the components of “relationships”. 

Finally, applying Relational Thinking will bring substantial long-term benefits for environmentally-sound economic growth: lower demands on public services, lower levels of taxation, and the flattening of economic cycles through less debt of all kinds. This fresh vision for human well-being and community life provides new energy & drive for economies around the world."

=More Information=

* [[Relational Research]]

* For further information, please see the National (USA, UK, ZA, HK, SGP, AUS) sites related to the Network, as well as the Central sites, such as: www.relationshipsfoundation.org, http://relationalthinking.net, www.relationalresearch.org, and www.relational-analytics.com

* Membership of the Relational Thinking Network is open to organisations and individuals who share the Judeo-Christian ideals and ideas of the Network, entirely irrespective of any other considerations such as religion, belief, caste, status, wealth, skin-colour or nationality.

* Membership and other questions, please, to Professor Prabhu Guptara on +41 71 622 0274 or prabhusguptara@gmail.com

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Movements]]