
* '''Policy paper: [[Releasing the True Value of Land]]. The Land Market and new Forms of Ownership for Organic Agriculture. By  Titus Bahner, Xaver Diermayr et al. International Biodynamic Association IBDA, Hitzacker / Germany, October 2012''' 

URL = ?

Request a copy via Dr. Titus Bahner: titus.bahner@lebendigesland.de 


=Description=

Eimhin David Callanan:

"Since its founding in 2014 Kulturland has amassed over 120 hectares of land , which is managed by 19 agroecological farming projects around Germany. Its founder , Dr Titus Bahner, wrote the attached piece as his thesis for his Phd in agricultural economics. He refused a post doc , noting that the change needed was not happening in the universities,and left to build the thesis in reality, creating the land cooperative, Kulturland.

Page 60 through 69 show the core of the thesis , whereby new commons are created and protected into perpetuity, using the cooperative model.

Kulturland member [[Thomas Rippel]], together with colleague Hannes Steinhilber , last year built an open source crowdinvestment platform to support commons and cooperative projects based on a 0% 'ideological investment'. Its first iteration raised 1million euro.

Thomas' next goal, together with German colleagues, is a land backed crypto currency, launching in spring."

=More information=

contact to the authors:
c/o Dr. Titus Bahner
Buchberg 9
29456 Hitzacker, Germany
+49 5862 9411033
titus.bahner@lebendigesland.de 


[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]