'''* Special Issue: Religion Online and Techno-Spiritualism. Cybersociology Magazine, Issue Seven.  Guest Co-Edited by [[Michel Bauwens]]. 01 Sept 1999.''' 

URL =  http://www.cybersociology.com

(link no longer working)


=Contents=

The [[Spiritual Cyborg]], by Erik Davis, a San Franciso-based writer, culture critic, and independent scholar who recently published “TechGnosis: Myth, Magic, and Mysticism in the Age of Information” (Harmony Books, 1998). / 

Is Cyberspace a Spiritual Space?, by Margaret Wertheim, is a regular contributor to numerous magazines and is the author of “The Pearly Gates of Cyberspace: A History of Space from Dante to the Internet” and “Pythagoras Trousers” / 

Dialogue on the Cyber-Sacred and the Relationship Between Technological and Spiritual Development, by Michel Bauwens and Father Vincent Rossi. / 

Techno-Spiritual Quotes, Collected by Jeremy S. Gluck, the founder of Spiritech UK, an association that strongly believes not only the function of technology as a mirror of human consciousness but in the eventual unfolding of an original machine consciousness that will be a partner to humankind. / Cyberspace: the New Frontier for Religion, by Lin Collette, Brown University, USA. / 

Big Brother is Online, by Javier Bernal, University of Lincolnshire & Humberside (UK). / 

Is India on the Brink of a Digital Abyss?, by Venkatesh Hariharan, Knight Science Journalism Fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. / 

Cyborg Selves: examining identity and meaning in a chat room, by Marcus Leaning, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. BOOK REVIEWS: Holding On to Reality:The Nature of Information at the Turn of the Millennium (1999) By Albert Borgmann Review by: David Rieder, Univ. of Texas: Arlington / How We Became Posthuman : Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (1999) By Katherine Hayles Review by Nathalie Muller / 

Cyberville: Clicks, Culture, and the Creation of an Online Town (1998) By Stacy Horn Review by Claire Shearman."

[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]