
=Description=

Cecile Blanchet:

"The other form of organisation that holds great potential for energy democracy are municipal utilities. They are known in Europe for the water utilities and used to play a large role for energy as well. But the wave of privatisations in the 1990s put them in the hands of private corporations. Since a few years, some cities are taking a reverse path and buy their networks and utilities back. This is very interesting because municipal utilities, which inherently belong to all, have potentially one crucial advantage over cooperatives: as all inhabitants/users can be considered as members, they might prove more inclusive structures. However, this is only true if the governance mode is copied on the coop one: “one member one vote”."
(https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems/)


=Discussion=

==Energy as a commodity vs [[Energy as a Commons]]==

Cecile Blanchet:

* "Energy is a commodity: it is produced to make profit (even green): we are clients/consumers and our decision power is to chose between different companies. The incentive in this case is to produce as much energy as possible (or raise the prices) to increase the profits. The prices are set either by the producer (the owner of the power plant) or by the market.

* Energy is a commons: it is produced to respond to a need and we are producers and consumers at the same time, this is called “prosumers”. We can decide together with our neighbours on the system we want to have. The incentive is to produce what is needed and save it. Being a commons does not mean that energy becomes free of charge but that the prices can be adapted to our needs (we control it and use it to foster social and climatic justice). Think of water, which is also a common good: it still has a cost for the consumer. But you don’t make profit out of it because it is considered as a human right. We should look at energy in that way."


=Example=

Cecile Blanchet:

"In Germany, there is a strong movement to claim the gas, electricity and heating networks back from private corporations. Initiated by civil organisations, they are pushing the political arena to take action towards a remunicipalisation of the energy system. This is a very interesting process, which allows to explore key concepts such as the right to energy and democratic governance as well as the interplay between politics and the civil society."
(https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems/)


==Hamburg==

Cecile Blanchet:

"In Hamburg, the concession for the networks was hold by Vattenfall and ran out in 2013. People then decided to regain control on the grid. So the city of Hamburg grounded a municipal utility (called “Hamburg Energie”), as a daughter of the water utility. It is now an energy provider, which focuses on producing and selling local green energy (mostly electricity but also some gas).

Next to that, a collective of citizens founded the initiative “Unser Hamburg Unser Netz”. They ran a campaign and had a referendum, during which people voted in favour of a full remunicipalisation of the networks. Therefore, the electricity network was bought back in 2014 and the gas and heating networks should get back in the public hand by 2018/2019.

So things seem to be on a right track in Hamburg, and it was indeed experienced as a tremendous victory for the supporters of energy democracy. But… something is missing in the Hamburg model: the citizen participation, based on the cooperative model. Indeed, both the municipal energy utility and municipal TSO are run as companies and users are not taking an active part in decision-making (they are merely consulted)."
(https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems/)


==Berlin==

See [https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems/ part 2] of the article of Cecile Blanchet


=More information=

* part 1 of the overview article: https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems/

* part 2 of the article: https://energycommonsblog.wordpress.com/2017/02/20/rc04-remunicipalisation-of-energy-systems-part-2/

* Video: [[Cecile Blanchet on Energy as a Commons and Remunicipalization in Germany]]


[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]