

=Definition=

Douglas Rushkoff:

""Renaissances are historical instances of widespread recontextualisation. It is the rebirth of old ideas in a new context. Renaissance is a dimensional leap, when our perspective shifts so dramatically that our understanding of the oldest, most fundamental elements of existence changes. The stories we have been using no longer work". 
(http://occupywallst.org/article/theory-thursday-it-not-revolution-it-new-networked/)


=Discussion=

Bernardo Gutierrez:

" The Renaissance, the dimensional leap, precedes revolutions. The perspective of the paintings of Piero della Francesca (among others) led to mathematical theory that ended some centuries later with the idea of a flat Earth. The movable type of Gutenberg´s printing machine changed the writer-reader relationship (and blew political structures). The network, connecting peers, renconfigures most definitions. From media to revolution, the meanings of the dictionaries seem not to fit into this new dimension.

The Renaissance, according to the prestigious James P. Carse, was not an "attempt to promote another vision, but that alternative visions prometiesen other visions." The Renaissance was a new horizon more than a set of answers. A new horizon in the words of Carse, who arose against anyone and formulated a constant invitation to join him.

Perhaps the revolution is not in sight. Maybe we're just in a deep process of Renaissance. And maybe we do not even need the revolution as we know it. In fact, a pessimistic view of the three years of interconnected revolts that began with Tunisian Revolution in late 2010 would present a grim picture. The army, at the helm of Egypt that toppled Hosni Mubarak. A exagerated neoliberal Government in the Spain shaked by 15M movement - Indignados. The conservative Enrique Peña Nieto ruling México after #YoSoy132 explosion. Erdoğan, leading with an iron capitalist fist, post #DirenGezi Turkey. Changing the world without taking power?"
(http://occupywallst.org/article/theory-thursday-it-not-revolution-it-new-networked/)


[[Category:P2P History]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]