
=Discussion=

By Justin Murphy, based on Nick Land's Meltdown essay:

"Consistent with Alfred Crosby's The Measure of Reality: Quantification and Western Society, 1250-1600, Land's term rationalization summarizes perfectly the quantitative mentalité that arrives precisely during the Renaissance.

Crosby believes that quantification and visualization are two variables that enter into a particularly important feedback loop during the Renaissance. It's well known that perspective in painting arrives during the Renaissance, but why does vision matter?

Crosby believes that vision is uniqe in the way that it imposes on all of the other senses. The distinguishing characteristic of vision is its consistency with quantitative measurement in terms of uniform and manipulable quanta. When you visualize ideas on paper, or you record events on paper, or you record music on paper, you can then rearrange them. Rearranging historical facts on paper is a kind of time travel.

If we are discussing Crosby at some length it is only because of Land's claim, later in the essay, that the human control system is "predominantly vision-configured." Perspectivism in painting was, of course, discovered during the Renaissance.


Empirically, there are at least three strong examples of renaissance rationalization that supercharged oceanic navigation:

* The practical astrolabe (~1400)
* Accurate cartography (e.g., Ptolemy's Geographia in 1400)
* Joint-stock companies (~1553 in the case of England)


Oceanic navigation made money, funding more rationalization, making oceanic navigation more profitable, and so on.

Early computational rationalization plus financial rationalization made oceanic navigation an early form of distributed, loosely organized, human-in-the-loop Artificial Intelligence.

The Earth is captured by abstract value optimization; it locks in a swarm of financiers, seamen, and commodity traders.

Commoditization take-off."

(http://www.ccru.net/swarm1/1_melt.htm)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]