'''* Article: THE RENEWABLE ENERGY COMMONS:   GLOBAL PUBLIC GOODS, GOVERNANCE RISK, AND INTERNATIONAL ENERGY. TIMOTHY MEYER'''

URL = http://biogov.uclouvain.be/iasc/doc/full%20papers/Meyer.pdf


=Introduction=

"For years, the great bane of international cooperation has been the much-scorned 
free rider. International public goods such as climate change mitigation, vaccination
against disease, reduction in acid rain, and preservation of the ozone layer all require
incentivizing states to participate in international institutions when the individually 
rational thing to do is remain on the sidelines. Lawyers, policymakers, and scholars have 
come up with a host of devices to deter free riding and encourage participation in global 
public goods. Issue linkages, trade sanctions, financial assistance, and minimum 
participation requirements are just some of the carrots and sticks that states use in 
international public goods institutions. And these efforts have frequently been successful.

For example, the Montreal Protocol, which governs ozone-depleting substances and uses 
financial assistance for developing countries as a carrot coupled with the stick of trade 
sanctions against non-members, has near-universal membership and has been haled as the 
single most successful environmental agreement to date.

But as the end of 2012 draws 
near, the inability to  conclude a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol is forcing 
commentators to rethink their approach to supplying global public goods. The traditional 
tools of international governance have proven inadequate to generate meaningful 
international cooperation on climate change mitigation. What, then, is the way forward?

I argue that the scholarly focus on  increasing participation and  deterring free 
riders has caused commentators to underestimate the ways in which institutional design
can  undermine the ability of international legal regimes to facilitate cooperation.

International institutions can be designed in a number of ways that compound the risk of 
that international cooperation will fail, which I refer to as governance risk. In this brief 
article, I focus on two features of institutional design that are intended to encourage 
participation in public goods institutions, but  can  create the risk of gridlock and 
governance failure.

First,  many public goods institutions are epistemic institutions. They establish 
processes for exchanging and evaluating information in an effort to reduce scientific 
uncertainty as a barrier to bargaining over substantive regulation among states with 
diverse epistemic and normative commitments. However, states and private actors do not 
invest in research on environmental harms behind a veil of ignorance. They frequently 
know the distributional consequences of regulating a particular activity; that is, they 
know which states (and domestic constituencies) stand to win and which to lose from 
governing a particular activity. Institutions that  merge the knowledge-exchange and 
development process with the ability to negotiate and impose binding legal regulations 
thus run the risk that states that oppose the imposition of substantive regulations will use 
epistemic processes as a way to try to block the adoption of substantive regulation.

Second, governance risk can be systemic. Policies adopted in one institution can 
lead to  governance failures or higher costs to cooperation in other institutions.

Governance risk is systemic when institutions are linked in some way: institutionally, as 
when institutions have overlapping jurisdiction or competence; at the bargaining table, as 
when states hold cooperation in one institution hostage to extract concessions in an 
otherwise unrelated institution;  or functionally, as when two  otherwise unrelated 
institutions regulate different aspects of the same underlying activity. Systemic 
governance risk is an underappreciated negative externality of cooperation in the 
fragmented international legal system.  For example, cooperation in an area such as 
energy security, with its focus on stable  and cheap access to fossil fuel supplies, can 
crowd out cooperation on climate change, with its focus on raising the prices of carbonintensive energy sources. States in one institution might also respond to the threat of 
interference from another institution by attempting to obstruct the other institution’s 
mission, as members of OPEC have done during the climate change negotiations.

This Article proceeds in three parts. In Parts I and II, I briefly sketch a theory of 
institutional  governance risk and systemic governance risk, respectively. Institutions 
organized around the production of public goods, such as climate change mitigation, are 
particularly prone to high degrees of governance risk. The institutional design choices 
that aim to increase participation and reduce free-riding in public goods institutions, such 
as creating negotiating bodies like the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) that encourage broad membership by extracting few upfront 
commitments from states,  can  sometimes  exacerbate governance risk by introducing 
epistemic and normative divisions among negotiators that can paralyze institutions.
Systemic governance risk, for its part, is most frequently found among institutions that 
might appear unrelated, but in fact regulate different facets of the same underlying 
activity. Climate change institutions and energy institutions are a perfect example.
Actions taken under the auspices of the International  Energy  Program (IEP) or the 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) can make cooperation under the 
auspices of the UNFCCC costlier than it otherwise would have been.

Part III discusses several ways in which institutions might be designed to reduce 
these governance risks. In short, I argue that sometimes further fragmenting institutions 
by giving them very narrow mandates can reduce both institutional governance risk, the 
risk the institution itself fails, and systemic governance risk, the risk it causes other 
institutions to fail. I explore this argument in the context of a relatively new 
intergovernmental organization, the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).

IRENA mitigates its governance risk by divorcing epistemic issues from the ability to 
promulgate binding legal rules. IRENA’s activities involve almost exclusively the 
development and dissemination of energy related to renewable energy, with little to no 
possibility of serving as a forum for the negotiation of legal obligations such as minimum 
renewable energy requirements for states. As such, IRENA’s is an intergovernmental 
effort to create a “renewable energy commons” on which policymakers and investors can 
draw.  At the same time, IRENA mitigates contribution to systemic governance risk by 
held out by institutions such as the UNFCCC, but neither is it likely to founder on the 
cooperative challenges those institutions face. Instead, institutions such as IRENA, that 
mitigate the risks they pose to the interests of member states and other institutions, offer 
the realistic possibility of incremental cooperation on the provision of public good
focusing on long-run trends among market actors that are largely ungoverned by existing 
international institutions. IRENA thus does not offer the promise of grand cooperation
held out by institutions such as the UNFCCC, but neither is it likely to founder on the 
cooperative challenges those institutions face. Instead, institutions such as IRENA, that 
mitigate the risks they pose to the interests of member states and other institutions, offer 
the realistic possibility of incremental cooperation on the provision of public goods."
(http://biogov.uclouvain.be/iasc/doc/full%20papers/Meyer.pdf)


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]