

=Typology=


==Type 1 Replication==

"One thing to notice is that '''the human is working, and the tools are helping'''. A faster tool, a pen rather than a chisel, makes faster work, as does practice. But all work is human work, and it shows: in particular, skill becomes an all-important factor in the quality of the work and how much can be performed. This kind of replication scales poorly, favors one-of-a-kind items, and rewards lifetime specialization. '''Call it craft; we call it Type 1 replication'''.


==Type 2 Replication==

The printing press was one of the most disruptive technologies of all time, and the reason is that it was one of the first examples of a new kind of replication. Now, '''by investing significant time in building a machine, casting type, and laying out a page, a human can replicate a text hundreds or thousands of times''', just by pulling a lever. Now we have a technology for replication that favors mass-production, scales well, and allows for the exploitation of unskilled labor. This is '''Type 2 replication, characteristic of the Industrial Revolution'''.

Type 2 replication results in an explosion of basically identical, cheap products, a lot of jobs in the cities, and a social and industrial ecology dominated by capitalists, who have the money to enjoy the benefits of large-scale manufacture. It remains the dominant form of manufacture, and it shapes our way of life, right down to the concepts of 9-to-5 and the weekend.

The Type 2 tools have evolved in a couple directions, which converge on our goal, the Type 3 replicator. As printing presses evolved, they became fully automatic in operation. A large early 20th century newspaper press still had to be laid out; once this was done, the machine was turned on, the paper rolls started spinning while the ink vats emptied, and bound stacks of newspaper shot out the other end. '''This is Type 2a replication, ‘a’ for ‘automation’. It displaces Type 2 wherever it is developed, since one no longer has to pay workers to pull levers'''.

The other direction is exemplified by the early Xerox machine. It could make a copy of any template provided, quickly and automatically, but needed human tending to change the template or do anything other than spit out identical copies, such as collation. For anything but a single sheet, an old-fashioned Xerox is a Type 2b replicator, ‘b’ for ‘bespoke’ or ’boutique’. They favor customization, and scale poorly, but they give good results to unskilled operators. Type 2a replication gave us the magazine; Type 2b replication gave us the ‘zine, which were culturally important without ever displacing the more professional media that inspired them."


==Type 3 Replication==

"The breakthrough to Type 3 came with the laser printer. '''A laser printer can print whatever template you want, accurately and quickly. It is functionally just as easy to make 1000 different pages than to make 1000 of the same page. The largest laser printers take a variety of raw goods in one end, and out the other end comes books, printed, cut, collated, bound, wrapped in a book jacket, packed in a mailing envelope and stamped. Each book different, each book ready to go.''' Humans write the books, order the books, empty the hoppers, and refill the feedstocks. The rest is all machine.

'''Type 3 replicators, in a variety of media, are the goal of the [[RepLab]] project. They scale well, favor customization and human empowerment over mass production and serfdom, and tend to economically displace Type 2 technologies when they emerge.'''

The computer is the best Type 3 replicator ever invented, in fact I would argue it is impossible to have a Type 3 replicator that is not also a computer. It is the computer, not the laser printer, which is displacing the magazine and the newspaper, through its ability to replicate any text in any language for the cost of a sip of electricity. Vinyl records are a Type 3 replicator with a Type 2 production process for the templates. Mp3 players are Type 3 through and through, and that’s the single biggest difference."
(http://mnemnion.wordpress.com/2009/11/28/replab-machines-making-machines/)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]