
=Source=

From Terje Bongaard's Medoss proposal



=Description=

Terje Bongaard:

"The Representative Ingroup Democracy (RID) hypothesis that we propose is
based on modern behavioural sciences like game theory, evolved human behaviour, group strategies
and how human universal behaviour is struggling to cope with the evolutionary new situation of
mega-societies [1, 2]. We predict that the RID model will enable stable and democratic sustainable
production, distribution, equality and social security in all human arenas, by giving each individual
equal responsibility and influence. The RID framework will be contrasted with other current
theoretical frameworks for social choice. We predict that the RID model will enhance legitimacy
and interdependencies and regulate the distribution of power and welfare through democratic
decision-making processes. By applying and evaluating this scenario, the project aims to investigate
the socio-political consequences of climate change, and related changes in the natural environment.
It will thus contribute to improved insight into society’s capacity to respond to either radical
changes or gradual processes in its decision-making processes.

...

The Representative Ingroup Democracy hypothesis (RID)
builds on the cooperative innate human universals, released through social control and ingroup
effects by participation in a limited group size on workplaces, schools and institutions. Workers,
pensioners, housewives, students, farmers, the unemployed, every individual over the age of 18 will
be included in a group of manageable size,
called an ingroup (Figure 1.). Ingroups
will manage own workplaces. From each
group, an elected representative enters the
next level of groups, where he/she is
presenting the views of the lower ingroup.
Openness and mandate are following
democratic rules. Not only what, but also
where specific decisions are to be taken,
will in themselves be democratically
decided. We will use the Norwegian
society as a model, but given the
universality of human behaviour, the
results will be applicable to other
countries and societies. The RID model is
hypothesized to release strategies of
cooperation and contribution, as well as to
curb egoism and corruption through social
control and ingroup effects. Through
democratic ownership, we predict that this
will enhance legitimacy and
interdependencies and regulate the
distribution of power and welfare through
democratic decision-making processes.
Owning other’s workplaces is one
freedom lost in this model. We predict that
freedom and influence will increase on
most other areas, including sustainable
production goals. Just distribution and
equality is predicted to increase the overall
acceptance of lowering consumption for
every individual. An important point is the
model’s handling of symbolic values, like economic monetary values. The human universal
measure of value is related to short term exchange values. Money releases an evolved feeling of
Figure 1. The RID model, applied for a society of Norwegian size.
Because of the exponential factor, larger nations will only need one more
security and content [9]. Consequently, it is extremely difficult to criticise capitalism’s measure of
success in terms of the money symbol, because the human mind itself masks the fact that future
goods must be produced by Ecosystem Services (ES) and concrete resources present in the future.
In case of shortage of resources and the ES they provide, the value of capital, gold, art or any other
symbol will disappear. "

=Discussion=

Sabrina Loren:

"RID model sounds interesting. The way of scaling in levels in particular. This approach is totally compatible with my torus fractal network.

You define capitalism as a result of outgroups and part of the reality.
I see capitalism as a result of money and outgroups as a non-natural effect of capitalism.

Darwin said "natural selection" and it doesnt mean "competition". Capitalism is not natural. It is just a human mistake that we have to solve.

You say: "Unfortunately, the global community is now among outgroups, and the cooperation and generosity found among friends and small groups meet with the evolved human strategies of competition.."

I say: "Competition will soon be the past, strategies of competition are not a symbol of evolution (prosperity at least). We are evolving from competition to cooperation. And this is what I want to focus on. On big scale (global) cooperation groups"

You suggest "Game theory" as a good tool. I see "Game theory" good only for competition models. 
I suggest "group consciousness" as a cooperating tool instead.

You focus on economic, political, social, cultural, ethical and ecology as the problems to solve. All of these are chaotic systems. You will need chaos modeling tools, like fractals, to approach them. And I am sure it is a big big big research.

I, instead, focus on the geometry of the human group connections in order to create a self-organized global structure that can balance according to the needs. My network can addapt to support any human way of working. 

I feel you are trying to model a cooperative-competitive present and I am trying to model a cooperative future. 
You include goverments and money and I think they will dessapear in the future, in my system at least."
(via email, June 2015)


=More Information=

Details also at:

#[[Ingroup vs Outgroup Dynamics]]
#[[Handicap Principle]]
#[[Democratic Ingroup Model]]

[[Category:Democracy]]