

=Directory=

Compiled by Rachel Botsman:


A raft of services have been founded over the past year, all promising to monitor and police your online reputation.

Connect.Me: Aims to turn your social profile into a personal reputation network, making it easier to find trustworthy people, from accountants to babysitters. (In beta.)

Tru.ly: Enables users to verify their digital identity against their real-world one by authenticating social profile data against official government data.

Legit: Correlates reputation data from a number of P2P marketplaces into a "LegitScore" and a report that summarises user behaviours. (In beta.)

TrustCloud: Aggregates public data and correlates it into a "TrustScore" that measures online behaviour. Its aim: to let you own your online trustworthiness.

Scaffold: Builds easy-to-use APIs and tools that enable P2P marketplaces to conduct background checks and verify a user's identity and reputation.

Confido: Wants to become the "FICO of social commerce" by providing a portable profile that users can carry across P2P marketplaces. (In beta.)

Briiefly: Working on combining indicators from across social networks and offline activities to create a trust profile and score. (In beta.)

Reputate: Aims to create a snapshot of a person's online reputation by aggregating reviews and ratings across P2P marketplaces. (In beta.)" (http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2012/09/features/welcome-to-the-new-reputation-economy?)


=More Information=

* in-depth review of emerging [[Reputation Economy]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]