
'''* Book: Fuchs, Christian. 2019. Rereading Marx in the Age of Digital Capitalism. London: Pluto Press.'''

URL = http://fuchs.uti.at/books/rereading-marx-in-the-age-of-digital-capitalism/

=Description=

The ‘end of history’ has not taken place. Ideological andeconomic crisis
and the status quo of neoliberal capitalism since 2008 demand a renewed
engagement with Marx. But if we are to effectively resist capitalism we
must truly understand Marx: Marxism today must theorise how
communication technologies, media representation and digitalisation have
come to define contemporary capitalism. There is an urgent need for
critical, Marxian-inspired knowledge as a foundation for changing the
world and the way we communicate from digital capitalism towards
communicative socialism and digital communism.

"Rereading Marx in the Age of Digital Capitalism" does exactly this.
Delving into Marx’s most influential works, such as Capital, The
Grundrisse, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts, The German Ideology
and The Communist Manifesto, Christian Fuchs draws out Marx’s concepts
of machinery, technology, communication and ideology, all of which
anticipate major themes of the digital age.

A concise and coherent work of Marxist media and communication theory,
the book ultimately demonstrates the relevance of Marx to an age of
digital and communicative capitalism."

=Contents=

1. Introduction: Rereading Marx in the Age of Digital Capitalism

2. Rereading Marx’s ‘Capital’ in the Information Age

3. Rereading Marx as Critical Sociologist of Technology

4. Rereading Marx as Critical Theorist of Communication

5. Rereading Marx in the Age of Digital Capitalism: The Case of Industry 4.0 and the Industrial Internet as the Digital German Ideology

6. Rereading Marx in the Age of Digital Capitalism: Reflections on Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri’s Book ‘Assembly’

7. Conclusion


=More information=

* Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32YXLWXaHMY&feature=youtu.be

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Books]]