
From an essay by Mariarosa Dalla Costa: [[Reruralizing the World]],which discusses four reasons why land should be seen as a commons and how this is expressed by a new generation of agricultural movements.

URL = http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta1.pdf


=Excerpts=


==Resurgance of agricultural movements==

"It can therefore be said that, '''in the decade that just
ended, yet with its roots in the struggles for bread, land and water of
the eighties, a planetary movement for the defense of the access to
land, for the preservation of its reproductive powers, for access to
fresh and genuine food, has been formed'''. I encountered the Via
Campesina in 1996 in Rome when, with Vandana Shiva, Maria Mies,
Farida Akter and people of other circuits we put together the first
alternative convention to that of the Food and Agriculture
Organization, a convention in which that same network had a vital role
in its ability to mobilize, to organize, and to fine-tune the themes that
were brought to everyone’s attention. It was also a crucial moment of
the Zapatista insurrection, which had at its heart as with all indigenous
struggles the issue of the land/Earth as a common good. In my view,
given the resonance with which it came to the fore and the response
and support that it enjoyed on the part of the most diverse sectors
within developed countries, that rebellion had built an ideal bridge,
which for the first time had joined the struggle over the question of
land expropriation with that of the post-Fordist expropriation of labour.
Emblematic of this was the fact that at one pole there were the
rebelling indigenous of Chiapas and on the other the
workers/unemployed of developed Europe protesting in the streets
carrying the banner of Zapata. In 1996 however agricultural issues
were still paid scarce attention by rebel forms of activism in Italy. I still
remember sensing a certain surprise surrounding the subject within a
movement meeting I raised it at in March of that year. The attention
paid to such themes today offers us a measure of the progress made
since.

The networks that have been constructing themselves from the
various global Souths and the Zapatista insurrection, as I was saying,
returned to the developed world the concept of the land/Earth as a
common good, and a many-sided concept at that."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta1.pdf)


==Why Land is a Common Good==

Let us consider the primary facets:

a) The land/Earth above all as a source of life, of
nourishment and therefore of plenty if preserved as a
system capable of reproducing itself. Therefore the right
of access to the land and to the resources it contains,
above all water and seeds, against their continual
privatization. The right of access to and the economic
possibility of farming the land according to organic
techniques, using all of the biodiversity that place can
offer. Therefore a right to the variety of food as a
universal right, not only for elites, and as a guarantee of
better nutrition and greater health. The right to food
freedom as the other face of food democracy. Food
democracy as the basis for a different project of life,
where farming, production and commercialization
practices are sustainable from an economic, social, and
environmental point of view. This against farming
choices that condemn us to nutritional homogeneity (that
is also the bearer of low nutrition and poor health), to the
solely industrial production of food (possibly for import or
export, but for many impossible to purchase), and to the
specialization of crop cultivation imposed geographical
areas within the neoliberal internationalization of
markets;

b) The land/Earth as the source of natural evolution.
Therefore the right to protect the diversity and integrity
of the different varieties against their destruction and
genetic manipulation and the resulting immiseration and
risks for the population. Networks that oppose
themselves not only to the expropriation of the land but
to its violation and to the commodification of its
reproductive powers which constitute the crucial terrain
of the current capitalist strategy of hunger, itself
functional to stratifying labour and holding it ransom. On
the other hand this terrain is crucial for the possibility,
quality, and freedom of human reproduction. Therefore
on such issues the political positions that are the bearers
of the project of a different life, the most revolutionary
ones, appear to be the most conservative.

c) The land/Earth as territory on which to live against the
continual eradication brought about by the industrial
concept of agriculture and by war operations. Both of
these take away land, polluting it in the former case with
chemical products, and in the latter with explosives. War
increasingly provokes via such pollution with lethal new
explosives and toxic substances an infinite damage and
an expulsion without a possibility of return.

d) The land/Earth as a public space against its continual
fencing off and privatization. From the increasingly
numerous refugee camps to the increasingly numerous
golf courses that alter the environment, taking away
fields for farming or rice fields or public parkland.
Already there have been bloody struggles around such
elite projects from Vietnam to Mexico."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta1.pdf)


==The revival of agricultural movements in the West==

Yet even the construction of community that these networks represent,
beginning from the land as a primary common good - in that they
understand this to be the foundation of a different social construction -
is articulated within a multifaceted approach.

'''Another equally significant fact is that networks for the
recuperation of a different relationship with the earth, for the spread of
organic agriculture, for access to fresh and genuine food, are being
organized in the more developed capitalist countries'''. In the United
States '''as far back as 1986 farmers resisting the dominant agricultural
model founded the National Family Farm Coalition'''. Other examples,
and significant ones, were created in the nineties in that country as
well as in Canada, and of course in France there emerged the
experience of “peasant-based farming” with José Bové. '''The
Community Food Security Coalition formed in the United States in the
past decade, involving producers, consumers and various other
subjects, joined under the slogan of “food security for the community”''',
a notion that gathered steam simultaneously from the Atlantic coast to
the Pacific. The latter not only put in place an organic agriculture, but
it assured the distribution of its products at a local level allowing for
access, through various types of arrangements, to low-income citizens,
building distribution points at low cost and providing the necessary
transportation to reach them. Declaring their intent to install a “more
democratic nutritional system,” it gathers 125 groups that connect
food banks, networks of family farms, anti-poverty organizations which
rarely collaborated on such network’s programs in the past, and
obviously operates on the basis of the push tying people together,
putting in contact small urban or rural farmers, food banks, and soup
kitchens for the poor and low-income communities. Similarly, '''the San
Francisco League of Urban Gardeners''', which self-organized around the
same problem, then became key organizers in the struggle for more
decent conditions for reproduction, from housing to public parks, by
making available for the community capacities, work skills and
knowledges generated at a local level. 

The first thing to note here is
that a different will regarding the relationship to the earth, one that
plays itself out through farming, is in these examples the first step
towards a different will regarding modalities of life in their entirety, a
different food project for a different social project. This is particularly
evident if we look at that broad movement of initiatives that goes by
the name of “social ecology” or “bio-regionalism” or “community
economic development” which tend to re-localize development in the
sense of developing, alongside a different form of managing the land
(for nutrition, for housing, for public space), a different management of
work skills, professional abilities and knowledges geared towards the
strengthening and defence of the roots of a social context against its
destitution and the eradication of its citizen inhabitants decreed by the
global economy.

In the same way, '''the fact that the earth can represent housing
stability, beyond being a source of nutrition, has led to the
development in the United States of Public Land Trusts, which are
conceived also as a means by which to safeguard the environment'''.

With such initiatives people put together funds to purchase land. The
goal is to preserve it as a piece of untouched nature or to build housing
upon it: the latter can be sold but not the land upon which they are
built. In this way the price of the home is kept low and therefore
accessible for low-income segments of the population.

Even in the French case of peasant-based agriculture the plan for
a different social project, beginning from its declared principles, is
abundantly obvious. Above all that of international farmer solidarity
against the harshest and most destructive competition which
neoliberal globalization wants to impose, and beyond this are the
principles of the social and economic significance of labour and human
activity; of the refusal of productivism that is clearly expressed by
Bové when he says: our goal and our work are not those of production:
we occupy a space, we manage it and participate in the social bond
with the countryside”; of a management of the countryside that is
respectful of people, of the environment and of animals that translates
itself in not wanting to increase excessively one’s farm because the
countryside must represent jobs for many people, in not wanting to
have more animals than those which the earth can sustain, in
assuming responsibility of the maintenance of vegetable and livestock
varieties that characterize that area, and much more. Similarly, the
fundamental theme of nutrition and of not wanting to run risks with
respect to this has been key in allowing the political position and
commitment to grow and envelop the commodification of health,
education, and culture.

In sum we can say today that the land, farming and nutrition
constitute the emerging theme of the self-organized networks that
developed in particular in the nineties and which, with the global
movement of farmers, has vigorously come to the fore as the missing
subject, upon whose labour we all depend every day in the
reproduction of our lives. If re-localizing development is particularly
significant with respect to the agricultural question this only fuels the
re-localization of other aspects of development and life. Global is the
movement, global are the rights, and global are the struggles, above
all for the universal right to a healthy diet, a varied one and not a
standardized and not an estranged one with respect to one’s own
cultural traditions and the specificities that the land, worked by men
and women rather than raped by humans, can generate. And if it is
true that, as Columbian farmers that have self-organized around the
cultivation of varieties at risk of extinction say, the spirit is within the
nature surrounding us, in the trees and in the rivers, then reruralizing
the world is necessary to recuperate the spirit as well as life."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta1.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Land Commons]]