

=Bibliography=

* Nakazato, H., Hiramoto, T. (2012). An empirical study of the social effects
of community currencies. International Journal of Community Currency

* Ramada, C. & Cassoni, A. (2012) Digital Money and its impact on local
economic variables: The case of Uruguay. 

* Research Department of Metropolitan Jewish Health System. ‘An Evaluation
Of Elderplan’s Time Dollar Model’ Executive summary.

* Sarasola, M. R. (2012) Can Mobile Money Systems have a measurable impact
on Local Development? Innovation & Research Multiplier and Social Trade
Organization (STRO) for the international development research centre (IDRC). 

* Stodder, James P. (1998) ‘Corporate Barter and Macroeconomic Stabilization’.
International Journal of Community Currency Research, 2 (2)

* Stodder, James P. (2007) Residual Barter Networks and Macro-Economic
Stability; Switzerland’s Wirtschaftsring. 

* Studer, T. (1998) WIR and the Swiss National Economy. Basel: Department of
Sonoma State University. Thiel, C

* Thiel, C. (2012). Moral money: The action guiding impact of complementary
currencies: a case study at the chiemgauer regional money. 

* Williams, C., Aldrigde, T., Lee, R., Leyshon, A., Thrift, N. & Tooke, J. (2001)
Bridges into Work? An evaluation of Local Exchange and Trading Schemes.


=Source=

From the bibliography attached to:

* Report: Complementary Currency Systems Social and Economic Effects of Complementary Currencies. By Lotte Boonstra, Prof. dr. Arjo Klamer et al. Erasmus University Rotterdam. 

[[Category:Money]]