

'''* Book: New Mode of Capitalist Production Organization - Research on Modularity Production Network. By Chen Shuoying.  China Social Press, 2011''' 

URL =


=Abstract=

"After two hundred years’ development, the capitalist production mode evolves into a 
new shape---network economy. The traditional mode of production features the 
vertical control of final product producers, while the new global production network 
allocates resource effectively around product standards on a global scale, forming 
modular production and composition under the control of standards. The rise of ICT 
provides the conditions for transnational production. If the second industrial 
revolution, by introducing science into production process, enabled capital to stand, 
for the first time, on the material bases belonging to capitalism’s own nature, then 
today’s technology network comprised of autonomous computer terminals, fiber optic 
cables and digital technology, once again constitutes the technical basis in line with 
the nature of contemporary market economy agents. Modular production network not 
only incorporate enterprises into organizational structure with fuzzy borders, but also 
integrates national and local economy, resulting in complex geography-economy. The 
network effects inherent in network structure subvert the negative feedback 
mechanism of market competition, leading to multi equilibrium, path dependence and 
lock-in effect, which hastens economic change and increases uncertainty. 

Modularity, as a way to handle complexity, composes matter into hierarchies and 
makes the components interchangeable. Under the complex and uncertain network 
economy background, the advantage of modularity is becoming more and more 
obvious. A hierarchical industrial structure-- modularity production network comes 
into shape. Modularity production network is a combination of technological design 
rules and institutional exchange and distribution rules. It’s technological essence is a 
hierarchical enterprise topology technologically carried by design rules, with the 
non-stake control legally supported by intellectual property rights, capable of 
reducing the complexity to establish network connection through the configuration of 
module operator and promoting the evolution of complex product system, so as to 
balance between the flexibility of network nodes and the network’s overall order. It’s 
economic essence is contemporary centre - periphery system of international division 
of labor dominated by standard-setter (multinational companies), conducive for 
transnational monopoly capital to reap profit in the midst of the complex economic 
environment. 
Modular production network contains duality prevailing the objective world, for 
specific aspects: 1. the duality of division of labor, i.e. the coexistence of division of 
labor among organizations and division of labor within organization; 2.the duality of 
evolving, including the duality of product architecture’s evolving trends, i.e. the 
coexistence of integration at the level of key components and modularity at the level 
of product system; product architecture cycles between integration and modularity; 
the duality of knowledge’s evolving direction, i.e. module suppliers try to tap tacit 
knowledge within modules, while standard-setter derives tacit knowledge from within 
the borders of different organizations and to codified it into explicit knowledge; the 
duality of enterprise organization’s evolving trends, i.e. the coexistence of vertical 
disintegration and horizontal integration. Since modularity is a kind of hierarchical 
system, the production network formed based on modularity also has a hierarchical 
organizational structure. The centre of modular production network is the 
multinational corporation setting design rules, who is also known as final assemblers, 
platform leadership and network flagship. The stratum surrounding the center is 
first-tier suppliers comprised of specific module manufactures and interchangeable 
module contractors. At the bottom of the pyramid locates small to medium sized 
periphery suppliers. The relationship between network flagship and other network 
members is both of market equal exchange and organization hierarchical control. The 
former justifies claim from all network members to network surplus, while the latter 
leads to asymmetric distribution of residual claim and residual control. And, even in 
the modular era, the first-tier suppliers engaged in manufacturing still conform to the 
logic of economies of scale, making them involve in large-scale integration. With 
intellectual property rights of design rules, network flagships can control the first-tier 
suppliers without holding the latter’s equity. The first-tier suppliers control periphery 
suppliers with ownership of physical assets and the monopoly status at the middle 
layer. 
As suppliers stratify, labor forces are increasingly differentiated into core labor force 
and periphery labor force. Employers induce core labor force’s effort through 
combination of stimulation and control. The two sides appear as partnership on the 
surface. With regard to periphery labor force, employers push their labor productivity 
to the limit in production seasons. In slack times, employers cease to hire those 
workers. The numerical flexibility of periphery labor force is used to withstand 
market fluctuations. With divide-and-conquer strategy by capital and weakening of 
labor protection from state, capital regain the overwhelming dominance over the labor 
force. The differentiation of labor force deprives collective identity of workers and 
dilute workers’ class consciousness. As a result, the development of Labor party stalls, 
And the income gap between core labor force and periphery labor force widens. 
Left-wing theorists and practitioners need to review the working class and labor 
movement in order to cope with the changes brought about by the globalization of 
production. 

The implication of international division of labor’s evolution on industrial structure is 
that services sector, particularly productive services industry has become the 
dominating sector in developed countries, while the national economy of developing 
countries is dominated by high energy consumption, high pollution and low-margin 
manufacturing. Developed countries don’t leave much space for china’s producer 
service industry as they do for china’s manufacturing industry. In modular era, the 
only way to create the demand source for China’s producer service industry, is to 
construct the independent modular production network, i.e. to establish China’s own 
brand and own products platform. What Chinese enterprises have to do is to reverse 
the standardized process by transferring the open modular production structure into 
integrated structure, then to create new integrated architecture through setting up its 
own design rules, so as to take advantage of the manufacture capabilities of global 
suppliers. The above mentioned goal can only be achieved if Chinese government will 
strengthen the division of labor among china provincial regions and create business 
environment promoting the supply chain integration among Chinese enterprises."(http://netglobalcapitalism.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/abstract-of-chen-shuoyings-book.pdf)


=Contents=

"The book is organized as follows: 

Chapter 1 Introduction, shows the causes, values, 
methods and frameworks of the study; 

Chapter II Literature Review, cards the 
literature of modular production network theory and related enterprises network 
theory, global production network theory and global value chain theory, in order to 
provide a panorama of network organization research. The unique perspective of this 
book is offered based on review of the existing archive. 

Chapter III The environment 
for the emergence and development of modularity production network, outlines the 
environment where modular production network generates and develops through the 
study on large-scale evolution of economic patterns and metamorphosis process 
within the economic pattern of capitalist economy. Triggered by the study on the 
evolution of economic patterns, this chapter then introduce the paradigm shift of 
economics thought, emphasizing the scientific world outlook and development 
concept guiding the research of modularity production network. The category of 
modularity and modularity production network is given at the height of scientific world outlook and development concept. 


Chapter IV The duality of modularity 
production network, summarizes many mutual contradictory, interdependent dualities 
of modularity production network based on its technological and economic essence. 
The implications of these dualities on China’s participation in modularity production 
network are analyzed and advices on how to raise Chinese enterprises’ international 
competitiveness by taking advantage of the mutual conversion of contradictory 
duality are then offered. 


Chapter V The governance structure of modularity 
production network, first states the hierarchy of modularity production network’s 
organization, then explains how the governance structure corresponds to the function 
of different units within network flagship and the function of each organizations at all 
levels in the network. Finally, financing governance structure is analyzed, illustrating 
different finance pattern at different developmental stage and level of the network. 


Chapter VI The pricing mechanism of modular production network, studies on how 
network flagship manage bilateral market through bilateral pricing mechanism. 


Chapter VII The effect of the development of modularity production network on 
labor-capital relations, outlines the new labor force landscape where labor forces are 
increasingly differentiated into core labor force and periphery labor force. This 
chapter goes on to study the social economic implications of the differentiation and its 
impact on contemporary labor movement. Chapter Ⅷ The enlightenment of 
modularity on developing China’s producer service industry offers policy 
recommendations based on the above theoretical analysis of modularity production 
network. 


=More Information=

* [[Modular Production Networks]]


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]