
'''= quarterly journal publishes articles on the study and the practices of resistance'''

URL = http://resistancestudies.org/

=Description=

From an interview of Christopher Kullbenberg:


"The Resistance Studies Network was launched in 2006 by researchers Stellan Vinthagen and Mona Lilja at the University of Gothenburg. They felt a need to establish a network to remedy the lack of academic study in the field of resistance to power.
Two years later, in January 2008, the first issue of the Resistance Studies Magazine appeared with four contributions from Swedish, English and Indian researchers. The quarterly journal publishes articles on the study and the practices of resistance.
“It is a fully peer-reviewed journal, publishing scholarly articles in the spirit of openness and sharing. Instead of moving the power of the peer-review system to the publishers, we keep the scrutiny within our editorial board of highly qualified researchers. We also apply a fully blind peer-review system where the authors don’t know who is reviewing the articles, and the reviewers don’t know who has written. All the articles are also free to download and to copy,” says Christopher Kullenberg, who is a postgraduate student in Theory of Science. He is currently working on a thesis describing the role of statistics in the constitution of modern societies. He has also been a harsh critic of the “FRA-law’, which he sees as a threat to free, independent research.

“Academics in both Germany and the UK who study different political groups have been arrested and security police have searched through their houses. We who conduct research on terrorism, activism and political resistance are of course target groups for the new FRA authority.”

Another aim of the journal is also to bridge the gap between academia and people working in the field. So far, a large number of the 250 members are researchers but the network is open to all, Christopher Kullbenberg emphasises.

“You don’t have to have a job at the university to join. Everyone is welcome – even our seminars are open to the public”.
Why do you think resistance study has been a neglected area?

“The study of resistance movements has been a focus point in many theories and disciplines, for example in Theory of Science and even more so in the field of Global Studies. But within traditional academic disciplines there is a strong focus on the constitution of power and social order. However, heterogeneous acts of resistance, their social organization, and their impact on social order have largely been neglected. In today’s globalized world we are seeing the potentially transformative protests in many countries,” says Christopher Kullenberg.

So instead of focusing on how nation states try to uphold authority and power, the members are more interested in the movements that destabilize the machinery of power.

“We want to raise awareness of current resistance activities. There is a great variety of perspectives and angles of approach to the study of resistance movements. People come from various disciplines and this is very rewarding. We don’t always understand each other but it is better to disagree than to have a common view of the world. That would be a far greater loss. But we have no intentions of making resistance studies to a resistance science”, Christopher Kullenberg explains.

The research also raises new, problematic and ethical questions. Is, for example, armed resistance ever justified? To what extent should resistance embody democratic processes? If the outcome of resistance is uncertain, should we pursue it even if it means risking harmful consequences? Also is legitimate resistance justified if the aim is to achieve a more equal distribution of resources?"
(http://www.gu-journalen.gu.se/english/News/News_detail/?contentId=855527)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Research]]