
'''* Article: Agro-food consumption patterns to favour social and economical resilience. The case of Sant Cugat del Vallès. By Pere Losantos and Ricard Espelt.'''

URL = http://ict4rd.net/agro-food-consumption-patterns-to-favour-social-and-economical-resilience-the-case-of-sant-cugat-del-valles/

=Abstract=

"Currently, we can distinguish two different approaches to agro-food consumption. The main model follows the value chain nutrition rules and it is focused on establishing the quality and product price-stability. At the same time, strengthen of the short circuits of commercialization is significant, as an alternative to the main model. These initiatives, which have different working matters, promote the roll to involve consumers in the consequences of their consumption habits. In addition, these types of consumers value direct connection among producers and local stakeholders. In the context of Network Society, ICT adoptions offer a tool to organize these short circuits of commercialization business. This article studies the case of the municipality of Sant Cugat del Vallès, located close to Barcelona metropolitan area and where we can recognise much of the short circuit of commercialization patterns. Through this paper, we are going to detail how they work in the municipality chosen, which the business model possibilities are and how ICT are integrated. On the one hand, we are evaluating if the proliferation of these initiatives into the proximity territory can offer a consumption alternative thanks to the interaction between producers and consumers. On the other hand, taking into account the Case of Sant Cugat del Vallès, we are going to analyse the significance of a new pattern between rural and urban spaces relations through agro-food consumption."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Spain]]