

=Characteristics=

"The method to achieve long-term stability is resilience.

Resilience is a quality of systems. It helps
us to recover from external shocks and to
become resistant to crisis. The notion is
also used in medicine for patients who survive
illnesses more easily or recover sooner
than others.

What we need are resilient social structures.


Here are some features of resilient
social systems:


==TRANSPARENCY==

The participants know of each other what
they are doing and can react accordingly and
cooperate instantly. There is no room forsecret
committees and boardroom politics.


==COMMUNICATION==

The participants are ready to communicate
effectively and inclusively, on-line (as it
were) and as personally as possible.


==COOPERATION==

The participants benefit from the mutual
use of their capabilities and talents. The
over-all benefit of cooperation is larger
than the mere addition of individual contributions.


==DEMOCRACY==

The participants create a system of collective
benefits on the basis of equal rights.

The actual democratic systems are all oligarchic,
as the so-called private economic
sector is excluded (about 60 per cent of the
social reality). Democracy makes identification
and a sense of responsibility possible.

Dictatorships and other hierarchical
systems are notoriously unstable.


==MODULARITY==

Resilient systems consist of well-defined
interchangeable modules which support
each other. Redundancy is enhanced by
modularity.


==DECOUPLING CAPACITY==

Modules can survive on their own for a certain
period of time. Defects can be repaired
without endangering the whole system.


==DECENTRALIZATION==

Decoupling presupposes decentralization.

Local self-sufficiency within a defined
context makes democracy more
manageable.


==RELOCALIZATION==

Multifunctional local systems correspond
to local needs. Modules need proximity to
support each other and to create local/temporal
synergies.

Transportation must be minimized because it consumes energy
and therefore fuels.


==ECOLOGICAL DESIGN==

Sustainable systems can only work with a
new ecological design of the things used by
them. Instead of planned obsolescence20 robustness,
repairability, re-usability (“cradle
to cradle”), combinability etc. are the basis
of ecological engineering. According to Stahel,
21 the material throughput could be reduced
by a factor of ten and still achieve the
same level of utility. Such products/
processes are poison for growth, of course,
and have been kept off the market so far.

Our future will not be based on low-tech or
on a return to the middle ages (or the Paleolithic).It
will be based on a kind of modular
high-tech, that we have yet to see. Once we
have overcome the capitalistically stunted
form of technology, the real technological
age will begin at last.

Instead of consumer
goods for strictly individual use, we’ll develop
tools, machines and other goodssuited
for communal and cooperative use, for the
synergetic luxury of neighborhoods.


==ADAPTED SIZE==

Size must be adapted to function. “Big” is
not always the most effective. Just as
“small” is not always beautiful. On the
whole we could speak here of adaptive
basic patterns.


==COGNITIVE DIVERSITY==

A variety of methods, ways of thinking
and cultures is needed. Diversity itself is
an important feature of stable systems.

Our current monomaniacal system (valorization
of capital) must be replaced by a
variety of relatively independent systems.


==GRADUATED COMMITMENT==

Resilient organizations are based on
grades of varied intensity of commitment.
There is always a core group with a higher
degree of commitment, surrounded by circles
of varying participation. Not everybody
must do everything. Division of
labor can be a good thing.


==BELONGING==

The feeling of belonging to a community
improves resilience. This also goes for
health and happiness.

They can be religious,
ethnic, cultural or other communities
of a certain stability.

Resilience is based on cooperation and isincompatible
with an absolute imperative of
competition. There is nothing wrong with
a certain amount of competition at the right
time and in the right context, though."
(http://www.o500.org/books/pm_power_of_neighborhood.pdf)


=Source=

From the book on the [[Commons and Its Institutions]], i.e. The [[Power of Neighborhood and the Commons]]


[[Category:Commons Economics]]