
'''* Book: * [[Resource Accounting for Sustainability Assessment]]. The Nexus between Energy, Food, Water and Land Use. Edited by Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesus Ramos-Martin, Sandra G. F. Bukkens. Routledge, 2014'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/Resource-Accounting-for-Sustainability-Assessment-The-Nexus-between-Energy/Giampietro-Aspinall-Ramos-Martin-Bukkens/p/book/9780415720595

=Description=

"The demands placed on land, water, energy and other natural resources are exacerbated as the world population continues to increase together with the expectations of economic growth. This, combined with concerns over environmental change, presents a set of scientific, policy and management issues that are critical for sustainability.

Resource Accounting for Sustainability Assessment: The nexus between energy, food, water and land use offers an approach for multi-scale, integrated assessment of this nexus. It presents a comprehensive and original method of resource accounting for integrated sustainability assessments. The approach is illustrated with three detailed case studies: the islands of Mauritius, the Indian state of Punjab, and the energy economy of South Africa. The relationships between flows of goods, services and materials in these case studies offer valuable insights. The book provides a much needed quality control on the information used in deliberative processes about policy and planning activities.

This innovative book will be of interest to researchers, students and practitioners in the fields of sustainability science, international development, industrial ecology, sustainable resource management, geography and ecological economics."

=Contents=

==Part 1 THEORY== 

1. Addressing the complexity of integrated resource assessment Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesús Ramos-Martin and Sandra G.F. Bukkens 

2. The multi-scale integrated assessment of societal and ecosystem metabolism Mario Giampietro and Sandra G.F. Bukkens 

3. The scientific basis of the narrative of societal and ecosystem metabolism Mario Giampietro 

4. The interface between societal and ecosystem metabolism Mario Giampietro and Pedro L. Lomas 

5. Land systems: Multi-scale dynamics of human and environmental systems Richard J. Aspinall 


==Part 2 THE TOOLKIT== 

6. Accounting for human activity and socio-economic characteristics Zora Kovacic and Jesus Ramos-Martin 

7. Food grammar J. Cadillo-Benalcazar, M. Giampietro, T. Serrano-Tovar, S.G.F. Bukkens 

8. Energy grammar Mario Giampietro and François Diaz-Maurin 

9. Water grammar Cristina Madrid and Mario Giampietro 

10. GIS protocols for use with MUSIASEM Richard J. Aspinall and Tarik Serrano-Tovar 

11. The Sudoku effect within MUSIASEM Mario Giampietro, Sandra G.F. Bukkens, Richard J. Aspinall and Jesus Ramos-Martin 


==Part 3 CASE STUDIES==

12. The Republic of Mauritius Tarik Serrano-Tovar, Juan Cadillo Benalcazar, François Diaz-Maurin, Zora Kovacic, Cristina Madrid, Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesus Ramos-Martin, Sandra G.F. Bukkens 

13. Punjab State, India Cristina Madrid-Lopez, Juan Cadillo-Benalcazar, François Diaz-Maurin, Zora Kovacic, Tarik Serrano-Tovar, Tiziano Gomiero, Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesús Ramos-Martín, Sandra G.F. Bukkens 

14. The Republic of South Africa François Diaz-Maurin, Juan Cadillo Benalcazar, Zora Kovacic, Cristina Madrid, Tarik Serrano-Tovar, Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesus Ramos-Martin, S.G.F. Bukkens 

15. Resource accounting for sustainability assessment Mario Giampietro, Richard J. Aspinall, Jesus Ramos-Martin, Sandra G.F. Bukkens



[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Books]]