
=Discussion=

==GREEN GROWTH BY MEANS OF RESOURCE PRODUCTIVITY==

UNIDO's 'Green Growth' report:

"From around 2007 onwards, several
“green” initiatives have been introduced
as a response to the global economic and
financial crisis. “Green Economy”, “Green
Growth”, and “Green Industry” are the most prominent of
these new development concepts, which aim at improving
human wellbeing and social equity and at increasing resource
productivity to ensure more sustainable patterns of growth
and industrial development.
The world and its population is not just about its economies,
it is an intricate web of communities, citizens, families and far
more. The human dimension needs to have equal standing with
the economic and environmental pillars of the green discourse.
We need effective and new strategies and policies – a change
in paradigm, which at its core, focuses on switching from efforts
to increase labour productivity to substantially improve
resource productivity.

Labour productivity has increased twentyfold
in the last 200 years. Today, with
ever increasing unemployment rates mirroring
this fact, labour is far from being
in short supply. On the contrary, natural
resource scarcity is putting our societies
at risk and the environmental effects of global resource use,
such as climate change, desertification, or food shortages are
threatening the security of mankind as well as undermining
the stability of the world’s economic and security systems. As
a consequence, it is paramount that increased resource productivity
becomes the central driver of technological progress
in the future, with incentives for those who are more productive
with scarce resources. This will stimulate our economies
in many ways, e.g. in terms of higher economic multiplier 
effects as well as with the creation of (mostly local) green jobs.
“Green Growth” must be understood as a goal for national,
regional and global policies. This goes beyond sheer technical
progress and involves structural change and transition towards
less capital and resource intensive activities, especially in the
early industrialized and therefore highly resource consuming
parts of the world. It will involve business as well as household
engagement and requires new forms of public-private interaction.
If growth is to be understood as a means to enhance human
wellbeing, it should not only be environmentally sustainable
but also socially and economically viable. Guided by enabling
policies and a strong ethical framework, such a development
can help to ensure that everyone on the planet has enough to
eat, work and live in decent conditions, is embedded in social
networks and enjoys a good quality of education, health and
community networks.

...


Rigorous targets are not only needed to measure progress on
improving resource efficiency, but also to reflect the overarching
capacity of sustainable supply within the world’s biocapacity.
There have been suggestions of several quantitative indicators to
monitor the economic, environmental and social development
in Europe and other world regions towards the attainment of
these three key targets."
(https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media_upgrade/Media_center/2013/GREENBOOK.pdf)


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]