
=Description=

Yihong Ding:

"the central issue is '''how to allow users managing their “owned” resources properly. Improving the portability of Web data is a very important step towards this general request; but it is not the general request yet. To reach the eventual goal, we need to implement a new mechanism that well manages ownership, beyond portability, of data'''. Moreover, this ownership management issue is not only about data, but also about other resources such as services. '''Thus I am more favorite to the term “resource portability” than the “data portability'''.”

The key of resource portability is the switch of ownership over resources instead of the deployment of resources. For instance, when a user make a comment on a blog, who should own this comment, the commenter or the blog owner? By default, the current mechanism is that the one who owns the physical storage space of the comment owns the comment. Most of the time, the comment belongs to the blog owner. Many other times, however, the comment may actually be owned
by a third party who provides the space for the blog owner. In very few extreme cases, the commenter actually owns the comment. This reality theoretically contradicts to the comment logic that the one who makes the comment (i.e. the commenter) should be the unquestionable owner."
(http://yihongs-research.blogspot.com/2008/02/resource-portability-path-towards-next.html)


=Discussion=

Martin Springer:

"So why is it important that a commenter owns his blog comment? Yihong suggests that “the commenter has the full control of updating or even deleting the comments based on their own interest”. In my opinion this makes a lot of sense, because for several reasons an author might want to revise or even withdraw what he wrote in public. Ownership over Resources means that the author keeps the copyight of his content, even if he has to publish it on a technical platform he can not control."
(http://camorra.org/swann/?p=157)

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]