

=Definition=

From the Wikipedia:

"Resource justice (also referred to as "resource equity" or "resource governance") is a term in environmentalism and in environmental ethics. It combines elements of distributive justice and environmental justice and is based on the observation that many countries rich in natural resources such as minerals and other raw materials nevertheless experience high levels of poverty. This resource curse is one of the main ethical reasons to demand resource justice, that is, a globally fair distribution of all natural resources."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_justice)

=More information=

* https://www.foeeurope.org/resource-justice

* Mapping Environmental Justice: EJOLT is a global research project bringing science and society together to catalogue and analyze ecological distribution conflicts and confront environmental injustice. [http://www.ejolt.org/]


'''* Evolution of the environmental justice movement: activism, formalization and differentiation'''

URL = http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/10/10/105002/pdf

"To complement a recent flush of research on transnational environmental justice movements, we sought a deeper organizational history of what we understand as the contemporary environmental justice movement in the United States. We thus conducted in-depth interviews with 31 prominent environmental justice activists, scholars, and community leaders across the US. Today’s environmental justice groups have transitioned from specific local efforts to broader national and global mandates, and more sophisticated political, technological, and activist strategies. One of the most significant transformations has been the number of groups adopting formal legal status, and emerging as registered environmental justice organizations (REJOs) within complex partnerships. This article focuses on the emergence of REJOs, and describes the respondents’ views about the implications of this for more local grassroots groups. It reveals a central irony animating work across groups in today’s movement: legal formalization of many environmental justice organizations has made the movement increasingly internally differentiated, dynamic, and networked, even as the passage of actual national laws on environmental justice has proven elusive."


* A [[Circular Economy Within Ecological Limits]].

"Together with other NGOs and academics, this position paper sets out why we need to set targets to reduce EU resource consumption and waste generation in the European Commission's new Circular Economy Action Plan, ahead of its release in March 2020. We urge that a headline target to halve the EU material footprint by 2030 is included and that a binding EU target to cap waste absolute generation per capita is set. The position paper is written by Friends of the Earth Europe, the European Environmental Bureau and the Institute for Ecological Economics at the Vienna University of Economics and Business."
(https://www.foeeurope.org/a-circular-economy-within-ecological-limits), even as the passage of actual national laws on environmental justice has proven elusive."

* '''Introduction: Natural Resource Justice. By Caroline Sweetman & Maria Ezpeleta.'''

URL = https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13552074.2017.1395138

"This issue of Gender & Development focuses on Natural Resource Justice from a gender justice and women's rights perspective."

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]