

URL = https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/europe-2020-indicators/resource-efficient-europe


=Description=

"Resource efficiency means using the Earth's limited resources in a sustainable manner while minimising impacts on the environment. It allows us to create more with less and to deliver greater value with less input.

Resource-efficient Europe is part of the Europe 2020 Strategy, the EU's growth strategy for a smart, inclusive and sustainable economy. It supports the shift towards sustainable growth via a resource-efficient, low-carbon economy.

The Roadmap to a Resource-Efficient Europe sets out a framework for the design and implementation of future actions. It also outlines the structural and technological changes needed by 2050, including milestones to be reached by 2020.

The Communication "Towards a Circular Economy" further promotes a fundamental transition in the EU, away from a linear economy where resources are not simply extracted, used and thrown away, but are put back in the loop so they can stay in use for longer. It sets out measures driving a more efficient use of resources and waste minimisation.


The scoreboard is made up of two lead indicators measuring resource productivity and domestic material consumption, eight ‘macro' indicators regarding land, water and carbon (known as ‘dashboard' indicators), and 22 additional indicators grouped into three themes:

* transforming the economy; 
* nature and ecosystems;
* key areas.


The scoreboard includes the most recent statistics from Eurostat, the European Environment Agency and other international recognised sources as available at the time of analysis.

The Commission produced descriptive reports on the resource efficiency scoreboard in 2014 and 2015."

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Circular Economy]]

[[Category:Statistics]]

[[Category:Europe]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]