'''= putting customers and independent designers in direct contact through collective physical shops'''

(the difference with using curators is that designers keep their independence in this concept)

Note that the use of 'cooperative' may be deceiving in some instances.


=Description=

"the concept of many-stores-in-a-store, in which merchants do their own online upkeep ... the Yokozunas, R.A.G.s and Emerges of this world are offering a glimpse of new distribution channels for new content. It's a win-win: consumers get direct access to truly original goods, services and experiences, while designers can just get started: no contracts, utility bills or advertising strategies necessary."
(http://www.springwise.com/retail/shelfspace_for_minipreneurs/)

=Examples=

==Beehive==

"The Beehive Co-op offers craftspeople and designers a retail solution that’s more substantial than a Sunday market without the daunting prospect of leasing an entire store. Members rent a portion of Beehive’s store in exchange for a monthly fee and at least four hours of staffing assistance. This keeps overhead low and puts customers and designers in direct contact, boosting the sense of community and giving the designers valuable first-hand feedback on their products. There’s an ethical draw, too: Beehive’s focus on fostering local design means products have a smaller carbon footprint, and money earned stays in the community.
(http://www.springwise.com/retail/cooperative_retail_for_indepen/)


==Yokozuna==

"In Hamburg, Germany, consumers can score authentic works of art at miniature prices from over forty national and international artists who rent a shelf at Yokozuna, a 15 square meter high-in-demand retail hotspot. For a mere EUR 5 per month, young artists, designers and hobby enthusiasts can exhibit and sell their work, with a third of the retail price going to Yokozuna."
(http://www.springwise.com/retail/shelfspace_for_minipreneurs/)


==InQbox==

"inQbox, which stands for incubation in a box, is an uncluttered store in a Singapore mall that is stacked with well-lit, attractive shelving units. It rents out 'boxes' to small businesses and artists, providing them with retail and gallery space, and taking care of the daily hassle of retail. Prices for a box start at SGD 80 (EUR 40/USD 50) per month, depending on size and location within the store. Vendors are selected carefully, and the store is popular with shoppers for its unique array of wares. And lots of shoppers means valuable mini-real estate, so there's often a long waiting list for boxes.

As inQbox puts it, they aim to "encourage creativity and entrepreneurship by providing individuals with a low cost and low risk platform to develop and incubate their talents further than just a hobby, home business or side interest. This allows you to continue with your busy life, be it taking care of your children, traveling or working in a corporate firm."
(http://www.springwise.com/retail/shelfspace_for_minipreneurs_up_1/)


=More Information=

#[[Minipreneurs - Resources]]
#More examples at http://www.springwise.com/retail/shelfspace_for_minipreneurs/ ; http://www.springwise.com/retail/shelfspace_for_minipreneurs_up_1/



[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]