
=Characteristics=

"Rethinking public services in the light of commons has several virtues:

Public services as commons become inalienable. They can no longer be subject to exclusive appropriation, either by private companies or public administrations. This protects them from market logic, which leads to the pursuit of maximum profitability, often in contradiction with the general interest. The right of access to these services is guaranteed by law to all citizens as an enforceable right.

Public services become both more efficient and of better quality. The direct contribution of users to the development, management, and implementation of services ensures responses that are better suited to needs. The construction of public services involves virtuous cooperation among different stakeholders, open innovation, and the intersection of complementary expertise: users, citizen collectives, associations, artisans, artists, companies, public agents...

Citizens become full-fledged political actors by contributing to the design, production, and governance of their public services. Everyone can thus express their agency and become aware of their capacities to act and contribute to the general interest. This collective action, promoting encounters, social bonds, and dynamics of solidarity, is an essential pillar of better living together.

Public administrations are endowed with a new mission: not only to provide a service to citizen-users but also to strengthen the agency of citizen-contributors. By reducing working hours, recognizing new rights, promoting a culture of participation, or facilitating their engagement, public institutions enable citizens to fully contribute to the creation of the general interest."


=Sources=

'''* Policy Paper: OUVRIR LA GOUVERNANCE ET LA PRODUCTION DES SERVICES PUBLICS AUX CITOYENS. Coordinateurs du livret : Louise Guillot, Rémy Seillier et Sébastien Shulz. Societe des Communs. January 2024.'''

URL = https://societedescommuns.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/LIVRET3_ServicesPublics_V240128.pdf


[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]