
'''= "We now have the digital tools to make agreements between each other accountable, trust each other relative to context and deliver on those promises without a proxy".''' [https://medium.com/edushifts/roi-9b9dd285f587]

=Discussion=

Ray Podder:

"No one can predict the future, though the signs for a future full of prosperous possibilities are all around us, when we are willing to reframe reality for the rest of us. Search and social networks signaled the start to the sharing economy, crowdsourcing, crowdfunding, and the evolution of blockchains, holochains, smart contracts, DAOs, OVNs, AR, VR, AI and whole host of emergent acronym ready ideas are showing us something previously unseen. 
 
'''We are no longer in a market driven reality.'''

Our exchanges now are on ubiquitous, asynchronous, autonomous networks, a whole system of networked interdependencies. Sure, most of them now look like walled garden platforms like Facebook, Google, Amazon, Uber, AirBnB, etc. though their longevity will be determined by whether or not they share data and transform their models to serve their ecosystems instead of extracting from them. This recent article on Google’s cash cow drying up with Amazon searches may be an early indicator of the fate of profit driven networked platforms, still accounting for value using an industrial era market paradigm of transactions instead of transformation. 
 
Regardless of where you stand on the evolution of our socioeconomic reality, our technologies today can deliver something, never before possible at this global scale. They can instantly close the gap between intention and outcome, matching resources for inputs, outputs and waste dynamically with demand. Delivering real ROI, our Returns On Intention. 
 
Of course we don’t know if those who fear losing control of their current power position will see what’s here now as a threat, or the transition to greater prosperity for all that it represents. However, one thing is certain, and that is, our current systems were born out of seeking out Returns On Intentions, and the next systems will be no different. Because ultimately, intention is intelligent. It points to our deepest desires. In other words, it points to love, the driving force of our living existence here on Earth."
(https://medium.com/edushifts/roi-9b9dd285f587)

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]