
=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"Natural philosophy is a tradition that was kept alive and reached a high point with the work of Friedrich Schelling, and has continued in  the  work  of  process  metaphysicians  and  scientists  rejecting  the  Newtonian  paradigm  of  science  (Gare,  2014).  It  involves  reconceiving  nature  as  relational  processes in such a way that the emergence of humans with all their complexity, including their ability to create and develop science, becomes intelligible. Bloch, Castoriadis  and  Ricoeur  all  understood  this,  and  wrote  works  on  natural  philosophy. However, natural philosophy was only a minor component of their philosophy.  Bloch  referred  back  to  the  radical  Aristotelianism  of  Avicenna,  Castoriadis   criticised   ensemblistic-identitary or   ensidic   logicand   argued   that   mathematics has limited potential to grasp reality, while Ricoeur referred back to  Spinoza.  None  of  these  philosophers  made  any  significant  contribution  to  natural  philosophy  or  drew  upon  or  contributed  to  the  sciences  influenced  by  post-Newtonian    process    metaphysics,    despite    their    sympathy    for    such    developments. With the global ecological crisis, overcoming Cartesian dualism is no longer just  an  intellectual  matter.  Climate  science,  geology,  environmental  history,  ecological economics and above all, ecology, have come to the fore in efforts to comprehend our situation. Ecology, which includes human ecology, provides the transdiscipline  that  can  relate  each  of  these  disciplines  to  each  other.  Through  the  development  of  anti-reductionist  ideas  in  ecology,  natural  philosophy  has  been given a new lease of life, making it possible to revive what had appeared to be  the  defunct  discipline  of  natural  history.  


[[Robert  Ulanowicz]]  has  argued  that  ecology  should  replace  physics  as  the  pre-eminent  discipline  for  defining  and  advancing science. 


As he put it in his book Ecology, The Ascendent Perspective (1997, 6): 

- Ecology  occupies  the  propitious  middle  ground.  ...  Indeed  ecology  may  well  provide  a  preferred  theatre  in  which  to  search  for  principles  that  might  offer  very  broad implications for science in general. If we loosen the grip of our prejudice in favour of mechanism as the general principle, we see in this thought the first inkling that ecology, the sick discipline, could in fact become the key to a radical leap in scientific thought. A new perspective on how things happen in the ecological world might conceivably break the conceptual logjams that currently hinder progress in understanding evolutionary phenomena, development biology, the rest of the life sciences, and, conceivably, even physics. 

Ulanowicz has further developed this argument in A Third Window (2009).There are a number of elements being integrated in recent developments in theoretical  ecology.  The  most  important  of  these  elements  are  non-linear thermodynamics,  hierarchy  theory  (according  to  which  emergence  occurs  through  the  interpolation  of  enabling  constraints)  and  other  developments  in  complexity   theory,   including   second-order   cybernetics,   field   theories   of   morphogenesis, and biosemiotics, including biohermeneutics and eco-semiotics."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1061/1691)


[[Category:Cosmobiological]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]