

=Description=

By regen.network:

"At the heart of regen.network is a mechanism called Reverse Mining, wherein the world’s farmers are rewarded for verified carbon drawdown. Conventional agriculture, and much of the capitalist system, has been purely extractive in nature, liquidating ecological and community capital for financial yields. We’ve been mining the planet for wealth. Reverse Mining turns this on its head by having a token generation process that actively restores the health of the planet. In short, regen.network catalyzes the transformation of the planet though the regeneration of our soils. This is Reverse Mining."
(https://www.regen.network/)




=Discussion= 

James Quilligan:

"This is a very exciting project! Connecting agriculture and finance in this new way is cutting edge and you are really breaking ground with this. My one caution for you is that in emphasizing the rejuvenation of the carbon cycle, you are marginalizing the rejuvenation of the hydrological cycle and the nitrogen cycle. While you may believe that some dimensions of water and soil problems will be solved indirectly by giving primary attention to the carbon cycle, as noted in the paper I would ask you to consider that all three cycles are of equal and interrelated importance and all deserve balanced attention if we are to create an economy based on the carrying capacity of the planet."
(fb, January 2017)

=More information=

*  more at https://medium.com/regen-network/implicate-intersections-the-global-weirding-531582d4e6c5

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Regenerative Approaches]]