
=Description=

Frédéric Bosqué:

"A revitalization land trust is an entity that invests in land and real estate to support the local development of rural areas. These organizations acquire, renovate, or construct buildings to meet the economic, social, and environmental needs of rural communities. Their primary goal is to rejuvenate declining areas by facilitating the establishment of businesses, commercial activities, or public services. Acting as catalysts, they work to restore the attractiveness of these territories.

The SCIC SA Quartier Rural en Transition de Lustrac and the SCI Le Tilleul, which finance the Centre d'Écoconstruction de Ressources et de Formation (CERF) of the TERA project, are excellent examples of this model. These entities mobilize diverse capital to develop a pilot project for a rural neighborhood in transition, combining ecological housing, local production, and nearby services.

According to the Banque des Territoires, the aim is to support the deployment of 100 such land trusts over five years across France, including in small towns and rural villages."

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/les-fonci%C3%A8res-de-redynamisation-des-outils-au-service-fr%C3%A9d%C3%A9ric-bosqu%C3%A9-svqhe/)


=Discussion=

Frédéric Bosqué:

"The SCIC SA Quartier Rural en Transition de Lustrac, in partnership with TERA, is a living example of these aspirations. By integrating ecological, social, and economic objectives, it provides a model for making this new approach to territorial development viable—not only within its own community but also as a replicable solution for other regions looking to revitalize their territories.

The creation of the National Network of Revitalization Land Trusts, in partnership with the Fédération des Entreprises Publiques Locales (FedEpl), aims to support the capacity-building of operators managing these trusts.

Revitalization land trusts offer a tangible response to the challenges faced by rural areas. By mobilizing diverse resources and involving all local stakeholders, they contribute to building more resilient and attractive territories. The success of these initiatives relies on a shared vision and active collaboration between public and private sectors, fostering harmonious development in rural zones."

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/les-fonci%C3%A8res-de-redynamisation-des-outils-au-service-fr%C3%A9d%C3%A9ric-bosqu%C3%A9-svqhe/)



=Examples=

Frédéric Bosqué: '''Examples of Successful Land Trusts in France'''


==Foncière Cœur de Ville==

This program, initiated by the French government, aims to revitalize town centers suffering from declining activity. By purchasing and rehabilitating vacant properties, the land trust has facilitated the establishment of local businesses and services in medium-sized towns, boosting their economic vitality.


==La Semaest in Paris==

La Semaest, a mixed-economy company, acquires and renovates commercial spaces in eastern Paris to host independent merchants and artisans. To date, it has supported the establishment of nearly 700 businesses, contributing significantly to the revitalization of entire neighborhoods.


==Brest Commerces==

The Brest metropolitan area created its own land trust, Brest Commerces, to rejuvenate the city center by acquiring and renovating about 30 properties. These spaces are intended to host local businesses, strengthening the area's economic and social fabric.


==Villages Vivants==

This solidarity-based land trust focuses on small rural communities, revitalizing village centers by purchasing and refurbishing vacant properties. It installs businesses or social activities in these spaces, helping to restore local economic and social connections.


==FOCCAL (Foncière Occitanie Causses et Cévennes pour l’Artisanat Local)==

FOCCAL supports local craftsmanship in rural areas, particularly in the Causses and Cévennes regions. By rehabilitating spaces for artisans, it bolsters the local economy and preserves traditional skills and knowledge.


==Departmental Land Trusts in Nouvelle-Aquitaine==

Since 2020, several departmental land trusts have been created in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region to combat commercial decline in small towns. These trusts renovate commercial properties to sustain local businesses and strengthen town and village centers.


==SCIC SA Quartier Rural en Transition de Lustrac==

Although not officially a land trust, this SCIC (Cooperative Society of Collective Interest) under the TERA project seeks to fulfill a similar role. It successfully mobilized public, private, and civil society funding to launch the first pilot rural transition neighborhood in Lustrac. The project includes eco-friendly housing, a local producers’ grocery store, shared vehicles, and infrastructure promoting social ties and a circular economy. This initiative illustrates how SCICs can also act as land trusts and serve as replicable models for other rural areas."


=More information=

# www.tera.coop
# www.lustrac-en-transition.coop


[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:France]]