'''Revolution OS'''

URL = http://www.revolution-os.com/

Trailer available at http://www.ifilm.com/ifilmdetail/2419320?htv=12 

Playlist on Youtube, listing the different 10-minute sections together, via
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQ3WBI7cPSY&feature=PlayList&p=D8C1D6C6C9305DD4&index=0&playnext=1



= a 2001 documentary which traces the history of GNU, Linux, and the open source and free software movements.


=Description=

"REVOLUTION OS tells the inside story of the hackers who rebelled against the proprietary software model and Microsoft to create GNU/Linux and the Open Source movement.

On June 1, 2001, Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer said "Linux is a cancer that attaches itself in an intellectual property sense to everything it touches."

Microsoft fears GNU/Linux, and rightly so. GNU/Linux and the Open Source & Free Software movements arguably represent the greatest threat to Microsoft's way of life. Shot in cinemascope on 35mm film in Silicon Valley, REVOLUTION OS tracks down the key movers and shakers behind Linux, and finds out how and why Linux became such a potent threat.

REVOLUTION OS features interviews with Linus Torvalds, Richard Stallman, Bruce Perens, Eric Raymond, Brian Behlendorf, Michael Tiemann, Larry Augustin, Frank Hecker, and Rob Malda. To view the trailer or the first eight minutes go to the ifilm website for REVOLUTION OS.

Companies such as Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Oracle, Wipro, Ogilvy & Mather, OSTG, and Dreamworks Animation have rented REVOLUTON OS for private theatrical screenings. It has also screened in numerous film festivals including South By Southwest Film Festival, the Atlanta Film & Video Festival, Boston Film Festival, and Denver International Film Festival. REVOLUTION OS won Best Documentary at both the Savannah Film & Video Festival and the Kudzu Film Festival."
(http://www.revolution-os.com/)



Linus Torvalds is interviewed on his development of the Linux kernel as well as on the GNU/Linux naming controversy and Linux's further evolution, including its commercialization."
(http://opensourcevideos.blogspot.com/2007/05/revolution-os.html)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Technology]]