
* Book: Revolução 2.0 e a Crise do Capitalismo Global. Ed. by Giuseppe Cocco and Sarita Albagli.

=Description=

Sarita Albagli:

"The book "2.0 Revolution and the Global Capitalism Crisis", coordinated by Giuseppe Cocco and Sarita Albagli, will be launched on December 10, 6 pm, at CBPF. 

The book  addresses the new and constitutive dynamics, which are reinforced by  information and communication digital networks, amid the crisis of cognitive capitalism.  It approaches the challenges to network democracy building within the context of a global crisis; the conflicts and new metropolitan dynamics in this scenario; the disputes for the affirmation of a new rights agenda; and the role of live culture and live work in social and collaborative innovation versus the new enclosures and appropriative forms  which  are collectively produced.  The book brings together contributions from Brazilian and foreign researchers, most of  whom actively participate in such social and political movements."


=More Information=

"Este livro trata das novas dinâmicas e espaços constituintes, que se potencializam nas redes digitais de informação e comunicação, em meio à crise do capitalismo cognitivo. Aborda os desafios à construção de uma democracia em rede no contexto de crise global;  os conflitos e novas dinâmicas metropolitanas nesse cenário; as lutas pela afirmação de uma nova agenda de direitos; e o papel da cultura viva e do trabalho vivo na inovação social e colaborativa versus os novos cercamentos e formas de apropriação do que é coletivamente produzido. O livro reúne contribuições de pesquisadores, do Brasil e do exterior, muitos dos quais também participam ativamente desses novos movimentos sociais e políticos."

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Brazil P2P WikiSprint]]
[[Category:Brazil]]