'''= Flemish Belgian therapist, coach, facilitator, change agent and writer, leader of Art of Hosting in Belgium'''

==Bio==

"I started my professional life as a clinical psychologist and psychotherapist. I was born, raised and am living in Belgium. I founded Vitis, whose core purpose is to bring deep transformation in individuals, organisations and society.
My earlier work was in psychotherapy integrating the body in the process of healing. Besides being a coach and mentor, combining deep compassion, bodily awareness and a lust for life, I facilitate and host transformation in individuals and groups. I am a transformational change professional who has a rich background of experience and interests, also working with Systemic and Organizational Constellations, revealing the hidden dynamics in human systems and bringing them into flow again.

The synergy of my different trainings and expertise give me the skills to discern easily the origin of blockages in an organisation: in the realm of the relationships, in the organisational structure or in the individual. Because I draw on the mental, the emotional and the intuitive knowing, it often brings totally new and fresh solutions in a short time.

My personal interest is in the field of conscious leadership and how this relates to team, groups and communities – in work and daily life.  I worked originally in the area of personal development, coaching and the social profit sector, and currently in the field of participatory leadership for business and global systems. I am always fascinated by ‘What else is possible?’"

==More Information==
* The book and articles on [[Collective Presencing]]
* [[Art of Hosting]] and Harvesting Conversations that Matter
* [[Percolab]]
** [https://percolab.be/ Percolab Belgium]
* [[Spotted Zebras]]
* Mobile: + 32 (0)473 50 21 76
* [http://www.vitis-tct.be/ personal website]
* [https://www.facebook.com/ria.baeck Facebook page]


[[Category:Belgium]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Facilitation]]
[[Category:Relational]]