

Richard Poynder has conducted  many interviews with most of the luminaries of the open and free initiatives.

He is in turn interviewed about his experiences, by Sundar Raman for the Open Views series.

URL = http://kruufm.com/node/182


=Questions for Richard Poynder=

* What is your background, and what motivated you to start compiling
the Open and Shut interviews?

* Please give us some background on what you think the open source and
free culture movements are about, and what motivated their creation.

*  FLOSS and free culture are very popular ideas right now. Do you see
them as a fad in response to an overly controlling corporate culture,
or do you feel these are ideas that are more fundamental to the human
condition - i.e., is open source something that people need to be
trained to accept, or is it more natural for people to embrace the
idea?

*  You're interviews and background on those at the forefront of the
open source movements around the world are very detailed. Do you see
that there's a common personality trait, or common background around
these people that pushed them in the direction of open source?

*  The current state of development is largely based on financial
return. There are exceptions, such as the One Laptop Per Child
project, and other similar "humanitarian" projects. What motivates a
person to go in the direction of open-source. Without a financial
return, why would anyone spend the amount of time it requires to build
a system or create a work of art just to give it away for free? Is
there historical precedent to this, or is this a brave new world
that's being forged by a group of "revolutionaries".

* You come from a journalistic background (as far as I can tell from
Google searches). The publishing world has been at the core of
restricting access to information. Do you see the publishing industry
becoming more open, especially with the accelerating popularity of
blogs, collaborative news outlets and collaborative information
repositories such as Wikipedia? How does the publishing industry cope
with these massive changes is how individuals acquire information? How
do you see things like the open-access movement changing traditionally
closed publishing areas (which you'd think would be open due to the
nature of scientific peer-review)?

* There used to be a myth that free and open source products were
primarily the work of hippies with anti-corporate agendas who were
against capitalism. This idea has been debunked several times, but I'd
like to get your thoughts on the subject. Also, there is a great deal
of debate about what "open business" looks like, and what the
alternative to the traditional business model is. Do you have any
ideas or experience on what constitutes an "open business", or do you
have examples of successes and failures?

* Could you please share some of your thoughts on what the successes
and failures around the open/free movements are - what are the things
that have been done right, and what's been done wrong? What would your
suggestions be to those who are treading down these paths now?

* The free/open movements have stretched well beyond the realms of
Richard Stallman's free software. Stallman in the past has voiced
concern that copyleft and open source should only be used in software,
and possibly software documentation. However, the movement has
stretched into biotechnology, music, art, and seems to have no limits.
Do you think this is diluting the value of the core philosophy behind
open source? Do you think those at the forefront of some of the newer
movements (for example BiOS or CC) might be creating compromised
versions of "open source"? (In a sense it could be argued that CC is a
collection of compromises. And there have been criticisms of the BiOS
license from multiple sources in the last year or so, relating to how
Cambia retains certain control over derivative works. The latter is
perhaps also due to the patent vs. copyright complication).

* If you had to pick one open-source group or application that you'd
like to promote, what would it be and why (for example, one of my
guests said PLoS, and another said that TCP/IP is the most important
open source project ever)?


[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Interviews]]