'''Richard Florida on the Creative Class'''

Blog at http://creativeclass.typepad.com/



=Podcasts=

URL = http://www.landed.fm/shows/richard-florida.html


==Description==

"Market value in the knowledge economy is driven by creative energy in the workforce. In his groundbreaking 2002 bestseller The Rise of the Creative Class, prize-winning economist Dr. Richard Florida profiled the characteristics of creative knowledge workers, and introduced strategies for attracting and leading them successfully. With The Flight of the Creative Class, Florida addresses global competition and what countries and corporations must do to thrive in the knowledge economy. Called a "national cultural guru," by the Boston Globe, Florida has become a leader in the international debate about the causes and consequences of economic growth, as well as an important thought leader for organizations worldwide. Join us for a fascinating and thought-provoking presentation."
(http://www.landed.fm/shows/richard-florida.html)



==Review==


"Yesterday, I took a fascinating journey down an incredible new road of thought presented by Economist Dr. Richard Florida, via Landed Radio's excellent podcast series. Florida spoke at the Human Capital Institute in Chicago and Landed.fm was able to capture and share that message with the world via podcasting...

I won't be shy about this--I was riveted to hearing this entire presentation because the ideas he expresses here have helped me explain the countless changes I am seeing both in businesspeople--especially technical professionals--and in business and in the way people want to live and work.

I've been poking and jabbing at what's going on in our economy today. I can feel the riptide pulling us all toward a very different business world tomorrow, but I just haven't been able to explain what or why or how it feels different. I am also now incredibly passionate about helping the communities I am in to respond to these demands and create, or recreate, incredible places to live, work and play. Go to Landed Radio to learn more about Florida, the Rise of the Creative Class, and the most important fundamental shift in our workforce in the last 500 years."
(http://www.landed.fm/shows/richard-florida.html)



==More Podcasts==


2006 speech at http://www.evoca.com/everyone_recording.jsp?rid=32914


=Webcasts=


==Webcast 1==

URL = http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-1156163746651756400&q=%22richard+florida%22&hl=en

56 minute interview with Charlie Rose (2004).


==Webcast 2==

URL = http://www.seattlechannel.org/videos/video.asp?ID=1473

Speech in Seattle, 2003


=More Information=


[[Creative Class]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Policy]]