
Podcast via https://www.raggeduniversity.co.uk/2018/05/08/on-mutual-recognition-by-richard-gunn/

"This is an audio recording of Richard’s presentation to the Ragged University on the 31st of May 2018."

=Description=

Richard Gunn:

"In recent years, the term ‘mutual recognition’ has become more central to what I write and argue and say. More specifically, the terms ‘recognition’, and ‘mutual’ recognition have been central to a number of papers that my friend Adrian Wilding and myself have jointly produced’.

Currently, Adrian and I are preparing a book-length version of our views. This presentation attempts to give an account of what, by ‘mutual recognition’, we mean. The term ‘mutual recognition’ has a background in G.W.F. Hegel’s writings. It is, Adrian and I argue, pivotal to the thought and assumptions of Karl Marx. Some references to Hegel’s and Marx’s writings cannot be avoided. Here, I avoid as far as possible textual debate. And no knowledge of Marx’s and Hegel’s writings is assumed."
(https://www.raggeduniversity.co.uk/2018/05/08/on-mutual-recognition-by-richard-gunn/)

=More information=

* R. Gunn and A. Wilding ‘Revolutionary or Less-than-Revolutionary Recognition?’ [published online by Heathwood Institute and Press (www.heathwoodpress.com) on 24 July 2013]; 

* R. Gunn and A. Wilding ‘Occupy as Mutual Recognition’ [published online by Heathwood Institute and Press (www.heathwoodpress.com) on 12 November 2013]; 

* R. Gunn and A. Wilding ‘Recognition Contradicted’ [published in South Atlantic Quarterly Vol. 113, No. 2 (Spring 2014)]; 

* R. Gunn and A. Wilding ‘Marx and Recognition’ [published online by Heathwood Institute and Press (www.heathwoodpress.com) on 24 November 2014].


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Podcasts]]