
=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Ridesharing is the sharing of vehicles by passengers to reduce vehicle trips, traffic congestion and automobile emissions. Types of transportation that are considered ridesharing include carpool, vanpool, and transit or public transport. Bicycle commuting and walking are not considered forms of ridesharing, since a motorized vehicle is not being used for the trip. Telework and compressed work schedules are also included, since no vehicle trip is used for the work hours. Other names for ridesharing include Transportation Demand Management, Alternative Transportation, Active Transportation, and Mobility.

...

The service commonly referred to as real-time ridesharing, and provided by transportation network companies such as Lyft, Uber, and Sidecar, arranges '''one-time rides on an on-demand basis and does not require the sharing of the vehicle for the purpose of reducing vehicle trips. As of January 2015, the Associated Press Stylebook recommended a change in this language to ride-hailing or ride-booking services'''.

Now the long distance ridesharing service is another trend. Company like Pinche, is providing such a long-distance ridesharing community."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rideshare


=More Information=

See also: [[Real-Time Ridesharing]]

In the U.S.:

The Best Workplaces for Commuters Program provides qualified employers with national recognition and an elite designation for offering outstanding commuter benefits, such as free or low cost bus passes and vanpool fares and strong telework programs. (http://www.bestworkplaces.org/)

The Association for Commuter Transportation is an international trade association and advocate for ridesharing, commuter transportation, and transportation demand management. (http://actweb.org/)

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Sharing]]