'''= "The Right of Public Access (‘Allemansrätt’), or Outdoor Access Rights gives you the right to roam the countryside in Sweden in perfect peace and quiet".'''

=Description=

Visit Sweden:

"Freedom to roam, The Right of Public Access, or Allemansrätten as we say in Swedish. Our Right of Public Access is a unique institution. It gives us the freedom to roam just about anywhere in the countryside as long as we do not disturb or destroy.

Outdoor Access Rights (Allemansrätten): The Keep Sweden Tidy foundation runs several public campaigns and projects to encourage a sustainable environmental development.

This is the Right of Public Access

When you are in Sweden you have the right to walk, cycle, ride, ski and camp on any land with the exception of private gardens, near a dwelling house or land under cultivation. We call it the Freedom to Roam.

Sweden’s natural wonders; Swedish Lapland, the Swedish mountains, coastlines and archipelagos are waiting for you to come and discover them.

The Right of Public Access is a unique right to roam freely in the countryside. But with this right come responsibilities – to take care of nature and wildlife and to show consideration for landowners and for other people enjoying the countryside. The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sums up the Right of Public Access in the phrase ‘Don’t disturb – Don’t destroy'.'' 
(https://visitsweden.com/what-to-do/nature-outdoors/nature/sustainable-and-rural-tourism/about-the-right-of-public-access/)


[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Sweden]]
[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]
[[Category:Sweden]]
[[Category:Transportation]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Urban Commons]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]