=Description=

Ralph Thurm:

"Rightsholdership connects directly to the idea of wellbeing as the ultimate end, if approached right and really processed through from the individual (nano) level of understanding, through the micro (organizational) level, meso (industry, portfolio or habitat) level, macro (economic, ecologic, social) level, up to what we at r3.0 call the ‘supra level’, that’s where the wellbeing of all is manifesting itself. As mentioned earlier, I am a deep believer of Plato’s ‘The one will never be well unless the whole is well’. That ‘whole’ includes all species on planet Earth, including us humans. 

Rightsholdership also exposes the flaws of shareholder and stakeholder primacy as remarked in earlier parts. Over the last years I was trying to better grasp how a basic understanding of rightsholdership would help to enable wellbeing, and what came out is a cause-and-effect feedback loop. The starting point actually is the nano/personal level, by which the awareness of a bigger whole changes a dominant leadership attitude (competition) to the idea of stewardship (collaboration). The impacts then develop into the micro, meso and macro level and then create accountability feedback loops up until the supra level."
(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/big-sustainability-illusion-goodbye-esg-lalaland-hello-ralph-thurm/)


=Discussion=


==The 5 T’s of a [[Regenerative and Distributive Market Mechanisms]]==

Ralph Thurm:

"If rightsholdership functions on a nano level, what would be the corresponding effects in macroeconomics, and how would it help to create System Value? At r3.0 we summarize it as the Five Ts: True Costing, True Benefiting, True Pricing, True Compensation, and True Taxation. 


We believe it is the interplay and simultaneous effects of these five fundamental shifts
that allow markets to steer in the direction of a System Value Economy. Here’s how:


* True Costs cover the actual impacts on nature and humanity, eliminating the perverse “externalization” of negative effects only and “internalization” of positive effects only;
* True Benefits: balances “depreciation” with “appreciation” of positive effects;
* True Prices: Price aligns with sustainable impact, with unsustainable products and services rising beyond affordability;
* True Compensation: Link incentives to sustainable outcomes, including sustainable levels of income and benefits;
* True Taxes: Levy adverse impacts (resource overuse, pollution) and liberate positive impacts (labor) from taxation."

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/big-sustainability-illusion-goodbye-esg-lalaland-hello-ralph-thurm/)

[[Category:Rights]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]