'''= "The [[IASC]] Research Group RightSeeds explores commons-based approaches to variety breeding, seed production and seed usage".'''

URL = https://www.rightseeds.de/en/

== Description ==

'''1.'''

"The Research Group RightSeeds explores
commons-based approaches to variety
breeding, seed production and seed usage. A
Commons orientation in the seed and variety
sector provides a promising approach in
reorienting the agricultural sector towards the
international sustainability goals of food
sovereignity and agrobiodiversity. The project
employs a transdisciplinary research approach
by integrating perspectives from the fields of
economics, ecology, political science and
philosophy, and collaborating with seed
initiatives, companies and NGOs in Germany
and the Philippines.

Both the synthesis of different research
perspectives and the sound analytical
investigation of arrangements in specific fields
of application of the New Commons, such as
Seed and Variety Commons, promises to
strengthen their systematic understanding and
their challenges in practice."


'''2.'''

"The Commons-based variety breeding and seed production presents an approach to counteract genetical erosion of crop plant variety and thus promotes food sovereignty.

Especially in countries of the Global South, Commons-based approaches such as seed exchange systems, community seed banks and participatory plant breeding are successfully practiced. More recently, seed initiatives in the context of organic plant breeding in Germany have emerged that are starting to integrate principles of Commons in their work.

The research project´s goal is to explore the transformative potential of  Commons-based seed systems for a social-ecological plant cultivation and how this potential can be enhanced. "
(https://www.rightseeds.de/en/)


'''3. Tschersich, J. et al. :'''

"The conceptual work of this paper is part of the transdisciplinary research project RightSeeds, which explores commons-based seed systems and their transformative potential for realizing food security, food sovereignty and enhancing agrobiodiversity in plant cultivation. RightSeeds follows an understanding of transdisciplinarity as a problem- and solution-oriented endeavor, in which new knowledge is generated through the collaboration of scientists from different disciplines with practitioners (Jahn 2008; Lang et al. 2012). The perspectives and disciplinary knowledge from ecology, economics, political science and ethics, as well as farming, breeding and other practical knowledge from European and Philippine practical partners are integrated. In Germany and Austria, these include 16 organizations and initiatives in the fields of organic plant breeding, seed production and marketing, variety conservation, food retailing and NGOs. In the Philippines, MASIPAG is the practical partner of the project, a network of 35.000 rice grower families, plant breeders, scientists and NGOs."
(https://www.thecommonsjournal.org/article/10.5334/ijc.1043/)

== More information ==

* '''Article: Sievers-Glotzbach, S., Tschersich, J., Gmeiner, N., Kliem, L., & Ficiciyan, A. (2020). Diverse Seeds – Shared Practices: [[Conceptualizing Seed Commons]]. International Journal of the Commons, 14(1), 418–438.''' <br>
URL = https://www.thecommonsjournal.org/article/10.5334/ijc.1043/

* [[Seed Commons]]

* RightSeeds Research Group<br>
Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg<br>
Prof. Dr. Stefanie Sievers-Glotzbach<br>
Department of Business Administration,<br>
Economics, and Law<br>
26111 Oldenburg, Germany<br>
rightseeds@uol.de

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Commons]]