'''Site : https://ripostecreativeterritoriale.xyz/'''

The Covid-19 crisis poses unprecedented challenges for local authorities and public services. In response, the CNFPT is opening a laboratory for collaborative experimentation: the "Territorial Creative Response" - learning together from the crisis. Within this network open to territorial public actors and their partners, everyone commits, proposes, and expresses a need! Cooperation is at the heart of the approach in order to create solutions together, to invent new modes of action and to prepare for the aftermath.

The "Creative Response" projects, linked by a common approach, are open spaces of cooperation to learn together from the crisis, promote solidarity, pool initiatives and prepare for the aftermath. These communities of open practices are animated in a logic of commonality, cooperate with each other and share their productions under a CC by SA default license. 

==Call for the creativity and strength of the network of territorial public innovation actors to face the new challenges created by the covid crisis 19==

What if this period of confinement and closure of collective spaces became an opportunity to demonstrate the strength of cooperation and our collective intelligence between elected officials, territorial officials, citizens, partners?
And what if this unprecedented crisis could allow the emergence of a more sustainable, more inclusive local democracy, with a re-enchanted place for territorial public service?
What if, during this crisis, we invent new areas of solidarity and mutual aid, following the example of the approach of the University of Territorial Public Innovation, which will take place in open forum mode in 10 regions on 7 and 8 July 2020 around the question "How can we learn to cooperate to solve the challenges in our territories?

The covid 19 crisis has placed local authorities and public services in the face of unprecedented challenges:

* How to ensure the continuity of the activities of our local public services with very limited human resources?
* How can we implement remote management with our teleworking employees?
* What material, organisational and technical arrangements can be imagined in our public services to protect our employees on duty?
* How can we support national education in the deployment of distance learning tools?
* What new social responses should we bring to our vulnerable users (elderly, precarious, single parents, etc.)?

[[Category:France]]