
'''= organization for the creation and development of free and open source software for the public good.''' 

URL = http://dev.riseup.net/about-riseup-labs/

=Description=

"Riseup Labs is a computer science and educational organization for the creation and development of free and open source software for the public good.  Concurrently we create and disseminate educational materials associated with our software as well as other popular open source software initiatives. Riseup Labs adapts emerging internet communication technologies to the needs of individuals and organizations working for social justice.

Riseup Labs is active in the Free Software movement. Riseup Labs contributions include a social networking and collaboration platform, a suite of secure backup tools for system administrators, a platform for the administration of email services, and statistical tools for monitoring, alerting, and trend analysis in graph form of system health and network utilization.

Riseup Labs actively works with Debian, the largest free software project distributing the GNU/Linux operating system. We works with the Debian Testing Security team, performing security assessments, providing patches and vulnerability tracking on core components, such as the kernel, and work with maintainers and release managers to ensure quick resolutions to sensitive problems. We also compile and write Debian educational material for public distribution. Furthermore, Riseup Labs contributes packaged software core to our email, web and virtual server research and development for distribution with Debian.

Riseup Labs takes security and privacy very seriously. Along with detailed privacy and security manuals for popular internet communication systems, Riseup Labs develops and distributes custom versions of popular mail delivery software and web mail clients that has been specifically designed to protect the privacy and security of the users. To these ends we also develop and distribute custom versions of various system logging tools.

Riseup Labs provides, free of charge, educational guides and training material on specifics of all Riseup Labs development initiatives as well as information on broader topics surrounding the use of internet technologies."
(http://dev.riseup.net/about-riseup-labs/)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Movements]]