

'''* Article: The Canadian Movement for Monetary Sovereignty: Rise and Fall. By Ellen Brown. COMER, THE JOURNAL OF THE COMMITTEE ON MONETARY AND ECONOMIC REFORM, Vol. 25, No. 6 • June 2013'''

URL = http://comer.org/archives/2013/COMER_June2013.pdf

Chapter 17 of a new book by Ellen H. Brown, The Public Bank Solution


=Excerpt=

Ellen Brown:

"The government of Canada devised its innovative
system of state-bank-created credit in
the 1930s, and drew freely from it for nearly
four decades of unusual prosperity, growth and
development. Then in the 1970s, Canada
joined the Basel Committee of G10 countries
at the BIS. A change in economic policy followed
that cut the government off from its
own state bank funding, subjecting it instead
to the skyrocketing interest rates of private
international credit markets. Canada is now
struggling with debt and deficits along with
most of the rest of the Western world.
While Australia’s innovative central bank
was being reined in by the City of London
in the 1930s, Canada’s was just getting
started. Before 1935, the Canadian government
did not have a central bank. It had to
borrow from private banks that issued their
own banknotes, with the country’s largest
private bank, the Bank of Montreal, serving
as the government’s de facto banker.

But in the throes of the Great Depression,
this private system had failed. The money
supply had collapsed, forcing businesses to
close and unemployment to soar. The banks
were blamed for making conditions worse
by failing to extend loans; while for the government,
a national debt to private banks
meant a mounting interest burden.

By the eve of the depression, interest on
Canada’s public debt had reached an alarming
one-third of government expenditures;
and many officials believed that the government
needed a central bank to generate its
own money. In 1933, a Royal Commission
was put together to look into creating such
a bank. A major debate then ensued over
whether it should be public or private.
William Lyon Mackenzie King, elected
prime minister in 1935, thought the bank
should be public. 


He admonished:

- “Until the control of the issue of currency
and credit is restored to government
and recognized as its most conspicuous and
sacred responsibility, all talk of the sovereignty
of Parliament and of democracy is
idle and futile.”


...


The Bank of Canada opened in 1935
under private ownership; but in 1938, the
Bank Act was amended to make it a publicly-owned
institution. According to William
Krehm in A Power Unto Itself: The Bank of
Canada, the 1938 nationalization allowed
the central bank to create the money to
finance federal projects on a nearly interestfree
basis. The bank could also lend to the
provinces. The interest it collected went
back to the federal treasury.

In creating the credit to finance federal,
provincial, and municipal projects, the
Bank of Canada was doing what private
banks do every day; but it was doing this
in the public interest. In parliamentary
hearings in 1939, Graham Towers, the first
governor of the Bank of Canada, confirmed
that banks routinely create credit with accounting
entries.


...


“In the years 1935 to 1945, Canada’s
monetary base – that is, the supply of legal
tender – was increased from $259 million
to $2,017 million. M1 – all currency and
non-interest-bearing deposits – rose from
$742 million to $2,956 million. Because
the central bank created most of the money
itself and lent it to the government in the
form of treasury bills at rates as low as .37
percent, the bank was able to keep the interest
paid on Canada Savings Bonds bought
by the public to 3 percent or less. Without
the low-rate financing provided by the central
banks, the Allied powers could not have
won the war.”

According to the late Will Abram in
Money: The Canadian Experience with the
Bank of Canada Act of 1934 (2009), the
Canadian government first showed what it
could do with its own central bank during
World War II, when Canada ranked fourth
among the Allies for production of war
goods. Under the Returning Veterans Rehabilitation
Act of 1945, some 54,000 returning
vets were given financial aid to attend
university. The Department of Veterans
Affairs provided another 80,000 vets with
vocational training, and the Veterans’ Land
Act helped 33,000 vets buy farmland.
After the war, the Industrial Development
Bank, a subsidiary of the Bank of
Canada, was formed to boost Canadian
businesses by offering loans at low interest
rates. The Bank of Canada also funded
many infrastructure projects and social programs
directly. Under the Trans-Canada
Highway Act passed in 1949, Canada built
the world’s longest road and the world’s longest
inland waterway (a joint venture with
the United States), as well as the 28-mile
Welland Canal. Senior citizens, regardless
of income or assets, received a modest allowance
from the government under the
Old Age Security Act; and children under 15
got one as well.

In 1957, funding from the Bank of
Canada helped launch the Canadian federal
health care system. A Hospital Act was
passed under which the federal government
agreed to pay half its citizens’ bills at most
hospitals, and a Diagnostic Services Act gave
all Canadians free acute hospital care, as
well as lab and radiology work. In 1966, the
Hospital Act was expanded to cover physician
services. In 1984, the Canada Health
Act ensured that no medically-necessary
care would include private fees or a charge
to citizens.

From 1939 to 1974, Canada financed
these projects largely through its government-owned
central bank, without sparking
price inflation or driving up the federal
debt. (See Figure 9 on page 4.) From 1935
to 1939, the Bank of Canada issued most of
the nation’s credit, and it issued 62 percent
of the credit during the last years of World
War II. Until the mid-1970s, the Canadian
government continued to create enough
new state money to monetize 20 percent
to 30 percent of the national deficit. It
advanced money at low interest, forcing
commercial banks to keep interest rates low
in order to compete.

This four-decade run of prosperity came
to an end, however, when Canada abandoned
its successful experiment in selffunding
and began borrowing heavily on
the private market. This change in policies
occurred when the Basel Committee was
established by the central-bank Governors
of the Group of Ten countries of the Bank
for International Settlements in 1974, and
Canada joined it.11 A key objective of the
Committee was and is to maintain “monetary
and financial stability.” To achieve
that goal, the Committee discouraged governments
from borrowing from their own
central banks interest-free and encouraged
them to borrow instead from private creditors,
including large international banks.12
The proffered justification for the policy
was that borrowing from a nation’s own
central bank, which had the power to create
money on its books, would inflate the
money supply and prices, while borrowing
from private creditors would not. Overlooked
or concealed was that private banks
create the money they lend just as public
banks do. The difference is that a publiclyowned
bank returns the interest to the
government and the community, while a
privately-owned bank siphons it into private
coffers, progressively drawing money out of
the productive economy.

The change in government borrowing
policies was justified as being necessary to
fight “stagflation” – rising prices accompanied
by high unemployment – which
had set in during the late 1960s. Under
the sway of the classical monetarist theories
promoted by US economist Milton
Friedman, the phenomenon was blamed
on governments either issuing money too
freely or borrowing too freely from their
own central banks. Overlooked was that the
stagflation was global, and that Canadian
prices had remained stable and the national
debt had been low for decades, although the
Bank of Canada had been steadily increasing
the monetary base. Paul Hellyer, former
Defense Minister of Canada and founder
of the Canadian Action Party, maintains
that elevated prices in the 1970s were the
result not of government money creation
but of “cost-push” inflation, triggered by
big labor unions, big government, and big
corporations negotiating top dollar for their
contracts.

According to William Engdahl in The
Gods of Money (2009), there was another
cause of cost-push inflation in the early
1970s, and this one was intentionally engineered:
the skyrocketing cost of oil. When
Nixon took the US dollar off the gold
standard in 1971, the dollar dropped precipitously
in international markets. US
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and
President Nixon then held a clandestine
meeting in 1972 with the Shah of Iran, who
was offered any weapons he wanted from
the US arsenal except nuclear bombs. He
would need vastly greater income to pay for
them, but the revenue was soon provided.
Engdahl cites evidence that in 1973,
a group of powerful financiers and politicians
met secretly in Sweden to discuss how
the dollar might effectively be “backed” by
oil. An arrangement was then finalized in
which the oil-producing countries of OPEC
would sell their oil only in US dollars, and
the dollars would wind up in Wall Street
and London banks, where they would fund
the burgeoning US debt. For the OPEC
countries, the quid pro quo was military
protection, along with windfall profits from
a dramatic boost in oil prices"


[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]