
'''* Report: The Rise of the Micro-Multinational: How Freelancers and Technology-Savvy Start-Ups  Are Driving Growth, Jobs and Innovation. By Ann Mettler and Anthony D. Williams. Lisbon Council Policy Brief, 2013.'''

URL = http://www.dinosaur-exchange.com/FTP/LISBON_COUNCIL_Rise_of_Micromultinationals.pdf


=Summary=

"This policy brief is divided into four parts. 

Part one ... is intended to introduce the 
concept of micro-multinationals and 
explain why we believe their dramatic 
arrival on the economic scene is but the 
first shot in a wider, rapidly unfolding 
revolution. 

Part two will look in greater 
depth at the changing economic 
landscape and the forces driving 
micro-multinationals to the forefront 
of modern economic developments. 

Part three will discuss the changes that 
micro-multinationals are themselves making 
on the world around us, and part four will 
look at the implications for policymakers 
and make eight recommendations."

=Excerpt=

==From the Introduction==

Ann Mettler and Anthony D. Williams:

"As crisis engulfs the world’s leading 
economies, there is great concern about 
job creation and energizing growth rates.

The sudden arrival of subdued, Japanese-style growth prospects for North America, 
Europe and the rest of the developed 
world – combined with years of sluggish 
employment figures – have given increasing 
urgency to the task of finding effective 
responses. But so far, nothing seems to 
have worked. That is not surprising, as 
traditional levers of policy intervention 
tend to be designed around the interests 
of economic incumbents – existing market 
players – rather than the newcomers that 
are today’s key engine of growth and jobs. 
Consider this: All net job growth in the 
United States between 1980 and 2005 
came from firms less than five years old.

And, interestingly, in each year between 
1997 and 2008, more than 2.5 million 
people simply created their own job by 
becoming entrepreneurs (and also created 
more than one million additional paid 
employment positions each year).

 
In other  words, 65% of all jobs created in the US 
in that time were jobs that entrepreneurs 
created for themselves, making freelancing 
an increasingly important source of 
employment and a significant, albeit 
often overlooked, cornerstone of modern 
economic activity. In Europe, the numbers 
are similar. Some 32.6 million people are 
classified as self-employed, which accounts 
for more than 15% of total employment.

The vast majority of Europe’s self-employed, some 23 million, are freelancers, 
meaning they work for or in one-person 
companies. And while the crisis has had a 
negative impact on the overall employment 
situation in Europe, a European 
Commission study recently found that 
self-employed entrepreneurs were much 
more resilient to the economic downturn 
than dependent workers and employees.

At the forefront of this seismic shift in the 
way jobs are created and economic value 
added is a new type of company, the micro-multinational. Traditionally, these small, 
self-starting, service-driven companies 
would have been described as small- and 
medium-sized enterprises, or SMEs, but 
thanks to the Internet, the emergence of 
new business platforms and the increased 
openness of the global economy, these 
companies can enter markets with a 
minimum of bureaucracy and overhead. 

Add to that their unparalleled ability 
to respond promptly to changing 
market developments, a collaborative 
DNA that often translates into superior 
innovation performance and the lack 
of the institutional inertia and legacy 
relationships plaguing larger organizations, 
and one begins to see the transformative 
and paradigm-changing potential. 

Take Local Motors, a radically new kind of 
car company founded in Chandler, Arizona 
by Jay Rogers, a former US Marine with 
a mission to reinvent the auto industry. 

Rogers doesn’t employ a design team 
and he doesn’t do much in-house R&D. 
Instead, he has an online community 
of 12,000 freelance designers from 121 
countries that participate in contests and 
collectively design next generation cars. 

Unlike its larger rivals, there are no massive 
three million square foot manufacturing 
facilities and no shiny global headquarters 
to house tens of thousands of office 
workers. Instead, he makes cars using 
a network of micro-factories, each 
one producing custom-built off-road 
vehicles designed for that particular region. 

And the results have been spectacular: 
So far, he has designed and produced around 
50 off-road vehicles (that’s the company’s 
niche) and plans to produce and sell 1500 
more at roughly $75,000 [around €55,000] 
each. He employs around 15 full-time staff.

Examples like Local Motors may be on the 
extreme side – after all, not every micro-multinational is organizing freelancers 
on a project basis to take on bloated 20th
century industrial behemoths such as the 
car industry. But it is a good example 
of the basic economics driving micro-multinationals to the forefront of today’s 
economy. Put simply, in the past you had 
to be large to gain global reach; today, 
this is no longer the case. Typically, a 
company like Local Motors can conceive 
and design a car in 14 months – not the 
three- to five-year development time it 
can still take Detroit and some European 
carmakers. And customers don’t need 
to schmooze with slick salesmen or visit 
expensive showrooms to choose their 
vehicles. Instead, many Local Motors 
customers take part in designing their 
own cars online, customizing production 
to get their perfect vehicle, and cutting 
out an expensive distribution network 
that drives up the price and slows down 
delivery. True enthusiasts can even visit 
the Local Motors factory and take part 
in building their car themselves.

But the truly transformational development 
is this: In the 19th and 20th century, firms 
needed to get big to attain the scale 
necessary to develop global distribution 
networks, to tap into global talent pools 
and to bring in the large revenue that 
drives profits and creates jobs. As the 
world enters the 21st century, this formula 
has been stood on its head. Today, many 
large companies are hampered by their 
size – bogged down in bureaucracy and 
overstaffing that makes them painfully 
slow to take decisions and often blinds 
them to important new opportunities 
emerging in today’s markets. This, in turn, 
leaves them singularly unprepared to take 
advantage of the radical new opportunities 
on offer, and facing the world with a cost 
structure that makes it difficult for them 
to compete with leaner, new enterprises 
like Local Motors. The result is that large 
companies are under increasing pressure 
to deliver more with less – a fact which 
may well account for the jobless economic 
recovery we have seen in 2010 and 2011, 
and could well be an indication that 
big companies, no matter how much 
economic stimulus is applied, are never 
going to deliver the jobs that politicians 
are counting on them to provide.

But it also means that entrepreneurs, 
freelancers and the self-employed are in 
a position unlike ever before to become 
the engine of jobs, growth, innovation 
and future prosperity – and to deliver on 
their dreams. Put simply, technology puts 
them in the driver’s seat, allowing them 
to scale up and deliver products without 
having to build the huge infrastructure and 
bureaucracy that 20th century enterprises 
relied upon. The difference over time is 
a revolution in the way economic value 
is created, with smaller companies now 
able through technology to gain the scale 
that only larger ones could previously 
aspire to. Under these circumstances, 
the speed, agility and responsiveness 
that their small size permits becomes 
a major asset, rather than a liability. 

And it is no surprise that, more and more, 
big companies are starting to depend on 
the ability of smaller companies to help 
them meet deadlines, deliver top-of-the-line work and effectively embrace fast-changing market conditions to which their  own sclerotic management structures are 
not capable of responding quickly enough.

This has important implications for the 
labor market, too. Policymakers must 
understand and embrace the fact that 
jobs are being created not by yesterday’s 
economic heroes, but by tomorrow’s 
emerging champions – and focus their 
policy on stimulating the creation of more 
globally-focused SMEs and creating a 
social system that facilitates and supports 
work in this area, as we will argue in part 
four of this policy brief. Undoubtedly, it is 
a good news story – unless you choose to 
view it from the nostalgic lens of yesterday’s 
economy. There has never been a better 
time to be an entrepreneur, to write your 
own job description, to create a profession 
for yourself and to find your own way 
forward in a highly diversified modern 
economy that puts so much power at the 
mere click of a keyboard. And that is exactly 
what more and more people are doing."


==Labor Trends==

1. Most jobs are created by young 
companies and start-ups. OECD 
research shows that when firms with 
similar characteristics in terms of 
country, industry, firm size and age are 
compared, age explains a substantially 
larger share of the overall variation in 
job creation and total job reallocation  than size.

In other words, job creation 
declines with firm age. It is thus not 
surprising that, as the figures cited at the 
outset of this policy brief show, firms 
less than five years old accounted for all 
net job growth from 1980-2005, and 
business start-ups account for almost 
20% of gross job creation in any given 
year, despite the fact that they account 
for only 3% of overall employment in 
the US.


2.Today technology makes it possible 
for small companies to gain the reach 
and traction of big companies at very 
low cost. Nothing has empowered 
and enabled small- and medium-sized 
companies more than technology. A 
recent study found that at least one-third 
of SMEs make extensive use of web 
technologies, and those that 
do have benefited tremendously, using 
new Internet-based services to perform 
the functions that entire departments 
once performed for large corporations.

Against this backdrop, it makes sense that 
SMEs that heavily use web technologies 
grow and export twice as much as 
others.

They also create twice the 
number of jobs. A strong presence on the 
Internet not only benefits the companies 
in question but also the economy at 
large. In the United Kingdom, for 
example, 71% of SMEs use the Internet 
with medium or high intensity and the 
Internet contributes about 5.4% to British 
GDP. In Russia, on the other hand, only 
about 41% of SMEs have medium or 
high Internet usage and the Internet only 
contributes 0.8% to Russian GDP. 


3. New platforms and online business 
services are making it easier for small 
companies to focus on areas where 
they add value. In the past, entrepreneurs 
had to build most of their business 
infrastructure from scratch, adding 
tremendously to their costs and workload. 
Today, micro-multinationals have the 
same capabilities at their fingertips as 
their macro-counterparts because they 
can purchase most necessary back office 
services at minimal cost online. And they 
also enjoy a symbiotic relationship with a 
vast secondary market for global business 
services.

From globally accessible 
cloud computing services to mobile-to-mobile international phone connections 
and online sales and advertising platforms, 
the possibilities to connect, outsource and 
streamline are endless. From their first 
day on the job, micro-multinationals can 
access international markets – once the 
exclusive domain of corporate giants – via 
readily accessible platforms and services 
provided by companies like Google Inc., 
Salesforce.com, Skype, Facebook, Amazon.com, eBay Inc., FedEx Corp. and many 
others. 

In addition to improving company 
performance, these platforms are also 
increasingly important in finding new 
clients and matching talent pools with job 
opportunities. Entrepreneurs can access all 
of these business services at a fraction of 
the cost of building and managing them 
internally. “You can bootstrap a company 
much more easily,” says Kim Polese, CEO 
of SpikeSource, an open-source software 
services start-up that has flourished in this 
new environment. Ms. Polese estimates 
that her company’s expenses for hardware, 
software, and network bandwidth are as 
little as one-tenth of what they would have 
cost five years ago. 


4. Internationalization – the key to 
success for almost all contemporary 
businesses, large and small – is easier 
to achieve via the Internet. To this 
day, and despite the on-going talk of 
globalization, internationalization is 
still not sufficiently recognized as a 
key driver of company growth, success 
and profitability, perhaps because of 
the inherently domestic focus of policy 
making and policymakers. However, 
financiers and venture capitalists know 
that successful internationalization – 
and the effort to use the Internet to tap 
immediately into a global customer base 
of seven billion potential consumers – can 
make all the difference, which is why they 
now encourage the start-ups they fund 
to implement global strategies from day 
one to gain access to larger markets and 
reduce costs. According to a USA Today 
survey of venture capital-backed startups created since 1999, nearly 40% have 
employees outside the US.

And 60% of 
companies with fewer than 500 employees 
have budgeted one to five million dollars 
on outsourcing this year.

In an analysis 
by the London-based Centre for Economic 
Policy Research, researchers found that 
companies that are “regionally minded” are 
four times less likely to innovate than their 
globally connected counterparts.

In terms of product development, the addition of 
just one new international relationship 
improved a firm’s odds of successfully 
introducing new ideas by 26%.


5.Today’s workforce has changing 
priorities. Micro-multinationals like 
Local Motors may be enabled by 
technology, but they are inspired by 
people’s passions and by their desire 
to master their own economic destiny. 
Indeed, countless research studies have 
shown that growing numbers of talented 
and creative people wish to develop their 
careers in a more flexible manner and 
pursue livelihoods outside the confines 
of traditional bureaucracies.

The 2010 Freelancer Survey, for instance, cites 
among the top five reasons to decide 
to freelance, the desire to have more 
flexibility, more creative control over 
projects, to be able to work from home, 
to make more money and to grow a business.

These “free agents” defy the 
typical image of the security-craving, 
risk-averse employee who strives for 
a lifelong job with a safe employer, 
ideally the government or a large, 
established corporation. Freelancing is 
particularly important in economies 
with a large creative industry. In the 
United Kingdom, for instance, freelance 
numbers increased by 15-20% between 
1998 and 2008 and generated an 
estimated £222 billion [€254 billion 
or $346 billion] in sales in 2006, or 
approximately 8% of total private sector turnover.

The shift towards free 
agency is well documented in the work 
of scholars and commentators such as 
Richard Florida, Daniel Pink and Robert 
Reich.
19
 Collectively, they suggest that 
modern economies have entered a new 
era of work, one where most workers 
are untethered from large institutions 
and where conventional institutional 
bureaucracies cease to be the dominant 
organizational form for business, 
government and society. Or in the words 
of Andrei Cherny, senior fellow at the 
Center for American Progress: “In this 
economy, each worker is, in effect, their 
own small business – responsible for 
guiding their own career and economic 
future.” 

The shift towards free agency has 
picked up since the recession, but the 
transition has also been aided by booming 
marketplaces for freelance talent through 
such web-based service providers as Elance 
and oDesk.

In July 2011, some 250,000 
companies paid 1.3 million registered 
freelancers on oDesk, a web portal which 
bills itself “the marketplace for online 
work teams,” for over 1.8 million hours 
of work, up from half that amount a year 
earlier. The “talent-as-a-service” model is 
both attractive to employers who can get 
access to valuable skills on demand, and 
to freelancers, who can build reputations 
as reliable service providers and earn 
money from the comforts of their homes. 

Of course, not all free agency can be 
attributed to rising entrepreneurial zeal or 
the desire for greater career flexibility. For 
a significant segment of the labor market, 
free agency is not so much a career choice 
as it is a reality imposed by a sclerotic, two-tier labor market that has forced many into 
taking employment matters into their own hands. 


6. Experienced and highly skilled 
individuals are setting out in record 
numbers to work for themselves.
During the last decade, until 2008, the 
total number of self-employed was steadily 
increasing. In Europe, there were 32.6 
million self-employed in 2008 compared 
with 30.6 million in 2000.

In the US, 
there were 15.8 million self-employed 
in 2008 compared with 14.6 million 
in 2000.

Following the crisis in 2008, 
the numbers of self-employed declined 
slightly. However, people employed in the 
self-employment sector showed greater 
resilience to the unfavorable economic 
conditions, at least in Europe. In 2009, 
the number of self-employed fell by only 
1% compared to a 2% drop in the number 
of dependent workers.
 
Also, and contrary 
to conventional wisdom, self-employed 
Europeans are not youngsters. On the 
contrary they tend to fall within a higher 
age group with almost 40% over the age of 50.

The same holds true in the US, 
where the highest rate of entrepreneurial 
activity belongs to the 55-64 age group 
over the past decade. The lowest level 
of entrepreneurship is recorded by the 
20-34-years-old age bracket.

Interestingly, many of the self-employed choose not to 
employ other people and instead remain 
one-person operations. Of the more 
than 32 million self-employed people 
in Europe, 23 million were freelancers.

On the upside, these freelancers represent 
a potentially significant pool of latent job 
creators that could be activated if equipped 
with the training, mentorship, resources 
and incentives they need to grow 
their businesses.
Collectively, these developments are 
reshaping our economies in fundamental 
and lasting ways. But our political 
institutions have been slow to adapt.
 
Precious financial resources have been 
poured into propping up yesterday’s 
industries and political capital has been 
spent on maintaining the power of 
economic incumbents, while Internet-empowered start-ups like the micro-multinationals described in these 
pages have been largely ignored, even 
though they are among the only kind 
of companies creating market-driven 
jobs these days. The result has been, not 
surprisingly, subdued economic growth 
and a distinctly stagnant job market. 

Knowing what does not work, it is now 
time to shift gears and finally to use the 
crisis as a once-in-a-generation opportunity 
to lay the foundation for a “New Work 
Order” in which the future is seen not 
as a challenge we can’t meet but as an 
opportunity that we should make available 
to all.


==How Micro-Manufacturing is Revolutionizing Production==

"Until recently, only large companies had 
the manufacturing muscle to bring physical 
goods to the mass market. But thanks 
to contract manufacturing in China and 
affordable 3D printing, yesterday’s factory is 
evolving into a global community of custom 
design and personal fabrication services 
that open up the world of physical product 
manufacturing to just about anyone with 
some ingenuity and a good idea. 

Today, a clever inventor or product designer 
can set assembly lines in China into motion 
with nothing more than some keystrokes on 
their laptop. A few days later, a prototype 
will be at their door, and once it all checks 
out, they can push a few more buttons and 
be in full production, making hundreds, 
thousands, or more. The era of the virtual 
micro-factory is here and for the first time 
entrepreneurs can design and sell products 
to a global market without a physical plant 
or even inventory. In fact, with new services 
such as Ponoko, based out of New Zealand, 
micro-multinationals can arrange to have 
their products manufactured and delivered 
direct to customers virtually anywhere in the 
world. Upload a design to the website, select 
the materials and Ponoko does everything 
else. Entrepreneurs who are just getting 
started can even post their products to 
Ponoko’s marketplace. Says Chief Strategy 
Officer Derek Elley: “It’s a bit like low-cost 
global manufacturing and peer-to-peer 
commerce straight from your living room.” 

Ponoko and other micro-manufacturers 
have benefited tremendously from an 
extraordinary shift in the business practices 
of Chinese factories. During the economic 
slowdown, manufacturers seeking new 
customers became increasingly flexible, web-centric and open to custom work where the 
volumes are lower but the margins higher. A 
search on Alibaba.com, the largest aggregator 
of China’s manufacturers, products, and 
capabilities, pulls up a long list of suppliers 
that will manufacture product designs in 
batches as small as a single unit. Alibaba’s 
Instant Messaging service even translates 
between Chinese and English in real 
time, so customers can communicate with 
suppliers using their native language. Since 
its founding in 1999, Alibaba has become a 
$12 billion [€8.9 billion] company with 45 
million registered users worldwide. 

The upshot of micro-manufacturing 
platforms like Ponoko and Alibaba is that 
creators can now turn their ideas into 
tangible offerings with less risk, lower costs, 
instant scalability and less complexity – and 
without the need for large, highly-trained and 
highly-paid workforces on their own payroll. 
In turn, consumers get lower prices for 
individualized products, and perhaps most 
importantly the decentralized manufacturing 
model promises to reduce the environmental 
impact tied to production – mostly 
through the elimination of intermediaries, 
material efficiency and reduced need for 
transportation. 

Making low-volume, high-value and 
customized components is all very well, but 
could 3D printing and micro-manufacturing 
really compete with mass-production 
techniques that have been honed for over a 
century? Established techniques are unlikely 
to be swept away, but micro-factories 
already make everything from cars to bike 
components to bespoke furniture in any 
design you can imagine. Amsterdam-based 
Freedom of Creation, renowned for its 
lighting designs, has 3D-printed fixtures 
gracing the interiors of luxury hotels around 
the world. Canada-based Weatherhaven, 
which supplies portable shelters, digitally 
explores and validates its custom designs 
without having to build physical prototypes. 

This saves the company up to $100,000 
[€73,953] per shelter. Even the medical 
profession foresees a time when more 
sophisticated 3D printing will produce 
replacement organs or drug therapies. And 
yet, these developments are just beginning.
Micro-manufacturing’s most revolutionary 
developments will manifest when 3D printers 
reach price points attractive to ordinary 
households. MakerBot’s Thing-o-Matic 
(the company’s most affordable 3D printer) 
comes close already. Literally a factory 
for your desktop, this laser printer-sized 
appliance retails for $1299 [€960] and 
can print just about any 3D shape into plastic 
(five years ago, you couldn’t get anything 
like this for less than $125,000 or €92,441). 

From custom chess sets to decorative 
lampshades, MakerBot enthusiasts seem to 
have endless imaginations when it comes to 
dreaming up new uses. Users who like to 
tinker can share their custom modifications 
with like-minded “makers” who congregate 
on Thingiverse.com, a collaboration and 
discussion platform where users swap product 
designs by the thousands. 

True, these makers may be in the vanguard – 
for now. But momentum is building quickly. 
Terry Wohlers, who produces an annual 
in-depth study of the advances in additive 
manufacturing technologies, estimates 
3D printing will grow to become a $5.2 
billion [€3.85 billion] industry by 2020, up 
from $1.3 billion [€961 million] in 2010.
Meanwhile the most recent Maker Faire in 
San Francisco — an event that caters to a 
growing population of makers and their fans 
— attracted more than 100,000 engineers, 
programmers, tinkerers, hackers, builders 
and general-interest do-it-yourselfers. And 
with local “hackerspaces” and Maker Faires 
now booming in urban centers around the 
world, it’s only a matter of time before the 
technology matures to a point where the 
mainstream market follows. 

When that happens, manufacturing-intensive 
industries will confront the same dramatic 
upheavals as those faced by publishers and 
media empires in the wake of the digital 
revolution. In time, 3D printing capabilities 
will make remixing and sharing atoms as 
easy as manipulating and disseminating 
bits. Tinkerers might even swap product 
designs over the Internet and print out a 
physical product in the convenience of their 
living rooms. As science fiction author and 
blogger Cory Doctorow writes in Makers, 
his new book on the subject: “The days 
of companies with names like ‘General 
Electric’ and ‘General Mills’ and ‘General 
Motors’ are over. The money on the table 
is like krill: a billion little entrepreneurial 
opportunities that can be discovered and 
exploited by smart, creative people.



==New Models of Social Protection==

Most contemporary social protection 
systems were designed for a very different 
economic reality, essentially the post-WWII industrial era, with its mostly male 
workforce, employed in steady, often for life, jobs in big corporations, incremental 
innovation and an underlying demography 
that made pay-as-you-go pension systems 
seem like a sustainable proposition. We of 
course now know that the job for life is not 
only an illusion but for many people who 
aspire to have more flexibility and control 
over their careers also an undesirable trap. 

Innovation is disruptive and a formerly 
upright demographic pyramid has been 
turned upside down in a matter of two 
to three generations, undermining the 
long-term viability of public pensions and 
with it eroding the public trust that is so 
crucial in sustaining them. Few people 
are more likely to fall through the cracks 
of the existing social protection systems 
than the self-employed and freelancers.  
On both sides of the Atlantic, people 
in these employment segments have a 
higher risk of poverty and are more likely 
to lack basic social protection, such as 
maternity leave, despite the fact that they 
put in significantly more working time 
than others. In addition, self-employed 
and freelancers are imminently more 
exposed to economic upheavals, meaning 
that they are often the first to feel firsthand the effects of a downturn. 
What does this mean concretely? In Europe,
for example, 18% of self-employed people
are classified as poor versus 6% of
employees, even though the self-employed 
tend to work on average almost 44.4 hours 
a week (and 49.7 hours for employers), 
compared to 36.8 hours a week for 
employees.

In the United States, on the 
other hand, in this latest recession 81% 
of freelancers were at some point either 
unemployed or underemployed (without 
qualifying for unemployment benefits), 
40% did not get paid by deadbeat clients 
and 39% cut back or eliminated their health coverage.

It may sound paradoxical 
but as more people realize that they can 
no longer count on the state or employers 
to provide for economic security, it is 
more and more likely that even greater 
numbers of individuals will opt for selfemployment and freelancing because 
despite the vulnerabilities, it is still one 
of the best ways to take employment 
matters into their own hands. 

The economic and societal impact of 
micro-multinationals is clearly felt yet 
poorly understood. They are changing the 
division of labor between large and small 
organizations, between developed and 
emerging economies and are leading the 
way on innovation; they defy conventional 
wisdom and turn the old policy mantra 
that “big is good” on its head. Being a small 
organization is no longer a liability but an 
important asset, a comparative advantage 
vis-à-vis bigger players. Yet, many of the 
entrepreneurs and freelancers spearheading 
such ventures face a disproportionate amount 
of risk and vulnerability, feeling left behind 
as social systems designed for a different 
economic age have gone unreformed and 
are unable to meet their needs. Grasping 
these new realities is, granted, a quantum 
leap for most policymakers, but drawing 
the right lessons now could go a long way 
towards restoring growth and kick-starting 
employment in our battered economies. 


==Six Business Platforms that are Revolutionizing the Start-Up Companies and Service Providers==

"It’s impossible to fully appreciate the 
rise of micro-multinationals without 
understanding how the Internet makes 
contracting for business services 
increasingly cost effective. Today, 
everything from market research to back-office support to contract manufacturing 
is available on tap. And most, if not 
all of it, can be managed over the web. 
Suddenly, the small can become very 
large very quickly with superefficient 
business models that allow entrepreneurs 
to design, develop and deliver their 
products and services around the world 
with a fraction of the resources that would 
have been required just a decade ago."

===Crowd financing===

Start-ups can’t breathe without a steady supply of oxygen in the form of investment capital. 
In the past, entrepreneurs could turn to their friends and family, their bankers, and/or 
seek a venture capitalist. Now with new collaborative venture funding platforms such as 
Y Combinator, TechStars and Vencorps, entrepreneurs can not only seek out short-term 
funding from a global online community; they can also find like-minded collaborators, get 
access to resources, seek out mentoring and connections, and even win new customers.

#AngelList
#Kickstarter
#Kiva
#TechStars
#Vencorps
#Y Combinator


===Digital utilities===

Unlike previous generations, today’s entrepreneurs can buy, off the shelf, practically any 
computing and communication function they need to run a company, from storage to word 
processing to free video chat services. Users of Amazon’s cloud computing services, for 
example, pay 10 cents an hour to harness its nearly unlimited computing capacity, allowing 
anyone to leverage the size and reach of the world’s greatest e-commerce engine – from the 
computer geek testing a new algorithm from her dorm room to a Mumbai-based start-up 
that wants to roll-out a new call center service without spending all its capital on computers.

#Skype
#Linux
#Google Apps
#Amazon Cloud
#FreshBooks


===Professional services marketplaces===

Business process outsourcing is no longer just for big multinationals looking to shed costs. 
For entrepreneurs, marketplaces like Elance and Guru.com provide flexible, on-demand 
access to talented people and business capabilities for much less than it would cost to hire or 
build internally. Business owners can browse detailed work samples and customer ratings for 
thousands of vendors in service categories ranging from accounting to web design. Elance 
provides built-in software to track works in progress and handle billing, payment, and tax 
records, while Guru.com allows buyers to put funds in escrow until work is received. 

#Elance
#Guru.com
#oDesk
#Brickwork India
#DoMyStuff.com 
#RentACoder
#Mechanical Turk


===Micro-Manufacturing===

Until recently, only large companies had the manufacturing muscle to bring physical 
goods to the mass market. But as the machinery of factory production become 
available to individuals, anyone with a good idea and some ingenuity can design and 
sell goods globally without a physical plant or even inventory.  Thanks to contract 
manufacturing in China and affordable 3D printing, virtual micro-factories now 
make everything from bike components to bespoke furniture in any design you can 
imagine. In the near future, tinkerers might even swap product designs over the 
Internet and print out a physical product in the convenience of their living rooms.

#Alibaba.com
#Ponoko
#MakerBot Industries
#Quirky.com


===Innovation marketplaces===

The growing value of intellectual property, combined with the connectivity provided by 
the web, is fuelling the creation of new online marketplaces to facilitate patent licensing 
and IP transfer across firms, industries and regions. For micro-multinationals, these 
marketplaces for innovation have tremendous competitive and economic advantages. Firms 
without deep R&D capabilities can license leading-edge technologies for much less than it 
would cost to develop in-house. Firms that are strong innovators, on the other hand, can 
increase their return on R&D by licensing inventions to innovation-hungry companies.

#InnoCentive
#NineSigma
#yet2.com


===E-commerce platforms===

In the past, large vendors, distributors and product manufacturers dominated 
retail outlets to consumers. Opportunities to sell products to the masses were 
limited by the product placement fees demanded by powerful retailers. Today, 
e-commerce platforms such as eBay, Amazon, Etsy and Apple’s AppStore have 
opened up the world of retail to a global network of smaller producers and 
a long tail of niche products and services. Savvy retailers can use the power 
of social media to engage with niche audiences or expand their reach into 
overseas markets using online advertising platform like Google Adwords.

#Google Adwords 
#Facebook
#Salesforce.com
#eBay 
#Etsy 
#Amazon AppStore


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Business]]