
'''* Essay: "The rise of Communitarianism and other Alternative Movements from the Athenian crises.'''

URL =  http://www.cambridgescholars.com/yesterdays-tomorrows-5  


=Abstract=

"It appears that one common thread between most utopian theories is that they flourish at periods of social, political and economic unrest. Although democracy is not necessarily the political system that utopias refer to, social justice certainly is. Thomas More and Robert Owen react to the problematic state of their respective societies by constructing theories, which contain their solutions and ideas about change. There are many parallels to draw between such historic moments in utopian historic milestones and the present.

Because of the crisis, Athens appears to be at a crossroads. Its effects are far-reaching, society is in a state of flux and change is bound to occur. Many refer to the current state as a derailment of democracy, while we can interpret it as a democracy's dystopia. Yet, this problematic and dysfunctional condition encourages an emergent debate about the commons. This paper examines the alternative forms of emerging social, economic, political and cultural structures, and their impact and potential spatial representation(s) in the context of a communitarian movement. It also makes an attempt to trace the urban and architectural categories that may reflect this emergent condition."


=Source=

* Nicholas Anastasopoulos, from the book: Yesterday's Tomorrow:On Utopia and Dystopia (Liz Russell, Pere Gallardo, eds. Cambridge Scholars, 2014 [http://www.cambridgescholars.com/yesterdays-tomorrows-5]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Greece]]