
=Discussion=

Yongseun Kim:

"The transition from the money of account to more formalized financial systems became most evident during the Renaissance, particularly in Florence, where the practice of double-entry bookkeeping took hold. This system allowed businesses to record every transaction as both a credit and a debit, ensuring that financial records balanced accurately. Double-entry bookkeeping was a breakthrough in economic organization, enabling trust between parties by providing clear records of all transactions. This method underpinned the rise of modern banking and allowed for greater transparency and control in financial dealings.

However, despite the improvements introduced by double-entry bookkeeping, the system still depended on the integrity of the parties involved. Each party maintained its own records, and there was always the potential for fraud, errors, or manipulation of these records. Blockchain technology, with its innovation of triple-entry bookkeeping, addressed these limitations by adding a third layer: a shared public ledger that records transactions immutably.

In triple-entry bookkeeping, transactions are not only recorded by both parties but also cryptographically verified and permanently stored on a decentralized ledger (the blockchain). This ledger serves as the third entry, allowing anyone — both participants and external auditors — to verify the transaction. This system ensures that each transaction is transparent, traceable, and secure, eliminating the reliance on trust and significantly reducing the possibility of fraud or errors.

The most transformative aspect of triple-entry bookkeeping is its capacity for instant auditability. Unlike traditional systems, where audits are performed after the fact, blockchain-based transactions can be verified in real time. This advancement enhances the transparency and accountability of financial systems by ensuring that all transactions meet strict verification criteria before they are finalized.

The shift from double-entry to triple-entry systems represents a significant leap in financial transparency and security. By ensuring that every transaction is publicly verifiable and immutable, blockchain technology addresses the key weaknesses of traditional financial systems, paving the way for more robust and decentralized financial structures.

This innovation is not merely a technical improvement but a fundamental evolution in how financial transactions are recorded, verified, and trusted. It creates a more secure and transparent environment for digital assets and decentralized finance (DeFi), setting the stage for the discussion of central banks and the growing importance of monetary policy."

(https://medium.com/@deframing/the-meaning-of-monetary-economics-in-the-crypto-world-e7f89e60d3a3)


[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]