
'''* Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., Wood, A., Barnard, H., Hjorth, I., Simon, D. P. (2017). The Risks and Rewards of Online Gig Work At The Global Margins.
Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute, 2017.'''

URL = https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/publications/gigwork.pdf

"A report to help platform operators improve their positive impact,
help workers improve their situations, and prompt policy makers
and stakeholders to revisit online gig work regulation."

=Description=

"Online gig work is becoming increasingly important
to workers living in low- and middle-income
countries. Our multi-year and multi-method research
project shows that online gig work brings about
rewards such as potential higher incomes and
increased worker autonomy, but also risks such
as social isolation, lack of work–life balance, discrimination,
and predatory intermediaries. We also
note that online gig work platforms mostly operate
outside regulatory and normative frameworks that
could benefit workers.

This report summarises the ways in which observed
risks materialise in the market, highlighting responses
from a 456-respondent survey and stories
from 152 interviews. The report’s central question
is whether online gig work has any development
potentials at the world’s economic margins.

Its motive is to help platform operators to improve their
positive impact, to help workers to take action to
improve their situations, and to prompt policy makers
and stakeholders interested in online gig work
to revisit regulation as it applies to workers, clients,
and platforms in their respective countries. 

This report is based on a three-year investigation
conducted by researchers from the Oxford Internet
Institute (OII) at the University of Oxford and the
Gordon Institute of Business Science (GIBS) at
the University of Pretoria. Professor Mark Graham
(Primary Investigator), Professor Vili Lehdonvirta
(Co-investigator), and Professor Helena Barnard
(Co-investigator) led the project, with significant contributions
from Dr. Isis Hjorth and Dr. Alex J. Wood.
David Sutcliffe and David Peter Simon designed the
report. All material in this report is released under a
CC BY-NC-ND licence. The content of this report is
available to be shared freely."



[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Articles]]