=Description=

Paul Romer:

"Economists studying public finance have identified two fundamental attributes of any economic good: the degree to which it is rivalrous and the degree to which it is excludable. Rivalry is a purely technological attribute. A purely rival good has the property that its use by one firm or person precludes its use by another; a purely nonrival good has the property that its use by one firm or person in no way limits is use by another. Excludability is a function of both the technology and the legal system. A good is excludable if the owner can prevent others from using it. A good such as the code for a computer program can be made excludable by means of a legal system that prohibits copying or by means of encryption and copy protection schemes."
(http://artsci.wustl.edu/~econ502/Romer.pdf)


=Discussion=

Patrick Anderson, remark in the context of [[User Owned]] theory:

"A consumer pays [http://socialsynergyweb.net/cgi-bin/wiki/PriceAboveCost Price Above Cost] whenever there is real or artificial rivalry.

Rivalry is 'real' when a product is [[Scarcity|scarce]] even after all effort has been toward increasing abundance.

Rivalry is 'artificial' when a product is scarce because of actions by owners to decrease abundance.

Artificial rivalry can be held in place when consumers do not know how to organize and own the [[Physical Sources]] of production themselves. A [[User Owned]] organization does not employ artificial rivalry unless they are acting against new users that are not yet owners - and in that case they are not a true [[User Owned]] company."

=More Information=

#Related: [[Abundance vs. Scarcity]]
#[[Nonrival]]



[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Peereconomy]]