'''''Robert David Steele Vivas'' is a US citizen and activist focused on electoral reform, intelligence reform, and open source everything. '''

==Bio==

From Robert Steele:

I consider myself an activist for electoral reform and open source everything. The two go together. One empowers the 99% inclusive of the five billion poorest, and the other makes possible the creation of infinite distributed wealth, a world characterized by peace and prosperity for all.

From Wikipedia (now deleted):

"Robert David Steele Vivas (born 16 July 1952) is an American activist and a former Central Intelligence Agency clandestine services case officer known for his promotion of open source intelligence (OSINT). He is the founder and CEO of [http://oss.net/ OSS.Net] as well as the Golden Candle Society. He was a Marine Corps infantry and intelligence officer for twenty years and was the second-ranking civilian (GS-14) in Marine Corps Intelligence Activity from 1988–92, and was also an adjunct instructor at Marine Corps University in the mid-1990s.

Steele was a candidate for the Reform Party's nomination for President of the United States in the 2012 presidential election until 23 February 2012."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_David_Steele)

==Personal Biographic & Production Page==

Steele's official home page with complete biographic information, testimonials & profiles, and links to his life work as well as interviews is 

http://robertdavidsteele.com

==Alternative Form of Name==

The form [[Robert David Steele Vivas]] is also used, with Vivas being the Latino matronymic honoring Robert's mother born in Cali, Colombia, gaining naturalized citizenship in the USA in 1951. Robert's legal name is Robert David Steele.

==More Information==
* [[Open Source Everything Engineering]]
* [[Open Source Everything Manifesto]]
* [[Robert Steele on Citizen Intelligence]]
* [[Robert Steele on Open Source Everything]]
* [[Robert Steele on the Open Source Everything Manifesto]] 


[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Open Intelligence]]
[[Category:Open Governance]]