
=Bio=

", PhD Candidate in Urban Planning, International PhD Programme - Department of Architecture, Design and Urbanism (DADU) Alghero, University of Sassari (Italy) in partnership with the University of Karabuk, Turkey, Visiting PhD at the Polytechnic of Turin. She graduated with honors in Law, with a Master's thesis on Fundamental Rights in Europe and the Environment Law. She worked in Strasbourg at the European Court of Human Rights and the Permanent Mission of Italy to the Council of Europe; she was involved in works for the implementation of the European Landscape Convention, the instruments dedicated to participation, management, protection and cooperation. In a complementary manner to the legal profession, she studied Urban Planning at DADU and then obtained an International Master in Mediterranean Landscape Urbanism (DADU Alghero / Berlin, Paris), with a thesis on the outcomes of participatory processes in regulatory plans and systems. H Then she worked at the General Directorate of Local Authorities, Urban Planning and Finances at the Autonomous Region of Sardinia, at the Task Force of Municipalities' Association for the adaptation to the Regional Landscape Plan of the Urban Plans, in Detailed Plans of historic centers, and the development of participating laboratories to planning and pilot projects for local development. She worked at the Chamber of Commerce of Northern Sardinia for local development projects and the Office of Enterprise Europe Network. She obtained a Master of Community Planning and one in EU Planning and Policies and management of complex projects in international cooperation, promoted by the University of Cagliari in coordination with the organizations of the Third sector.  She is an active partner of the Association An Island - Shared Idea (Un'Isola - Idea Condivisa) that practices of exercise of right to the city  and promotes urban opportunities for active participation also with the institutions.  She currently works as a researcher and pratictioner at Labsus - Laboratorio per la Sussidiarietà and she is involved in processes taking place in the urban context of production from below and grassroots, and shared administration of the commons, in particular she belongs to  the mouvement of Cavallerizza Reale in Turin. She would like to do ActionResearch on legal arrangements and dispositives that are able to governing and to embrace transformations, to find new intervention tactics. She would  like to study the coherence with the European urban policy and to work on the design of public policies and services."
(http://wiki.remixthecommons.org/index.php/Commons_Watch/Bios)


[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons]]