
'''= Robin was a huge contributor to the movement for a cooperative commonwealth, and passed away at the end of May 2017, a huge loss for all those who knew him'''


=Bio=

'''1.'''

"Robin Murray is an industrial economist. Currently a Senior Visiting Fellow at the LSE, he was a teaching Fellow at the Institute of Development Studies in Sussex for twenty years, prior to which he taught economics at the London Business School. Having specialised in industrial strategy, international corporate taxation and international commodity supply chains, his most recent work has focused on industrial restructuring in response to environmental pressures (notably waste and energy), on social innovation, and on the civil economy – particularly in co-operatives, with whom he has had considerable personal involvement.

During the 1980s and 90s, Robin acted as a consultant on industrial and development issues to a wide range of governments, serving as Director of Industry in the Greater London Council and later as a Director of Development in the Government of Ontario. This work led him to the conclusion that there was a major role that could be played in achieving social goals by mission driven third sector companies. In response, he co-founded Twin Trading, the fair trade company, in 1985, which now sells four branded products in the UK: Cafedirect, Divine Chocolate, Agrofair and Liberation Nuts. The company works with existing farmers co-operatives and supports the development of new ones, now supporting over 300,000 farmers in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

Robin has also established a range of environmental ventures, focused on the economy of distributed systems and their potential for environmental and social sustainability. He is co-founder of the environmental partnership Ecologika, whose members work in the fields of waste, energy, transport, food and health, which has played a major role in the re-direction of UK waste policy, and, with the Mayor’s office, helped to establish the London Climate Change Agency, a consultancy service for the retrofitting of Green Homes, and the development of city-wide plug-in hybrid vehicles. From 2004-5 he served as Director of RED, the innovation unit of Design Council, where he led the team working on public health.

He is a Fellow of the Young Foundation, for whom he co-authored two books on social innovation, and is currently working on a text on the Social Economy."
(http://beyondthetechrevolution.com/team/robin-murray/)


'''2.'''

“Robin Murray is an industrial and environmental economist. His recent work has focused on new waste and energy systems and on projects in the social economy. He was co-founder and later chair of Twin Trading the fair trade company and was closely involved in the companies it spun off, including Cafedirect, Divine Chocolate, Liberation Nuts and Agrofair UK. He has alternated working for innovative economic programmes in local, regional and national governments, with academic teaching and writing.”
(http://www.socialinnovator.info/blog/blog-bio/robin-murray) 


=In Memoriam=

==An appreciation of his life by Hilary Wainwright==

""I'm thinking of my friend, many people's friend, the great economist, Robin Murray who died yesterday. Robin exuded vigour and hope. And he infected those around him with his mood. Maybe as a resuIt I find myself resisting the sadness which threatens to overwhelm me now that he is gone. The tears well but they refuse to flow. The only respite is to ring several of our common friends for mutual comfort: Stephen Yeo, the inspiring historian of the co-operative movement in which Robin had a passionate and therefore active interest. Carlota Perez whose theory of technological change and it's connection with financial crisis he hugely admired and with whom he collaborated at the LSE. Mary Kaldor the theorist of war and of movements for peace with whom he taught Marxist economics at Sussex university. 'We didn't always agree' she says , but he loved debate. My niece Jessi who joined Murray breakfasts after a swim at the London Fields Lido in Hackney for which he and his beloved artist wife Frances campaigned after the nearby Haggerston baths were closed.

People and ideas. Even as he lay breathless with the terminal lung disease which led to his death, and under strict instructions from Frances not to talk too much, he would not be able to contain his passion for both people and ideas. They were his life force. He could not imagine living without talking about both, between sucking the means to do so from his oxygen machine. One evening's topic were the ideas of Allende's cybernetics advisor Stafford Beer and, more generally, the idea of the economy as a nervous system. At the same time, his starting point was always the cell, the dynamics of the particular , so he was forever fascinated by particular exemplary initiatives and how they worked, the conditions for their success so, between breaths, the conversation would turn to the burgeoning Japanese consumer co-operative movement. Or to the co-operative shop in his original home county, Cumbria, to which even as his illness advanced he devoted inordinate energy.

Above all he was perennially fascinated by people's stories, especially the stories of the young people in his family or helping with his care. The stories from his beloved and talented daughter, Beth and her Italian boyfriend Gianluca, of a visit to Gianluca olive-growing family in northern Italy, and of exactly how his father harvested and sorted the olives. Or of how my niece Jessi proposed to her boyfriend in a tent during a hike across a Himalayan pass.'I asked her to describe the exact moment '. He said afterwards. He was living for the moment as his illness took hold. But his irrepressible curiosity about what moments were important for other people was throughout his life, one of most endearing qualities.

Our most thrilling moments together were when he was was appointed to lead a small band of economic guerrillas who were brought into the GLC by Ken Livingstone, John MacDonell and Chair of the Industry and Employment Committee , Michael Ward, to draw up and help implement the London Industrial Strategy. He was a wonderful leader, with the self-confidence to enable maximum autonomy for the diverse cells of the 70 or so strong Industry and Employment Department. I led the Popular Planning Unit and although a few eyebrows were raised at our proposals – for example for the GLC to try (unsuccessfully as it happened) and buy the Royal Docks in order to implement the People's Plan for the Royal Docks (a community plan for an alternative to the City Airport) – Robin gave us constant encouragement. The politicians , Mike Ward along with Livingstone and MacDonell had won the space for new thinking and Robin was the ideal person to take it and recruit a team to grasp and push every opportunity.

And what a team! Robin was immensely proud of the people and their work together. I will write about this work later today for Open Democracy and post it here. Suffice it to say now that it is not surprising that our four years of intense work, axed by Margaret Thatcher in an act of political vandalism in 1986, should produce a wealth of ideas from which John MacDonell has been able to draw for Labour's persuasive manifesto that just could on June 8th, finally put an end to neo-liberalism nationally as Robin's London Industrial Strategy sought to defeat it in London.

This is just many of the examples of how Robin's legacy of hope will live on with us and through us. And why inspite of the sadness that this remarkable man with his indominitable spirit and generous enthusiasm will no longer physically be part of our lives, no longer welcoming us with Sunday breakfast, tears well but do not easily flow."
(facebook, May 2017)


==Pauline Tiffen on Robin's key role in the Fair Trade movement and the TWINS venture==

The author was Director/worker	at	TWIN	1986-2000; written 4th June 2017

'''Pauline Tiffen:'''

"For	Robin	Murray	- Memories	and	Legacy

In	the	manic	days	of	an	expiring,	soon-to-be	abolished	Greater	London	Council,	Robin	Murray	
used	his	considerable	clout	and	knack	for	outstanding	visionary	thought	- he	made	wildly	
exciting	ideas	sound	so	obvious	and	easy	- to	channel	funds	into	a	new	venture, to	be	dedicated	
to	exploring	ways	to	trade	for	mutual	benefit	through	two	new	entities	called	Third	World
Information	Network and	Twin	Trading.	

Robin	Murray	founded	Twin	and	Twin	Trading	in	1985,	and	initiated	them	with	a	series	
question-think-and-act	workshops	attended	by	like-minded	men	(it	has	to	be	said), and	activists	
from	around	the	world	- Mozambique,	Senegal,	South	Africa	to	name	a	few.	All	were hard	at	work	
challenging	and	attempting	to	find	dignified	liberation	and	economic	survival	in	the	face	of	the	emerging	neo-liberal	onslaught.	Once	mocked	as	“Ken	Livingstone’s	foreign	policy	department”,	
the	four-year	forward	funding	was	a	license	to	go	out	and	make	a	difference.	Twin	was	a	network	from	day	one	in	a	“pre-network	era”.			Later	the	accronym	alone	would	stand	as	the	name,	as	the	world	and	our	concepts	of	first,	second,	third	worlds	changed	around	us	and	the	ideas	of	networking,	matrix	methodologies	and	the	greater	efficiencies	of	non-hierarchical	forms	and	
trust-based	forms	of	organisation	took	hold.	My	first	job	at	Twin	was	“Information	and	Network	
Officer”	- can’t	have	been	many	of	those	around.
Commonplace	today,	Robin	opted	for	the	then	highly	unusual	interlinked	structure	of	non-profit	
and	for-profit	companies,	with	a	‘self-perpetuating	oligarchy’	to	run	them	and	keep	them	‘true’.	

This	exemplified	his	strategic	awareness	of	the	importance	and	meaning	of	organisation	
formation,	of	form	following	content.	This	would	play	out	again	and	again	in	the	multiple,	
innovative	and	catalytic	initiatives	dreamed	up	and	rolled	out	at	the	Twins	- Cafedirect,	Divine	
Chocolate,	and	later,	Liberation	Nuts.	

Robin	contributed	in	ways	that	cannot	be	measured	to	the	unique governance	of	the	embryonic	
Twins.	He	was	the	first	to	back	the	workers’	decision,	led	by	then	Director	Richard	Day ,	to	capitalise	our	grant	and	earn	money:	a highly	a-typical	position	for	“lefties”.	While	we	struggled	a	little	over	the	use	of	the	word	“profit”	versus	“surplus”	(with	Michael	Barratt	Brown	never	quite	able	to	use	the	former),	it	was	a	statement	of	our	intention	to	live	on	beyond	the	grant,	and	be	
successful	on	our	own	terms	politically,	but	viable.	

As	Director	and	worker	for	14	years	at	the	Twins,	(and active	on	many	Boards	and	governance	
structures	since,) from	Robin	I	learned	many	tools	to	support	and	defend	social	enterprises	and	
the	brave	people	in	them.	I	have used	these	the	world	over.	From	Robin	I	learned	the	incredible	
and	simple	importance	of	taking	good	minutes.	Robin’s	attention	to	detail	and	his	indivisible	
incorporation	of	the	micro	to	the	macro, and	the	relationship	of	our	decisions	to	our	values	and	principles	was	a	critical	factor	in	Twin’s	and	my	evolution,	particularly	in	moments	of	strife.	He	was	meticulous	and	sometimes	ruthless	in	holding	people	to	account,	socialising	the	ideas	and	decision	making	process,	providing	succour	to	those	fighting	within	organisations	- our	own	and	our	network	- to	sustain	the	vital	commitments	made	in	the	face	of	opposition	or	retrenchment.

Robin	was	an	adventurer.	Twin	was	his	ship.	As	Twin	grew,	its	trading	and	ventures	spun	off,	he	delighted	in	the	successes and,	it	is	worth	saying,	in	the	failures.	He	saw	opposition	and	crisis	as	opportunity.	“When	you	are	sunk,	in	a	deep	hole,”	he	would	say	in	the	many	such	moments	along	the	way,	“you	have	to	do	the	hard	work	to	decide	which	way	you	want	to	be	facing	when	you	climb	out.”		I	cannot	tell	you	how	many	times	I	have	quoted	this	guidance!	Robin’s	day-to-day	take	on	alternative	business	never	strayed	from	the	realities	(and	horrible	dilemmas	and	challenges	presented)	but	wove	into	these	realities	a	search	for	and	appreciation	of	a	different	feel	and	purpose.	Robin	was	an economist	with	a	fascination	for	numbers,	but	I	doubt	many	in his	profession	would	look	not	just	at	the	credibility	of	the	quantified	outcomes,	but	at	the	very	‘aesthetic’	of	a	business	plan.	This	was	Robin’s	way	of	testing	the	‘rightness’	and	‘justice’	of	a	
proposal	and	its	implementation:	its	beauty.	For	Robin,	failure	to	support	and	show	solidarity	to	
allies	and	comrades	was	ugly.

Robin,	was	supported	and	also	challenged	- something	he	relished	- by	a	host	of	incredible	minds	and	hearts	around	our	Board	table	- Michael	Barratt	Brown,	Teodor	Shanin,	Vela	Pillay,	Peter	
Robbins,	Sandy	Balfour	to	name	but	a	few.	He	was	particularly	prescient	about	the	dangers	of	
mainstreaming	Fair	Trade,	during	the	roll	out	of	the	modest	and	values-driven	Stichting	Max	
Havelaar in	the	Netherlands then	led	by	Bert	Beekman,	into	a	series	of	national	certification	
schemes	for	Fairtrade	with	a	supranational	oversight	body.	He	foresaw	the	structural	limitations,	
the	co-optation,	and	the	future	defeats	and	warned	against	the	surrendering	the	alternative	
economic	nature	of	our	project;	in	the	words	of	Richard	Day,	our	purpose	was	being	“in	but	
against	the	market”.	

Twin’s	early	entry	into	the	domain	of	branding	and	intellectual	property	with	the	launch	of	
Cafedirect	and	Divine	superceded	the	certification model	Robin argued,	adding	and	sharing	
equity	value	which	otherwise	accrued	only	to	brand	owners.	He	saw	this	as	the	source,	in	a	
postmodern	economy,	of	a	far	greater	leveraging	power	(with	the	increasing	dominance	of	
retailers	and	potential	for	connectivity	with	consumers)	than	other	traditional	capitalist	and	
anti-capitalist	mechanisms	for	control	of	pricing.	Through	trial	and	practice	we	realised	that	
transformation/processing	and	working	up	the	value	chain	- an	early	premise	of economic	
development	and	even	industrial	strategy	- could	seldom	deliver	power	or	income	to	the	weakest	
players	in	a	global	market.	Yet	Robin	was	one	of	the	first,	with	Michael	Barratt	Brown,	to	see	
from	the	Twin	experiment	that	alternative	trade	praxis	generates	new	forms	of	change,	
dialectically,	by	opposition,	by	example,	and,	even	more	simply,	competitively.	Would	or	could	
Cadbury’s	have	switched	to	Fairtrade if	we	hadn’t	created	the	sourcing	conditions	(the	largest	FT	
certified	coop	in	the	world)	and	challenged	them	head	on	in	the	supermarket	shelves.	Did	Robin	predict	the	‘ditching’	of	the	label	and	co-optation	of	the	messages	we	have	seen	(Sainsbury,	Cadbury,	Marks	&	Spencer)	- yes	he	did.	This	was	exciting	for	Robin, but	we	remain	with	imperfect	solutions	to	this	challenge.

As	Director	of	Twin	for	more	than	a	decade,	I	experienced	the	friendship,	care	and	presence	of	Robin	as	a	more	or	less	permanent	tutorial	or	post-doctoral	viva!	Challenging,	supporting,	and	sometimes	admiring:	no	business	books	or	professional	self-improvement	courses	for	me	from	
Robin.	“I	think	you	will	like	this,”	Robin	would	say,	dropping	a	copy	of	Le	Roy	Ladurie’s	
“Montaillou” on	my	desk	(A	portrait	of	life	in	a	medieval	village,	an	exposition	of	the	universal	and	permanent	role	of	beliefs	and	resistance	in	daily	life,	and	a	book	sometimes	subtitled	“the	promised	land	of	error”).	And,	to	Robin’s	patient	and	generous	tutelage,	I	must	add	here	of	course,	Michael	Barratt	Brown	(Reform	and	Realities,	Zed,	Short	Changed:	Africa	and	World	
Trade,	Pluto	Books)	and	Teodor	Shanin	(Peasants	and	Peasant	Societies,	The	Awkward	Class, The	
Idea	of	Progress).	

Together	Robin	and	I	conceived	of	and	produced	a	series	of	papers	[circa	1998],	funded	by	the	Department	of	International	Development.	We	organised	debates	on	these	key	concerns	and	
insights	gleened	from	our	practical	work:	on	branding,	on	IP,	on	Fairtrade	Certification	
structures,	the	uneven	bargaining	power	of	producers,	asymmetrical	access	to	information,	and	
on	what	alternative	multinationals	should	look	like.	These	ideas	were	all	ahead	of	the	curve,	
typifying	that	amazing	place	Robin	occupied	in	his	life	- active,	passionate	and	determined	in	the	here	and	now,	constantly	squeezing	lessons	from	life	to	prepare	for	and	mould	the	future.	
We	 have	 come	 far	 since	 then, and	we	 are	 surrounded	 with	multinationals	 that	 are	 ethical	 and	
committed	 to	 sustainability.	 This	 needs	 to	 be	 challenged	 and	 reshaped.	 The	 Pluto	 Educational	
Trust,	of	which	I	am	a	Founding	Trustee	together	with	Roger	Van	Zwanenberg,	and	which	owns	
Pluto	Journals	(and	41%	of	Pluto	Books),	is	preparing	the	launch	a	new	Journal	of	Fair	Trade in	
June	2018,	 to	reclaim	 the	best	practices	and	values	 that	contribute	 to	mutuality	and	 fairness	in	trade.	 Its	companion,	being	launched	 this	 July,	is	 the	Fair	Trade	 Initiative,	a	membership	based	organisation,	with	a	network	and	website	providing	a	forum	and	funnel	for	new	work,	ideas	and	
outspoken	 debate.	 	 Robin’s	 Fair	 Trade	 papers	 are	 a	 model	 for	 where	 and	 how	 the	 Fair	 Trade	Initiative	and	the	Journal	of	Fair	Trade	aim	to	engage.	In	his	honour,	we	will	include	these	papers,	and	would	welcome	support	to	comment,	and	add	and	update	these	over	the	first	few	volumes.	
For	 more	 information	 about	 the	 Journal	 of	 Fair	 Trade	 and	 the	 Fair	 Trade	 Initiative	 email	
ptiffen@plutoeducationaltrust.org or	Redfstrivens@plutojournals.com.	To	join	the	Initiative	and	
for	details	on	paying	by	PayPal,	click	here.

Robin	Murray	was	an	inspired	and	inspiring	man.	We	are	less	supported	and	affirmed	now	he	is	not	with	us.	I	wish	he	were	here,	but	I	am	sure	our	works	and	continued	resistance	would	please	him	greatly."
(June 2017)

==Tim Crabtree of Schumacher College==

"Occasionally in life we meet someone rather special, and Robin Murray was one of those people. We met at Schumacher College five years ago – Robin had helped to develop a Master’s programme in Economic for Transition with my colleague Julie Richardson, and I became a lecturer on the course in 2012. Like many, I had read his work since the 1980’s, knew of his work at the GLC, Sussex and as a founder of the Fair Trade movement, and was therefore rather in awe of Robin’s reputation. Yet as a person he turned out to be approachable, charming and humble – and soon he became a friend and mentor (though he wouldn’t have liked the latter description!) For me, his most notable quality was that he always wanted to know what you were thinking about, what you were engaged with at that time, and really wanted to explore those areas with you.

I am writing these recollections at Plum Village, a mindfulness practice centre in France established by the Vietnamese Zen teacher Thich Nhat Hahn. It feels appropriate as Robin was curious about my practice, came to early morning meditation when at Schumacher College and read one of Thich Nhat Hanh’s books that I sent. To me it reflects his seemingly limitless curiosity and desire to engage with others.

For many of our students, time with Robin was transformative. As soon as he arrived at Schumacher College he would head to the kitchen to help make supper and to talk to the students working there. At other times, he would he would go for long walks with students, always fascinated by their inquiries and always generous with his experience and expertise.

One of the themes that Robin was exploring was the way in which the economy could become more “organic”, mirroring the ecological processes we experience in nature. So, for example, instead of individual enterprises scaling up, the aim would be to connect together firms in mutually supportive networks. We discussed the way in which form in the economy emerges, the way in which these forms get “firmed up” and then how the firm as organism could remain “alive” and generative. Robin would talk of his experience with Latin American cooperatives and how their adoption of the principle of ongoing “formacion” was so important – that it is not just about coming up with innovative ideas and starting things up, but continuing to concentrate on maintaining and developing the culture and spirit of a company.

One of my favourite memories is of Robin giving a session on a course called Enterprise Live. He said that he just had 10 slides which would help him to talk about 10 principles of the social economy. Three hours later we all sat absorbed and entranced by Robin’s ideas and reflections. The bell for lunch rang and Robin turned to his tenth slide – which was divided into 10 sub-points! He suggested that we finish, but we all implored him to carry on – Robin talked for another 30 minutes finally bringing to close a wonderful session of insights distilled from over 50 years of innovation, entrepreneurship and insight, underpinned of course by his commitment to service and to creating a better and more just world.

I have lost a friend and someone I am proud to have thought of as a mentor – an inspiration not just because of his ideas and his pioneering activity, but because of his manner, his warmth and his generosity. We have lost a man who combined practical experience, probing intelligence and a gentle wisdom – truly an inspiration to so many."
 
Tim Crabtree, Plum Village, France, 3 June 2017

=More information=

* profile by Hilary Wainwright, https://www.opendemocracy.net/neweconomics/life-robin-murray-visionary-economist/

* an interview on his engagement with the [[Fair Trade]] movement, https://www.mixcloud.com/deltawithdellaz/an-interview-with-robin-murray-a-leader-in-the-fair-trade-movement/ ; listen to: [[Robin Murray on the Fair Trade Movement]].

* a chapter from a book published by the Cooperative Society in the UK: [[Taking Stock of the Cooperative Economy in the UK]]


==Bibliography==

Selected Publications

Murray, R. (2015) ‘Post-Post Fordism in the Era of Platforms’ New Formations, 84/85

Murray, R. (2015) ‘Prospects for innovation in the Co-operative Economy’, in Ed Mayo (ed) The Co-operative Advantage, Co-operatives UK 2015

Murray, R. (2012) ‘Global Civil Society and the Rise of the Civil Economy’ in Kaldor, M., Moore, H.L. and Selchow, S. (eds) Global Civil Society 2012: Ten Years of Critical Reflection, Palgrave MacMillan

Murray, R. (2011) ‘Raising the Bar or Directing the Flood’ in John Bowes (ed) The Fair Trade Revolution, Pluto

Murray, R., Caulier-Grice, J. and Mulgan, G. (2010) The Open Book of Social Innovation, NESTA and The Young Foundation

Murray, R. (2010) [[Cooperation in the Age of Google]], Co-operatives UK

Murray, R. (2009) Danger and Opportunity: Crisis and the New Social Economy, NESTA

Murray, R., Caulier-Grice, J. and Mulgan, G. (2009) Social Venturing, NESTA and The Young Foundation

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]