'''Robin D. Gross is founder and Executive Director of IP Justice an international civil liberties organization that promotes balanced intellectual property law and protects freedom of expression.'''


=Bio=

 
"An attorney, Ms. Gross advises policy makers throughout the world on the impact of intellectual property rules before national legislatures and in international treaties and trade agreements. Ms. Gross lectures at international seminars, law schools and universities on cyberspace legal issues including digital copyright, fair use, and Peer-2-Peer (P2P) file-sharing.

In May 2006 the UN Secretary General appointed Ms. Gross as Member of his Advisory Group to the UN Internet Governance Forum. Ms. Gross serves as a member of the High Technology Legal Advisory Board for Santa Clara University School of Law, where she teaches International Copyright Law. She represents the Non-Commercial Users (NCUC) Constituency on the GNSO Policy Council at the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). She is a member of the Board of Directors for the Union for the Public Domain, a nonprofit organization in Washington, D.C. that is dedicated to protecting the public domain. Ms. Gross also serves as a member of the Advisory Board for Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility - Peru, and for FreeMuse, an independent international organization based in Copenhagen that advocates freedom of expression for musicians and composers worldwide.

Before founding IP Justice in 2002, Ms. Gross was the first Staff Attorney for Intellectual Property with the cyber-liberties organization the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) where she began the group's campaign in intellectual property litigation in 1999.

A 1998 graduate of Santa Clara University's High Technology Law Program, Ms. Gross is licensed to practice law in California. A Michigan native, she graduated from Michigan State University's James Madison College in 1995 with degrees in political philosophy and international relations."

( http://www.cptech.org/a2k/igf/athens110206/speaker_bios.html) 


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:IP]]