

=Description=

Mary Lacity and Leslie Willcocks:

"Knowledge workers consistently tell us they want to be liberated from such highly-structured, routine, and dreary tasks to focus on more interesting work. Some are actually getting that wish, thanks to a new approach known as Robotic Process Automation (RPA).

When people first hear the term “Robotic Process Automation,” they might imagine shiny robots gliding around office buildings. In reality, this is just software that can be made to perform the kinds of administrative tasks that otherwise require stop-gap human handling – for example, transferring data from multiple input sources like email and spreadsheets to systems of record like ERP and CRM systems. Calling it robotic, however, emphasizes the utility of a machine that can stand in for a worker and handle disparate, discrete chores. (One “robot” equals one software license and, in general, one robot can perform structured tasks equivalent to two to five humans.). The workplace adoption of RPA differs from classic business process automation in two important respects:

The developer hoping to automate a task does not need to have programming skills. Business operations people who have process and subject matter expertise but no programming experience can, with only a few weeks of training, start automating processes with RPA tools. If you are familiar with Microsoft’s Visio product, you can envision RPA tools functioning in the same way, with users dragging, dropping, and linking icons that represent steps in a process. (One of us took the software training for Blue Prism, one of the leading RPA providers, and was able to automate a process in less than two hours.)

RPA does not disturb underlying computer systems. This is “lightweight IT,” in that the robots access other computer systems the way humans do—through the user interface with a logon ID and password. No underlying systems programming logic is touched. (For IT readers: RPA accesses systems of record through the presentation layer.)

Given this ease of use and lightweight operation, adoption of RPA can originate inside business operations, and typically does, rather than being brought to the business by the IT department. And thus (because RPA projects do not require expensive IT skills), the threshold of processes worth automating is substantially lowered. Even where a particular tedious task is not being performed by a very large number of people, RPA can economically delegate the task to robots."
(https://hbr.org/2015/06/what-knowledge-workers-stand-to-gain-from-automation)

=Example=

Mary Lacity:

"In one case study we saw UK mobile communications provider Telefónica O2 deploy more than 160 robots to process between 400,000 and 500,000 transactions each month, yielding a three-year return on investment of over 650%. More astounding, Telefónica O2 reached this scale by training only four people. Another case study subject, a large UK-based utility, deployed more than 300 robots that process three million transactions per quarter, yielding an annual return on investment of 200 percent. Here, two humans orchestrate 300 robots that perform the work of 600 people. In general, early adopters of RPA find that automation radically transforms operations, delivering much lower costs while improving service quality, increasing compliance (because everything the software does is logged), and decreasing delivery times."
(https://hbr.org/2015/06/what-knowledge-workers-stand-to-gain-from-automation)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Technology]]