
= European-funded system to speed the development of human-serving robots. [http://www.zeitnews.org/applied-sciences/robotics/europe-launches-roboearth-wikipedia-robots]

=Description=

"The RoboEarth project was years in the making and received around 4 million euros ($5.4 million) in funding from the European Union for interrelated projects at technology conglomerate Royal Philips NV and universities in the Netherlands, Germany, Spain and Switzerland.

Designers of robots can add information to the system, which is then shared for free so that others don't have to reinvent the electric wheel. For example, if a robot maker wants to program a hand to grasp something, that's difficult to design. But the coding for three different ways to do it may be there for a robot to plug into on RoboEarth.

But RoboEarth is more than an encyclopedia. It has a system of networked computers that allow it to perform intensive computing tasks that smaller computers — or in this case simpler robots — may not be able to. It also allows individual robots to communicate between themselves, the so-called RoboCloud of networked computers, and the robot database.

"The future in robotics and especially cloud computing is very exciting," said Gajan Mohanaraja, of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology at Zurich, which is taking part in the project.

Mohanarajah was one of the core developers of the RoboCloud, sometimes called an "online brain for robots," which was launched in March ahead of the rest of the project.

"This means we can build very lightweight and cheap robots and completely offload most of the computing to the cloud," Mohanarajah said."
(http://www.zeitnews.org/applied-sciences/robotics/europe-launches-roboearth-wikipedia-robots)

[[Category:Technology]]