=Bibliography=

As recommended by Mark Whitaker:

(booknotes from MW as well)


==Medici Money: Banking, metaphysics and art in fifteenth-century Florence==

'''* Book: Medici Money: Banking, metaphysics and art in fifteenth-century Florence. by Tim Parks, Professor of Literature and Translation (Author)'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Medici-Money-metaphysics-fifteenth-century-Florence-ebook/dp/B00EDJEVVI/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1632368462&sr=8-1]

This is a book about the rise of money power and the rise of secular possibilities and destruction of Florence’s actual democracy by them as well, lots of details and beautifully written for philosophical implication of money power on both destroying democracy and yet giving expansion for secularism; interesting religious hybrids of how the Medici first infiltrated the symbolic aspects of church iconography, etc.

“The Medici are famous as the rulers of Florence at the high point of the Renaissance. Their power derived from the family bank, and this book tells the fascinating, frequently bloody story of the family and the dramatic development and collapse of their bank (from Cosimo who took it over in 1419 to his grandson Lorenzo the Magnificent who presided over its precipitous decline). The Medici faced two apparently insuperable problems: how did a banker deal with the fact that the Church regarded interest as a sin and had made it illegal? How in a small republic like Florence could he avoid having his wealth taken away by taxation? But the bank became indispensable to the Church. And the family completely subverted Florence's claims to being democratic. They ran the city. Medici Money explores a crucial moment in the passage from the Middle Ages to the Modern world, a moment when our own attitudes to money and morals were being formed. To read this book is to understand how much the Renaissance has to tell us about our own world. Medici Money is one of the launch titles in a new series, Atlas Books, edited by James Atlas. Atlas Books pairs fine writers with stories of the economic forces that have shaped the world, in a new genre - the business book as literature.”



==The Life and Times of Jacob Fugger==

'''* Book: The Richest Man Who Ever Lived: The Life and Times of Jacob Fugger Paperback – August 9, 2016 by Greg Steinmetz (Author)'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Richest-Man-Who-Ever-Lived/dp/1451688563/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?]

Similar book of interest is the history of the largest secular bank in Europe at the time that was more international, and how it made and broke Popes while Medici just started out earlier in Florence mostly: 

I have read this one as well though the other book by Tim Parks brings out the theoretical implications best with this tight case of Florence, though the Steinmetz book brings out the truly international politics and national and papal politics far better in secular money pressures from the first international European bank of Fugger.
“bank became indispensable to the Church” same with Fugger later  than Medici.

“Jacob Fugger lived in Germany at the turn of the 16th century, the grandson of a peasant. By the time he died, his fortune amounted to nearly 2 percent of European GDP. Not even John D. Rockefeller had that kind of wealth. Most people become rich by spotting opportunities, pioneering new technologies, or besting opponents in negotiations. Fugger did all that, but he had an extra quality that allowed him to rise even higher: nerve. In an era when kings had unlimited power, Fugger had the nerve to stare down heads of state and ask them to pay back their loans - with interest. It was this coolness and self-assurance, along with his inexhaustible ambition, that made him not only the richest man ever but a force of history as well. Fugger helped trigger the Reformation and likely funded Magellan's circumnavigation of the globe. The ultimate untold story, The Richest Man Who Ever Lived is more than a tale about the richest and most influential businessman of all time. It is a story about palace intrigue, knights in battle, family tragedy and triumph, and a violent clash between the 1 percent and everybody else.”


==The Sixth Great Power (Barings Bank)==

'''* Book: The Sixth Great Power (Barings Bank). by Philip Ziegler | Oct 12, 1988'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Sixth-Great-Power-Philip-Ziegler/dp/0394573250/ref=sr_1_1?]

This is another quite a good book I have read years ago:

Loaning to England and France during their wars, the Bank of the British East India Company as wel, though that BEIC connection is little commented upon oddly in this ‘official history’ by an author who looked into their correspondence:

“When "The Sixth Great Power" was published 20 years ago, it was a mildly amusing family history of an English banking clan up through the death of the second Lord Revelstoke. Given what has happened since, the book is hilarious. Barings made its mark during the Napoleonic Wars, becoming the top merchant bank in the leading economic nation, although Rothschilds' various branches perhaps were worth more pounds and francs and marks. Yet Barings was considered to be the leading bank in the world, hence sixth power after Britain, France, Prussia, Austria and Russia. Philip Ziegler's is much more a family history than a business history. The family, deriving from a German textile trader who settled in a provincial West Country town even before the Hanoverian accession, was prolific in children, only a small number of whom stayed with the bank. The others seceded with vast fortunes to become earls, landowners and politicians. All, it appears, were hideous snobs and anti-Semites. Some few had talent, but it was not especially highly regarded. "Integrity was indispensable," writes Ziegler. That is, by the easy English standards. While there were things a gentlemen wouldn't do -- such as invite his poor relations to dine -- the standards of commercial morality would get an American businessman indicted today. Money makes money, with a little care, and having fattened on the corpse of Europe, Barings was placed to make a great deal more without any conspicuous merit. Looking backward, from the time Barings was sold for $1.80, the history of the house looks silly. Only fools could fail to make money in such a system, but Barings had fools enough. It crashed in 1890, being rescued by a brave governor of the Bank of England, in an episode that will resonate strongly with anyone following the machinations of the governor of the Bank or the Secretary of the American Treasury in 2008. Lidderdale, the late Victorian, comes out much shinier than the current crop. Despite much sententious letter writing -- quoted at length by Ziegler -- Baring partners seem never to have paid much attention to ordinary accounting controls, despite the bad surprises this led to again and again and again. This finally caught up with them for good in 1995 when a single junior manager, Nick Leeson, managed to destroy the bank and many thousands of ordinary people along with it. Though Leeson was not by breeding a Baring, he was well up in the tradition of sententiousness (see my review of his "Rogue Trader") and now -- according to e-mail solicitations I receive -- is offering his financial expertise for a fee.

The Barings, as a whole, were not eccentric enough to be fun to read about, so the point of "The Sixth Great Power" is a bit obscure. It appears to be not merely an authorized but a subsidized company profile. Ziegler says he had full access to the company archives but was free to write as he wished.

Perhaps. He spends many paragraphs excusing hinky Baring behavior -- usually on the ground that others in the business were worse, which may be correct -- but it seems odd that the copyright was jointly registered by Ziegler & Co. and Baring Brothers & Co. Ltd. My copy, which is from the first English edition, is printed on extravagant though not sumptuous stock, whose extra cost, I surmise, was picked up by the bank.

Like a good deal of Baring paper, it wasn't as good as it looks at first glance. The phototypesetting work is slovenly with many line drops.”


==The Invention of Capitalism==

'''* Book: The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History of Primitive Accumulation by Michael Perelman | May 3, 2000'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Invention-Capitalism-Classical-Political-Accumulation-ebook/dp/B00EDIWR9M/ref=sr_1_1?]

Another really good book or two or on the pointlessness of thinking that there is a ‘market’ we can theorize or a money power separate from politics. Of course that line of approach of some kind of autonomous market theorization from Locke onward through Smith through Marx 


“The originators of classical political economy—Adam Smith, David Ricardo, James Steuart, and others—created a discourse that explained the logic, the origin, and, in many respects, the essential rightness of capitalism. But, in the great texts of that discourse, these writers downplayed a crucial requirement for capitalism’s creation: For it to succeed, peasants would have to abandon their self-sufficient lifestyle and go to work for wages in a factory. Why would they willingly do this?
Clearly, they did not go willingly. As Michael Perelman shows, they were forced into the factories with the active support of the same economists who were making theoretical claims for capitalism as a self-correcting mechanism that thrived without needing government intervention. Directly contradicting the laissez-faire principles they claimed to espouse, these men advocated government policies that deprived the peasantry of the means for self-provision in order to coerce these small farmers into wage labor. To show how Adam Smith and the other classical economists appear to have deliberately obscured the nature of the control of labor and how policies attacking the economic independence of the rural peasantry were essentially conceived to foster primitive accumulation, Perelman examines diaries, letters, and the more practical writings of the classical economists. He argues that these private and practical writings reveal the real intentions and goals of classical political economy—to separate a rural peasantry from their access to land.
This rereading of the history of classical political economy sheds important light on the rise of capitalism to its present state of world dominance. Historians of political economy and Marxist thought will find that this book broadens their understanding of how capitalism took hold in the industrial age.

==Politics and Markets in the English Financial Revolution==

'''* Book: City of Capital: Politics and Markets in the English Financial Revolution. by Bruce G. Carruthers | Dec 19, 1999'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/City-Capital-Politics-Financial-Revolution/dp/0691049602/ref=sr_1_1?]

“While many have examined how economic interests motivate political action, Bruce Carruthers explores the reverse relationship by focusing on how political interests shape a market. He sets his inquiry within the context of late Stuart England, when an active stock market emerged and when Whig and Tory parties vied for control of a newly empowered Parliament. Carruthers examines the institutional linkage between politics and the market that consisted of three joint-stock companies--the Bank of England, the East India Company, and the South Sea Company--which all loaned large sums to the government and whose shares dominated trading on the stock market. Through innovative research that connects the voting behavior of individuals in parliamentary elections with their economic behavior in the stock market, Carruthers demonstrates that party conflict figured prominently during the company foundings as Whigs and Tories tried to dominate company directorships. For them, the national debt was as much a political as a fiscal instrument. In 1712, the Bank was largely controlled by the Whigs, and the South Sea Company by the Tories. The two parties competed, however, for control of the East India Company, and so Whigs tended to trade shares only with Whigs, and Tories with Tories. Probing such connections between politics and markets at both institutional and individual levels, Carruthers ultimately argues that competitive markets are not inherently apolitical spheres guided by economic interest but rather ongoing creations of social actors pursuing multiple goals.”


== Anglo-American Oil Politics and the New World Order ==

'''* Book: A Century of War: Anglo-American Oil Politics and the New World Order. by William F Engdahl | Feb 29, 2012'''

URL = [https://www.amazon.com/Century-War-Anglo-American-Politics-World/dp/1615774920/ref=sr_1_1?]


Echoes of Carruthers, though a history of why we consume oil: nothing to do with markets, more about states and military investments. A phrase I have invented to describe this, which I mentioned in passing last time, was that some materials are put ‘in the market [from outside politics] instead of ‘of [created out of ] the market’.’

"Control the oil and you control entire nations," said Kissinger. Oil is an instrument of world domination in the grip of the Anglo-American empire. This is a story about power, power over entire nations and continents. Century of War is a gripping account of the murky world of the international oil industry and its role in world politics. Scandals about oil are familiar to most of us. From George W. Bush's election victory to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, US politics and oil enjoy a controversially close relationship. William Engdahl takes the reader through a history of the oil industry's grip on the world economy. His revelations are startling. A thin red line runs through modern world history, covered in oil and blood. This book is not for the faint of heart, but for those who can see beyond the daily media manipulation of reality that is called news.” 

[This book goes well with the oligarchic histories of Tarpley]


=More information=

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_banking_families

[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]