
Excerpt: Opening a Public Sphere in China. By Larry Diamond. From an essay on [[Liberation Technology]] in the Journal of Democracy.

URL = http://irevolution.files.wordpress.com/2010/08/diamond-21-3.pdf


=Text=

Larry Diamond:


“The prevailing answer is no: China’s “Great Firewall” of Internet filtering
and control prevents the rise of an independent public sphere online.
Indeed, China’s policing of the Internet is extraordinary in both scope and
sophistication. China now has the world’s largest population of Internet
users—more than 380 million people (a number equal to 29 percent of the
population, and a sixteen-fold increase since the year 2000). But it also
has the world’s most extensive, “multilayered,” and sophisticated system
“for censoring, monitoring, and controlling activities on the internet and
mobile phones.”8 Connection to the international Internet is monopolized
by a handful of state-run operators hemmed in by rigid constraints that
produce in essence “a national intranet,” cut off from anything that might
challenge the CCP’s monopoly on power.

Access to critical websites and online reporting is systematically
blocked. Google has withdrawn from China in protest of censorship,
while YouTube, Facebook, and Blogspot, among other widely used sites,
are extensively blocked or obstructed. Chinese companies that provide
search and networking services agree to even tighter self-censorship than
do international companies. When protests erupt (as they did over Tibet
in 2008, for instance) or other sensitive political moments approach,
authorities preemptively close data centers and online forums. Now the
party-state is also trying to eliminate anonymous communication and networking,
by requiring registration of real names to blog or comment and
by tightly controlling and monitoring cybercafés. Fifty-thousand Internet
police prowl cyberspace removing “harmful content”—usually within 24
to 48 hours. Students are recruited to spy on their fellows. And the regime
pays a quarter of a million online hacks (called “50-centers” because of
the low piece rate they get) to post favorable comments about the partystate
and report negative comments.

Such quasi-Orwellian control of cyberspace is only part of the story,
however. There is simply too much communication and networking online
(and via mobile phones) for the state to monitor and censor it all.
Moreover, Chinese “netizens”—particularly the young who are growing
up immersed in this technology—are inventive, determined, and cynical
about official orthodoxy. Many constantly search for better techniques to
circumvent cyber-censorship, and they quickly share what they learn. If
most of China’s young Internet users are apolitical and cautious, they are
also alienated from political authority and eagerly embrace modest forms
of defiance, often turning on wordplay.

Recently, young Chinese bloggers have invented and extensively
lauded a cartoon creature they call the “grass mud horse” (the name in
Chinese is an obscene pun) as a vehicle for protest. This mythical equine,
so the narrative goes, is a brave and intelligent animal whose habitat is
threatened by encroaching “river crabs.” In Chinese, the name for these
freshwater crustaceans (hexie) sounds very much like the word for Hu
Jintao’s official governing philosophy of “harmony”—a label that critics
see as little more than a euphemism for censorship and the suppression of
criticism. Xiao Qiang, editor of China Digital Times, argues that the grass
mud horse has become an icon of resistance to censorship. The expression and cartoon
videos may seem like a juvenile response to unreasonable rule. But the fact
that the vast online population has joined the chorus, from serious scholars
to usually politically apathetic urban white-collar workers, shows how
strongly this expression resonates.

In order to spread defiance, Chinese have a growing array of digital
tools. Twitter has become one of the most potent means for political and
social networking and the rapid dissemination of news, views, and withering
satire. On April 22 at People’s University in Beijing, three human
rights activists protested a speech by a well-known CCP propaganda official,
Wu Hao. Showering him with small bills, they declared, “Wu Hao,
wu mao!” (“Wu Hao is a fifty-center!”). Twitter flashed photographs of
the episode across China, delighting millions of students who revel in
mocking the outmoded substance, tortured logic, and painfully crude style
of regime propagandists.

When Google announced in late March 2010 it was withdrawing its
online search services from mainland China (after failing to resolve its
conflict with the government over censorship and cyber-attacks), the
Chinese Twitter-sphere lit up. Many Chinese were upset that Google
would abandon them to the more pervasive censorship of the Chinese
search-engine alternatives (such as Baidu), and they worried that the
Great Firewall would block other services such as Google Scholar and
Google Maps. Others suspected Google of doing the U.S. government’s
bidding. But the company’s decision provoked a wave of sympathy and
mourning, similar to what happened in January when Google first announced
that it was considering withdrawing: “Citizen reporters posted
constant updates on . . . Twitter, documenting the Chinese netizens who
endlessly offered flowers, cards, poems, candles, and even formal bows
in front of the big outdoor sign ‘Google’ located outside the company’s
offices in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou.”10 Security guards chased
the mourners away, declaring the offerings “illegal flower tributes.” The
term quickly spread in China’s online forums, symbolizing the suppression
of freedom.

The public sphere in China involves much more than “tweets,” of
course. Those often link to much longer blogs, discussion groups, and
news reports. And many thought-provoking sites are harder to block because
their critiques of CCP orthodoxy are subtler, elucidating democratic
principles and general philosophical concepts, sometimes with reference
to Confucianism, Taoism, and other strains of traditional Chinese thought
that the CCP dares not ban. Full-scale blog posts (not subject to Twitter’s
severe length limits) are far likelier to criticize the government (albeit artfully
and euphemistically). Rebecca MacKinnon finds that China’s blogosphere
is a “much more freewheeling space than the mainstream media,”
with censorship varying widely across the fifteen blog-service providers
that she examined. Thus, “a great deal of politically sensitive material
survives in the Chinese blogosphere, and chances for survival can likely
be improved with knowledge and strategy.”

Despite the diffuse controls, China’s activists see digital tools such as
Twitter, Gmail, and filtration-evading software as enabling levels of communication,
networking, and publishing that would otherwise be unimaginable
in China today. With the aid of liberation technology, dissident
intellectuals have gone from being a loose assortment of individuals with
no specific goal or program to forming a vibrant and increasingly visible
collaborative force. Their groundbreaking manifesto—Charter 08, a call
for nineteen reforms to achieve “liberties, democracy, and the rule of law”
in China—garnered most of its signatures through the aid of blog sites
such as bullog.cn. When Charter 08 was released online on 10 December
2008, with the signatures of more than three-hundred Chinese intellectuals
and human-rights activists, the government quickly moved to suppress
all mention of it. But then, “something unusual happened. Ordinary people
such as Tang [Xiaozhao] with no history of challenging the government
began to circulate the document and declare themselves supporters,”
shedding their previous fear. Within a month, more than five-thousand
other Chinese citizens had signed the document. They included not just
the usual dissidents but “scholars, journalists, computer technicians, businessmen,
teachers and students whose names had not been associated with
such movements before, as well as some on the lower rungs of China’s
social hierarchy—factory and construction workers and farmers.”

Officials shut down Tang’s blog soon after she signed the Charter, and
did the same to countless other blogs that supported it (including the entire
bullog.cn site). But the campaign persists in underground salons, elliptical
references, and subversive jokes spread virally through social media and
instant messaging. One such joke imagines a testy Chinese president Hu
Jintao complaining about the Charter’s democratic concepts such as federalism,
opposition parties, and freedom of association. “Where do they
all come from?” he demands. His minions run down the sources and bring
him the bad news: The troublesome notions can be traced to Mao Zedong,
Zhou Enlai, the CCP, the official newspaper (the Xinhua Daily), and the
constitution of the People’s Republic itself. A flustered Hu wonders what
to do. His staff suggests banning all mention of these names. “You idiots!”
shouts Hu. “If you ban them, you might as well ban me too!” “Well,”
his staff retorts, “People do say that if they ban you, at least the Charter
will be left alone.”
(http://irevolution.files.wordpress.com/2010/08/diamond-21-3.pdf)


=More Information=

#[[Role of the Internet in Malaysia]]


[[Category:China]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]