
* Article: Bureaucracy shouldn’t be a dirty word: the role of people-responsive bureaucracy in a robust public economy. By Janine R. Wedel. real-world economics review, issue no. 84, 2018

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue84/Wedel84.pdf [https://rwer.wordpress.com/comments-on-rwer-issue-no-84/ comments]

=Abstract=

"Bureaucracy, government, and practically all things “public” are under enormous siege
in the age of Trump. This comes at an already perilous moment. Over the past several
decades, government reform, privatization, checklist-type “accountability,” and
digitization, among other developments, have reorganized governance in a way that
has weakened public institutions, apparently making them less responsive to the
people they are supposed to serve. The status quo may well be connected to the
collapse of public trust; wholesale disaffection is surely a key reason that voters have
elected the likes of Trump and counterparts elsewhere. Now at the helm, Trump is
further attacking the already weakened pillars of democratic society.

To help remedy this state of affairs, the “public” must come back as a virtue.

Establishing a vibrant public economy relies on a well-functioning bureaucracy that
truly serves people. We need to reconsider developments such as the outsourcing of
government functions and the prevailing checklist approach to accountability. True
accountability cannot be reduced to metrics that are poorly conceived, encourage
appearances over truth, obscure the broader picture, and are severed from larger
institutional knowledge and public trust.

A robust public economy is needed to help restore public trust. No democratic society
can survive indefinitely without it."


[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Articles]]