
=Discussion=

Author unknown:

"As economic returns from the collection and sale of forest products increase and wealth is created at
the local level through aggregation economies and market visibility, the threat of overharvesting
products from the forests will significantly increase. In the present scenario, forest governance in
most of the tropical world is beset with lack of clarity. With a few exceptions, local communities do
not have sufficient autonomy to manage forests for the purposes of subsistence, income generation
or to regulate the operations of external actors in the forest (Camino et al., 2023). In the absence of
clear property rights, community organizations are dependent on public agencies for regulation and
enforcement, which is often absent or worse (Erbaugh et al., 2020). These system dynamics also
create conditions for a tragedy of the commons, with every individual racing to extract as much as
possible, without regard to sustainability of the resource.

Community ownership of forest lands addresses these challenges. The underlying argument is that
clear property rights, particularly in the form of collective ownership, provide the incentive for
communities to invest in the growth of their forests by aligning present economic benefits with
sustainable management of forests for its future benefits. Investments in the management of
resources for their long-term productivity are contingent upon the belief that benefits that accrue in
the future will not be captured by external actors. Community ownership of forests provides
incentives for communities to invest in the protection of their forest resources while ensuring that
the other services that forests provide like carbon sequestration, habitat quality and connectivity,
and pollination (among several other ecosystem services) are not compromised in the present and
future.

While it is challenging for external actors to ensure that rules are enforced, penalties are imposed,
and forests are monitored to prevent unsustainable practices, communities that are organized as
formal management organizations are well placed to take on this responsibility. They possess a deep
knowledge about their forests and stand to gain the most from the transactions in a formal forest
economy. This realization is now percolating through the policy community across the world, with
increasing recognition of the salience of community ownership of forest land for sustainable
governance and stewardship. More than three decades of scholarship, starting with Elinor Ostrom’s
work on the superiority of existing common property regimes across the world, has generated
strong evidence in favor of community ownership of forests (Kaur et al., 2023). Beyond providing a
safeguard against expropriation or exploitation, community forest ownership can now be seen as
the necessary building block of a sustainable and equitable forest economy. 

...

The literature on forest commons has demonstrated the significance of community ownership and
governance for social and ecological outcomes (Erbaugh et al., 2020). Community ownership of
forests and a decentralized governance system have positive outcomes for sustaining the lives of
people, mitigating climate-related challenges, and conserving biodiversity (Chhatre & Agrawal, 2009;
Miller et al., 2022; Persha et al., 2011). However, the role of forests in this literature is often limited
to people’s use of forest products for subsistence and as a minor source of income, not as an
instrument for the transformation of their livelihoods.

Forests have been functioning as spaces of wealth since the industrial revolution, but with limited or
no visibility of the actors in the first mile of forest-based value chains. The value created by the sale
of forest products does not fully benefit local communities because of three reasons: a lack of clearly
defined property rights that put restrictions on the scale at which forest products can be marketed
or sold at the local level; a lack of convergence among civic, market, and public institutions across
scales towards creating synergies in social, economic, political, and ecological outcomes; and an
institutional architecture for equitable distribution of the wealth created from forests while ensuring
their long-term sustainability. The private sector, although increasingly committed to the adoption
of responsible business practices, lacks accurate and trustworthy information about the sources of
forest-based raw materials and the communities managing these forests.

We propose that investments to build the capacity of community institutions for decentralized
governance of forests (at the local and landscape levels) and wealth creation through enterprise
development will create synergies in achieving multiple sustainable development goals and minimize
trade-offs that result from operations in the forest economy. The forest economy of the future is not
only about providing raw material to industry for wealth creation far from forest landscapes, but
also about the participation of local communities in markets on favourable terms through an
institutional network that ensures inclusion of voices across scales to ensure the sustainability of
forests. However, community agency must be coupled with a coordination mechanism across
institutions at the local and landscape levels, embedded in partnerships with multiple external
stakeholders. The framework presented in this paper describes the building blocks and moving parts
necessary to achieve this vision.

The framework makes two novel contributions: convergence of interventions for producing positive
social, economic, political, and ecological outcomes jointly, and complementary and collaborative
interactions among institutions across scales to enable just and equitable distribution of resources.
The implementation of interventions outlined in the framework cannot be undertaken by any one
stakeholder group in isolation. Historically, the implementation of any one of these interventions has
met with limited success in achieving the expected outcomes. The strength of our framework lies in
the joint implementation of interventions, the scale of operations to enable governance of forests at
a landscape level, and formal multi-way partnerships among forest communities, the government,
and the private sector. Such partnerships will enable implementation at scale, build trust among all
stakeholders, and mitigate market risks for community enterprises. For example, the recognition of
community ownership of forest lands in the absence of interventions that are targeted at improving
the livelihoods of local communities may improve tenure security and autonomy to manage
resources for sustainable use but are unlikely to create significant wealth in rural economies.
Similarly, direct-to-consumer marketing in the absence of aggregation economies will not create jobs
or improve livelihoods as communities are not well placed to compete with large businesses. While
there are experiences of enabling economies of scale through women-led collectives, the large-scale
supply of forest-based raw materials cannot be sustained over the long run in the absence of
community governance of forests with secure tenure.

For forests to materialize as enablers of economic growth, rural prosperity, and carbon sinks, we
need multilateral partnerships for implementing the three interventions in the forest economy
framework. A partnership between governments, industry, and communities is critical to achieving
scale in operations, building the capacity of community enterprises, and establishing a system of
accountability among different actors involved in the forest economy. The framework enables the
emergence of a network of institutions at different scales for complementary and collaborative
action to create wealth at the local level while ensuring the long-term sustainability of forests and
their services for the welfare of society. The discourse on climate change mitigation and adaptation,
sustainable development goals, and forest landscape restoration has not sufficiently considered the
role of forests in achieving synergies in outcomes on multiple dimensions. Forests continue to be
perceived as spaces of conservation while supporting the survival of communities that live in or
around them. We propose to invert this logic: biodiversity conservation, sustainable development,
and forest restoration can be co-benefits of investments targeted at increasing the incomes of
people that depend on forests.
The implementation of the proposed framework will make direct contributions to several
sustainable development goals. The immediate outcome of aggregation economies and market
visibility is the creation of jobs and wealth in the rural economy. By increasing the disposable
incomes of households that depend on forests, the framework will make direct contributions to SDG
#1 (No Poverty). The framework will improve SDG #5 (Gender Equality) by ensuring the participation
of women in markets. Such inclusion will create pathways to channel public investments to
empower women’s collectives and build their capacity as business leaders. Government mandates
for emissions reduction from energy production compels industry to look for cleaner alternatives
(Naylor & Higgins, 2018). The framework demonstrated in this paper is built on forest landscapes,
which are the most viable and promising alternative that also enables countries to achieve SDG #7
(Affordable and Clean Energy).

At present, actors in the first mile of the forest economy operate in the informal sector, and their
income portfolios are built on unskilled jobs with high levels of drudgery. Mechanical interventions
to create value at the local level will not only reduce the drudgery involved in the collection and
processing of forest products but will also establish local communities as the primary suppliers of
industrial raw materials in forest-based value chains (SDG #8: Decent Work and Economic Growth).
The institutional architecture for the collective sale of forest products enables value creation and
retention at the local level. Market visibility through direct and formal partnerships with large
industrial buyers will result in significantly greater rewards by capturing a higher proportion of value
closer to the forests (SDG #10: Reduced Inequality). At the same time, market visibility increases
transparency in the forest economy. The application of digital technologies like blockchain will build
trust to enable consumers and businesses to work towards SDG #12 (Responsible Consumption and
Production). The framework will contribute to SDG #13 (Climate Action) through its institutional
architecture and multiway partnerships for sequestering carbon in forests at the landscape level,
avoiding emissions through better forest management and governance, and building adaptive
capacity to deal with climate change. The interventions proposed in this paper enable the private
sector and industries at large to sustainably procure forest-based raw materials from humandominated forests, contributing to SDG #15 (Life on Land). As disposable household incomes in rural
landscapes increase, local communities will have plausible incentives to invest in the growth of their
forests for the long-term availability of forest products and the restoration of ecosystem services."

(Source: Radical Forest futures: Building on community ownership. Author unknown.)


[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Commons Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Articles]]