What is the role of experts in social media?


=Discussion=

==John Blossom's recommendations==

From http://shore.com/commentary/newsanal/items/2007/20070227gather.html:

"'''Keep relationships toe-to-toe.''' More established media methods for featuring experts online tend to make the expert person the "star of the show." While this may work well for personalities featured briefly on a site social media tends to favor relationships that evolve over a much longer period of time. Don't make experts invisible but make it clear that they are but one of many contributors in the community. This is important not only to everyday members but as well to experts who are eager to get uninhibited feedback and ideas from their target audiences. 

'''Don't expect experts to be community leaders.''' While experts may be looked up to by your online communities their workloads oftentimes are such that they will not be in a position to anchor those communities any more than other members. In fact, having a dominant expert, widely recognized or self-proclaimed, can inhibit the formation of the peer contributions which build up the broadest base of content possible. Allow experts to use your publishing tools in a way that provides them with a chance to provide thought leadership in your online community without expecting them to take on anything but a "just another contributor" profile within the community. 

'''Consider premium packaging for selected levels of expert access.''' To go back to the Davos analogy, you didn't fork over a pile of cash to Bill to have that chummy conversation, but you did pay a pretty hefty tab for the conference. The potential for subscription access to social media seems fairly antithetical to many at this time but as pointed out by Reid Conrad, CEO of NearTime, in his SIIA Previews presentation the smaller the social media community the more effective and important the subscription model becomes for making the most of focused groups creating a high level of contributed value. The technology and methodologies used to implement social media are inherently egalitarian but in a world where some people want to be more equal than others we can expect to see social media "country clubs" sprouting up fairly rapidly - with key experts in tow." 
(http://shore.com/commentary/newsanal/items/2007/20070227gather.html)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Relational]]