=Discussion=

==The role of technical communities in corporate innovation==

West and O’Mahony:

“To some extent, firms and technical
communities have always collaborated (Allen,
1983) to create standards (e.g., Isaak, 2005),
shared infrastructure (Bradner, 1999), and
innovation outcomes (Hargrave and Van de Ven,
2006) that are bigger than any one firm can
achieve. 

Empirical work suggests three reasons
why firms participate in technical communities.

First, there is increasing evidence that path
breaking innovations cannot occur without a
community to interpret, support, extend and
diffuse them (Hargrave and Van de Ven, 2006;
Schoonhoven and Romanelli, 2001; Hargadon
and Douglas, 2001; Hunt and Aldrich, 1998;
Christensen and Rosenbloom, 1995; Rosenkopf
and Tushman, 1994; Tushman and Rosenkopf,
1992; Anderson and Tushman, 1990; Van de
Ven and Garud, 1989). Research on
technologies such as medical devices, bicycles,
computer hardware, and electricity show that
new technologies are shaped by human
institutions that provide a context for the
interpretation and use of such technologies
(Bijker, Hughes and Pinch, 1987).

Second, research on collective models of
innovation (von Hippel, 2005; von Hippel and
von Krogh, 2003; Hargrave and Van de Ven,
2006; Allen, 1983) and on community technical
organizations (Rosenkopf, Metiu and George,
2001; Rosenkopf and Tushman, 1998) shows
that communities of lead users help firms not
only in interpreting and applying new
innovations, but in their creation and further
development by refining new design iterations
(von Hippel, 1988, 2005; Shah, 2006; Murray
and O’Mahony, 2007). A large body of evidence
suggests that firms in many industries (toys,
entertainment, medical devices, manufacturing,
sporting goods, music) benefit from
contributions from community members
(Jepperson and Frederiksen, 2006; von Hippel,
2005; Franke and Shah, 2003; Lakhani and von
Hippel, 2003).

Third, although it is not widely recognized,
technical communities provide a vehicle to
coordinate the work of both firms and
individuals in developing new technologies and
standards (Rosenkopf et al, 2001; Mowery and
Simcoe, 2005). Technical communities offer
individuals leadership opportunities (Fleming
and Waguespack, 2007; O’Mahony and Ferraro,
2007) and enhance their technical credibility
(Hars and Ou, 2002; Lerner and Tirole, 2002).
For example, participation in a specific public
community (such as standardizing the http
protocol as a member of the Internet
Engineering Task Force) allows participants to
both develop and advertise domain specific
knowledge (Fleming and Waguespack, 2007).

The degree to which firms benefit from
collaboration with technical communities can
also depend on features of the technology itself
such as the degree of modularity (Baldwin and
Clark, 2000), or the number of complements,
linking mechanisms, or interface technologies
required (Tushman and Rosenkopf, 1992).
While practitioners have long argued that
effective management of such communities can
help support firm goals (Williams and Cothrel,
2000; Armstrong and Hagell, 1996; Godwin,
1994) little empirical work has been done in this
area.”
(http://www.joelwest.org/Papers/WestOMahony2008-WP.pdf)



=More Information=

# Innovation is becoming diffuse: [[Diffuse Innovation]]
# Innovation is becoming social, socialized: [[Socialization of Innovation]]
# Innovation is becoming "user-centered": [[User-centered Innovation]]


==Bibliography==

Dahlander, Linus, Wallin, Martin W., 2006, “A man
on the inside: Unlocking Communities as
complementary assets,” Research Policy,
35, (7), 1243-1259.

Fleming Lee and David M. Waguespack, 2007.
“Brokerage, Boundary Spanning, and
Leadership in Open Innovation
Communities,” Organization Science, 18,
(2), 165-180.

Franke, Nikolaus and Shah, Sonali, 2003. “How
communities support innovative activities:
An exploration of assistance and sharing
among end-users,” Research Policy 32 (1),
157-178.


==Open Source Software==


Lee, Gwendolyn K. and Cole, Robert E, 2003. “From
a Firm-Based to a Community-Based Model
of Knowledge Creation: The Case of the
Linux Kernel Development,” Organization
Science, 14 (6), 633-649.

von Hippel. Eric, 2001. “Innovation by User
Communities: Learning from Open-Source
Software,” MIT Sloan Management Review
42 (4), 82-86.

von Hippel, Eric and Georg von Krogh, 2003, “Open
source software and the ‘private-collective’
innovation model: Issues for organization
science,” Organization Science 14 (2), 209-
223.

von Krogh, Georg, Spaeth, Sebastian and Lakhani,
Karim R, 2003. “Community, joining, and
specialization in open source software
innovation: a case study,” Research Policy
32 (7), 1217-1241

West, Joel and Scott Gallagher, 2006, “Challenges of
open innovation: the paradox of firm
investment in open-source software,” R&D
Management, 36 (3), 319-331.

===Sectoral Studies===

Jeppesen, Lars Bo and Lars Frederiksen, 2006, “Why
Do Users Contribute to Firm-Hosted User
Communities? The Case of Computer-
Controlled Music Instruments,”
Organization Science, 17 (1), 45-63.


Rosenkopf, Lori and Tushman, Michael L, 1998.
“The Co-evolution of Community Networks
and Technology: Lessons from the flight
simulation industry,” Industrial and
Corporate Change 7 (2), 311-346.



[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]