'''* Special Issue: Interface Volume 2 Issue 2: Voices of dissent: activists’ engagements in the creation of alternative, autonomous, radical and independent media. Alice Mattoni, Andrejs Berdnikovs, Michela Ardizzoni and Laurence Cox'''

URL = http://interfacejournal.nuim.ie/2010/11/interface-issue-2-volume-2-voices-of-dissent/


=Contents=

This issue of Interface seeks to provide answers to some of the abovementioned
challenges and proposes some thought-provoking articles about alternative
media in different regions of the world.

Focusing on Scandinavian countries, Tina Askanius and Nils Gustafsson
investigate what happens to alternative media contents when they are
circulated/publicized through social networking sites. The article focuses on the
use of Facebook and Youtube during the demonstrations during the 2008
European Social Forum in Malmö, Sweden and the 2007-2008 grassroots
mobilizations before and after the eviction of the Youth House in Copenhagen,
Denmark. In doing so, the article raises important questions related to the
activists’ use of commercial social networking and content sharing sites to
spread radical and alternative messages. Grounding their theoretical reflections
in empirical material, the authors explicitly address critical questions about the
commodification of protest cultures and the mainstreaming of alternative media
messages.

Patrick McCurdy’s article explores the media politics of the Dissent! group
around the 2005 Gleneagles G8 summit. While a binary opposition, celebrating
activist media and demonizing mainstream media, certainly existed within
Dissent!, McCurdy argues for the emergence of a pragmatic orientation within
which mainstream media are seen as a site of struggle and alternative media are
seen as complementary to the mainstream. He notes the distinction between the
formal rules of the Hori-Zone convergence space and (some) activist-level talk
which articulates this latter perspective. Criticising the “spiral of silence” which
excluded debate on interaction with mainstream media, he argues that it serves
to mask the existence of more pragmatic approaches and give the illusion of
consensus around “anti-media” positions.

Italian artistic activist projects are the main subjects of Tatiana Bazzicchelli’s
article, exploring politically oriented forms of art which rest on (social)
networking practices. She does so from a cross-temporal perspective and by
taking into consideration the use of different technological supports: from the
practice of mail art to Neoism, from the Luther Blisset Project to the creation of
Anna Adamolo. Tracing the origins of (social) networking in politically oriented
artistic practices, Bazzichelli puts social networking sites and the practices
associated with them in a historical perspective. Her contribution is therefore a
first step towards the development of a critical model to single out and compare
different types of (social) networking in contemporary societies.

The long-lasting experience of the media art platform Public Netbase, in Vienna,
is at the centre of Clemens Apprich’s article, which discusses practices of urban
resistance through media art interventions. Already active at the beginning of
the 1990s, Public Netbase engaged in seminal public performances related to
the digital network culture and became a relevant artistic and political actor in
the Viennese urban space and beyond. In 2006, however, the City of Vienna
severely cut its financial resources. Apprich analyzes the practices of Public
Netbase in the re-appropriation of urban space after its marginalization within
the Viennese artistic scene and discusses the importance of such projects for the
development of counter-hegemonic engagement in the public space.

From South Korea, Dongwon Jo addresses how activists used different types of
media outlets and technological platforms during the 2008 Chotbul Protests in
Seoul. These lasted about four months, initially against the U.S. beef import
negotiations and then widening to a broader criticism of the government.

Activists and protest participants employed information and communication
technologies creatively. The combination of mobile phones, websites and offline
demonstrations resulted in multifaceted media practices that went beyond the
development of grassroots journalism. Beyond the 2008 experience, this article
also illustrates the peculiarities of media activism’s relationship to the South-
Korean media and political systems.

Brigitte Geiger and Margit Hauser discuss the complexities of creating and
recording feminist knowledge and history. The approximately 40 archives in
German-speaking countries, operating within movement contexts such as
women’s centres, face challenges in defining what should be included and have
gone through lengthy processes of professionalisation. The article offers
histories of feminist and lesbian media production since the 1970s as well as
discussing changing issue focuses. The article’s methodology, highlighting the
practicalities of developing movement-centred archives, offers valuable insights
both into the construction of feminist and lesbian movement knowledge over
time, and into the contemporary construction of movements’ own historical
sense of themselves.

Margaret Gillan’s exploration of working-class community media in Ireland,
drawing on an extended interview with community activist Robbie Byrne,
highlights the difficulty of developing media which are accountable to, and
produced by, marginalized communities in struggle. The combination - in
broadcast media in particular - of capital costs, technical requirements and state
regulation poses enormous challenges. Such communities have often gone
through a double disappointment: first in discovering the barriers to their
organized voice posed by the mainstream media, and secondly in the encounter
with radical, independent producers who are keen to produce about the
community but accept (or impose) technical and production requirements
which in practice disempower and exclude working-class people. The article
outlines some of the choices and strategies which have been used to enable
media production on the terms of communities in struggle rather than those of
the state or the independent / arthouse sector.

Maria Cristina Guimarães Oliveira and Odalisca Moraes’ action note
“Communication: historical and cultural indicators of Pina” explores the
communicative dynamics in processes of cultural resistance within grassroots
development projects in the “Comunidade do Bode”, a shantytown in the
neighborhood of Pina, Brazil.

The action note “Extension or Communication? Audiovisual technologies as
facilitators of communication in the Olga Benário MST settlement” by Lívia
Moreira de Alcântara and Elder Gomes Barbosa, discusses the effects of using
audiovisual technologies for communication within the Olga Benário MST
settlement, located in the Brazilian municipality of Visconde do Rio Branco,
Minas Gerais.

Peter Waterman opens the special section on on alternative international labour
communication by computer with discussion of an online survey which he
carried out in early 2010. Waterman has developed the ideas expressed by
respondents, providing his own vision of the relationship between labour
movement and computer-mediated networking. In the last part of the article,
under the rubric of “What is to be done?”, the author offers 26 propositions on
networking, labour and solidarity in the context of a contemporary globalized
and informatized capitalism. Waterman’s propositions and his general approach
assume the priority of networking activities over other mobilization strategies.

Waterman’s article is followed by two responses to his survey, which suggest
radically different orientations. Both respondents represent web-based
international labour media projects (LabourStart and Netzwerk IT). The first
response is provided by Eric Lee and it takes a sceptical view of global solidarity
movement based on the web as an alternative to traditional trade union
organizations. It also casts doubt upon the claim that the new media would
create something utterly new, something different from and even opposed to the
existing trade union movement.

The second response is offered by Dave Hollis, who prefers the network form,
non-hierarchical structures and the newest global social movements rather than
traditional trade union organizations. Moreover, he believes in the ability of
alternative labour media to challenge, subvert or overcome union hierarchy.
Unlike the first respondent, Hollis thinks that the new media, their power and
effects, are underestimated.

The “key document” section includes a declaration on politics, knowledge, and
art by the interesting Russian group “Chto delat / What is to be done?” which
unites activists, artists, researchers and philosophers. The document outlines
the main principles of organization and coordination within the group, its basic
program and ideological platform. A special focus in the declaration is on the
tasks of contemporary art, the importance of twentieth-century avant-garde
thought for the rethinking and renewal of the leftist philosophical and political
tradition, and the place of revolutionary art in a time of reaction.

Stefania Milan’s review of Rodriguez, Kidd and Stein’s Making our media:
global initiatives towards a democratic public sphere highlights how this two-
volume collection, documenting and reflecting on the experiences of movements
involved in the OURMedia / Nuestros Medias network, deepens the field of
alternative media research and creates a participatory conversation between a
vast range of experiences and approaches in the service of praxis. Tomás
MacSheoin’s review of Clifford Bob’s The marketing of rebellion: insurgents,
media and international activism reads it as a “cookbook” for local groups
seeking international (above all NGO) support and highlights the realism with
which Bob reads the relationships between local campaigns and international
NGOs - and the ways in which the former “market” themselves to the latter,
while noting that matters might be different when the international solidarity in
question is social movement rather than NGO-based.

As usual, there are also articles, notes and reflections not directly related to the
main topic of the issue.

Philippe Lucas’ article highlights the structural similarities between the “CSX”
movement of consumers, survivors and ex-patients in mental health institutions
and the medical cannabis movement. Both organized around struggles over
cognitive liberty and the right to make core decisions about one’s health without
incarceration, the article discusses these movements’ struggles to position their
participants as central to public debate and policy rather than mere objects.
Lucas also discusses characteristic differences in the psychological orientation
of these movements’ participants, and concludes by proposing that cognitive
liberty and freedom of thought may provide core principles around which
alliances could be forged.

William K Carroll’s article analyses the potential for the creation of a counter-
hegemonic bloc within which practices and social visions capable of fashioning a
post-capitalist economic democracy could begin to flourish. In the context of the
current crisis of neoliberal capitalism and the deepening ecological crisis, the
author seeks to discern elements of practice that might weld the present to an
alternative future. The objective of the article is to show how a Gramscian
problematic furnishes activists with an analytical and strategic lens that can
illuminate practical answers.

Raphael Schlembach’s article on “anti-German” activism explores this
controversial strand of “pro-Israeli, anti-German” communism. Those taking
this position have evolved from anti-fascism, via the critique of anti-Semitic and
nationalist positions in the German peace movement and the left more
generally, to a position of unconditional support for the Israeli state and for US
foreign policy - as well as provocatively celebrating the firebombing of Dresden.

Schlembach argues that “anti-Germans” represent not only an identity politics
in the supposed defence of modernity against barbarism, but also in some ways
a logical development of Frankfurt School-derived critical theory.

Tomás Mac Sheoin’s bibliography introduces the main theme of the next issue
of Interface, which will be devoted to repression and social movements. The
bibliography provides a comprehensive set of resources on the policing and
repression of the anti-globalization protests and movement, assembling a
variety of material from the news media, the movement, academia and the
security forces. The bibliography includes classic contributions to the literature
on the policing of protests, pieces dealing in general with policing and
repression of the anti-globalization movement, and references concerning the
relevant events in particular countries. Wherever possible, a free downloadable
Internet address is given for material.

Iyad Burnat’s action note comes from the resistance in Bil'in, a small Palestinian
village to the west of Ramallah, against the wall being constructed by the Israeli
state, isolating 29 Palestinian towns from the West Bank and separating many
Palestinians from their homes and land. The note describes the forms and
methods of protest used, discusses the factors that contributed to the success of
the resistance, shows Israeli military response and highlights the sacrifices
made by the residents of the village.

In a short piece, Peter Waterman responds to Colin Barker’s article on
Solidarnosc in Poland in Interface (2/1). Waterman criticizes Barker’s
assumption that Solidarnosc had the potential to be a socially revolutionary
movement, and highlights nationalist and religious elements within and around
Solidarnosc, as well as the problematic mediating role of the dissident
intelligentsia in the movement. Barker’s response highlights the internal
diversity of Solidarnosc and hence the genuine choices it faced. In a situation
where workers across Poland had built alternative institutions in opposition to
the official ones, these were understood by the regime as posing a challenge to
existing social power structures; the Solidarnosc leadership shared this
understanding and sought to limit the challenge. Barker defends the importance
of intra-movement debate and the continuing value of arguing for different
strategies.

Maite Tapia’s review of Jo Reger, Daniel Myers and Rachel Einwohner’s
Identity work in social movements stresses the relationship between the
“identity work” carried out by movements and the dialectic of “sameness” and
“difference” that activists use to construct the sense of collective similarity and
opposition. Finally, Laurence Cox’s review of John Charlton’s Don’t you hear
the H-Bomb’s thunder? Youth and politics on Tyneside in the late ‘fifties and
early ‘sixties highlights the importance of such oral histories of movement
generations and movement participation in shaping our own lives as activists.

This issue, finally, sees the launch of our new website, which we hope will make
Interface easier to use and enable a deeper dialogue between the activists and
researchers who read the journal. Our next issue (3/1, publication date May
2011) will focus on repression and social movements; the editors are Lesley
Wood and Cristina Flesher Fominaya. The final item in the current issue is the
call for papers for issue 3/2 (publication date November 2011) on the topic of
"Feminism, women's movements and women in movement" (editors Catherine
Eschle, Sara Motta, Cristina Flesher Fominaya and Laurence Cox)."
(http://interfacejournal.nuim.ie/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Interface-2-2-pp.1-22-editorial1.pdf)


=Excerpt=


==Introduction==

From the editorial: [http://interfacejournal.nuim.ie/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Interface-2-2-pp.1-22-editorial1.pdf]


Despite the distinctive features of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
countries, this discussion highlights some practical issues which are more
generally relevant, such as the obstacles to creating and employing non-digital
media - which on a global scale are still far more significant than digital media -
by movements of the politically excluded (such as anarchists and autonomists)
or the socially excluded (such as movements of the poors, dalits, or migrant
workers). These issues - which amount to the question of the “ownership of the
means of intellectual production” - are in some ways reproducing the old Soviet-
bloc situation in the majority world, so that a politicized minority can use
alternative technologies (today, digital means rather than carbon paper) to
challenge elites on their own terms, either around the political concerns of the
dissident minority or through providing technical and intellectual support to the
struggles of the marginalized.

Another challenge is the ability of new alternative media to overcome the
general political apathy affecting wide sections of the population in many states
- a particularly acute issue in the ex-Soviet region but a more general problem in
the age of neo-liberalism, which relies on the relative demobilisation of the
kinds of mass interest group politics that characterized Keynesian welfare
states, national developmentalism in the majority world and (in its own peculiar
way) state socialism.

Overcoming these challenges, in the ex-Soviet region and the majority world,
may require a return to traditional awareness-raising practices such as
mobilization in the workplace, grassroots organizing, street meetings, face-to-
face oral agitation in public places, written / printed material (flyers,
newssheets, brochures, etc.), visual material (posters, exhibits, etc.) and other
forms of active interaction with the general public. It also may require
charismatic leaders and dedicated agitators with a talent for persuasion and a
readiness to be engaged in routine and exhaustive face-to-face meetings with
various strata of society. The sporadic individual production and scattered
diffusion of videos, photos and audio-recordings are hardly able to persuade
wide sections of the population to change the way they think and act. In the
same way, the producers of such videos, photos and audio-recordings can
hardly play a role similar to that played by charismatic leaders in former times.
In the ex-Soviet area, as well as in other regions of the world, contemporary
independent media appear to address the organized, engaged and motivated
parts of the population - although here as elsewhere studies of alternative media
audiences are notable by their absence, most empirical research focussing on
the far smaller group of active participants.

One obvious approach is to combine new alternative media with “old” forms of
activists’ interaction with society. It is certainly wise to avoid idealizing any
single method or tool. In particular, the power imbalance within movements
between those with the relevant technological skills and access to the necessary
equipment and those who do not, needs to be more widely thematized. At
present, many movements - while accepting arguments as to the increasing
centrality of media - have paradoxically relinquished all control over their own
media strategy to specialists with their own preferences and agendas; a process
every bit as risky as allowing a movement’s parliamentary or indeed military
wing to set its own direction in isolation from the wider movement. While
academics have been bitterly critical of organisational claims to “represent”
movements and social groups, there has to date been little serious reflection on
the appropriateness of allowing those who happen to have a computer and
understand how to negotiate social media to “represent” particular movements.
Another important challenge in reflecting on contemporary alternative media is
what in countries of the Global North is the increasingly ubiquitous presence of
portable technological devices that allow people/citizens to reproduce slices of
social realities through audio-recording, photographs and video materials. At
the dawn of the 2000s, the expression “media activism” was frequently
employed to label activists involved in radical news-making processes which led
to the production of accounts and reports presenting social movements’ point of
view on contentious issues and on grassroots mobilizations.

In the last 10 years, however, portable technologies have exploded. Mobile
phones, in particular, have become a daily device of personal communication,
while also offering the opportunity to record in different ways what is going on
around the phone user. The last generation of mobile phones, moreover,
combines this function with direct internet connections. Multi-media user-
generated contents can thus be easily produced everywhere with sufficient
wealth and can even be uploaded immediately on the web. Potentially everyone
attending a demonstration, therefore, can produce her/his own personal
account of the event.

On the one hand, this multiplies the digital memories related to mobilizations
and creates a dispersed archive of documents related to protest events. At the
same time, however, portable and personal digital communication devices also
put into question the very notion of “media activism” and “alternative media”.

The challenge is, therefore, to rethink the place of alternative media practices
and to deconstruct the very concept of alternative media. The idea that the
production of alternative media is based on horizontal interactions and
dialogues amongst people belonging to the same (protesting) collective actor,
for instance, is challenged by the individual production and diffusion of short
videos, audio-recordings and photographs. Are these contents still alternative
media contents and according to which definition? Are the producers of such
contents still alternative media practitioners and according to which
definitions?

A key issue here is the ways in which the possessors of very traditional kinds of
media power (often major newspapers, the digital giants and so on) construct
spaces for “citizen journalism” which generate profits for their owners from this
upsurge of popular participation in media production - while simultaneously
censoring, constraining or marginalising both political content in general and
the possibility of generating collective action in particular. Movements are
certainly able to work within and around such constraints, but often the new
technologies can produce the illusion of popular engagement while
undermining active control.

A telling contrast might be that between the use of SMSs - widely effective
because of their minimal formal elements in organising protests in a huge
variety of different contexts - and YouTube, effective at diffusing images, but
more commonly feeding into the substitution of opinion (in the privacy of one’s
own home) for action. An adequate comparative analysis of the different new
technologies, however, has yet to be developed - not least because the
investment, in time and emotional energy, in particular technologies and their
associated social worlds, is substantial, and neither researchers nor activists
who have invested heavily in one particular mode are keen to admit that it may
be rather less effective or significant than they hoped at the start. More
generally, the investment in “new technology” per se is often one which marks
an individual’s academic career or movement position, and it is hard not to play
up the significance of such an investment. Presumably as (or if) the new media
landscape stabilizes and these new forms become less dramatically new it will be
possible to develop more adequate assessments of their relative significance. In
this respect, the broader “lay public” has a role to play vis-à-vis the interested
claims of specialists.

Nevertheless, it is clear that - whatever final evaluation is made of the relative
significance of digital media vs old media, and of different kinds of digital
media, today’s proliferation of digital activism has enabled a horizontal
circulation of information, in western countries in particular, that often escapes
the narrow frameworks of institutionalized media. This bottom-up approach
has generated a more diverse and, perhaps, democratic use of media
technologies to raise awareness and challenge the status quo in a variety of
national and cultural settings.

At the same time, though, the enormous effort and energy put into this kind of
activism, and the associated notion of “alternative media”, has been challenged
in two related ways. One is the activist concern that particular kinds of
technology (such as digital petitions and online protests) can be a passive,
living-room based substitute for real-world demonstrations and direct action.

As with other kinds of media, it is clear that this is not always the case, and as
noted most contemporary movements in western countries use digital media as
part of their organising strategy. However, no observer can deny that - just as in
the past some movements “only existed on paper” - we now have movements
and organisations which “only exist on the Internet”. This poses particular
challenges to international solidarity (since outside observers are only rarely in
a position to assess the significance of movements abroad separately from their
online material) and for relationships between the metropolis and the periphery
(since in peripheral contexts association with a virtual organisation may be a
crucial lifeline for radicals or the marginalized, and what appears as
instrumental political action may in fact be a form of personal support).

The other challenge is the observation that the relative efficacy of digital
activism can be hampered by a generalized passivity of publics who feel
disengaged or disempowered by the overwhelming role played by mainstream
media. Present-day Italy is a case in point here. The duopolistic television
system of the Rai and Mediaset groups, along with prime minister Berlusconi’s
stranglehold on both print and broadcast, seem to have generated a widespread
indifference towards alternative forms of media. Hence, even interesting media
initiatives such as the street television network Telestreet remain as localized
experiments that hardly reach beyond the confines of their target
neighbourhood and thus provide little resistance to popular mainstream media.

In view of this, a key challenge faced by alternative media practitioners is that of
engagement with social movements that question the practices of mainstream
media. Another challenge, therefore, consists in the attention that needs to be
paid to the evolving relationship between alternative and mainstream media
because it is only by engaging in a dialogue that reassesses the power of
institutionalized media that a more constructive critique and more effective
alternatives can be proposed.

We have, of course, been here before, and in many different ways. The
overthrow of absolute monarchies, dictatorships and empires has almost always
taken place in the teeth of the official or mainstream commercial media (and
usually in a context of severe censorship). Media monopoly is not new, even if
its relative significance may now be greater; and most if not all successful
movements have managed to generate their own media. Indeed, it is only in the
last two or three decades that western European newspapers in particular have
lost their traditional characters as representatives of particular parties, interest
groups, ethno-religious constituencies and so on. The generation of newspapers,
magazines and radio stations created by the upheavals of 1968 and subsequent
years have taken very different routes in different cases: here reproducing the
“movement-representative” character of earlier epochs, there speaking to a
“niche market” defined by age and social class, and elsewhere again
“mainstreaming” themselves to the point of homogeneity. Thus an over-
insistence on the absolute newness of the current situation (whether in terms of
monopoly or in terms of technology) can lead to an inability to evaluate its
actual characteristics, which can only be done historically and comparatively.
Two yet broader questions can be raised, if hardly (at the present stage of
research and activism) answered in any definitive way. One is the implications
of the “digital divide”, that of access to the capital, equipment and skills
required to adequately produce and consume the new technologies. Shaped by
gender, class, age and education in western countries, this divide becomes acute
- and politically debilitating for movements - in many majority world countries,
where it is a huge struggle to hold together the oral, face-to-face technologies
characteristic of much indigenous, peasant and shanty-town organising in
particular, the “old media” structure of many political parties, trade unions and
NGOs, and the “new media” world. In some cases, these gaps are papered over
rather than fully addressed, with the result that what is said on the ground, what
is done in parliament and what is produced on the Internet can be three
radically different things, particularly for large movements like the Brazilian
landless people’s movement MST or the Indian NBA movement against the
Narmada dam projects. In other cases, these different worlds exist side by side,
overlapping but rarely fully.

This overlap is heightened by the tendency in contemporary capitalist
production towards the generation of niche markets - in media, and in
technology, as in everything else. Increasingly, the movement problem is one of
creating relationships between (say) groups of middle-class teenagers skilled in
the use of social media; subcultures oriented towards the production and
consumption of particular clothing and music styles; on-the-ground
organisations capable of distributing large numbers of flyers and posters;
popular milieu oriented around particular styles of talk and sociability;
academic or political professionals able to negotiate the worlds of technical
discourse; and so on.

All too often, alliances fail here: in the fact that different movements, or
organisations, represent such different “ways of doing things” - in the first
instance, such different media and modes of discourse - that meaningful
conversations across media (as opposed to the branded diffusion of a single
message on multiple platforms, which is not at all the same thing) do not
develop. These gaps have been bridged before; and perhaps, in the face of large-
scale economic crises, they can be bridged again. This is of course in part the
hope represented by the Interface project in the slightly different context of
modes of discourse and article formats."
(http://interfacejournal.nuim.ie/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Interface-2-2-pp.1-22-editorial1.pdf)


=More Information=

==Bibliography==

Bibliography [http://interfacejournal.nuim.ie/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Interface-2-2-pp.1-22-editorial1.pdf]:

Arns, I. and Sasse, S. (2006). Subversive Affirmation: On Mimesis as a Strategy
of Resistance. In: East Art Map: Contemporary Art and Eastern Europe.
Berlin: Irwin. Available at http://www.projects.v2.nl/~arns/Texts/Media/Arns-
Sasse-EAM-final.pdf (Accessed 10 November 2010).

Atton, C. (2002). Alternative Media. London, Sage publications.

Atton, C. (2003). "Reshaping social movement media for a new millenium."
Social Movement Studies 2(1).

Atton, C. (2007). "Current Issues in Alternative Media Research." Sociological
Compass 1(1): 17-27.

Barry, E. (2009). “Protests in Moldova Explode, With Help of Twitter.” The New
York Times, 7 April 2009. Available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/08/world/europe/08moldova.html
(accessed 22 October 2010)

Bowring, B. (2010). Russian protesters go online to outwit authorities.
guardian.co.uk, 4 August 2010. Available at
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2010/aug/04/russia
n-protesters-online-outwit-authorities (accessed 22 October 2010)

Chainworkers Crew. (2006). "Reader." Available at
http://www.chainworkers.org/materiali/chainworkers_reader.pdf (accessed 5
November 2010)

Cottle, S. (2008). "Reporting demonstrations. The changing media politics of
dissent." Media Culture & Society 30(6): 853-872.

Couldry, N. and J. Curran, Eds. (2003). Contesting Media Power: Alternative
Media in a Networked World. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.

Downing, J. (2001). Radical media: rebellious communication and social
movements. Thousand Oaks, Calif., Sage Publications.

Fuchs, C. (2010). "Alternative Media as Critical Media." European Journal of
Social Theory 13(2): 173-192.

Garcia D. and Loving, G. (1997) . The ABC of tactical media. Available at
http://subsol.c3.hu/subsol_2/contributors2/garcia-lovinktext.html (accessed
28 October 2010).

Gillan, K., J. Pickerill, et al. (2008). Anti-war activism. New Media and Protest
in the Information Age. Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York, Palgrave
MacMillan.

Goldstein, J. (2007). “The Role of Digital Networked Technologies in the
Ukrainian Orange Revolution.” The Berkman Center for Internet & Society at
Harvard University. Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2007-14,
December, 2007. Available at
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/sites/cyber.law.harvard.edu/files/Goldstein_Ukr
aine_2007.pdf (accessed 22 October 2010)

Hadl, G. (2007) "‘Community Media’? ‘Alternative Media’? Unpacking
Approaches to Media By, For and Of the People." Papers in International and
Global Communication Volume, 1-27. Available at
http://ics.leeds.ac.uk/papers/cicr/exhibits/48/Hadl.pdf (accessed 05
November 2010).

Langlois, A. and F. Dubois, Eds. (2005). Autonomous media: activating
resistance and dissent. Montreal, Cumulus Press.

Mattoni, A. (2008). "Serpica Naro and the others. The social media experience
in the Italian precarious workers struggles." Portal 5(2). Available at
http://epress.lib.uts.edu.au/ojs/index.php/portal/issue/view/35/showToc
(accessed 28 October 2010)

Morozov, E. (2009a). “Moldova’s Twitter Revolution.” Available at
http://neteffect.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2009/04/07/moldovas_twitter_revol
ution (accessed 23 October 2010)

Morozov, E. (2009b). “More analysis of Twitter’s role in Moldova.” Available at
http://neteffect.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2009/04/07/more_analysis_of_twitt
ers_role_in_moldova (accessed 23 October 2010)

O’Lear, S. (1997). “Electronic Communication and Environmental Policy in
Russia and Estonia.” Geographical Review, Vol. 87, No. 2, Cyberspace and
Geographical Space, Apr., 1997, pp. 275-290.

O’Lear, S. (1999). “Networks of Engagement: Electronic Communication and
Grassroots Environmental Activism in Kaliningrad.” Geografiska Annaler,
Series B, Human Geography, Vol. 81, No. 3, 1999, pp. 165-178.

Rodriguez, C. (2001). Fissures in the mediascape. An international study of
citizens' media. Creskill, N.J., Hampton Press.

 “ROAR: Cop goes online to address prime minister.” RT, 10 November 2009.
Available at http://rt.com/Politics/2009-11-10/video-blog-police-officer.html
(accessed 28 October 2010)

Tarì, M. and I. Vanni (2005) "On the life and deeds of San Precario, Patron
Saint of precarious workers and lives." Fibreculture. Available at
http://www.journal.fibreculture.org/issue5/vanni_tari.html (accessed 28
October 2010)

Usher, S. (2006). “Belarus protesters turn to internet.” BBC News, 21 March
2006. Available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4828848.stm (accessed
22 October 2010)

“Wave of web-protests floods Russia.” RT, 5 July 2010. Available at
http://rt.com/prime-time/2010-07-05/wave-web-protests-russia.html
(accessed 28 October 2010)

Žižek, S. (1993). Why are Laibach and NSK not Fascists? M'ARS - Casopis
Moderne Galerije, 3(4), Ljubljana: Moderna Galerija.

Zaytseva (Зайцева), А. (2010). Спектакулярные формы протеста в
современной России: между искусством и социальной терапией.

Неприкосновенный запас, No 4(72). Available at
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2010/4/za4.html (accessed 10 November 2010).



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Research]]