
=Discussion=

James Quilligan:

"In my view, many commons need a  
social contract negotiated between the commoners and the state.  Each  
one should be negotiated on its own terms. There may be pure commons  
management on one hand, or perhaps state-commons hybrids on the other  
-- but that's up to the commoners to negotiate with the state. This is  
not a sell-out.  It's to protect the commons and also to help evolve  
the future role of the state.  Let's face it, governments are not  
going to somehow melt away. We wouldn't want that anyway, because  
government provides security and other public goods that we commoners  
cannot provide for ourselves. The libertarian and fundamentalist  
private sector folks are (hopefully) learning the hard lesson that the  
state is a precondition for civilization  -- and the commoners mustn't  
allow the Right's ideologically conditioned condemnation of the state  
to carry over into our own thinking. This doesn't mean a regressive  
retreat to the likes of the social welfare state or Keynesianism. The  
next step for us to consider is creating social charters -- not state  
constitutions but charters that are negotiated and apply to specific  
commons --  to determine how our commons trusts are formed and the  
work that they will carry out, locally, regionally, and globally.   
It's not that the commoners have to reach after moral legitimacy (we  
have that), but we certainly do need legal legitimacy and authority on  
our own terms, on the basis of birthrights and customary claims to the  
sources of our livelihood and well-being, not on the basis of the old  
liberal social contract.  Hence, the social charters.  The sense of a  
revolutionary change in the nature of what government does -- as it  
faces the transformational power of the commons -- needs to be faced  
squarely by all of us.  Frankly, without the help of the state, how  
are commoners ever going to stop these privatized enclosures? Yet  
commoners often focus on the legal aspects of property rights vis a  
vis corporations and ignore the potential legal benefits accruing from  
the state. The corporations wouldn't be enjoying their rights of  
'corporate personhood' in the first place if the state had not granted  
them, and, as you know, commoners have grown to mistrust the state  
(rightly so!) because it has broken the social contract with us in  
order to empower and privilege businesses.  But that flow of legal and  
political power can be neutralized, even reversed, if we recognize  
that the deadweight is not property, but private property.  We need to  
turn legally recognized property rights to our favor, and that can  
only be done in cooperation with the state and the rule of law. The  
governance of a commons is not the same thing as the legal protections  
afforded by the state -- the two things must not be equated, but I'm  
afraid many commoners have indeed conflated them, somehow assuming  
that the co-governance of a commons is all that's needed. That's  
reductionist thinking.


==[[Multilateralism 2.0]]==


"Multilateralism gets a bad name because it's associated with governments and their  
limited abilities to provide people-  and ecologically-centered goods  
and services through international cooperation. That's certainly the  
case at the present. Let's not forget that the multilateral  
institutions were initially created after WW II to provide global  
public goods. This experiment has been bungled for many reasons,  
mainly the one that you note, that Neo-Liberal ideology has taken  
over. That philosophy needs to be rooted out from the bottom-up, yes,  
but it cannot happen without sympathetic support from the top-down.  
Yet this is not simply a matter of tone, it's a matter of actual laws  
and institutions. The commons will never scale up to the global level  
(or, to put it another way, become scale-free) simply through  
associations of like-minded commoners. It also needs institutional  
support from governments and the private sector, of course, to the  
extent that they will endorse this tripartite arrangement;  but it  
also requires institutional support at the transboundary level of  
global common goods.  The sky, the Arctic, the seabeds all need to  
have specific watchdogs and managers -- who is capable of organizing  
that?  Not commoners, not public sector or private sector. They have  
no authority to do so and never will under the current circumstances.  
That's why the commoners and multilateral institutions are  
(ultimately) natural allies -- which commoners have not yet realized.  
The break will come when government power evolves upwardly to empower  
new multilateral institutions in charge of managing specific global  
commons, and downwardly to the commoners who are vigilantly watching  
the commons across the world and who will work alongside the  
multilateral institutions for the protection of the commons -- now  
with actual authority for the global commons. The time will come when  
commoners will sit on the board of the (existing and new) multilateral  
institutions, along with government reps (let's keep the private  
sector out of this).  I don't see anyone grappling with these matters  
in the conference document -- our commoners appear to be walking over  
a cliff without a global vision. This needn't happen. The commons  
offers us the ability to transform multilateralism, but there is not  
the slightest hint of that here. Redefining Neo-Liberal ideology is  
not the same as transforming our existing multilateralism -- these  
changes are not going to happen through ideology alone. That's where  
the pernicious dichotomy of the digital commons Vs. the physical  
commons creeps in -- the Neo-Liberal mistrust and penchant for  
enclosure and division is reified by underscoring the specious  
ideological rift between non-depletable and depletable goods and  
translating this into major North-South differences (we're seeing this  
at the WTO as well as the Copenhagen talks, and it will continue to  
develop without the global commons discourse). The split in our Solidarity is not inevitable, but first we are all going to have to  
embrace globalism rather than shun it. Someone must elaborate, in calm and definitive terms, the  
holarchical unity of the noosphere, the biosphere and the physiosphere (which can  
only be balanced through a new multilateralism) -- or we will not  
merely have conflicts over resources, we will have a global conflict  
between the ideological representatives of each of these spheres --  
wars between the 'replenishables' and the 'non-replenishables'.   
Without a multilateralism of the commons, this rift will fester and be  
exploited -- not only by our own internal critics -- but also by the  
masters of Neo-Liberalism. Then the commons will become an 'ism', we  
will be positioned against ourselves globally, and all of us can  
probably expect the worst.  That's what we'll get without  
Multilateralism 2.0 -- which only our commoners can spearhead (and co- 
create) by continuing to evolve the broadest possible concept of the  
commons."

(by email, August 2009)


=More information=

* The [[Role of the State in a Commons-Creating Society]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]