Initial Version (January 28, 2013) by Sarah Bussen, student at Truman State University


== Context within NORA ==

=== Needs ===

* Food production
* Helps level socioeconomic differences by providing food
* Improve public health
* Foster community and supportive relationships by providing a community gathering place, and shared projects
* Being at Home: Noise insulation; Aesthetically pleasing


=== Resources ===

Air and Atmosphere:
* Filter air pollutants
* Improves atmosphere quality
* More plants to reduce CO2 levels

Water:
* Reduce storm water run-off
* Decreases risk of flooding

Urban Land:
* Gives a purpose to unused space
* Frees up ground space for other uses

Energy
* Insulate buildings to reduce climate control cost
* Saves money on roof wear and tear
* Cools area by reducing area that reflects sunlight
* Cools area because plants absorb less heat

Biological Resources
* Habitat for wildlife
* Increases biodiversity

Urban built infrastructure
* Provides new uses for old buildings

== Problems of Food Security ==

There is a significant need for fresh produce in many urban areas
across the globe. Locally grown produce has many benefits not only because
it can reduce preservation and transportation costs, but also because it
provides the same nutritional content without all of the harmful effects on
the environment. With the population growing significantly, more food will
need to be produced on less land as people use more land to live on.
Instead of expanding on conventional farming practices that strip the soil of
its nutrients and rely on modified food that is mass-produced, there are other
options, such as rooftop gardens, community and personal gardens, and
vertical farming. These practices create a greater accessibility to food,
promote lower costs for food production, and lessen the negative
environmental impact. Allowing individuals who live in urban areas to have
access to sustainable, locally grown food promotes fair access to
healthy food, can create jobs and fosters a sense of unity in the community.
A significant number of households in the United States lack food security, meaning
they do not have assured access to an adequate food supply. Even though there is enough
food produced to feed everyone, it is often distributed in such a way that some people go
hungry. Because much of the food produced for the U.S. is wasted, an important point is
to allow people to take control of their food. A good way to do this is to grow it yourself.

All over the world, people are living in areas without access to adequate food supply.  This food insecurity is sometimes due to lack of financial resources to acquire food, but is also sometimes due to lack of access geographically to food. Urban areas often do not have adequate farmers’ markets or health food stores, leaving many people to rely on convenience stores if they do not have transportation to another area.

Access to healthier food would increase the productivity of children in society because students who are
properly nourished do better in school.  This would also promote general health because the community would be getting the nutrients necessary to sustain life in a natural and healthy way. This is not possible for many people living in urban areas. Because of this, there are some areas with more than enough food while others are forced to live off processed food with little nutritional value, or to go hungry. In an article
titled “Can the World Feed 10 Billion people?,” Patel sums the problem up nicely when he says,  “humanity
produces  enough food to feed everyone but, because of the way we distribute it, there are still a billion hungry.”

We see a lot of people living in [http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-desert-locator/go-to-the-locator.aspx food deserts even in the United States]. These are places where individuals do not have access to adequate food because of their living situation. In the book, "Categorically  Unequal,"  Massey describes how many people lack access to quality food. This is where sustainable food systems can really help.  With proper education and support more people could  grow their own food, which would not only put less pressure on large farms, but it would also eliminate a lot of our transportation and packaging needs. While growing food may not be accessible option for some parts of
the world,  due to climate or resource constraints, it seems like it would be a solution that  could help a good portion of people get more food.

The main scarcity when it comes to food in urban areas of industrialized countries is not the quantity, but the accessibility of
quality.  While many people may have access to cheap food that is easy to eat, many either do not have
access to healthy options, or do not feel they have the time to prepare these options.  With  progressive
urban farming techniques, not only will  people have greater  access because it can be right where they
live, they will also be eating quality, natural food.
Even though the amount of food produced in increasing faster than
population, the number of malnourished individuals is also increasing
(according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization).

== Approach to creating greater abundance ==

Perhaps the easiest way to create a greater abundance of food is to grow more of it, where it is needed. The main limitation with this is that not everyone knows how to grow their own food. This is where the commons system is so beneficial.  By sharing knowledge and resources, more people can have access to healthy food.  If  a community can work together to create a garden, they can split the time and work
needed to produce a successful harvest of food while still achieving the benefits.

One way to do this is through rooftop gardens. Any building with an accessible flat roof can be turned into a garden to provide food for its inhabitants. If you have enough time and resources, you can actually prepare the entire roof with a layer of soil, leaving walkways. This is not always the most practical, but
an easy compromise is to use raised beds. This allows you to easily control the size of the planting areas  without compromising convenience.  This also allows the bed to drain properly. By constructing open-top boxes, preferably made of recycled wood or other materials, you have an easy location to grow any
kind of crop. If that does not seem to be feasible, many people reuse old kiddie pools instead of building new containers.

(http://offgridworld.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/vertical-farm10.jpg)                      (http://media-cache lt0.pinterest.com/upload/155937205818052575_Z90BEmcV_c.jpg)


== Success Stories ==

=== Via Verde in the Bronx, New York City ===

This housing development in NYC
provides affordable and co-op housing to
the community. This was created to
promote community health by providing
accessibility to healthier foods. GrowNYC
is the organization that helped to provide
the resources for this endeavor and works
to teach residents how to manage the
garden on their own. The rooftop garden
also holds solar panels that contribute to
some of the building's electricity needs.
The garden not only provides a community
gathering space and food to the tenants,
but it also helps to insulate the building,
meaning that less energy is used to heat
and cool the apartments.


=== 909 Walnut- Kansas City ===

This apartment complex in Kansas City
provides upscale accommodations and
living facilities in the way of 161 condos.
Stable financial backing makes it possible
for even those with less money to rent
these. An attached garage provides parking
and a 16,000 square foot community
rooftop garden for residents. This project
received the 2008 award for Green Roofs
for Healthy Cities, Award Of Excellence.


=== Mercer Street Parking Garage- Seattle, Washington ===

A program called UpGarden is
working to provide Uptown Seattle with
community gardens. The Mercer Parking
Garage prior to the 1962 World's Fair to
house travelers. This unused space was
converted into a garden with special care
given to use lightweight soils and building
materials to respect the structural integrity
of the complex. People are continuing to
experiment with different crops, but have
had a lot of success growing cherry
tomatoes, sweet corn, and herbs, among
other things.

[http://www.flickr.com/photos/earthfixteam/7890385498/ Picture of the UpGarden]

=== East District: Hong Kong ===

A farmer in Hong Kong rents garden
beds on the rooftop of an office building in a
place with very little ground-level green
spaces. Because many people in lower classes
are being forced into desk jobs from
agricultural ones, the need for a
transformation of farming is clear. Various of
these rooftop gardeners in Hong Kong are
striving to convince politicians for more
funding. Because land is so expensive,
rooftop gardens seem to be a viable
alternative for producing food and fostering
community.

== Links ==

The following links provide more information useful for urban gardeners:
*[http://www.tulanecitycenter.org/programs/projects/files/Urban%20Farming%20Toolkit%20(for%20web).pdf Tulane City Center, Urban Gardening Toolkit].   A good place to start.
* [http://www.communitygarden.org/learn/starting-a-community-garden.php American Community Gardening Association, Starting a Community Garden]. A step-by-step procedure for planning and building a community garden
* [http://www.urbanfarmonline.com/?navm=tophome Urbanfarm Online]. An online magazine and network for urban farming in the United States.
* National Gardening Association. [http://www.garden.org/foodguide/browse Food Gardening Guide].
* Job Ebenezer. [http://www.technologyforthepoor.com/UrbanAgriculture/Garden.htm A Guide to Container Gardens].
* Wietse Briunsma and Marielle Dubbeling. 1998. [http://www.alnap.org/pool/files/ua-rg.pdf Resource Guide on Urban Agriculture]. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation and ETC Netherlands. An international compilation of organizations supporting urban agriculture and relevant research.


A blog on urban farming, and an interview with the blogger
* [http://www.urbanfoodpolicy.com/ Urban Food Policy]. A blog by Nevin Cohen, Assistant Professor of Environmental Studies at The New School (New York)
* [http://sustainablecitiescollective.com/growninthecity/22664/5-questions-dr-nevin-cohen-five-borough-farm-project-food-systems-academia-and- The Future of Urban Agriculture], interview of Nevin Cohen, by the Sustainable Cities Collective


Two videos
* Jesse DuBois. [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8jpmLiGz4gk The Urban Farming Revolution]. TEDx talk, 2011, on the “urban farming revolution” in Los Angeles.
* Rabbi Shmuel Simenowitz, “[http://www.torahcafe.com/rabbi-shmuel-simenowitz/urban-farming-and-social-justice-video_eb4c2e918.html Urban Farming and Social Justice].” Short video; Jewish perspective on urban farming and sustainability.


* Huffington Post. [http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/08/31/8-rooftop-gardens-from-ar_n_268573.html 8 Rooftop Gardens From Around the World].

== Literature ==

Calumet Quarter. [http://foodsecurity.uchicago.edu/research/community-gardens-2/ Community Gardens]. A 2012 paper from the "Calumet Quarter," a course on food security at the University of Chicago, taught by Professor Kathleen Morrison. It discusses urban community gardens in relation to food security, crime rates, and sense of community.

Campbell, Katie. 30 Aug. 2012. [http://earthfix.opb.org/communities/article/first-rooftop-community-garden-seattle/ "Seattlites Learn What Will Grow in the Nation's First Rooftop Community Garden," Oregon Public Broadcasting EarthFix."]

Drescher, Axel, Petra Jacobi and Joerg Amend. 2000. [http://www.ruaf.org/node/106 "Urban Food Security: Urban agriculture, a response to crisis?"] UA [Urban Agriculture] Magazine.

Garasky, Steven; Lois Wright Morton, and Kimberley Greder. 2004. [http://www.soc.iastate.edu/sapp/Food%20Insecurity.pdf The Food Environment and Food Insecurity: Perceptions of Rural, Suburban and Urban Food Pantry Clients in Iowa]. ''Family Economics and Nutrition Review'' 16 (2): 41-48.

Goodwin, Craig. [http://www.yearofplenty.org/2011/06/rooftop-community-gardens-sprouting-on-rooftops-in-hong-kong.html "Community Gardens Sprouting on Rooftops in Hong Kong."] Year of Plenty. N.p., 29 June 2011.

Gottlieb, Benjamin. [http://www.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/asiapcf/06/28/hongkong.urban.farming/index.html?section=cnn_latest "Crops out of Concrete: Farming Hong Kong's Urban Island."] CNN. Cable News
Network, 29 June 2011.

Gregor, Alison. "[http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/08/realestate/healthier-eating-starts-on-the-roof.html Healthier Eating Starts on the Roof]." The New York Times. 08
Apr. 5, 2012.

Hampwaye, G.; Nel, E. and Ingombe, L. 2009. [http://cloud2.gdnet.org/cms.php?id=research_paper_abstract&research_paper_id=15739 The role of urban agriculture in addressing household poverty and food security: the case of Zambia]. Global Development
Network. United Nations Development Programme, GDN Library Working Paper Series.

Massey, Douglas S. Categorically Unequal: The American Stratification System. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2007.

Nugent, Rachel. [http://wentfishing.net/farmlit/Theme3.pdf "The Impact of Urban Agriculture on the Household and Urban Economies."] Thematic Paper 3: 67-97.

Patel, Raj. "[http://rajpatel.org/2011/05/04/can-the-world-feed-10-billion-people/ Can the World Feed 10 Billion People?]" rajpatel.org, May 4, 2011.

Zelman, Joanna. "[http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/05/12/farm-bill-2012-innovative-farming_n_860069.html Farm Bill 2012: Time For An Overhaul With Innovative Farming Systems]."
Huffington Post, 12 May 2011.


Back to [[Food]] page

[[NORA Commons Resource Model|Back to NORA main page]]

[[Category:Commons Abundance Network]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]