
'''* RESEARCH NOTE: The roots of banking and monetary systems- do they lie in biological self-organization? By Nikhil Joshi, Ph.D. Lifel Working Paper No: 2014-01-01'''

URL = Lifel.Org


=Abstract=

"In a previous hypothesis I have proposed that biological self-organization is comprised of cascading energy
cycles. Every new linguistic level in biological self-organization gives rise to capabilities for the catalytic
production of a new class of dependent species with a higher order of internal complexity. Here we present a
new hypothesis that reveals a common pattern in the organization of cognitive and modulator networks
within dependent species at each new linguistic level. The hypothesis proposes that dependent species at
each new linguistic level in self-organization give rise to an organizationally closed cognitive sub-network
that enables cognition and response at the new level of dynamic. Further such a cognitive sub-network
contains within itself coupling processes that couple cognition enabled species behavior with metabolic
states of the species. The hypothesis also proposes that collective adaptation of groups (or ecosystems) of
producing and dependent species at any given linguistic level in biological organization is functionally
enabled by an ecosystem level modulator network. I have examined this hypothesis by observing
organization at three different levels- molecular organization into cells, cellular organization into
ecosystems, and social organization into communities. Our observations point to the possibility that RNA
networks, neuronal networks and management networks in businesses could play the role of within species
cognitive sub-networks at three different levels in biological self-organization. Further, RNA modulator
networks in autotrophic cells, the dopamine system in the brain, and investment management committees in
businesses could serve to modulate cognition in the cognitive sub-networks within dependent species at
different levels. Observations also point to the possibility that subsoil fungal networks of Arbuscular
mycorrhizae, biomes of gut bacteria, and banking networks could play a common role of ecosystem level
modulators at three different levels in biological self-organization. Results from observations and key
implications of the hypothesis are discussed. The hypothesis reveals that money and banks seen in our socioeconomic
organization could be an extension of a much larger and recurring pattern in biological selforganization."


=More Information=

* contact author via  Nikhil.Joshi@lifel.org


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]