

=Bio=

"Rosa Elizabeth Acevedo Marin is a doctor in History and Civilization by the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales (France). She has graduation in Sociology by the Universidad Central de Venezuela. She has done PhD studies in the Université de Quebec À Montreal, UQAM, (1991-1992) and in the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (1992-1993). Nowadays, she is an Associated Professor III of Federal University of Pará (UFPA), Vice-Co-ordinator from Environment Nucleus of UFPA (NUMA) and Co-ordinator of the Institutional Headquarters of the Association of Amazonian Universities (UNAMAZ). She participates of the Research Group Pesquisa Grupo de Estudos Amazônicos (UFF), Mineração e Desenvolvimento Sustentável (UFPA), Núcleo de Pesquisas em Territorialização, Identidade e Movimentos Sociais (UEA), Saúde, trabalho e Meio Ambiente (UFPA) e Trabalho, Empresas e Mercados Globalizados (UFPA).

She has expierence in the History theme, with special emphasis in the Local History of Brazil. She mainly works in the following subjects: slavery in Pará, remaining maroon communities, territories and identities."


=Publications=

She is the author of the books Terra Urbana e Territórios na Pan-Amazônia no III Fórum Social Pan-Amazônico, Ciudad Guayana, Venezuela (Manaus: PNCSA, 2009, in co-authorship with Almeida, A. W. B.) Populações Tradicionais. Questões de Terra na Pan-Amazônia (Belém: Unamaz, 2006, in co-authorship with Almeida, A. W. B.); Meandros da História. Trabalho e poder no Grão Pará e Maranhão. séculos XVIIII e XIX (Belém: Unamaz, 2005, in co-authorship with Coelho, M. C.; Gomes, F. S.; Queiroz, J. M.; e Prado, G.); In the stone track of Abacatal (Belém: UFPA/NAEA, 2004, 2ed ed., in co-authorship with Castro, E. M. R.); Julgados da terra: cadeia de apropriação e atores sociais em conflito na ilha de Colares, Pará (Belém: UFPA, 2004); Some other Amazonians: Perspectives on Modern Amazonia (Londres: Institute for the Study of the Americas, 2004, in co-authorship with Castro, E. M. R.); Cruzando a Fronteira: 30 anos do estudo do campesinato na Amazônia (Belém: UFPA publisher, 2004, in co-authorship with Hébette, J.); Itancõa, nosso sítio no Baixo Acará (Belém: Unamaz, 2003); Unamaz: um projeto de cooperação pan-amazônica (Belém, Pará: Unamaz, 2003, in co-authorship with Carvalho, D. F. e Tourinho, M.); Saúde, trabalho e Meio Ambiente: políticas públicas na Amazônia (Belém: University Publisher, 2002, in co-authorship with Couto, R. C. S. e Castro, E. M. R.); A Terra dos Homens e a Paisagem Interior (translator) (Belém: NAEA, 1999, in co-authorship with Vaz, C.); No caminho de pedras de Abacatal: experiência social de grupos negros no Pará (Belém: EdUFPA/NAEA, 1999, in co-authorship with Castro, E. M. R.); Negros do Trombetas: Guardiães de Matas e Rios (Belém: CEJUP, 1998, 2ed., in co-authorship with Castro, E. M. R.); Negros do Trombetas: Guardiães de Matas e Rios (Belém: UFPA, 1993, in co-authorship with, E. M. R.); Colonização Para Quem? (Belém: UFPA/NAEA, 1979, in co-authorship with Hébette, J.); e Saúde e Colonização (Belém: UFPA/NAEA, 1977, in co-authorship with Hébette, J.). 

She is the organizer of the following books Diversidade do campesinato: expressões e categorias - Estratégias de reprodução social (São Paulo: UNESP, 2009, with Godoi, E. P. and Menezes, M. A.); Saúde da Família. Atenção Primária na Amazônia (Belém: NAEA, 2009, with Couto, R. C. S.); A Escrita da História Paraense (Belém: NAEA/UFPA, 1998); Hidrelétricas: conhecimento e dimensão ambiental (Belém: UFPA/NUMA, 1993, with Hoyos, J. L. B.); e Amazônia em tempo de transição. (Belém: Unamaz, 1989, with Castro, E. M. R.).

Research Projects 

* New Social Cartography of the Amazon (Co-ordination: Rosa Elizabeth Acevedo Marin.)

* Art and Literature Supplement of the North’s page: Society and culture before the Amazonian Integration of the 50s and 60s.

==Present-day on-line publications==

SA, L. F.; MARIN, R. E. A. Slave work in the farms of State of Pará. In: Novos Cadernos NAEA. Belém. Vol. 10, n. 1, jun. 2007. Pp 71-100. Available at: http://www.periodicos.ufpa.br/index.php/ncn/article/viewFile/72/145 

MARIN, R. E. A.; CARNEY, J. Agricultural knowings of the africans slaves in the New World. Ciência Hoje, Rio de Janeiro, v. 35, n. 205, p. 26-35, 2004. Available at: http://cienciahoje.uol.com.br/revista-ch/revista-ch-2004/205

MARIN, R. E. A.; GOMES, F. S. Revista de História (USP), São Paulo, v. 149, p. 69-107, 2004. Available at: http://www.usp.br/revistadehistoria/arquivos/RH-149.pdf 

MARIN, R. E. A.; CARNEY, J. Plants of the African Diaspora in the colonial Brazil agriculture. Memoria y Sociedad, Colombia, v. 7, p. 9-24, 2003. Available at: http://www.scielo.org.co/scieloOrg/php/reference.php?pid=S1794-24892006000100008&caller=www.scielo.org.co&lang=en 



=More Information=

E-mail: ream30@hotmail.com


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Brazil]]