
'''Ross Dawson is an acute observer and participant in the business-related P2P scene, monitoring diffuse innovation and participative processes as they relate to corporate development.'''

Photo link: http://www.livingnetworksbook.com/RossD182x130.jpg


=Bio=

He is the autor of the book '''Living Networks''', see http://www.livingnetworksbook.com/
and has an excellent blog at http://www.rossdawsonblog.com/ 

A bio from http://www.ahtgroup.com/dawson.htm

"ROSS DAWSON is Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Advanced Human Technologies. He is author of the Amazon.com best seller Developing Knowledge-Based Client Relationships 2nd Edition, the acclaimed book Living Networks, and more than 50 articles on international business.

Dawson is in demand worldwide for his innovative work as a keynote speaker, workshop presenter, and strategy facilitator. His numerous speaking engagements have covered five continents in the last year, and global media appearances including CNN, Bloomberg TV, SkyNews, European Business Network, and Channel News Asia. Clients for Ross's speaking, seminars, and consulting include American Express, AMP, BNP Paribas, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Ernst & Young, Freehills, IBM, KPMG, Lend Lease, Merrill Lynch, Microsoft, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and other leading organizations. He has run executive programs and lectured at numerous academic institutions around the world, and is on the advisory board of the Business Development Institute.

Prior to establishing Advanced Human Technologies in 1996 Dawson's positions included working in London as Global Director-Capital Markets at Thomson Financial, in Tokyo as Asian Director-Capital Markets, in international stockbroking with Merrill Lynch, and major accounts and product management at NCR. He holds a B.Sc.(Hons) from Bristol University, UK, and is certified as a Master Practitioner of Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP). He has extensive international business experience, and speaks five languages."

=More Information=

Ross can be contacted at rossd [at] ahtgroup [dot] com."


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Bios]]
(http://www.ahtgroup.com/dawson.htm)