

'''* A Route Map to the Enabling State. Sir John Elvidge. Carnegie UK Trust, 2014'''

URL = http://www.carnegieuktrust.org.uk/CMSPages/GetFile.aspx?guid=5b79f25d-3771-4b28-8b28-22fadee2356a

=Description=

"The Carnegie UK Trust has been a supporter and advocate of community led 
initiatives and ‘bottom up’ approaches to decision making and development 
throughout our 100 year history. Whether it was our early support for rural 
community councils or more recently community ownership of land, our Trustees 
have long recognised the power of community led activity to transform wellbeing. 


It has been increasingly apparent that traditional models of public service delivery 
can not solve our most complex social problems. In recent years we have seen 
policymakers and politicians take a growing interest in’ bottom up’ ways of working 
that give citizens and communities more control. A new more responsive and 
engaged type of state is emerging which we have described as an ‘Enabling State’. 
Progress, however is not linear. As our own research The Rise of the Enabling State 
shows, this shift is occurring in a piecemeal way, transformative language is being 
appropriated by those with vested interests and the narrative of the changing role 
of the state is at risk of being conflated with that of austerity and public service 
retrenchment.

In this document Sir John Elvidge presents the Enabling State and sets out eight 
steps that governments can take to improve the wellbeing of all sections of our 
society, to support individuals and communities to achieve positive change and 
ensure that the most vulnerable people are not left behind."

=More Information=

* "In December 2012 we published The Enabling State: A Discussion Paper"

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Articles]]