
'''* Report: Fair Share. Reclaiming power in the sharing economy. By Brhmie Balaram. RSA, 2016'''

URL = https://medium.com/@thersa/fair-share-reclaiming-power-in-the-sharing-economy-499b46bd4b00

Graphic summary at https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*9wHs3ag1x_mIe6IFiGsM1A.jpeg

=Description=

"The report is essentially a primer on the business model of sharing economy platforms, understanding how the model enables a rise to power and what that means for us all in terms of either trying to manage or counter the influence of these platforms.
 
In the report, the RSA offers:
 
·         A new concept of ‘shared value creation’;

·         A new process by which we can understand the monopolistic elements of some platforms, which we refer to as ‘crowdsourcing monopoly power’

·         An alternative approach to shaping the sharing economy through ‘shared regulation’

·         An overview of the trade-offs (opportunities and challenges) of the sharing economy from a range of perspectives, presented as the starting point for shared regulation."


=Summary=

"A new system of creating value is starting to have a major impact on our economy, the way we produce, the way we consume and the relationship between the two. This system is often referred to as the sharing economy, involving a spectrum of activity based on maximising the potential of our underused human and physical resources, from our skills to our things.

There are now 80 million people participating in the sharing economy in the
US while there are 23 million in the UK, and these numbers are on the rise. Global revenues have been projected to reach £230bn by 2025.

A few companies in the sharing economy are performing particularly well, overtaking established competitors in traditional industries. Yet, there are commentators who counter that these commercially successful companies are not really part of the sharing economy. Others question whether the sharing economy is actually a new phenomenon or, for example, if it is simply renting by another name.

The sharing economy has become confusing in recent years as technology has enabled diverse business models to emerge under the system. Many find the growth of new online platforms to be disorienting. The movement began with locally- based, grassroots-funded initiatives such as tool libraries and timebanks, but now seems to be led by global, venture-backed corporations.

While the sharing economy is exceeding most expectations of its business potential, it is disappointing those who were more excited by its social promise. Early proponents of the sharing economy were advocating for peer-to-peer exchange based on its capacity to revolutionise the way people relate to one another and the environment. They saw it as rooted in the commons, which encourages shared ownership over, or access to, resources.
However, as platforms expand they seem to be moving further away from other principles of the commons, which include sustainability, openness, and solidarity.

As sharing platforms have scaled, they’ve found it difficult to sustain their initial social value.

While governments are aware of mounting concerns that citizens have with the sharing economy, they do not seem to fully grasp what is happening nor have they developed a coherent response to these concerns. Some have intervened to suspend the operations of platforms whereas others have allowed these companies free rein. Alas, neither approach serves the common good.

An improved understanding of the sharing economy is needed to inspire a more thoughtful and appropriate response to regulation, and especially these sharing platforms.
 
The RSA’s primer on the sharing economy guides readers through the recent evolution of the sector, focusing in particular on the meteoric rise of some online platforms and what this means for us all.

We clarify existing and emergent business models and present a new frame for making sense of the trend towards sharing platforms. As a starting point we introduce the concept of ‘shared value creation’; this refers to the shift from value being created by products and services to value being created by users of a platform’s online network. We note that business models which depend on shared value creation to survive tend to scale their user base as quickly as possible.

Small number of sharing platforms have been able to scale their networks to
an extent where they are beginning to show signs of monopoly power in influencing the price, output, and investment of an industry, as well as in limiting the entry of new competitors. We call these platforms ‘networked monopolies’ to distinguish them from what we traditionally know as monopolies.

This new term reflects a process of crowdsourcing monopoly power from users – both consumers and workers. Sharing platforms strive for their networks to be ever-expanding, so that they can dominate the market; however, to maintain their position these platforms must empower the very users they depend on to fight in their corner against tighter regulations.

We explore how this affects labour in particular given the growing provision of gig work through on-demand platforms in the sharing economy. A question being widely deliberated in the US (and picking up steam in the UK) is whether the current criteria for classifying workers is sufficient for modern times. We consider whether a third category in between employee and independent contractor can offer workers a safety net while recognising that platform providers should also be differentiated from traditional employers.

We suggest that it is possible gig workers may have more power, rather than less, under a networked monopoly. This is because we are seeing the development of sharing platforms that are co-operative and decentralised in nature, and able to forgo intermediaries completely with the help of ‘blockchain’ technology. While these platforms are in their infancy, they hold promise for workers who will be able to truly free themselves from under the thumb of a middleman and fully retain their earnings.

Most likely, co-operative sharing platforms will puzzle governments in terms
of regulation, especially if they are decentralised and originate on the Darknet (as some have). Ironically, these co-operative platforms are in part a response to the failure of governments all around — in the US, UK and wider Europe — to properly regulate both capitalist sharing platforms and incumbents in traditional industries. Concentrations of political power reinforce concentrations of economic power, which is why we need an alternative means of regulation.

The RSA thus presents ‘[[Shared Regulation]]’ as an option for shaping the sharing
economy. Shared regulation is similar to self-regulation in the sense that it is the redistribution of regulatory responsibilities to parties other than government, but it goes beyond the inclusion of businesses as key actors in the regulatory framework.

Rather than relying on governments and platform providers to resolve what they see as problems in the sharing economy, shared regulation encourages greater participation from platform users (consumers and workers), community organisers, legal and administrative professionals, investors and designers in tackling issues.

Some may wonder if shared regulation is still needed if platforms are becoming decentralised. In short, yes. For one, shared regulation can enable the integration of decentralised platforms in the mainstream market. More importantly, however, we cannot be falsely lulled into believing that co-operative decentralised platforms in and of themselves are a cure-all for all that ails us in the sharing economy. Workers’ interests may be better protected under this emerging platform model, but we also need to consider the welfare of consumers, workers at large (ie in traditional industries and part of other sharing platforms), communities, the state, the economy, and the environment. Our last chapter is therefore dedicated to better understanding the trade-offs (opportunities and challenges) of the sharing economy from a range of perspectives.

We are at a critical moment where we could collectively realise the potential of the sharing economy on all fronts, but we need a unified approach to reclaiming power in the movement. This primer lays the groundwork for a fairer sharing economy, and in doing so, aims to revive our faith that it could be radically trans- formative for the common good."
(https://medium.com/@thersa/fair-share-reclaiming-power-in-the-sharing-economy-499b46bd4b00#.qatwmdovy)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Articles]]