== In English ==
Member and co-fundator of [http://www.zzzinc.net ZZZINC], a cultural innovation platform based on Barcelona, and of [http://www.stupidcity.net Metropolitan Observatory of Barcelona]. Researcher and professor of "public policy and culture" and of "innovation, culture and industry" at the Open University of Catalonia (UOC). He is developing his PhD thesis at the Institute of Government and Public Policy (IGOP) at the Autonomous University of Barcelona on the relations between social innovation and the commons. Coordinator and member of the independent research project [http://empresasdelprocomun.net "Empresas del Procomún"], about the relations between commons and economic models.

== In Spanish ==
Investigador y docente. Co-fundador y miembro de ZZZINC, espacio de coworking en Barcelona dedicado a la investigación e innovación en cultura. Coordinador y miembro de la investigación "empresas del procomún", investigación colectiva que tiene como objeto analizar las realidades económicas que emergen en torno a los commons. Empresas del procomún forma parte del Laboratorio del Procomún de Medialab Prado. Es miembro del Observatorio Metropolitano de Barcelona (OMB), plataforma de investigación vinculada a la Fundación de los comunes. Desde el OMB, partimos de pensar los "comunes urbanos" como nuevo territorio urbano bajo el que configurar modelos sociales y económicos más sostenibles y justos.

= External links =
* [http://leyseca.net/ Personal Blog]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Spanish]]
[[Category:Spain]]