

=Discussion=

A note on Steiner and the potential relation with fascism, by Matt Segall:

" I  must  mention  here  the  polemical  essays  on  Steiner  published  by  historian  Peter  Staudenmaier.  In  numerous   articles   on   the   Institute   for   Social   Ecology   website   and   elsewhere   (e.g.,   https://social-ecology.org/wp/2009/01/rudolf-steiner’s-threefold-commonwealth-and-alternative-economic-thought/), Staudenmaier  has  accused  Steiner  and  anthroposophy  of  sheltering  anti-democratic,  pro-capitalist  right  wing  political  views,  promulgating  racism  and  nationalism,  and  even  of  holding  proto-Nazi  sympathies.  While Steiner must be criticized for any misguided or racist statements, it seems to me that Staudenmaier’s accusations  often  reflect  his  own  metaphysical  and  ideological  presuppositions  rather  than  a  good  faith  consideration of Steiner’s own ideas and efforts in response to the social breakdown of the First World War. In Between  Occultism  and  Nazism:  Anthroposophy  and  the  Politics  of   Race  in  the  Fascist  Era  (2014),  Staudenmaier  describes the apparent internal contradictions and political pluripotentiality of Steiner’s views (which a more sympathetic reading would see as attempts to hold a dialectical tension between otherwise opposed social forces) while condemning many of his anthroposophist followers for accommodating themselves to Nazi rule in  the  1930s  (Steiner  died  in  1925).  Despite  the  condemnable  associations  of  some  of  his  followers,  it  is  important to note that, while critical of the propagandistic use of “democracy” as a label for political systems whose strings were pulled by oligarchs behind the scenes, Steiner was unambiguous in his support of actual democracy  in  the  domain  of  law-making  and  political  rights  (unlike  in  the  domains  of  arts  and  sciences,  athletics, and entrepreneurship, etc., where the leveling effects of majority rule would be inappropriate given the self-evident fact that individual talents in these areas are unequally distributed: the protection of equal rights  and  fair  distribution  of  resources  does  not  require  denying  differences  in  ability).  Further,  Steiner’s  rejection of ethno-nationalism could not have been more clearly stated. Hitler himself lashed out at Steiner’s threefolding proposals in a 1921 newspaper article as “one of the completely Jewish methods of destroying the  peoples’  normal  state  of  mind...”  (Völkische Beobachter). “If these people come to power,” Steiner said in response to Hitler’s March on the Feldherrnhalle in November 1923, “I can no longer set foot on German soil” (Samweber,Aus meinem Leben, 44). That said, like most 19th and 20th century European philosophers and anthropologists,  Steiner  upheld  a  Eurocentric  view  of  human  history.  His  comments  scattered  through  various  lecture  transcripts  concerning  historical  racial  hierarchies  must  be  condemned  even  while  they  should also be read in the context of his resolutely anti-racist and anti-sexist view of the human present and future. To offer just one example, in a lecture series in 1917 on the evils that must be overcome in the future course of human evolution, Steiner states: “Nothing is more designed to take humanity into its decline than the propagation of ideals of race, nation, and blood. ... The true ideal must arise from what we find in the world of the spirit, not in the blood” (Steiner, The Fall of  the Spirits of  Darkness, 186). Also crucial in this context are Steiner’s arguments in Ch. 14: “Individuality and Genus” in The Philosophy of  Spiritual Activity."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1069/1723)

[[Cagegory:Bios]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]