
=Discussion=


==“Rurality 2.0: The Seed of Megalopolis Resilience==

(translated from the French)

Frédéric Bosqué:

Our big cities give the illusion of being indestructible, but in reality, they are fragile—like giants with feet of clay. A megalopolis depends on constant supplies from the outside. If those flows are interrupted, the city comes to a standstill. The recent pandemic made this clear: it only takes a few days of disruption for supermarket shelves to empty. In the event of extreme heat, urban centers suffocate while the countryside offers shade, water, and coolness. However innovative our megacities may be, they cannot be resilient on their own. They will need external support—and that support already exists, even if it remains largely invisible.

In the shadow of skyscrapers, rural life is quietly reinventing itself. I call this Rurality 2.0: rural territories which, far from being “behind,” are becoming spearheads of a regenerative economy. From Brittany to the Cévennes, from Dordogne to Alsace, a new way of living and producing is emerging—rooted in the local, yet connected to the global. Many small communes are true laboratories of social and ecological innovation. There, people practice permaculture, energy sobriety, neighborly cooperation, tool sharing, and co-housing. They create mutual aid networks, cooperative grocery stores, short food supply chains, and local currencies. Taken one by one, these initiatives may seem modest; but joined together, they outline the model of a resilient society we’ll need in the face of climate shocks.

Rurality 2.0 offers concrete solutions to problems that metropolitan areas can no longer solve on their own. Entire villages are aiming for energy autonomy by installing community-owned wind turbines and solar panels—just like in Denmark, where citizen-led movements are helping the country target 100% renewable energy by 2050. Some regions are even experimenting with high-tech “rural neighborhoods”: digital third places, remote training, distributed enterprises... It’s possible to benefit from progress while still living in the countryside. These seeds of the future may be discreet today, but tomorrow, they could very well save us.

This is not about setting up a conflict between city and countryside, nor about emptying the cities for ideological reasons. Rather, it’s about rebalancing the system. Letting those who wish to live, work, and invest in rural areas do so—and giving them the means to succeed in their transition—means both easing the pressure on megalopolises and revitalizing our villages. It’s not a loss for the city—it’s a win-win exchange: urbanites who become rural dwellers remain connected, bring activity and youth to sparsely populated areas, and help relieve urban stress (housing, jobs, pollution).

Let’s imagine a near future where France is interwoven with dynamic rural ecosystems, strongly linked to cities through ties of solidarity and economic exchange. In such a configuration, a crisis in Paris or Lyon could find support in the countryside—and innovations born in rural areas could spread far and wide.

This future is possible. It already exists in embryonic form, sprouting in our pioneering rural communities. The end of the hegemony of megacities is not a tragedy—it’s the beginning of a renaissance. And each of us can contribute to it, starting now, by recognizing in these “acorns” of Rurality 2.0 the resilient oaks of the society of tomorrow.”

(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/ne-t%C3%A9puise-pas-%C3%A0-planter-des-glands-mais-vois-en-chacun-bosqu%C3%A9-fjgbe/)


[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]