
= a group of people created starting from the 15-M movement, from many different places, which has joined initiatives in order to connect rural alternatives all over the country and this way contribute to build bridges between rural and urban environments, and cooperate to build together a more balanced relationship .

URL = http://s.coop/7weh


=Description=

"We are a group of people created starting from the 15-M movement, from many different places, which has joined initiatives in order to connect rural alternatives all over the country and this way contribute to build bridges between rural and urban environments, and cooperate to build together a more balanced relationship .

“Rurales enREDadxs” are people, cooperatives, initiatives, asociations, networks, workgroups, discussion groups…ready to know each other and to share and build together a live rural world.

From December 8th to 12th we celebrated the first meeting of  “Rurales enREDadxs” at Piedralaves (Ávila), where all prospects were exceeded, being the participants more than 600 people, having more than 50 workshops, and a lot of positive energy and good vibrations.

Now we are organizing the 2º meeting of “Rurales enREDadxs”, that will take place between March 15th and April 10th (date still not defined). We would like this meeteing to be special. We would like the energy that brings people to the meeting to have no expiration date. We would like -in order to make the most of the meeting, of the bio-construction, energy, communications and horticulture workshops- to build a series of structures for those who would like to stay at the place and start a new self-managemente project in the rural environment.

We know we are many who long for this kind of life that allows people to be more in contact with Nature, leaving aside individualism, pollution, competitiveness and all deceptions  we are living in the cities.

On January 9th, we will be closing the form where you can suggest places for the next meeting of “Rurales enREDadxs” where we want to start building the space that will be the seed for the proyect. It doesn’t matter the size, it can be a deserted village, a populated one, an old farm…whatever place will be good as long as we can have 2 hectares of land to start with our work. We are many who are ready to start and give continuity to the project having no other limits than the common sense and logic."

=More Information=

If you know any place or have any idea this project can also be yours, people are the only ones really essential and it is because of people that the project can be achieved.

#We have the following form: <http://ruralesenredadxs.org/proximo-encuentro/> where you can write your proposal. http://ruralesenredadxs.org/proximo-encuentro/
#Photos of the first meeting (december 7th-11th) at Piedralaves (Ávila): https://picasaweb.google.com/108841084208936084796/EnREDadoxs2011?authuser=0&authkey=Gv1sRgCJzDwqTH_KaisQE&feat=directlink
#Follow us at: Blog: Rurales enredadxs <http://ruralesenredadxs.org/>
#N-1: Rurales enredadxs<https://n-1.cc/pg/groups/182664/rurales-enredadxs/>
#Facebook: gruppo rurales enredadxs<https://www.facebook.com/groups/277310748977112/?ref=ts>


[Category:15M Movements]]

[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Spain]]
You can find us every monday and thursday at Munble from 21:30 on <http://mumble.tomalaplaza.net> (to download go to www.mumble.tomalaplaza.net)