
= a [[Social Performance Platform]] for measuring, improving performance

=Interview=

"Daniel Debow, Co-CEO of social performance platform Rypple, explains how new web 2.0 tools can transform the way in which companies review their employees’ progress.


How would you describe Rypple?

The workplace has changed in the past 20 years, but the way we manage people has not, and that’s slowing us down. Rypple is taking people management into the modern age. It’s a social performance platform that’s fast, real-time and collaborative.


Why does the world need Rypple?

There’s a clear link between engagement and performance. Great management behavior is about praise and good coaching. Motivating people – getting peak performance – is also connected with other people; it’s about gaining recognition and finding progress in your work.

The traditional performance review doesn’t have a great deal of data to prove it works well. If this were an effective and worthwhile process, people would feel better about it. We talked to managers and employees, rather than HR departments, and they were incredibly dissatisfied. They thought existing ways of managing work only added to their workload and were too focused on compliance and process.


How is Rypple different from traditional systems of managing workers?

Previously, the workplace was a feedback desert, especially for new employees who had recently come out of education. You were told: “Do your job and, in six months, we will sit down for an hour and give you a long assessment.”

Rypple is trying to take an HR process that seems like something delivered from a distance and make it part of the everyday workflow. It helps to make work become fun, and it gives people a sense of progress and a connection with others.

In some ways, Rypple does the same thing that successful people management already achieves. We’re just trying to accelerate it and make it happen more often.


Can you paint a picture of how it’s different in practical terms?

When using Rypple in a workplace, you’ll get consistent and regular micro feedback throughout, as well as recognition from peers that is public, open and social. It lets you know you are on the right track and motivates you to improve still further. It allows you to set goals and collaborate.


What does the Rypple process look like?

It’s not unlike a social application such as Facebook or Twitter. You can see what feedback you and others get, read a thread of responses to questions and share notes with your manager. It’s a familiar interface that aggregates all feedback into one slot.


Is there a risk that constant feedback  will create even more work?

We’re trying to reduce work for the line manager by making the review process part of the regular workflow. We’re increasing business results by improving people’s performance continuously. They are not mind readers, so they need to know how to get better. Rypple helps people to manage their own brand and build a reputation. Once, people dreaded the performance review; now, they see it as a process that helps their career and advances their goals."
(http://performance.ey.com/2011/11/23/social-performance-a-digital-approach-to-people-management/)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]