

URL = http://wiki.reseaulibre.ca/

=Description=

"Réseau Libre est un regroupement informel de bénévoles qui vise à créer un réseau sans fil communautaire et de voisinage, indépendant et décentralisé. C'est un espace d'apprentissage, d'entraide et d'exploration.

Le réseau se construit de façon organique et évolutive à mesure que de nouveaux membres s'y joignent. Chaque personne participant au réseau installe une antenne sur son toit, ou dans sa fenêtre (un relais) et choisit les services qu'il désire partager avec la communauté."

=More Information=

* Article: Examining the Potentials and the Limits in the Provision of Wireless Networks: The Case of Réseau Libre. By Christina Haralanova and Evan Light. Journal of Peer Production, Issue 9: Alternative Internets. 2016

URL = http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-9-alternative-internets/peer-reviewed-papers/enmeshed-lives/

"This article presents a study of Réseau Libre, an emerging mesh network community in Montréal. Started in 2012 by a group of tech activists, its original goal was to connect peers through an independent, self-funded and decentralized wireless network. By creating an autonomous long-range wireless network outside the scope of government regulation. Réseau Libre's project is inherently political and within the creeping reaches of the surveillance state, seen as increasingly necessary. In this article, we examine the history and organization of Réseau Libre, its organizational limits and physical realities. We analyze the project within its particular political context and provide a number of recommendations oriented around the future success of Réseau Libre and other similar projects around the world."



[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Canada]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Cases]]