
=Discussion=

=Typology=

Sacha Pignot identifies three levels:


==[[Hyper-Localism]] (micro level)==

"The Connected Foundation:


Hyper-localism in fractal sovereignty isn’t isolation—it’s creating resilient foundation layers that can participate meaningfully in larger networks. 


This includes:

- Household production: Food preservation, craft production, repair culture, energy generation

- Community workshops: Shared tools, skill exchanges, local fabrication capabilities

- Neighborhood resource sharing: Tool libraries, community kitchens, local currency systems

- Immediate ecosystem management: Watershed stewardship, local food systems, micro-grids


The key innovation: these systems maintain full autonomy over production processes and resource allocation while accessing global knowledge networks when beneficial. A community workshop using locally sourced wood can access global design innovations while maintaining control over working conditions.


==[[Bioregionalism]] (meso level)==

The Ecological Integration level:

"Bioregionalism organizes human activity along ecological boundaries rather than political ones. Watersheds, climate zones, ecosystems, and natural resource patterns define the scale of coordination, creating economic systems that work with ecological processes rather than against them.

In fractal sovereignty, bioregions function as meso-scale networks connecting multiple hyper-local communities while respecting ecological carrying capacity. Different communities might specialize—agriculture, manufacturing, knowledge work—while sharing resources and coordinating to maintain ecological balance.

Bioregional coordination operates through network dynamics rather than hierarchical control. Communities share information about resource availability, ecological conditions, production capacity, and needs through distributed networks while maintaining local autonomy."


==[[Cosmo-Localism]] (macro level)==

The Global Knowledge, Local Control level:

Unlike linear globalism creating disconnected extremities, cosmo-localism follows an ouroboros pattern—a cycle where global knowledge flows back to enhance local capacity, which in turn contributes to global knowledge.

This creates a regenerative loop rather than extractive pipeline: local innovations get documented and shared globally, global knowledge gets adapted to local conditions, and the cycle continues with each iteration building capacity at all scales."

(https://soushi888.substack.com/p/beyond-local-vs-global)


[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Network Theory]]