
'''* Book: Sacred Civics Building Seven Generation Cities Edited By Jayne Engle, Julian Agyeman, Tanya Chung-Tiam-Fook. Routledge, 2022.'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/Sacred-Civics-Building-Seven-Generation-Cities/Engle-Agyeman-Chung-Tiam-Fook/p/book/9781032059112

=Description=

"Sacred Civics argues that societal transformation requires that spirituality and sacred values are essential to reimagining patterns of how we live, organize and govern ourselves, determine and distribute wealth, inhabit and design cities, and construct relationships with others and with nature.

The book brings together transdisciplinary and global academics, professionals and activists from a range of backgrounds to question assumptions that are fused deep into the code of how societies operate, and to draw on extraordinary wisdom from ancient Indigenous traditions; to social and political movements like Black Lives Matter, the commons, and wellbeing economies; to technologies for participatory futures where people collaborate to reimagine and change culture. Looking at cities and human settlements as the sites of transformation, the book focuses on values, commons and wisdom to demonstrate that how we choose to live together, to recognize interdependencies, to build, grow, create, and love - matters.

Using multiple methodologies to integrate varied knowledge forms and practices, this truly ground-breaking volume includes contributions from renowned and rising voices. Sacred Civics is a must-read for anyone interested in intersectional discussions on social justice, inclusivity, participatory design, healthy communities and future cities."


=Contents=

INTRODUCTION

* Chapter 1: Imagine Shaping Cities as if People, Land, and Nature were Sacred.
Jayne Engle, Julian Agyeman, and Tanya Chung-Tiam-Fook

* Chapter 2: Awakening Seven Generation Cities.
Tanya Chung-Tiam-Fook, Jayne Engle, and Julian Agyeman 　


==PART I: SPACE==

* Chapter 3: Honouring the Sacred in Cities: Indigenous Teachings for City Building.
Tanya Chung-Tiam-Fook

* Chapter 4: The Black Commons: A Framework for Recognition, Reconciliation, Reparations.
Julian Agyeman and Kofi Boone

* Chapter 5: (Un)situated Improvisation.
AbdouMaliq Simone

* Chapter 6: Co-creating the Cities we Deserve through Indigenous Knowledge.
Ginger Gosnell-Myers　


==PART II: TIME==

* Chapter 7: Unsettling the Coloniality of Foresight.
Aarathi Krishnan

* Chapter 8: Inhabiting the Edge.
Edgar Pieterse

* Chapter 9: Reconciling Relationships with the Land through Land Acknowledgments.
Deborah McGregor and Emma Nelson

* Chapter 10: Urban Planning Oscillations: Seeking a Tongan Way Before and After the 2006 Riots.
Yvonne Takau and Michelle Thompson-Fawcett　


==PART III: AGENCY==

* Chapter 11: Social Infrastructure for Our Times: Building Participatory Systems that Value the Creativity of Everyone.
Jayne Engle, Tessy Britton, and Pamela Glode-Desrochers

* Chapter 12: The Ceremony of Reclaiming Agency Through Wonder.
Catherine Tàmmaro

* Chapter 13: Feminist, Antiracist Values for Climate Justice: Moving Beyond Climate Isolationism.
Jennie C. Stephens　


==PART IV: TOGETHERNESS==

* Chapter 14: Participatory Futures: Reimagining the City Together.
Kathy Peach and Laurie Smith

* Chapter 15: Basque Civics.
Gorka Espiau and Itziar Moreno

* '''Chapter 16: Commons Economies in Action: Mutualizing Urban Provisioning Systems.'''
Michel Bauwens, Rok Kranjc, and Jose Ramos

* Chapter 17: Radicle Civics – Unconstituting Society: Building 21st Century Civic Infrastructures.
Fang-Jui "Fang-Raye" Chang and Indy Johar

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]