
'''= circular design and materials project supported by the Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation Institute and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, funded by the MAVA Foundation'''

URL = https://www.circulardesignguide.com/safe-circular

=Description=

"WHAT MATERIALS SHOULD WE USE TO CREATE THINGS?

Circular design encourages us to rethink business models, how we make products, and to consider the system surrounding them, but we also need to think about the materials we use. Whether it’s improving the safety of users or ensuring that resources can be used again and again - it is clear that materials matter.

Not all materials are fit for a circular economy. Some contain chemicals that are hazardous for humans or the environment. Additives are often unintentionally used or used for performance reasons - such as colouring, flexibility, or durability - but there are ways to design them out. If you can choose materials that are safe and circular, you can build a better offering for your users, while ensuring that the products and services you create fit within a circular economy.

Our goal is to help you as a designer make positive materials choices. The Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation Institute and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, together with design professionals, have collaborated to develop practical resources to assist you in making these choices and designing for a circular economy."
(https://www.circulardesignguide.com/safe-circular)

=More information=

* video: [[Charline Ducas, Alysia Garmulewicz and Mike Werner on Safe and Circular Materials Design]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Circular Economy]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]