'''Book:  S A H A R A S I A. James DeMeo, Ph.D. Orgone Biophysical Research Lab, [http://www.orgonelab.org/SaharasiaNewUpdate.pdf 2nd ed.], 2005'''

URL = http://www.saharasia.com [http://www.orgonelab.org/saharasia.htm]

The 4000 BCE Origins of Child Abuse, Sex-repression, Warfare and Social Violence In the Deserts of the Old World. Evidence for a Worldwide, Climate-Linked Geographical Pattern in Human Behavior.


=Abstract=

"James DeMeo's Saharasia is the largest and most in-depth scholarly study on human behavior and social violence around the world which has ever been undertaken. The findings summarized in Prof. DeMeo's book cover the entire globe, from early prehistory into modern times, integrating on world-maps a full sweep of standard research data from the fields of archaeology and history, plus an in-depth cross-cultural review and mapping of data from over 1000 distinctly different human societies, from standard anthropological data bases. It employed standard cross-cultural correlation tables on over 60 different variables, plus geographical mapping and quadruple blind research procedures to insure objectivity, and all the basic starting assumptions are clearly elucidated in advance. The work also incorporates his own personal field research in the deserts of the Middle East and Southwestern USA. No great knowledge of maths or scientific methods is required to follow the logic and research to their conclusions, though the book is clearly written for scholars. An early period of generally peaceful social conditions is documented in prehistory, but with a major shift towards patriarchal-authoritarian and decidedly violent social conditions across the Saharasian region after a major climate-shift from wet grassland-forest conditions towards harsh desert conditions at c.5000-4000 BC. Major epochs of cultural diffusion are also presented on maps, showing how violent patriarchal authoritarian, sex-repressive and child-abusive behaviors were carried outward from their Saharasian origins to nearly every corner of the globe. It presents previously-unknown geographical patterns in dozens of different human behaviors, beliefs and social institutions representative of human violence and warlike aggression, such as slavery, castes, genital mutilations and a low women's status. The findings have been praised by many, published in scientific journals and magazines, cited repeatedly, but in largest measure have been willfully censored out of the discussion by most within the editorial power-circles of modern academics and mainstream journalism, which continues to embrace the flawed and disproven theories of "violent genes" or other "original sin" concepts. None of those theories, nor anything like them, can stand in the face of the new evidence presented in Prof. DeMeo's Saharasia."
(http://www.orgonelab.org/saharasia.htm) 

==SCHOLAR'S ABSTRACT==

"Global geographical patterns of repressive, painful, traumatic, and violent, armored, patrist behaviors and social institutions, which thwart maternal-infant and male-female bonds, were correlated and developed through a systematic analysis of anthropological data on 1170 subsistence-level cultures. When the behavior data were mapped, the hyperarid desert belt encompassing North Africa, the Near East, and Central Asia, which I call Saharasia, was found to possess the greatest areal extent of the most extreme patrist behaviors and social institutions on Earth. Regions farthest removed from Saharasia, in Oceania and the New World, were found to possess the most gentle, unarmored, matrist behaviors, which support and protect maternal-infant and male-female bonds. A systematic review of archaeological and historical materials suggests that patrism first developed in Saharasia after c.4000 BCE, the time of a major ecological transition from relatively wet grassland- forest conditions to arid desert conditions. Settlement and migration patterns of patrist peoples were traced, from their earliest homelands in Saharasia, to explain the later appearance of patrism in regions outside of Saharasia. Prior to the onset of dry conditions in Saharasia, evidence for matrism is widespread, but evidence for patrism is generally nonexistent. It is argued that matrism constitutes the earliest, original, and innate form of human behavior and social organization, while patrism, perpetuated by trauma-inducing social institutions, first developed among Homo Sapiens in Saharasia, under the pressures of severe desertification, famine, and forced migrations. The psychological insights of Wilhelm Reich provide an understanding of the mechanism by which patrist (armored, violent) behaviors become established and continue long after the initial trauma has passed."
(http://www.orgonelab.org/saharasia.htm) 


=Discussion=

James DeMeo:

(discussing new challenges that may invalidate his hypothesis)

"By 1999, I was alerted to new archaeological findings
and books which claimed evidence for very ancient
human violence, dating to well before c.4000 BCE. The
book War Before Civilization4 by Lawrence Keeley, is
perhaps the most representative and widely-quoted
example of this new genre of books, which basically
argue for the innate, genetic or human evolutionary
causation of war and violence, in opposition to the
environmental-social-emotional causation argued in my
Saharasia. Keeley’s book laid down two basic arguments.

'''Argument One: Intertribal warfare of an extreme
and ruthless quality, as well as social-familial violence,
existed among so-called “primitive” cultures of the New
World long before the arrival of European colonials.''' To
this argument, I give a qualified agreement. In Saharasia,
I cited some of the same evidence noted by Keeley,
such as the butchery and despotism present among the
Aztec, Inca, and Maya culture, long before the arrival of
Columbus, Cortez or Pizarro. Likewise, the despotism
and savagery of other “primitive” subsistence-level cultures
in other world regions were detailed in Saharasia,
well back into history and prior to any contacts with the
sometimes equally despotic and savage Europeans. The
findings on this point, in both my Saharasia and Keeley’s
War Before Civilization defeated many widespread myths
about the supposed uniformly “peaceful” nature of “primitive
man”, “living in harmony with nature” — certainly,
there are many well-documented cases of violence and
organized warfare among isolated “primitive” tribal
groups. This was never in question. However, unlike my
Saharasia, these examples are too-often presented in
such a manner as to mischaracterize all primitive cultures
as carrying the seeds of violence. And so I do object
to making any kind of widespread and global extrapolation
of these signs of violence among some aboriginal
cultures as “proof” of an assumed but unproven ubiquitous
violence among all cultures, in all regions, at all
times. Also, the authors pushing this line of argument
almost always fail to take a genuine cross-cultural
approach, and rarely openly address the various peaceful
aboriginal societies as documented in various anthropological
studies from the late 1800s and early
1900s, as detailed in my Saharasia. As a consequence,
this first argument articulated by Keeley did not undermine
or challenge my work in any manner. In fact, some
of the archaeological evidence cited by Keeley and others
for violence among ancient peoples of the New World
— and which I did not know about or cite in the first
printing of Saharasia — were located almost precisely
in those regions where my World Behavior Map predicted such evidence might be found. More on this last
point is given below. With confidence, I can therefore
report, archaeological evidence on the question of “primitive
violence” in more recent times, but prior to the
epoch of European colonialism, provides excellent additional
supporting evidence for my Saharasia discovery.

'''Argument Two: Archaeological evidence for warfare
and massacres exist in some very old archaeological
sites, as early as 12,000 BCE, well before my c.4000 BCE
marker date.''' Keeley and other authors on the subject
specifically mention ancient fortifications and graveyards
filled with victims of violent deaths, well before
c.4000 BCE. These archaeological reports superficially
appear to provide a serious challenge to Saharasian
theory, mainly because of the early dates. However, a
close look at the original citations from the archaeologists
who did the field work, and from those who are
intimately familiar with the details, resolves the question
in favor of the environmental-social-emotional causation
implicit in Saharasian theory. In short, archaeological
findings are often misquoted and misrepresented
in more “popularized” accounts on “ancient violence”.

'''Conclusions'''

The information contained in the above sections can
be organized both temporally and geographically, into
four major regional categories of prehistorical violence:

1. As discussed in Saharasia, and revisited in this
article, there are a scattering of sites across Anatolia
and the Middle East which showed “fleeting glimpses”
of social violence as early as c.5000 BCE, and possibly
even earlier. These are timed with a temporary episode
of drought and aridity coincidental to the abandonment
of many villages and sites across the region. This early
evidence for land-abandonment and probable massmigrations,
with possible social violence appearing here
and there, along with a few cases of infant cranial
deformation, did not become epidemic, widespread or
persistent in character. Drought appeared, followed by
scattered and isolated signs of social disturbance. When
wetter conditions reappeared in the region, settlements
thrived once again under peaceful conditions.

2. A cluster of sites in southern Germany document
violent conditions at several sites between c.5500-4000
BCE. These massacre sites, at Talheim, Schletz and
Ofnet, may factually fall into the younger end of this
range of dates, which would place them well within the
time-line of events described in Saharasia, when Europe
was transformed by invasions from Central Asia. If
the older dates eventually prove to be correct, then they
would appear to be somewhat anomalistic within the
framework of Saharasian theory, but nevertheless also
appear to have some relationship to the isolated, scattered
and non-persisting signs of violence which spread
across Anatolia and the Middle East — coincidental to
a documented sub-phase of aridity and land-abandonment,
as described in point #1, above. Whatever their
dates, these massacre sites are not located in a formerly
dryland region, and no obvious mechanism related to
environmental pressures such as famine and starvation
can be invoked to explain their “spontaneous”
genesis of isolated violence. It appears certain, these
sites are the consequence of cultural diffusion of warlike
groups out of the neighboring drylands, either from
Central Asia at c.4000 BCE, or more likely from Anatolia sometime before or around c.5500 BCE, following the
migratory pathways for agricultural diffusion previously
identified in Figure 5.63 The geographical clustering
of the German sites does not support the assertion of
any widespread or ubiquitous violence, but rather, the
opposite, of isolated violence within a larger ocean of
peaceful social conditions.

3. The violence in the Nile Valley at Jebel Sahaba,
Wadi Kubbiyana and a few other sites at c.12,000 BCE
does not fit within the original Saharasian chronology of
drought and famine starting at c.4000 or even 5000
BCE, but nevertheless does occur during an earlier
period of intense aridity, prior to the Neolithic Wet
Phase of North Africa. As such, this very early violence
in North Africa confirms the basic drought-famine
mechanism for the genesis of violence as given in Saharasia.
Whatever violence did exist at this very early
time, however, was so scattered and isolated in its
distribution, that it died out once the Neolithic Wet
Phase developed. Once North Africa became wet and
lush, supporting grasslands and trees with large herbivores,
and numerous large rivers and lakes, evidence for
human violence vanishes, only to reappear after c. 3500
BCE, when North Africa dries out again. In this latter
case, the violent conditions persist, along with the harsh
arid conditions, from c.3500 BCE all the way down into
the modern era as a global phenomenon, to be recorded
by ethnographers and anthropologists, and documented
in Saharasia on the World Behavior Map.

4. In SE Australia, we have what appears to be an
episode of “Saharasian”-type genesis of small-scale inter-
group social violence — to include artificial infant
cranial deformation, and generally non-lethal familial
and tribal fights directed mostly at women — during an
episode of unusually dry and possibly episodic famine
conditions. The violence appeared during hyper-arid
conditions starting at c.11,000 BCE, but died out and
vanished by c.7000 BCE, after wetter conditions returned.
This suggests the strong influence of desertification
and aridity on social conditions, as detailed in
Saharasia.

Figure 8 identifies these four locations or regions of
confirmed archaeological evidence for anomalous violence
in the pre-Saharasian period, before c.4000 BCE.
After c.4000-3500 BCE, when all of Saharasia began
declining into an intense and widespread aridity,
the process of drought, famine, starvation and landabandonment
intensified, forcing the mass migratory
events described in Saharasia. Violence then irrupted
again, this time as a response to a more widespread and
persisting drought-famine situation which forced the
abandonment of entire regions. We have detailed here,
the arrival of the new famine-affected and violent Central
Asian migrants across the region of the European
causewayed enclosures. They wreaked havoc among
peaceful villages and trading centers, and ushered in
the epoch of the battle-axe, Kurgan warrior nomads,
fortifications and warrior-kings, and were followed by
subsequent waves of new immigrants who carried the
seeds of violence in their desert-borne and desert-bred
social institutions.

As argued in Saharasia, violence became anchored
into human character structure, by virtue of the development
of new social institutions for justifying and
glorifying sadism and butchery, even when directed
towards infants and children, and towards the opposite
sex. The key for transmission of early famine-related
violence outside of the dry regions is found in the
development of new social institutions which re-create
the violence generation after generation, irrespective of
climate. The earliest episodes of human violence, specifically
identified in the above four points, did not
persist in such a manner, and this may be due to the fact
that human social groups at these earlier dates had not
yet developed either the size or the organizational complexity
by which new social institutions could be readily
preserved over the long term. One hypothesis which
might explain the findings is, the conditions in Anatolia
and the Middle-East generated some elements of social
disturbance and violence within a small percentage of
cultures, who then migrated into Southern Germany
and committed massacres. A similar thing could have
occurred in the region of the Nile, leading to the anomalous
episode at Jebel Sahaba and Wadi Kubbiyana. At
some point, these hypothesized violent cultural groups
died off, or were assimilated into other peaceful cultures,
or otherwise vanished. Peaceful social conditions
then continued once rains and food supplies became
abundant once again.

Much of the claims for violence in the archaeological
record, described as “prehistoric” in the most general
terms, really demands to be more critically reviewed
and precisely reported in terms of both dates and locations.
Human bones with cut-marks do not automatically
constitute “evidence for cannibalism”, given the
existence of funeral rituals where the bones of the dead
are cleaned of their flesh. Hunting accidents — where
an occasional projectile point is found in an isolated
human skeleton — cannot, by themselves, stand as
evidence for widespread social violence and warfare,
especially where the injured individual shows signs of
bone-healing and sympathetic burial. Abstracted rockart
which claims to depict a person killed with numerous
spears, but which requires a specialist to make the
interpretation and to point out the details, falls down
into the realm of ambiguous speculation at best. If the
eye of an ordinary person cannot detect violence in the
rock art scenes, it is likely that the violence existed only
within the specialist’s imagination. And in some cases,
it surely is possible that later generations of violent
people might have drawn spears on top of older rock-art
of human subjects, just as people today add graffiti to
“dress up” existing pictures of people — where archaeological
digs fail to show violence in skeletons and structures, evidence from rock art can only be suggestive, at
best. And, the date for the first-settlement of a location
should not be confused with the date for the first clear
and unambiguous evidence for violence. A site can be
occupied for hundreds or thousands of years before the
first clear signs of violence appear.

I have shown here, the violence in early China, in
the causewayed enclosures of Europe, in Neolithic Spanish
rock art, and in massacres of New World cultures
before Columbus, all fit well within the parameters
given in Saharasia, and these examples provide additional
compelling support for the overall Saharasian
theory. This is especially so for the Americas, where
most of the evidence for village-scale massacres fits
within those regions identified on the World Behavior
Map as clusters of armored patrism. The close geographical
associations are, in fact, striking.

What is at issue is: how, where, and under what
conditions does human social violence and warfare develop.
Is it something that can occur anywhere, under
any conditions, something which lurks below the surface
of the human character just waiting to spring forth
to wreak social havoc? Or does human violence conflict
with and go against our basic biology, requiring only the
most severe trauma to bring it forth; either trauma in the
womb, in the crib, in the home and family, or the larger
trauma of severe drought, land degradation, the disruption
of food and water supplies, and the attendant
famine and starvation conditions which follow?


All of these considerations were given focused discussion
in Saharasia, and so will not be repeated here —
but the issue is, to what extent has Saharasia’s ancient
historical components been challenged by these newer
archaeological findings? From the discussion in this
paper, I have shown that the larger Saharasian discovery
and theory are not so easily challenged, due to the
specificity of its construct — since the early violence
identified at the c.4000-3500 BCE marker date is connected
to the existence of severe drought, desertification,
social displacement and famine within human
populations, one can expect to find similar social responses
under similar environmental conditions, even if
those conditions occur earlier than c.4000 BCE. But
more to the point, archaeology simply does not support
the fantasy that ancient humans were just as warlike
and bloody as either the historical or contemporary
“civilizations”. On the contrary, the farther back one
goes in time, before the c.4000-3500 BCE marker date,
the more difficult it is to find clear and unambiguous
evidence for human violence, and what does exist is
observed to be regionally isolated and anomalous."
(http://www.orgonelab.org/SaharasiaNewUpdate.pdf)





=More Information=

#http://www.orgonelab.org/ResearchSummary1.htm
#new findings since first printing, http://www.orgonelab.org/SaharasiaNewUpdate.pdf
#emergence and diffusion of patrism, http://www.orgonelab.org/saharasia_en.htm
#reflections on patrism/matrism, in 2003, http://www.orgonelab.org/MatriarchyCongress2003.htm, with answer to different critique expressed during a matriarchy conference


==Reviews==

#http://www.ahpweb.org/pub/perspective/saharasia.html
#review by Steve Taylor, http://www.imprint.co.uk/jcs_9_8.html


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Relational]]