'''Salvino A. Salvaggio = business consultant and P2P / open source researcher'''

URL = http://www.salvaggio.net/

== Bio ==
Salvino Salvaggio is Executive Director  of the VP Research, Development & Innovation (RDI) Office in Qatar Foundation (QF). In this role, he oversees and coordinates the Office team and the centres of QFRDI, aligning their scope and remit, facilitating all workstreams related to effective delivery and concrete implementation of initiatives. QFRDI’s initiatives and projects cover a broad spectrum, from applied research and grants supporting innovation, up to investment funds to scale-up private sector start-ups and companies.

Salvino is also a member of several boards of companies or international organisations.

All the professional positions that Salvino has held over the last three decades directly involved management of innovation aiming at creating economic value and growth. Examples of relevant such experience are:
# Implementation Director in QF CEO Office, responsible for the new governance framework for Research, Development and Innovation across QF.
# As Director of Funding and Industry Analysis of the Qatar Science & Technology Park (QSTP) Salvino created grant programs aiming at funding and launching innovation-based business projects and new ventures.
# Early 2000s, Salvino was an expert consultant in McKinsey & Co, mainly involved in strategy management and business building of tech-intensive projects for large multinational organizations, government authorities and education institutions. He was an active member of the @McKinsey incubator in Brussels.
# Experienced Manager for Accenture, where he led the Brussels Innovation Centre, an incubator launching and supporting business ventures and start-ups across Europe

Salvino taught in several universities (such as ISC Saint-Louis in Brussels, Université du Québec à Montréal in Canada, Hamad bin Khalifa University in Qatar…). Over the years, Salvino launched and managed his own tech start-up companies. He published scientific and professional articles and books, and a novel that won a first European prize.

In August 2007, Salvino was designated a Commander by the Italian President, one of the highest Italian civil decoration.

=== from 2006 ===
At the end of the 1990’s, together with Michel Bauwens, Salvino created the <i>Observatory of the Digital Economy</I>, an open research institute that published several reports digging deep into the various impacts of the digital technologies. Salvino mostly focused on the way new Internet technologies and new digital media impacted the economy and business. As a result, Salvino and Michel Bauwens edited the first ever book in French of anthropology of the digital society (<i>Anthropologie de la societe digitale</i>, Tome 1 et Tome 2).

Salvino A. Salvaggio has over 13 years of international management and consulting experience, (in innovation, strategy, organization and business technology), as well as a proven entrepreneurial mindset having launched and managed the growth and development of three ICT businesses. He is currently employed as a Senior Consultant by <i>ANGLE plc</i>, providing support towards the implementation and launch of the Qatar Science and Technology Park (QSTP). From June 2003 to November 2005, Salvino was Head of the Internet Portal in <i>Qatar Telecom</I>. Prior to that, he was an Internet Expert Consultant in <i>McKinsey and Co.</i> involved in strategy definition and implementation projects. Before that, Salvino was a Senior Manager in <i>Accenture</i> where he led the eCommerce Innovation Centre in Brussels. From the mid 1980’s till 2003, he was an academic in several European and North American universities and business schools.

He holds a Doctorate (Ph.D.), a corporate intensive MBA and has several post-graduate degrees. He has also published 9 books, 10 research reports and almost 100 articles in numerous scientific and professional journals, which have focused on the impact of ICT on contemporary society (business, social relationships, community development, etc.).

====  P2P Research ====

Since the early 2000’s, Salvino has oriented his research efforts towards the Open Source Software as well as the P2P platforms; he tried to assess the magnitude of the economical impacts of these 2 fields. In 2002-2003, Salvino published the first extensive research report detailing both the qualitative and, especially, quantitative impacts of Open Source Software onto its business adopters (''OpenSource : a r/evolution in the software industry ?''). This report has had a considerable success as it is based on a number of concrete case studies highlighting the positive contribution of Open Source Software to the financials of the companies that adopted it.
Lately, Salvino works on the definition of a new methodology to quantify the proportion of GDP growth due to the open source software and p2p movements.

Salvino belongs to the very limited group of researchers approaching the Open Source Software and the P2P phenomenon from an economical point of view.

== More Information ==
* [https://www.linkedin.com/in/salvinosalvaggio/ LinkedIn entry]

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Research]]