
=Discussion=

Samir Amin:


=Hypothesis=

"The modern world has produced a general image of universal history founded on the proposition that (European) capitalism is the first social system to unify the world. The least that can be said in that respect is that this statement seriously distorts reality and - I submit - is basically an expression of the dominant Eurocentric ideology. In fact, societies prior to the sixteenth century were in no way isolated\from one another but were competitive partners within at least regional systems (and perhaps even a world system). Overlooking their interaction, on*can hardly understand the dynamics of their evolution.

Simultaneously I maintain that capitalism is a qualitatively new age in universal history which started around 1500. Therefore I insist upon distinguishing the modern capitalist overall structure from protocapitalist elements which indeed appeared in anterior societies, sometimes since quite ancient times; I also insist upon the specificity of the capitalist center/ periphery dichotomy vis-a-vis previous forms of polarization."


==THE ARAB-ISLAMIC AND THE MEDITERRANEAN PRIOR SYSTEMS==

Everybody knows that the Arab-Islamic Mediterranean and Middle East region enjoyed a brilliant civilization even before the Italian cities. But did the Arab-Islamic world constitute a protocapitalist system? The protocapitalist forms are present and, at certain times and places, inspired a glorious civilization. The views I have put forward on this subject (see The Arab Nation, Eurocentrism) tie in with Mansour Fawzy's book (1990) on the historical roots of the impasse of the Arab world, and, in some regards, with the works of the late Ahmad Sadek Saad. Beyond possible divergences - or shades of meaning - we are of the common opinion that the Arab-Islamic political system was not dominated by protocapitalist (mercantilist) forces but, on the contrary, that the protocapitalist elements remained subject to the logic of the dominant tributary system power. In fact, I consider the Arab-Islamic world as part of a larger regional system which I call the Mediterranean system.

I have suggested (in Eurocentrism) that we can date the birth of this "Mediterranean system" from the conquests of Alexander the Great (third century Be) and conceptualize a single long historic period running from this date to the Renaissance, encompassing at first the "Ancient Orient"] (around the eastern basin of the Mediterranean), then the Mediterranean I as a whole and its Arab-Islamic and European extensions.

I have in this regard put forward the thesis that we are dealing with a I single tributary system from 300 bc (unification of the Orient by Alexander the Great) to 1492. I refer to a single "cultural area" whose unity is manifested in a common metaphysical formulation (the tributary ideology of the region), beyond the successive expressions of this metaphysics (Hellenistic, eastern Christian, Islamic, western Christian). In this tributary area I find it useful to distinguish between its central regions (the Mediterranean Orient) and its peripheral regions (the European West). Within this entity exchanges of every kind have (nearly always) been highly intensive and the associated protocapitalist forms highly advanced, particularly evident in the central regions (in the period of the first flowering of Islam from j the eighth to the twelfth centuries and in Italy for the succeeding centuries). These exchanges have been the means of a significant redistribution of surplus. However, the eventual "centralization" of surplus was essentially I tied to the centralization of political power. From that point of view the I cultural area as a whole never constituted a single "unified imperial state" I (except for the two brief periods of the Alexandrine empire and the Roman empire occupying all the central regions of the system). Generally speaking, the peripheral region of the European West remained extremely fragmented under the feudal form (and this is the very expression of its peripheral character). The central region was divided between the Christian Byzantine Orient and the Arab-Islamic empires (the Umayyad, then the Abbasid dynasties). It was first subject to internal centrifugal forces, then belatedly unified in the Ottoman empire, whose coincided with the ... end of the period and the overall peripheralization of the eastern region to the benefit of a shift of the center towthe previously peripheral I region of Europe and the Atlantic.

Could this "system" be described as protocapitalist? In support of the thesis is the presence of undeniable protocapitalist elements (private ownership, commodity enterprise, wage labor) throughout the period, expanding in certain places and times (especially in the Islamic area and in Italy), declining in others (especially in barbarian Europe of the first millennium). But in my view the presence of these elements does not suffice to characterize the system. On the contrary, I would argue that, at the crucial level of ideology, what began in the Hellenistic phase of this period (from 300 bc to the first centuries ad), and then flourished in the (eastern then western) Christian and Islamic forms, is purely and simply the tributary ideology, with its major fundamental characteristic: the predominance of metaphysical concerns.

What we are talking about is indeed a "system," but not a "protocapitalist system," that is, a stage in the rapid transition from tributary society to capitalist society. On the other hand, we are dealing with a "tributary system," not a mere juxtaposition of autonomous tributary societies (in the plural), which just happened to share some common elements, such as religion, for example, or integration - albeit of limited duration - in an imperial state, such as that of Rome, Byzantium, or the Umayyad or Abbasid dynasty.

The distinction implies in my view a certain degree of centralization of surplus, which took the form of tribute and not, as in capitalism, that of profit from capital. The normal method of centralization of this tributary surplus was political centralization, operating to the advantage of imperial capitals (Rome, Byzantium, Damascus, Baghdad). Of course this centralization remained weak, as did the authority of the centers concerned. Byzantium, Damascus, and Baghdad could not prevent their staging-posts (Alexandria, Cairo, Fez, Kairouan, Genoa, Venice, Pisa, and so on) from frequently achieving their own autonomy. The entirety of barbarian Christendom (the first millennium in the West) escaped such centralization. In parallel, the logic of the centralization of authority stimulated protocapitalist relations to the point that mercantile handling of part of the surplus never disappeared from the region, and took on great significance in some areas and epochs, notably during the glorious centuries of Islam, and the emergence of the Italian cities following the Crusades. On this basis I have described the social formations of the Arab world as tributary-mercantile formations. All this leads me to conclude that capitalism "might have been" born in the Arab world. This takes me back to other discussions on this issue with which I have been associated. I have argued that once capitalism had appeared in Europe and the Atlantic, the process of evolution toward capitalism was brutally halted in its development elsewhere, The reason why the evolution toward capitalism accelerated in the Atlantic West (shifting the center of gravity of the system from the banks of the Mediterranean to the shores of the" Atlantic Ocean), it seems to me, is mainly due to the colonization (of America, then of the entire globe) and contingently to the peripheral character of western feudalism.


==DID A SINGLE WORLD TRIBUTARY SYSTEM EXIST?==

My methodological hypothesis leads me to regard the other "cultural areas" as further autonomous tributary systems. In particular, it seems to me that the Confucian-Chinese tributary system constituted a world on its own and of its own. It had its own center (China), characterized by a strong political centralization (even if the latter under the pressure of internal centrifugal forces exploded from time to time. But it was always reconstituted), and its peripheries (Japan especially) had a relationship with China very similar to that of medieval Europe with the civilized Orient.

I leave a dotted line after the question whether the Hindu cultural area constituted a (single) tributary system.

This having been said, the question is: was the Mediterranean system "isolated" or in close relation with the other Asiatic and African systems? Can the existence of a "permanent" world-system, in constant evolution, be argued beyond the Mediterranean area and prior to its constitution? A positive response to this question has been suggested to some (notably Frank) by the intensity of exchange relations between the protocapitalist Mediterranean, the Chinese and Indian Orient, and sub-Saharan Africa, and perhaps even the significance of the exchanges in earlier times between these various regions of the ancient world. For my part, I do not believe that it is possible to answer the question, given the current state of knowledge. It is, however, useful to raise it in order to provoke a systematic exchange of views on what can be deduced from our knowledge, the hypotheses it may inspire, and the directions of research indicated for verification of these hypotheses.

I do not intend to substitute my own "intuitive views" for the eventual results of these debates. I advance them here only provisionally, to open the discussion. I should therefore suggest the following (provisional) theses.

First, humankind is one since its origins. The itinerary of the earth's population begins from the nucleus of hominids appearing in East Africa, going down the Nile and populating Africa, crossing the Mediterranean and the Isthmus of Suez to conquer Europe and Asia, passing the Bering Straits and perhaps crossing the Pacific to install themselves (in the most recent epoch) in the Americas. These successive conquests of the planet's territory are beginning to be dated. The following may be the pertinent question: has the dispersal brought a "diversification" of the lines of evolution of the various human groups, installed in geographical environments of extreme diversity and hence exposed to challenges of differing kinds? Or dpes the existence of parallel lines of evolution suggest the conclusion that humankind as a whole has remained governed by "laws" of evolution of universal application? And as a complement to this question it might be asked what effect have relations between the scattered human populations had on the fate, intensity, and rapidity of the transfer of knowledge, experience, and ideas?

Intuitively it might be imagined that some human groups have found themselves fairly isolated in particularly difficult circumstances and have responded to the challenge by particular adaptations unlikely to evolve of themselves. These groups would then be located in "impasses," constrained to reproduce their own organization without the latter showing signs of its own supersession. Perhaps included here would be the (still highly fragmented) societies of hunters/fishers/gatherers of the Arctic, the equatorial forest, small islands, and some coasts.

But other groups have found themselves in less arduous circumstances that have enabled them to progress simultaneously in mastery of nature (passage to settled agriculture, invention of more efficient tools, and so on) and in tighter social organization. In regard to the latter the question arises of "possible laws of social evolution of universal application" and the role of external relations in this evolution.

Secondly, in regard to societies that have clearly "advanced," can one detect similar phasing followed by all, albeit at faster or slower rates? Our entire social science is based on this seemingly necessary "hypothesis." For the satisfaction of the spirit? As legitimation of a universalist value system? Various formulations of this "necessary evolution" succeeded one another up to and during the nineteenth century. They were based either on the succession of modes of exploitation of the soil and instruments utilized (Old Stone Age, New Stone Age, Iron Age), or on the succession of social forms of organization (the of Savagery, Barbarism, Civilization). Various evolutions in these "particular" domains were regrafted on to what we regarded as fundamental general tendencies. For example, the "matriarchal-patriarchal" s, the succession of the ages of philosophical thought (primitive, animist, metaphysical, Auguste Comte-style positivist), and so on. I shall not spend time here discussing these "theories," which are almost always more or less overridden by subsequent research. I merely point to their existence as evidence of the persistence of the need to "generalize," beyond the evident diversity that is the property of the scientific approach.

It seems to me that the most sophisticated formulation of all the theories of general evolution was that proposed by Marxism and based on the synthetic notions of "modes of production." The latter comes from a conceptualization of the basic elements of the construction (forces of production, relations of production, infrastructure and superstructure, etc.). They are then "enriched" by the grafting on of particular theories articulated to those of "modes of production" (such as theory of the family, of the state, etc.). Here again I shall not discuss whether these Marxist constructs are indeed those of Marx himself, or the product of later interpretations that may or may not be consonant with the spirit of the Marxism of Marx. Nor shall I discuss the validity of these theories in the light of our present-day greater knowledge of the societies of the past. Once again I merely point to the formulations as the expression of this same need to "Understand," which implies the possibility of "generalizing."

Thirdly, on the basis of the conceptualization proposed, it is not difficult to identify several tributary societies at more or less the same level of maturity of general development: production techniques, instruments, range of goods, forms of organization of power, systems of knowledge and ideas, and so on. Noteworthy too is a fairly dense web of exchanges of all kinds between these societies: exchange of goods, knowledge, techniques, and ideas. Does this density of exchange justify speaking of a single world-system (albeit described as tributary) - in the singular? Frank and Gills provide an explicit criterion: an integrated system arises when reciprocal influences are "decisive" (A would not be what it is without the relation it has with B). So be it. But the overall question remains: were these relations "decisive" or not?

However, the universality of the laws of social evolution in no way implies the concept of a single system. Two distinct concepts are involved. The first refers to the fact that distinct societies - separated in geographical distance or time - have been able to evolve in a parallel manner for the same underlying reasons. The second implies that these societies are not distinct from one another but ingredients of the same world society. In the evolution of the latter - necessarily global - the laws in question are inseparable from the effects of the interaction between the various components of the world society.

I would in this context make two prefatory comments. 1) Economic exchanges are not necessarily a "decorative" element, making no lasting impression on the "mode of production" and hence on the level of development. Exchanges may be a significant means of distribution of surplus, decisive for some segments of the interrelated societies. The question is not one of principle but of fact. Were they? Where and when? I discount any hasty generalization that they were always (or generally) so or that they were never (or with rare exceptions) so. In the case of the Arab-Islamic region, for example, I have said that the exchanges were significant. They were enough to mark the formation of a "tributary-mercantile" character essential to an understanding of its involuted history of succession from a "glorious" phase to one of "degeneration," and of shifts of the centers of gravity of wealth and power in the region. I have also said that the "protocapitalist" formation of mercantilist Europe (seventeenth-eighteenth centuries) rapidly climbed the step toward capitalism thanks to these exchanges it dominated. But whether the exchanges had a matching role in China, India, the Roman empire, etc., I personally am in no position to say. 2) The exchanges in question must not be limited only to the economic field. Far from it. The writing of the history of the precapitalist epochs puts greater emphasis on cultural exchanges (especially the spread of religions) and military and political exchanges (rise and fall of empires, "barbarian" invasions, etc.), whereas the accent is on the economic aspect of relations within the modern world-system. Was this distinction wrong?

I do not think so. I believe, on the contrary, that the historians -*albeit intuitively - have grasped the reversal of dominance, from the political and ideological to the economic, which is the central core of my own thesis. At this level is it possible to speak of a single tributary political and ideological world-system? I do not believe so. I have therefore preferred to speak of distinct tributary "cultural areas" founded precisely on broad systems of particular reference - most often the religious: Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Christianity. Of course there is a certain relationship between these various metaphysics since they express the fundamental requirement of the same type of (tributary) society. The relationship in turn facilitates mutual borrowings.

To approach an answer to the question (of one or more systems), it is necessary to combine three elements: the density of economic exchanges and transfers of surplus distributed through this channel; the degree of centralization of political power; the relative diversity/specificity and hence autonomy of the ideological systems.

Autonomy of the various tributary systems does not preclude economic relations and other exchanges among them, nor even that such exchanges could be significant. It would be impossible to understand many historical facts and evolutions without reference to these exchanges: the transfer of technology of all kinds (the compass, gunpowder, paper, silk that gave its name to the roads in question, printing, Chinese noodles becoming Italian pasta, etc.); the spread of religious beliefs (Buddhism crossing from India to China and Japan, Islam traveling as far as Indonesia and China, Christianity as far as Ethiopia, south India, and Central Asia), etc.

There is certainly no centralization of surplus at the level of a world-system comparable to that characterizing the modern world in the exchanges that led here and there to lively protocapitalist links (from China and India to the Islamic world, the African Sahel, and medieval Europe) and transfers of surplus - perhaps even decisive at key points of the network of exchanges. The explanation is that centralization of surplus at the time operated mainly in association with centralization of power, and there was no kind of "world-empire" or even a "world power" comparable to what British hegemony would constitute in the nineteenth century or US hegemony in the twentieth.

The ancient (tributary) epochs had nothing comparable to the "polarization" on a global scale of the modern capitalist world. The earlier systems, despite significant levels of exchange, were not polarizing on a world scale, even if they were on a regional scale to the benefit of the centers of the regional systems (for example, Rome, Constantinople, Baghdad, the Italian cities, China, India). By contrast, the capitalist system is truly polarizing on a global scale and is therefore the only one deservedly described as a world-system.

This methodology for the analysis of the interactions between the tributary systems may call for a reassessment of the "traditional" findings in the history of the notorious "barbarians" who occupied the interstices of the great tributary cultural areas. Was the role of these "barbarians" really as it has been made out, a purely negative and "destructive" role? Or did their active role in Intel-trexchanges give them a certain vocation to take decisive initiatives? The latter would explain their success (not only military) in "unifying" immense territories (Genghis Khan's empire), their capacity to situate themselveat the heart of ideological initiatives (Islam born in Arabia, the "barbarian" crossroads of Mediterranean-Indian-African exchanges), their capacity to hoist themselves rapidly to central positions in a tributary system (the glorious example of the Khwarizm area in the first centuries of Islam), etc.

A final reservation concerning the systematization of the hypothesis of the existence of a single world-system throughout history: is it possible to speak of tributary systems and significant exchange networks among them before the fifth to third centuries bc? I do not think so for the following three reasons at least: 1) because the social systems of the greater part of humankind were still backward at the stage I have described as communal; 2) because the islets of civilization at the stage where the state was the recognized form of the expression of power had not yet found complete tributary ideological expression (see the argument on the ideology of the ancient world in Eurocentrism); 3) because the density of the exchange relations between these islets remained weak (this did not prelude some exchange relations; for example, technological borrowings that were able to travel unexpected distances).

==A CRITIQUE OF EVOLUTIONISM==

The theory according to which all human societies have been forever integrated in a single world-system, in continuous evolution (capitalism not representing therefore any kind of qualitative break in this respect), arises from a philosophy of history which is in the end based on the notion of competition. Certainly it is based on a realistic observation of facts, namely, that all societies on earth, in all eras, are to some extent in "competition" with one another. It would not matter whether the relations they did or did not entertain showed their awareness of it. We know that the strongest must carry the day. At this level of abstraction there is indeed a single world, because there is a single humankind. It might perhaps be added that most "open" societies with intensive relations with the others have a greater chance of measuring up to this competition and facing up to it more effectively. It is otherwise for those who shy away from competition and seek to perpetuate their way of life; they risk being overtaken by the progress made elsewhere and later being marginalized.

This discourse is not wrong, but merely at such a high level of abstraction that it begs the real issue, namely, how this competition is manifested. Two bourgeois historians - themselves philosophers of history - deliberately placed themselves at this most general level of abstraction (in order to refute Marx). Arnold Toynbee in this regard suggests an operative model reduced to two terms: the "challenge" and the "response to the challenge." I suggest that, as a model valid for all times and all places, it teaches us nothing that is not already obvious. Toynbee suggests no law to explain why the challenge is taken up or not. He is satisfied with a case-by-case treatment. There is an almost natural parallel with the contradiction between the axioms of neoclassical bourgeois economics defined in terms claiming to be valid for all times ("scarcity," "utility," etc.) and the historical concept of qualitatively differing successive modes of production, determining specific institutional frameworks in which the "eternal rationality of human beings" is expressed. Jacques Pirenne, far superior to Toynbee in my opinion, suggests a refinement of constant contradiction between (sea-going) "open" societies and (land-based) "closed" societies and does not hesitate to describe the former as "capitalist" (Sumer, Phoenicia, Greece, Islam in the first centuries, the Italian cities, the modern West) and the latter as "feudal" (from ancient Persia to the European Middle Ages). He never hesitated to attribute to ^hat I call "protocapitalist elements" the decisive place in the progress of the "open" societies making them the driving force of development of the forces of production. He likewise never concealed that his thesis was intended to discount the "closed" experiences of the Soviet Union and salute the dynamism of the Atlantic world. Hence Pirenne managed - certainly with skill - to replace class struggle with a constant struggle between the capitalist tendency and the feudal tendency within human societies.

I still believe that Marx's method is superior, precisely because it situates the abstraction at the appropriate level. The concept of modes of production gives back to history its explicit real dimension. At that level the significance and character of the capitalist break can be detected. The break is such that I do not think that competition between societies of earlier times and within the modern world-system can be treated in the same way. First because the competition of earlier times rarely crossed the threshold of consciousness and each society saw, or believed, itself "superior" in its own way, "protected by its deities," even when a looming danger imposed a greater consciousness (as between Muslims and Crusaders). Moreover, the discrepancy between the great tributary precapitalist societies is not such that the superiority of one over another is obvious; it is always conjunctural and relative. There is nothing comparable to the subsequent overwhelming superiority of capitalist societies over the rest. That is why I see the seizing of consciousness of this superiority as crucially important and therefore date the beginnings of capitalism to 1492. From then on the Europeans knew that they could conquer the world and went on to do so (see my arguments on this point in Eurocentrism'). We know a posteriori - but the actors of the time were unaware - that the "strongest" is the one who has advanced to a qualitatively superior mode of production - capitalism. I would add that in the competition of earlier times geographical distance had a blunting effect. However intensive exchanges between Rome and China, I find it difficult to believe that the "external" factor could have a similar impact to that of the discrepancies in productivity of our own times. I believe that this distancing gave strictly internal factors a considerably more decisive relative weight. It also explains why those concerned had difficulty in assessing the real balance of forces. Quite different, it seems to me, is competition within the modern world-system, where consciousness is so acute that it is a plaintive chorus in the daily discourse of the authorities.


==A DIAGRAM OF THE TRIBUTARY REGIONAL AND WORLD-SYSTEMS==

The diagram opposite (Figure 8.1) illustrates my concept of the "ancient world-system" (reduced to societies of the so-called eastern hemisphere: Eurasia-Africa) for the periods covering the eighteen centuries between the establishment of the Hellenistic system in the Middle East (300 bc), the establishment of the Han state in China (200 bc), the Kushana and Maurya states in Central Asia and India (200 ac), and the European Renaissance, that is, from 300 bc to 1500 ad. I wish to summarize its characteristics as follows.

First, as I have already said, all societies of the system in question are, from one end of the period to the other, of a tributary nature. Nevertheless, it is possible to distinguish among all these societies those which I would call "central tributaries" from those which are "peripheral tributaries." The former are characterized by a surplus centralization at the relatively high state level, with its redistribution placed under its control; while in peripheral formations, the embryonic character of the state (and even its virtual nonexistence) leads to a complete disintegration of surplus distribution monopolized by local feudal systems. The centers/peripheries antithesis is not, in this case, analogous to that which characterizes the (modern) capitalist world. In the latter, the relationship in question is an economicdomination relationship in which the centers override the peripheries (and this is associated with economic dominance). This is not so in the ancient relationship. Dominated by the ideological authority, the tributary structures are either or peripheral depending on the degree of the completion of the power-centralization process and its expression through a state religion. In the central formations, the latter takes the form of a state religion or a religious-oriented state philosophy with a universal vocation which breaks with the specific local religions of the former periods which I called "communal formations" (see Class and Nation). There is a striking relationship between the establishment of big tributary societies in their completed form and the emergence of great religious and philosophical trends which were to dominate civilizations over the ensuing two thousand years: Hellenism (300 ac), Oriental Christianity, Islam (600 ad), Zoroaster, Buddha, and Confucius (all three 500 bc). This relationship -which in no way excluded the reciprocal concessions provided by the relations that all tributary civilizations maintained among themselves - is not, in my view, an accident, but rather one of the consistent bases of my thesis on the dominant "tributary mode."

The establishment of great philosophical and religious movements associated with the formation of tributary systems represents the first wave of revolutions related to universal history, which is expressed by a universalist-oriented vocation transcending the horizons of the local -almost parochial - line of thinking in the ancient periods. This revolution sets up the tributary system as a general system at the entire level of mankind - or almost does so - for 2,000 to 2,500 years. The second wave of universal-oriented revolutions, which opens up capitalist modernity and its possible socialist overtaking, is marked by the Renaissance (and the revolution in Christianity with which it is associated) and, subsequently, by the three great modern revolutions, the French, Russian, and Chinese revolutions (see Eurocentrism).

The "model" par excellence of this tributary mode is, in my view, provided by China, which, without, it seems, a long incubation period (there is only one millennium between the Shang and the Zhou and the establishment of the Han dynasty), crystallizes in a form which undergoes no fundamental change, either with regard to the organization of productive forces and production relationships or ideology (the Confucianism-Taoism tandem replaced for only a brief moment by Buddhism), or with regard to power concepts during the 2,000 years between the Han dynasty and the 1911 revolution. Here, surplus centralization is at its height, at the level of an enormous society, not only during the brilliant periods where political unity was entirely or almost entirely achieved in this continent-country by great successive dynasties (Han, Tang, Song, Yuan, Ming, and Qing), but even during the periods of imerdynastic disturbances when the country was divided into several kingdoms whose size was nonetheless considerable for the period. At the borders of China, Korea and Vietnam also turned, during the course of the first millennium of our era, into similar tributary systems which, in spite of their political independence with regard to China, borrowed its model of organization and Confucian ideology.

In the Middle East, the tributary system derived its completed form from the conquest of Alexander the Great. I have recommended in this connection (see Eurocentrism) this reading of the successive philosophical and religious orientations of Hellenism, Oriental Christianity, and Islam, However, in this region, the incubation period lasted for as long as thirty centuries for Egypt and Mesopotamia, ten centuries for Persia, Phoenicia, etc., and five centuries for Greece. Hellenism, Christianity, and Islam were, moreover, to produce a synopsis which borrowed some elements crucial to each of these ancient components and even from Persia and India as well. Here, too, surplus centralization for the ensuing 2,000 years is remarkable.

Doubtless, the region was split after the precarious political unification in the Alexander era; but it was split into large kingdoms for the period. Hence, divided between even bigger empires - those of Byzantium (300 to 1400 ad) and the Sassanids (200 to 600 ad) - and subsequently reunified gradually through the expansion of the Muslim caliphate, formed in the seventh century ad, which conquered Constantinople at the end of our period (in 1453), the spaces of surplus centralization were still either vast (during the first three centuries of the caliphate), or at the very least, considerable, after the break-up of the caliphate from the year 1000 to the advantage of Arabo-Berber dynasties in north Africa and Turco-Persians in the Mashreq and western part of Central Asia. The western Roman empire finds its place in this reading of history as an expression of an expansion of the tributary model to the banks of the western Mediterranean. Of secondary importance in universal history, the Roman empire owes its place to the fact that it has transmitted tributary ideology - in the form of western Christianity - to the "European" periphery.

A Eurocentric reading of history (see my critical appraisal in Euro-centrism) has, in this regard, distorted the achievements which, beyond the Italian peninsula, failed to resist barbaric feudalization (that is, the disintegration of the tributary system).

A third completed tributary center was established on the Indian continent in 200 bc from the Maurya period, followed by the Kushana state (which overlaps the western part of Central Asia) and Gupta after the long incubation period which began with the Indus civilizations (Mohenjodaro and Harappa - 2500 bc). The Muslim conquest from the eleventh century on which followed after a "pulverization" period (of the seventh and ninth centuries) re-established together with the Ghazhavids, the sultanates of Delhi (1200-1500 ad), and subsequently the Mughal empire (1500-1800 ad), a tributary centralization on a large scale, while'the Hindu states of Dekkan, also tributaries, equally represented considerable kingdoms for the period.

Three zones appear in Figure 8,1 whose peripheral character is striking during the entire or almost entire period under consideration (from 300 bc to 1500 ad). Europe (beyond the Byzantine region and Italy, that is, "barbaric" Europe) was the product of a tributary graft (transmitted by the ideal of the Roman empire and Christian universalism) on a social -body still organized, to a large extent, on deteriorated community bases. Here, I wish to refer to the analysis I made (see Class and Nation) which simultaneously gives an account of the disintegration in the control of surpluses, and which defines feudalism as an uncompleted peripheral form of the tributary system, although the collapse of the state system was partially offset by the Church. Europe was slowly moving toward the tributary form, as testified by the establishment of absolute monarchies (in Spain and Portugal after the reconquista, and in England and France after the Hundred Years War). This belatedness constitutes, in my view, the crucial advantage which facilitated the early qualitative strides made by the Renaissance and capitalism (see Class and Nation).

Japan constituted, at the other end of the Euro-Asian continent, a peripheral tributary mode whose resemblance to Europe had struck me even before Mishio Morishima came to confirm my thesis. The degraded form of Japanese Confucianism, the feudal disintegration which preceded the belated formation of a monarchical centralization from the Tokugawa state (1600 ad), bear testimony to this peripheral character (see Eurocentrism), which, here, too, explains the remarkable ease with which Japan switched over to capitalism in the ninteenth century.

Sub-Saharan Africa constituted the third periphery. It was still lingering at the communal stage developing toward tributary forms. At this stage the tributary surplus centralizations still opeonly on societies with limited size. Disintegration therefore remained the rule.

The status of Southeast Asia was ambivalent. It seems to me that here it is possible to recognize some central type of tributary formations - even if they only cover spaces than those of other great Asian systems - and peripheral zones (denned by surplus disintegration). To the first type belongs the Khmer empire, followed by its Thai, Burmese, and Cambodian successors from the fifth century and, perhaps, in Indonesia, the Majapahit kingdom from the thirteenth century. On the other hand, the organized societies of Malaysia and Indonesia which crystallized into states under the influence of Hinduism (from the fifth century) and subsequently Islam, seem, in my view, to belong to the peripheral family, crumbled by the scattering of the surplus, collected in very small and relatively numerous and fragile states.

The status of the Central Asian region was special. The region itself is less defined in its borders than the others. Some large states were established in this region at an early period - such as the Kushana empire - which directly linked up the Hellenistic Middle East and the Sassanids and then the Islamic Middle East to India and China. The region itself became the center of gravity of an immense empire at the time of Genghis Khan (1300 ad). Before and after this final crystallization, it had entered the Islamic orbit. Its modes of organization were tributary-oriented, at one time advanced (where the expression of centralized power on a large scale makes it possible), at another time relapsing into "feudal" disintegration. But the major feature of the region was that, by virtue of its very geographical position, it was the indispensable transit zone for East-West trade China, India, the Middle East, and beyond to as far as the peripheries of the system). Having been in competition with the sea route from time immemorial, the continental route lost its importance only belatedly in the sixteenth century.

As for the second characteristic of the ancient world-system: during the entire eighteenth-century period under consideration, all the societies represented in Figure 8.1 not only existed together, but still maintained trade links of all types (trade and war, technological and cultural transfers) which were much more intense than was generally thought. In this very general sense, one can talk of the "general system" without, of course, mistaking its nature for that of the modern (capitalist) world-system. In Figure 8.1, I represent these links by eleven arrows. Of course, the intensity of flows that each of these arrows represents varied considerably with time and space. But above all - and I wish to emphasize this point - their connection with the internal dynamics peculiar to the different tributary systems they link up is not only fundamentally different from that which characterizes the "international links" within the modern world-system, but has also operated differently from one tributary formation to another."

(http://abuss.narod.ru/Biblio/WS/ws-5000_4.htm)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]