

=Source=

See: [[Environmental Sustainability of the Collaborative Economy‎‎]]

From the document H2020–ICT-2016-1 DECODE D.2.1 at 

[https://www.academia.edu/37197764/H2020_ICT-2016-1_DECODE_D.2.1_Multidisciplinary_framework_on_commons_collaborative_economy_0_0_Multidisciplinary_Multidisciplinary_Multidisciplinary_Multidisciplinary_Framework_on_Framework_on_Framework_on_Framework_on?email_work_card=view-paper]


=Directory=
CCCB:
Center of Contemporary Culture of Barcelona, oriented to open culture www.cccb.org 44.
Col·lectiu Punt 6:
architecture, urbanism and participation collective which aims a life without any kindof discrimination http://Punt6.org 45.
Coperfield:
 business consultancy firm which holds an incubator for social innovation/entrepreneurshipprojects http://www.coperfield.org 46.

Dipòsit de la Recerca de Catalunya
: Catalan Research Office with a link on open researchhttp://www.recercat.cat/  47.

Mapa literari català:
 a literary dissemination platform http://mapaliterari.cat/ca/  48.

X.Net:
activist group specialized on different digital contemporary issues, including free culture andcopyright issues http://whois--x.net/  49.

Restaurant Leka
: a restaurant where the furniture, the work clothing and the recipes are based onopen-design and are available on their web http://www.restauranteleka.com 50.

Medio Design:
 consultancy and design firm related to the new production and digital fabrication modelshttp://www.mediodesign.com/  51.

Ableton Live Barcelona:
 online informal community of Ableton creative software toolshttps://www.facebook.com/AbletonLiveUsersBarcelona/  52.

ARSGames:
non-lucrative association for the videogames cultural research open dissemination andpromotion53.

Docúpate:
experts and teachers panel who assists and teaches about documentary productionhttp://www.docupate.org/es/14-2-convocatoria.html 54.

Filmin
: on-demand tv platform of independent cinema https://www.filmin.es/  55.

Gràcia Territori Sonor:
 non-lucrative association, based on Gràcia district, which aim is promotingexperimental music http://www.gracia-territori.com/  56.

HAMACA
: videoart and electronic arts distribution organization with a horizontal network formhttp://www.hamacaonline.net/informacion.php 57.

Latele.cat:
 open, free and distributed communication media channel http://latele.cat/  58.

Tea-tron:
 network and platform for the dissemination, debate and promotion around theatre andperforming arts in Catalunya http://www.tea-tron.com/teatron/Portada.do 59.

Colectivo Enmedio
: creative activism network creatiu http://www.enmedio.info/  60.

Compacto:
 audiovisual production cooperativehttp://compacto.coop/  61.

Institute for Advanced Automatisms (IFAPA)
: artistic-action based research collective which aim isto stop the effects of quantification and datification of capitalist societies http://www.ifapa.me/  62.

Taller d’Història de Gràcia
: non-lucrative association with a History workshop format which promotesthe research and rescue of the collective memory of Gràcia district http://www.tallerhistoriadegracia.cat/  63.

La Caníbal:
 cooperative bookstore which promotes non-fiction and critic, feminist literature, includingthrough cultural actions, events and presentations http://www.lacanibal.net/  

Creativechain:
 Blockchain and coin platform for the creative sectors http://creativechain.org/proyecto/  65.

Chefly
: two-sided market and sharing platform for those who wants to eat homemade food, and thosewho loves to cook at home https://chefly.co/  66.

ECrowd!:
 crowdlending platform for environmental-friendly projects https://www.ecrowdinvest.com/ca/  67.

Piggybee:
 p2p platform for people who travel and people who want to send packets to other countrieshttps://www.piggybee.com/es/  68.

Bitnation:
 Blockchain platform for distributed governance https://bitnation.co/  69.

Backfeed:
 Blockchain platform for decentralized organizations http://backfeed.cc/  70.

Arboribus:
 online B2B (with a P2P orientation) lending platform https://www.arboribus.com/  71.

Community Exchange System
: SaaS management tools for social coinshttps://www.community-exchange.org/home/  72.

Coop57:
 financial services cooperative http://www.coop57.coop 73.

Fiare Banca Ética:
 ethical bank http://www.fiarebancaetica.coop 74.

Zank:
 personal P2P lending platform https://www.zank.com.es/  75.

Verse:
 app for managing micropayments between friends and P2P https://verse.me/es/  76.

Iniciativa Barcelona Open Data
: an hybrid between GNO and consultancy private firm for thepromotion of Open Data use between civilians as in companies http://iniciativabarcelonaopendata.cat/  77.

Dotopen:
 creative consultancy firm which organizes hackathons (as Smart City Hack contest) fordeveloping social apps and platforms http://appcircus.com/  78.

Espai Contrabandos:
 a space for the visibilization of independent publishing related to non-fiction andcritical thinking literature, by a collaboration with an association and Pol·len publishers cooperativehttps://www.espaicontrabandos.com/  79.

Fablab Barcelona 
http://www.fablabbcn.org/  80.

HOLON
: Open Design and Service Design firm http://www.holon.cat 81.

Makerconvent:
a makerspace at the Civic Center Convent de Sant Agustíhttp://conventagusti.com/maker 82.

MOB Barcelona:
 creative coworking spaces; each space has a specialization. At the same time, theywork as an Open Innovation Platform http://www.mob-barcelona.com/  83. Ouishare España: ecosystem and network of collaborative economies entrepreneurs, promoters andresearchers http://ouishare.net/en/community/37 84.

Atta33 Makerspace+TMDC:
 two interdependent makerspaces, with different focus united under thesame physical space https://atta33.com/  85.

Can Batlló
 https://www.canbatllo.org/  86.

International Creative Commons Cinema Festival of Barcelona: 
http://www.bccn.cc/  

Ciutat Invisible
: self-managed cooperative oriented towards the creation and dissemination of criticalcontents which burst political and social transformation processes https://www.laciutatinvisible.coop/  88.

La Deriva:
a disciplinary and postdigital self-managed space for creators and creativeshttp://laderiva.net/  89.

La Escocesa:
 cultural space for artshttp://laescocesa.org

La Fundición:
 cultural work cooperativehttp://lafundicio.net/que-es-como-funciona/  90.

Lab Libertario:
 non-physical space and collective which aim is the dissemination of new learning waysfor new tools of creation and open tech http://libertar.io/lab/  91.

Librería Gigamesh:
 fantasy genre bookstore where they promote and freely shares a space for smalland independent publishers, writers and local table game developers http://www.gigamesh.com/  92.

Makeatuvida
: non-lucrative association which researches and promotes a collaborative, open, makerphilosophy. Some of their projects are El Recetario http://www.makeatuvida.net/  93.

Transfolab:
makerspace oriented towards the reuse and recycling of materials, as long as thepromotion of a circular economy culture http://www.transfolabbcn.com/  94.

The Social coin:
social coin platform plataforma de moneda social https://thesocialcoin.com/  95.

Communia
: social economy cooperative for technologic sovereignty http://www.communia.org/  96.

Jamgo
: tech and IT development cooperative http://jamgo.es 97.

Pangea
: independent non-lucrative organization wich promotes the strategic use of open IT andnetworks http://pangea.org 98.

Open Wireless:
 a wi-fi sharing network https://openwireless.org/  99.

Bonobo Community
: work cooperative for IT professionals http://www.bcommunity.es/  100.

Delibera:
 platform tools for deliberating processes http://www.delibera.info 101.

Swarm City:
 Blockchain technology of commerce decentralization https://swarm.city/  102.

CatLabs
: Generalitat de Catalunya program, inspired on Living Labs, oriented to create a social digitalinnovation spaces network based on Catalunyahttp://catalunya2020.gencat.cat/ca/instruments/catlabs/  103.

Open Green Map:
 open mapping project for spaces, people and projects related to environmentalsustainability development http://www.opengreenmap.org/greenmap/barcelona-green-map 104.

Dones en Xarxa:
 plataforma no lucrativa per a fomentar xarxes i promoció de les dones professionalsi emprenedores (abans vinculades al sector TIC) http://donesenxarxa.cat/?lang=ca 105.

LabCoop
: non-lucrative cooperative for incubating social and cultural entrepreneurial projectshttp://labcoop.coop/  106.

Calidoscoop:
 a cooperative for the social and solidary economy http://www.calidoscoop.coop/ 

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Spain]]