
Let's try a reference. <ref>this is the reference</ref>

What happens with nested definition lists?
; 1. The first dt
: 1.1 The first dd
:; 1.2 including a 2nd level term?
:: 1.2.1 and a 2nd level dd?
::; 1.2.2 1and even a 3rd?
::: 1.2.2.1 what, 3?
:: could maybe use these for roll-your-own contents

Here is the interesting reason why double "==" works better.
=This is a single = heading=
and this is the following text
=Another single = heading=
and this is the following text
==Here is a double == heading==
and the text following it

Notice the spacing '''before''' the headings!

The double == heading leaves space before it, as expected for a sub-heading

The single = heading is larger, but leaves no space, so to get it looking OK, you have to add an extra space line in the text.
As here:


= Sandbox =
This is a sandbox. I am writing to it.

[[dtzortzis42]]

=Sandbox2=

This is another sandbox

=Sandbox3=

And another... this is a test by [[Stacco Troncoso]]

==Sensorica post test ==

At the third iteration, the service beneficiary gets a fast paced innovation at a quarter of the normal cost. Even more interestingly, the cost cuts aren’t transferred to those who provide the service. They are actual cost savings that result from a heavy use and rapid remix of open source, from the mutualization of resources within the network, from the collaborative nature of activities, from the elimination of bureaucracy, and other inefficiencies that come from lack of motivation. On the contrary, everyone is paid with the same measure, according to the Canadian labor market, no matter where the contributor lives. More precisely, within SENSORICA those who live in Pakistan aren’t paid less. And if that wasn't enough, on top of providing rapid innovation at a fraction of the cost to classical institutions, so that they can maintain jobs, at the same time sensoricans increase the value of the global commons, because everything they do is open source. All the data about the economic activity within SENSORICA is open to the public, we can’t make this up! 

This mutually beneficial economic relationship between classical institutions and SENSORICA, as an open innovation and peer production network, can be seen as a bridge between the classical capitalist economy and the p2p economy, as a channel for transfer of resources from the old economy to the new. 


===The Barda case===

The Barda periscope project was the first implementation of a new open project development methodology designed by Fernando, Tiberius and Lynn, in the context of a service provided to a client. This methodology was formalized in SENSORICA’s network resource planning (NRP) software through a concept named Workflow recipes, which are time-dependent and deliverables-dependent bundles of Processes associated with a Project (a context of work). This methodology consists of the following steps: Project initiation, Design considerations, Design, Prototyping, and Product. All the contributions to the Project were logged within this structure.

==More information==
<references/>