

==Reading Material==

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:High-importance_Free_software_articles

https://sharingisliberty.wordpress.com/

http://fossilbank.wikidot.com/

http://www.theopensourceway.org/wiki/Main_Page

www.catb.org/esr/faqs/hacker-howto.html

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1W8KksaSILLMV0TILQBWscshhFKvEAsLuXpwUdBgK17k/edit?pli=1

http://www.radicalsocialentreps.org/2012/07/open-source-currencies-on-the-rise-in-greece/

==Nonprofit Networking Organizations==
In NY:
* http://www.nycon.org/
* http://www.npccny.org/



=Old Wiki Homepage=
Welcome to the Sarapis Foundation wiki where we share unpolished information relevant to Free/Libre/Open source (FLO) projects.  We love FLO because it provides us with access to our technologies source materials so we can participate in their development.  Read more of [http://sarapisfoundation.org/index.php/think/openlocalism our thoughts about FLO.]

We've divided our work into three sections:

'''FLO Solutions are software, hardware, data and knowledge solutions that make their source materials accessible to anyone who wants to participate in their development.'''
*[[BEEx]] is FLO grassroots fundraising software solution that we've deployed at [http://www.beex.org BEEx.org]
*[[FLOing.org]] is a news aggregation and community website for people interested in participating in the free/libre/open evolution.
*[[OpenImperative]] helps nonprofit and community organizations understand the value of FLO solutions.

'''FLO Spaces are physical locations that encourage  participatory production practices.'''
*[http://www.opencoworking.org/wiki/index.php?title=Main_Page OpenCoworking] is a project to centralize and make accessible information about the world's coworking spaces.  You can see some of our notes on the project at [[Open Coworking Library]].
**[[Starting a Coworking Space?]]
**The [[OS Handbook]] is a living document that synthesizes coworking best practices from a variety of different sources including coworking owners, operators, users and community groups and includes original and curated business plans, financial models and investor presentations intended to help people understand, create and maintain FLO-friendly spaces.

'''FLO Participation are Sarapis team projects that integrate FLO solutions and FLO spaces together in ambitious ways.'''
*[[FLO Farm]] is a 200+ acre FLO Space in Eastern Pennsylvania where we farm, research, craft and live using FLO principles.  Check out [http://flofarm.org FLOfarm.org] to see what's happening on the land.
*[[New Junction City]] is a movement to turn the Broadway Junction neighborhood of Brooklyn, NY into a hub of FLO activity.
*[[FLOAmerica]] is a set of recommendations designed for America's unique set of challenges and traditions.

'''Help organize materials in our [[drop box]].'''

=Pages=

==Productivity Software==

Web Browser: Firefox http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/

Microsoft Office Replacement: Libre Office http://www.documentfoundation.org/

Email Management Thunderbird http://www.mozillamessaging.com/en-US/thunderbird/

Photoshop Replacement: GIMP http://www.gimp.org/

Illustrator Replacement: Inkscape http://inkscape.org/

3D Graphics: Blender http://www.blender.org/

==Web Applications==

Wordpress is best for blogs http://wordpress.org/

Joomla is makes it easy to produce content sites and intranets. http://www.joomla.org/

Drupal requires more work but is more customizable. http://drupal.org/

CiviCRM is a powerful, slightly complicated constituent relationship management system: http://civicrm.org/

==Software==

[[Standard Bundle]] is a list of popular, useful open source tools.

[http://www.osalt.com/ OS Alternative] shows you the open source alternatives to proprietary software products.

[http://www.openbravo.com/product/pos/ Open Source POS System]

==Hardware==

[http://reprap.org/wiki/Main_Page RepRap 3d Printer] and a [http://reprapkit.com/ store] to buy what we need to make one.

[http://www.globalscaletechnologies.com/p-22-sheevaplug-dev-kit-us.aspx SheevaPlug computing device]

==Philosophy==

[http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/wealth_of_networks/Main_Page The Wealth of Networks Wiki] is wiki "based on Yochai Benkler's book, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom."

Download and read [http://catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/homesteading/homesteading.ps Homesteading the Noosphere] by Eric Steven Raymond - a great primer on open source and hacker culture.

[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-cleveland-model-and-micromanufacturing-an-opportunity-for-collaboration/2010/04/06 "The Cleveland Model and Micromanufacturing: An Opportunity for Collaboration?" by P2P Foundation.]

[http://mutualist.blogspot.com/ Mutualist Blog: Free Market Anti-Capitalism] "To dissolve, submerge, and cause to disappear the political or governmental system in the economic system by reducing, simplifying, decentralizing and suppressing, one after another, all the wheels of this great machine, which is called the Government or the State. --Proudhon, General Idea of the Revolution"

[http://homebrewindustrialrevolution.wordpress.com/ The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low Overhead Manifesto] is a free PDF on the ramifications of open hardware.

[http://www.quirky.com/ Quirky] is an open(ish) approach to product R&D.

[http://www.opensource.org/governance/announce Open Source Alliance] announces it's looking to get politics.

==Development Firms==

[http://www.datascribe.biz/ DataScribe] builds nonprofit websites with open source tools.

[http://acquia.com Acquia] provides support to the Drupal Community

==Initiatives==

[http://www.100kgarages.com/ 100k Garages] "is a community of workshops with digital fabrication tools for precisely cutting, machining, drilling, or sculpting the parts for your project or product, in all kinds of materials, in a shop or garage near you."

[http://bestpractices.org/ BestPractices.org] Sharing Database in Improving the Living Environment in partnership with the UN-Habitat.

[http://open-innovation-projects.org/ Open Innovation Projects] is a list of open design projects.

[http://libreplanet.org/wiki/Main_Page LibrePlanet] "is a global network of free software activists organized into teams working together to help further the ideals of software freedom by advocating and contributing to free software."

[http://www.opensolutionsalliance.org/osa/index.html Open Solutions Alliance]

[http://adbard.net/ AdBard] is an adnetwork for the FLOSS community.

==Community Groups==

[http://groups.google.com/group/coworking The Coworking Google Group] is a community of space owners, operators, members and enthusiasts who discuss issues pertaining to the coworking movement

[http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/ HackerSpaces.org] is a one stop shop for a tremendous about of information about hackerspaces including a directory of spaces and information about best practices.

[http://coworking.de/ Coworking.de] is the German coworking community portal.

==News and Thought Leadership==

[http://emergentresearch.com/ Emergent Research] has a 'coworking lab' that focuses on monitoring the growth of the movement.

[http://www.deskmag.com/ DeskMag] is "the magazine about the new places we work, how they look, how they function, how they could be improved and how we work in them. We especially focus on workspaces which are home to the new breed of independent workers, such as coworking spaces, private shared studios and executive offices."

==Open Software and Data Projects==

[http://github.com/thehub/ The Hub's open source software projects] including space management software.

[http://groups.google.com/group/coworkingdb?hl=en Coworking Registry] is a database of coworking spaces that focuses on developing a powerful APi.

==Open Space Handbooks and Manuals==

The [http://socialinnovation.ca/ Center for Social Innovation] of Toronto Canada has published [http://socialinnovation.ca/sssi three pdfs] about their experiences creating a space, how to create your own space and how collaborative spaces are changing in the world.

The Hub Design+Make Handbook version 1.7 is "aimed at helping Hub Design and Make Teams develop and use principles, tools and systems to conceive and navigate the project of creating a physical Hub."

The [http://sarapisfoundation.org Sarapis Foundation] has published [http://sarapisfoundation.org/files/Coworking_Finances_v1.0.zip financial models] for a coworking space in Brooklyn, New York.  One model includes a cafe, the other is just coworking space and events.

Kaan Aksay also shared a great [http://www.editgrid.com/user/harro33/shared_office_model financial model] on the coworking google group that is highly geared towards the process of starting a shared office space.

==Exemplary Spaces==

[http://bucketworks.org/ Bucketworks] in Milwaukee

[http://www.indyhall.org/ Indy Hall] in Philadelphia

[http://thecubelondon.com/ The Cube] in London

[http://www.cocovivo.com/blog.html Coco Vivo] in Panama

==Organizing==

[http://www.anarres.org.au/essays/amndx.htm ANTI-MASS - Methods of organisation for collectives.]

=Needs Sorting=

==Space Databases==

[http://www.OpenCoworking.org/wiki OpenCoworking Wiki]

[http://www.Hackerspaces.org Hackspaces Wiki]

[http://www.ecovillages.org Ecovillages]

==Community Groups==

[http://groups.google.com/group/coworking The Coworking Google Group] is a community of space owners, operators, members and enthusiasts who discuss issues pertaining to the coworking movement

[http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/ HackerSpaces.org] is a one stop shop for a tremendous about of information about hackerspaces including a directory of spaces and information about best practices.

[http://coworking.de/ Coworking.de] is the German coworking community portal.

==News and Thought Leadership==

[http://emergentresearch.com/ Emergent Research] has a 'coworking lab' that focuses on monitoring the growth of the movement.

[http://www.deskmag.com/ DeskMag] is "the magazine about the new places we work, how they look, how they function, how they could be improved and how we work in them. We especially focus on workspaces which are home to the new breed of independent workers, such as coworking spaces, private shared studios and executive offices."

==Open Software and Data Projects==

[http://github.com/thehub/ The Hub's open source software projects] including space management software.

[http://groups.google.com/group/coworkingdb?hl=en Coworking Registry] is a database of coworking spaces that focuses on developing a powerful APi.

[https://github.com/nadineproject/nadine Nadine] is a Django web project that helps coworking space staff track and bill members, and more.

[http:///www.opencoworking.org/wiki OpenCoworking] is an open data platform for the coworking community.  More info [http://wiki.coworking.info/w/page/31359618/NadineProject here].

==Open Space Handbooks and Manuals==

The [http://socialinnovation.ca/ Center for Social Innovation] of Toronto Canada has published [http://socialinnovation.ca/sssi three pdfs] about their experiences creating a space, how to create your own space and how collaborative spaces are changing in the world.

The Hub Design+Make Handbook version 1.7 is "aimed at helping Hub Design and Make Teams develop and use principles, tools and systems to conceive and navigate the project of creating a physical Hub."

The [http://sarapisfoundation.org Sarapis Foundation] has published [http://sarapisfoundation.org/files/Coworking_Finances_v1.0.zip financial models] for a coworking space in Brooklyn, New York.  One model includes a cafe, the other is just coworking space and events.

Kaan Aksay also shared a great [http://www.editgrid.com/user/harro33/shared_office_model financial model] on the coworking google group that is highly geared towards the process of starting a shared office space.

==Exemplary Spaces==

[http://bucketworks.org/ Bucketworks] in Milwaukee

[http://www.indyhall.org/ Indy Hall] in Philadelphia

[http://thecubelondon.com/ The Cube] in London

[http://www.cocovivo.com/blog.html Coco Vivo] in Panama

==Practices==

[http://www.foodandtechconnect.com/site/2011/01/8-simple-steps-to-hackathon-epiphany/ 8 Simple Steps to Hackathon Epiphany]

[http://ickevald.net/resistance/anti-mass.htm The Anti-Mass: Methods of Organizing for Collectives]

==Space Directories==

The [http://directory.ic.org/ Intentional Communities Directory] is part of the Intentional Communities website, a project of the [http://fic.ic.org/ Fellowship for Intentional Community (FIC)].  The community list is 1000s long and [http://directory.ic.org/iclist/geo.php here.]



==Mark Frazier of OpenWorld==
Over the years, I've been impressed by the following spectrum of reform
opportunities. All can help awaken land values in distressed areas.

As long as the gains from appreciated land values go in large part to
social benefit (helping fund local good causes), there may be prospects
for a left-right alignment in support of the following:

1)  Free and open source eGovernment modules, aimed at improving business
climates in distressed areas (by simplifying business licensing, zoning,
and building code approval processes)

More:  http://www.openworldinstitute.org

2) Land grants -- via transfers of idle municipally-owned properties -- to
endow local microscholarship funds for peer learning, online skills
acquisition, and certifications

More: http://www.entrepreneurialschools.com/land-grants &
http://www.entrepreneurialschools.com/microscholarships

3) Lower insurance costs via group purchase of homeowners insurance
policies, with additional discounts keyed to level of progress
(digitally-recorded) by neighborhood cleanup/fixup and community crime
prevention initiatives

More:  Stimulating Community Enterprise - a 1984 report I did for the
Joint Economic Committee of US Congress (contact me if you'd like a copy)

4)  Formation of charter schools and virtual ventures that vest students
as equity stakeholders, with rewards and prizes linked to peer group
progress

More:  http://j.mp/7Z8m6w

5)  Student engagement with local enterprises via work-study projects on
removing barriers to their growth (see @anametheus "University of
Tomorrow" talk)

http://blog.changeyourreality.com/post/858769274/a-university-of-the-future
 (especially from 17:25 onward)

6)  Formation of coops to lower health insurance prices via group
purchase, including discounts for documented changes in diet/lifestyle
(e.g. the "Safeway Plan" rewarding those who bring body mass index levels
below 30)

More:  http://j.mp/4Ic3a1

7)  Reduction of property tax burdens on neighborhoods in step with their
assumption of infrastructure/service responsibilities

More: http://j.mp/dNriG2

8)  Linking of public sector salaries/pensions to the growth rate of the
local/regional economy, along the lines of Singapore's 'flexiwage' system.

More:  http://j.mp/gxZ6XH

==Projects==

[http://it.usaspending.gov/ IT Dashboard]: The IT Dashboard is a website enabling federal agencies, industry, the general public and other stakeholders to view details of federal information technology investments -

[http://www.usa.gov/webcontent/resources/tools/fedspace.shtml FedSpace]: FedSpace is a secure intranet and collaboration workspace for Federal employees and contractors.

[http://digitaliser.dk/ Digitalizer]: Danish Approach to FedSpace.

[http://www.opencongress.org/ OpenCongress]: Track bills, votes, people in Congress.

[http://littlesis.org/ LittleSis]: Free database of who-knows-who at the heights of business and government.

[http://www.popvox.com POPvox] "bridges the gap between the input the public wants to provide and the information Members of Congress want and need to receive."

[http://metavid.org/ MetaVid]: "The Open Video archive of the US Congress"

[http://maplight.org/ MapLight] "Connect the Dots between Money and Votes"

[http://www.followthemoney.org/ Follow the Money] "The Nation's Most Complete Resource for Information on Money in State Politics"

[http://www.opensecrets.org/ Open Secrets] "OpenSecrets.org is your nonpartisan guide to money’s influence on U.S. elections and public policy. Whether you’re a voter, journalist, activist, student or interested citizen, use our free site to shine light on your government."

[http://www.govtrack.us/ GovTrack] Tracking Congress

[http://publicequalsonline.com/ Public=Online]   "“Government transparency is critical to creating a better democracy, and of highest importance in how I cast my vote. I pledge, through my sustained engagement, to hold public officials accountable for being open and transparent.”

[http://wiki.civiccommons.com/ CivicCommons] "Sharing technolog for the public good."

[http://www.govhubs.org/ GovHub] open source repository for government.

[http://public.resource.org/index.html Public.Resource.org] makes bulk information from the government available like codes and court decisions.

[http://openstates.sunlightlabs.com/ The Open State Project] collects and makes available data about state legislative activities, including bill summaries, votes, sponsorships, legislators, and committees.

"A [http://wiki.changecamp.ca/ ChangeCamp] is a creative face-to-face gathering that is citizen-led, non-partisan and social web enabled

[http://www.scribd.com/doc/21926670/The-First-Earth-Battalion-Field-Manual The First Earth Battalion Field Manual] articulates a way for the US military to open itself up.


[http://www.muckrock.com/ MuckRock] is a website that helps you file, track, appeal, and eventually publish FOIA'd documents, all through a single web interface.

==Organizations==

[http://sunlightfoundation.com/ Sunlight Foundation] has a tremendous amount of [http://sunlightfoundation.com/resources/ projects] with which to collaboration.

[http://www.propublica.org/ ProPublica] is honest news.

[http://www.livingeconomies.org/ BALLE] is a vehicle for connecting to local businesses.

[http://www.cityyear.org/corpsexperience.aspx City Year] is an example of a 'capacity building organization.'

[http://octo.dc.gov/DC/OCTO/ Office of DC CTO] is a primary mover in the open city government movement.

[http://codeforamerica.org/ Code for America] "Connecting city governments and Web 2.0 talent."

[http://openplans.org/ OpenPlans] is a New York based nonprofit that helped create Open311 and other technology intensive open government projects.

[http://knowledgeaspower.org/ Knowledge as Power]: "KAP allows you to track legislation, communicate with lawmakers, and impact the laws of your state – it's quick, easy, and timely."

[http://www.opensourceforamerica.org/ Open Source for America] is a technology industry open source advocacy coalition.

[http://www.govloop.com/ GovLoop] is a social network geared towards government employees with over 35,000+ members.

[http://www.participatorypolitics.org/ Participatory Politics Foundation] is a New York based nonprofit that built [http://www.opencongress.org OpenCongress] and is working on a similar application for open city and state governments.

==Development Firms==

[http://developmentseed.org/ Development Seed] DC - Drupal, creators of [http://OpenAtrium.org Open Atrium], a Drupal based project management system being run on GaryJohnson2012.com.

[http://www.phase2technology.com Phase Two Technology]: DC - Drupal, creators of [http://www.phase2technology.com/openpublic OpenPublic], a Drupal CMS distribution for federal government projects.

[http://bridgecitystudio.com/ Bridge City Studio] Portland - Drupal has a nice [http://bridgecitystudio.com/resources resources] page.

[http://civicactions.com/ CivicActions] Berkeley - Drupal, [http://civicrm.org CiviCRM] constituent relationship management system of Drupal and Joomla.

[http://brattcollective.com/ Brattcollective.com] is "a worker-owned and operated technology collective, focused on workplace democracy and promoting a democratic society while supporting like-minded businesses and organizations by providing open-source website development and consulting."  They work with [http://aspirationtech.org/ Aspiration Tech].

[http://radicaldesigns.org/ Radical Designs] "is a full service web development group focused exclusively on the needs of non-profit and grassroots social change organizations."

==News and Commentary==

[http://govfresh.com/ GovFresh] is a news organization that "inspires government-citizen collaboration and build a more engaged democracy."

[http://www.opengovtv.com/ OpenGovTV] "provides Open Government and Gov 2.0 News, Information & Resources for businesses, government agencies, and constituents to more effectively participate in and benefit from the emerging technologies designed to restore this nation's economy and create jobs as a result of an Open Government."

[http://spectrum.ieee.org/riskfactor/computing/it/all-us-government-it-projects-under-review All US Government IT Projects Under Review]

[http://www.zdnet.com.au/denmark-urges-government-support-for-open-source_p2-120280102.htm Denmark urges government support for open source]

Open Source for America [http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/open_source_for_america_the_new_government_account.php  The New Government Accountability]

[http://www.netaction.org/opensrc/oss-report.html The Case for Government Promotion of Open Source Software]

[http://www.epractice.eu/en/cases/digitaliserdk Digitalisér.dk Review]

[http://planet.hackingcongress.org/ Joshua Tauberer's News Aggregator]

==States==

[http://www.civicapps.org/ CivicApps] Portland App Contest

[http://www.rjionline.org/fellows-program/herzog/index.php Open Missouri]

[http://reinventalbany.org/ New York State Executive Order]

==Opportunities==

[https://www.bpn.gov/ccr/default.aspx Central Contractor Registration (CCR)]  is the primary registrant database for the U.S. Federal Government. CCR collects, validates, stores and disseminates data in support of agency acquisition missions.  Is this the primary channel of US government communication with the private sector?  If so, we need to start working with them to make APIs...

[http://taxpayer.net/search_by_category.php?action=view&proj_id=2789&category=&type=Project The projects] that receive email funding.

[http://www.opencrs.com/ Open CRS] simply asks congress to make all the tax-payer funded reports of the $100m/year Congressional Research Service open and available to the tax-paying public.  What is this money was allocated via open competitions?

[http://resource.org/8_principles.html 8 Principles of Open Data]

==Fabrication==

[http://www.100kgarages.com/ 100k Garages] "is a community of workshops with digital fabrication tools for precisely cutting, machining, drilling, or sculpting the parts for your project or product, in all kinds of materials, in a shop or garage near you."

[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-cleveland-model-and-micromanufacturing-an-opportunity-for-collaboration/2010/04/06 "The Cleveland Model and Micromanufacturing: An Opportunity for Collaboration?" by P2P Foundation.]

[http://mutualist.blogspot.com/ Mutualist Blog: Free Market Anti-Capitalism] "To dissolve, submerge, and cause to disappear the political or governmental system in the economic system by reducing, simplifying, decentralizing and suppressing, one after another, all the wheels of this great machine, which is called the Government or the State. --Proudhon, General Idea of the Revolution"

[http://homebrewindustrialrevolution.wordpress.com/ The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low Overhead Manifesto] is a free PDF on the ramifications of open hardware.

'''The Idea: The government gives underutilized land to people who create FLO solutions for nonprofits so they can provide more services for less money to the America people.'''

Time Periods
*Colonial
*Revolution
*Pre Civil War
*Land Grant University Acts
*Cooperative Extension Programs
*World Wars
*Post War
*The Present

[http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/7/usc_sup_01_7_10_13.html Morrell Act]

==Cooperative Extensions==

'''Where can we find information about the 2900 different cooperative extension offices in the US?'''

-http://www.csrees.usda.gov/Extension/USA-text.html

'''What big technologies have been developed and deployed through cooperative extension programs over their history? Recently?'''

'''How do cooperative extension offices relate to land-grant universities?  Are they a part of the university, a university network, a statewide network? '''

Each U.S. state and territory has a state office at its land-grant university and a network of local or regional offices. These offices are staffed by one or more experts who provide useful, practical, and research-based information to agricultural producers, small business owners, youth, consumers, and others in rural areas and communities of all sizes.

'''Where does all the technology developed via cooperative extensions go?  Who owns it?'''

'''What activities take place at a cooperative extension office? '''

Most cooperative extension offices collaborate with partners to help people and communities improve their quality of life and economic well-being. They provide educational opportunities and information grounded in research based science.

'''What metrics does the government use to determine success for an individual office? A university? NIFA?'''

'''Why did they change the name of the Cooperative State Research, Education and Extension Service change it's name to the National Institute of Food and Agriculture?  When did this take place?  Why?  What do people think about this change?'''

==Federal Land Use==

'''Current Breakdown of types of Federal Land (value, fertility, etc)?'''


'''What does the Federal Government do with it's land?'''

Government land is used mainly as military bases, testing areas, nature and wildlife reserves, Indian reservations, or commercial leasing for mining or agriculture. Federally-owned and managed public lands include national parks, national forests, and national wildlife refuges, which are held for all Americans.

'''What factors determine the government's use of land?'''

The Federal agencies responsible for managing America's natural resources must meet both the public desire to protect them and the public expectation of economic growth based on them.

'''How much value is federal land producing per unit?'''

In 2008, the U.S. collected almost $23 billion in revenues from federal oil and gas production and leases: $13 billion in royalties and $10 billion in bonus bids.

'''What land has the most underutilized potential?'''

'''What practices are effective with the types of land the Federal government has?'''

'''How much value are different land management practices getting per unit?'''

'''How much value could the application of these practices on federal lands create?'''

==Potential Spaces==

http://www.trulia.com/property/3043356871-527-Glenmore-Ave-Brooklyn-NY-11207

http://www.trulia.com/property/photos/3052520087-2531-Atlantic-Ave-Brooklyn-NY-11207

==Affiliated Projects==

[http://345eldert.org/members/ 345 Eldert]

==Hive, Bk==

Coworking Space

Classes and Workshop

CSA Distribution

Art and Media Studio and Gallery

Cafe and Commercial Kitchen

Yoga and Health Center

Garden

Networks
*coworking registry
*hackerspaces.org
*[FLOSS Competency Centers http://flosscc.opensource.org/competence-centers]

==Potential Collaborators==

[http://www.nycfuture.org/ Center for an Urban Future] "is a New York City-based think tank that fuses journalistic reporting techniques with traditional policy analysis to produce in-depth reports and workable policy solutions on the critical issues facing our cities."

http://digital-democracy.org/

Brooklyn Rescue Mission

http://www.tacticaltech.org/

http://chashama.org/locations

http://www.myrtleavenue.org/

http://greenworker.coop/website_j/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=133&Itemid=38


[http://www.worldblu.com/ WorldBlu] "Join thousands of companies and individuals worldwide in a groundbreaking movement to see 1 billion people working in free and democratic workplaces."

[http://www.fiberforcommunities.com/index.html Google Fiber for Communities]

[http://www.muninetworks.org/ Community Broadband Networks]

[http://www.reddit.com/r/darknetplan/ DarknetPlan on Reddit]

"[http://dee.su/liberte Libre Linux] is a secure, reliable, lightweight, and easy to use Gentoo-based LiveUSB Linux distribution intended as a communication aid in hostile environments."

[http://www.openstack.org/ OpenStack] is open source software to build private and public clouds.

==Software==

[[Standard Bundle]] is a list of popular, useful open source tools.

[http://www.osalt.com/ OS Alternative] shows you the open source alternatives to proprietary software products.

[http://www.openbravo.com/product/pos/ Open Source POS System]

[http://trac.edgewall.org/ Trac] is an enhanced wiki and issue tracking system for software development projects.

[http://bazaar.canonical.com/en/ Bazaar] is a version control system that helps you track project history over time and to collaborate easily with others.

[https://launchpad.net/ Launchpad] is a software collaboration platform that provides: Bug tracking, Code hosting using Bazaar, Code reviews, Ubuntu package building and hosting, Translations, Mailing lists, Answer tracking and FAQs, Specification tracking.

[http://www.datascribe.biz/ DataScribe] builds nonprofit websites with open source tools.

[http://acquia.com Acquia] provides support to the Drupal Community

[http://idealware.org/ Idealware]: "Helping Nonprofits Make Smart Software Decisions"

==Hardware==

The work of Marcin Jacobowski's [http://www.openfarmtech.org Open Source Ecology project] and all the resources in their [http://openfarmtech.org/wiki/Wiki_map their wiki.]  [http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/explore-more/think-differentley/rethinking-almost-everything-the-global-village-construction-set Rethinking… almost everything: The Global Village Construction Set.]

[http://reprap.org/wiki/Main_Page RepRap 3d Printer] and a [http://reprapkit.com/ store] to buy what we need to make one.

[http://www.globalscaletechnologies.com/p-22-sheevaplug-dev-kit-us.aspx SheevaPlug computing device]

"[http://www.40fires.org/Wiki.jsp?page=Main The 40 Fires Foundation] takes an open source approach to developing energy-efficient technology."  They're working on a small hydrogen-powered [http://www.riversimple.com/ car].

[http://www.potenco.com/ Potenco] is a human powered pull-cord electricity generator.

[http://www.oswash.org/ The open source washing machine project] aims to rethink the way we wash clothes around the world, in accordance with economical, sociological, cultural and environemental aspects. Spearheaded by [http://www.bricolabs.net/ Bricolabs], "A distributed network for global and local development of generic infrastructures incrementally developed by communities."

[http://www.copenhagensuborbitals.com/index.php Copenhagen Suborbitals] is "working towards launching a human being into space."

[http://www.osmdevel.org/ Open Space Movement] "seeks to rally public interest in space colonization through a community-driven public space venture."

[http://beagleboard.org/hardware-xM Beagleboard] with [http://elinux.org/BeagleBoard additional info].

[https://www.alwaysinnovating.com/home/ AlwaysInnovating] makes pretty awesome hardware devices including a netbook, smart phone, tablet combo that may or may not be awesome.

==Data==

[http://getthedata.org/ Get the Data] is a venue to "ask and answer data related questions."

==Knowledge==

[http://blogs.ubc.ca/dean/2007/09/free-culture-open-access-open-education/ Free Culture, Open Access & Open Education]

[http://mashable.com/2011/01/07/online-education-websites/ 100+ Online Resources That Are Transforming Education]

http://opensourceschools.org.uk/

Examples of publishers making it easy to find federal funding options.
*[http://teacher.scholastic.com/products/funding/index.htm Scholastic]
*[http://educationalleader.com/popup_print.php?flag=home&file=fundingopp.html Benchmark Education]
*[http://info.pcieducation.com/get-your-free-funding-guide-here/?utm_campaign=Funding%20Guide&utm_source=Home%20Page PCI Education]

Joomla

http://www.joomschools.com/

http://people.joomla.org/groups/viewgroup/124-Joomla+for+Schools.html

http://www.coolnerd.net/2010/01/19/joomla-for-schools/

http://demotemplates.joomlashack.com/school/

http://www.nesd1.org/

Drupal

http://drupal.org/node/22523

The Pedagogy of Drupal: http://drupalschools.net/

http://groups.drupal.org/drupal-k-12-schools

http://opensourceschools.org.uk/drupal.html

http://flossed.org/taxonomy/term/161

http://drupalschools.net/content/case-study-presentation-design-4-drupal-mit

http://www.brightlemon.com/blog/drupal-development-plan-international-schools-link-web-site

==Philosophy==

[http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/wealth_of_networks/Main_Page The Wealth of Networks Wiki] is wiki "based on Yochai Benkler's book, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom."

Download and read [http://catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/homesteading/homesteading.ps Homesteading the Noosphere] by Eric Steven Raymond - a great primer on open source and hacker culture.

[http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/the-cleveland-model-and-micromanufacturing-an-opportunity-for-collaboration/2010/04/06 "The Cleveland Model and Micromanufacturing: An Opportunity for Collaboration?" by P2P Foundation.]

[http://mutualist.blogspot.com/ Mutualist Blog: Free Market Anti-Capitalism] "To dissolve, submerge, and cause to disappear the political or governmental system in the economic system by reducing, simplifying, decentralizing and suppressing, one after another, all the wheels of this great machine, which is called the Government or the State. --Proudhon, General Idea of the Revolution"

[http://homebrewindustrialrevolution.wordpress.com/ The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low Overhead Manifesto] is a free PDF on the ramifications of open hardware.

[http://www.quirky.com/ Quirky] is an open(ish) approach to product R&D.

[http://www.opensource.org/governance/announce Open Source Alliance] announces it's looking to get politics.

==Initiatives==

[http://www.100kgarages.com/ 100k Garages] "is a community of workshops with digital fabrication tools for precisely cutting, machining, drilling, or sculpting the parts for your project or product, in all kinds of materials, in a shop or garage near you."

[http://bestpractices.org/ BestPractices.org] Sharing Database in Improving the Living Environment in partnership with the UN-Habitat.

[http://open-innovation-projects.org/ Open Innovation Projects] is a list of open design projects.

[http://libreplanet.org/wiki/Main_Page LibrePlanet] "is a global network of free software activists organized into teams working together to help further the ideals of software freedom by advocating and contributing to free software."

[http://www.opensolutionsalliance.org/osa/index.html Open Solutions Alliance]

[http://adbard.net/ AdBard] is an adnetwork for the FLOSS community.


==New York==

"The [http://www.brooklyn.cuny.edu/pub/departments/csb/index.htm Center for the Study of Brooklyn] at Brooklyn College is pleased to introduce our new [http://websql.brooklyn.cuny.edu/organizations/ web-based directory of over 1,000 Brooklyn-based community organizations and institutions]."

[http://nycwiki.org/wiki/Main_Page NYCWiki] is a NY focused wiki created by Wikimedia New York City, the New York Chapter of the Internet Society, Connecting.nyc Inc.

=Quotes=

"More consumers create more problems.  More participants create more solutions.  It's that simple.

'''The Sarapis Foundation believes that access to technology is a human right and that the only way we can secure this right is by creating an entire ecosystem of [[FLO]] technologies people can use to create wealth and wellness for themselves and their communities.'''

Our reward for achieving this ambitious objective is nothing less than the abundance that becomes possible when everyone can participate in a networked society."
(http://www.sarapisfoundation.org/)

==Random==

'''How can we use open-sourced technology to mitigate purchases for common, simple products?'''


Not all of these ideas necessarily relate to the major questions poised, but rather they tend to lead into and inspire each other.


'''Drupal'''

1) Healthcare - upload patient records onto CMS's that's used by hospital networks

2) Schools - managing grades, times, events, files, etc.
* Revising University CMS, such as Blackboard which costs thousands of dollars a year

3) Veterans networking website

4) Homeless shelters negotiating needs

5) Nonprofit food/shelter organizations communicating about needs

6) Organizing taxes and tax return forms for governments

7) Managing parks around the country

8) Cities, government websites
* Tourism - Build a central platform for tourism websites, perhaps using the [[http://www.notfortourists.com/ NFT model]]

9) Public Transit Info
* Organizing schedules, train arrivals, logistics
* Put wireless networks in buses, tunnels, trains, tracks in order to communicate instantly

10) News media

11) Employee logistics
* Clocking in hours
* Using a touchscreen to clock-in
* Clock-in's can immediately be mapped onto a spreadsheet
** Employers no longer have to deal with data entry, but data manipulation


This reminded me of a phrase, '''"Less tech, more human"'''


'''Twitter for Companies'''

Instead of tedious one-sentence emails, have sound-bites delivered instantly
*Removes dependence on IM programs or conference calls
**Perhaps there are open source programs for IM and Conference Calling


I decided to sharpen my focus a little:


'''Why do organizations need to pay developers/professionals to personalize their product and train their employees?'''

There is no reason to train your employees in things that don't directly relates to your organization.
* '''Less tech, more human'''

1) Open-source projects of open-source projects
* Make a project to simplify Drupal
* Make a project to specify Drupal
** Drupal for education
** Drupal for healthcare

2) Hire firms to streamline them

3) Make simple instruction manuals

4) How-to pages

5) Videos

6) Ready-made versions

7) Simple-English

'''8) Simple Content Management''' : Simple English meets How-to

People record and file data abstractly - NO ONE knows how to properly organize. Although it is natural for us to record information in our brains, we never consciously organize it because our brains do it for us.
* Why should people organize? Let them do their jobs

We can write software that allows people to abstractly record information, but it automatically organizes it.
* No more hiring temporary professionals
* No more training periods

=Also Unorganized=

This page ==> '''[[Sarapis Page 2]]'''

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Sarapis]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]