=Description=

Satoshi Nakamoto is the pseudonymous individual or group responsible for creating Bitcoin, the first decentralized cryptocurrency, and authoring its original whitepaper and reference implementation. Nakamoto's work laid the foundation for blockchain technology and inspired the broader cryptocurrency movement. Despite extensive speculation, their true identity remains unknown.

(DeepSeek summary, August 2025)


=Documentation=

* Bitcoin Whitepaper (2008) [https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf]

On October 31, 2008, Nakamoto published Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System on the Cryptography Mailing List, outlining a system for digital transactions without reliance on trusted third parties.

* Bitcoin Network Launch (2009)

On January 3, 2009, Nakamoto mined the genesis block (Block 0) of the Bitcoin blockchain, embedding the headline:


* Reference Implementation & Early Development

Nakamoto released Bitcoin v0.1 in 2009 and collaborated with early developers (including Hal Finney) to refine the software. They remained active in the Bitcoin community until 2010, when they gradually withdrew from public communication.


=Status= 

* Final Known Communications

Nakamoto's last public email (April 23, 2011) stated:

"I've moved on to other things. [Bitcoin is] in good hands with Gavin [Andresen] and everyone."

Bitcoin (BTC) became the first globally adopted cryptocurrency.

Blockchain technology expanded into decentralized finance (DeFi), smart contracts, and Web3.

Nakamoto’s design introduced proof-of-work (PoW) consensus, though later projects explored alternatives (e.g., proof-of-stake).


==Satoshi on the P2P Foundation==

Some forensics, the first and last posts of Satoshi Nakamoto were on the P2P Foundation:

'So for the Forum public post, Satoshi have both P2P foundation and Bitcoin Forum

https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive/forum/

This is the first post, Feb 11, 2009

https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive/forum/p2p-foundation/1/ 

This is the last https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive/forum/p2p-foundation/4/ on Mar. 7 2014

The last post on Bitcoin.org is on 2010 July 17, https://www.bitcoin.com/satoshi-archive/forum/bitcoin-forum/231/

=More information=

Related link : [[Bitcoin]] ; https://bitcoin.org/ 

Cryptography mailing list, https://www.metzdowd.com/

P2P Foundation interaction link: https://p2pfoundation.ning.com/profile/SatoshiNakamoto

White Paper Bitcoin v2.0  - 01/11/2024

#https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/images/Bitcoin_2.0_11_ENG.pdf 
#https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/images/Bitcoin_2.0_11_Kor.pdf

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Evolution]]
[[Category:OpenCapital]]
[[Category:Post-Capitalism]]
[[Category:Bios]]