
'''= "a patient-owned cooperative that offers a platform for patients and care providers to share their health experiences with companies and researchers interested in their health experiences for their own projects".'''

URL =

=Description=

Ledgerback:

"Savvy Cooperative (“Savvy Coop”) is a patient-owned cooperative that offers a platform for patients and care providers to share their health experiences with companies and researchers interested in their health experiences for their own projects.


Savvy Cooperative addresses the following data privacy and stewardship issues and concerns:

* Assuring that patients are aware of, and reimbursed for, the sharing of their medical information with third parties for research, healthcare operations, drug development and other purposes.
* Who owns the patient’s medical information?
* How do patients feel about sharing their medical information and experiences?
* Do patients need to consent to secondary uses of their medical information?
* Should there be a profit-sharing scheme between patients and institutions?


Patients can earn rewards when they share their health experiences on the platform through (but not limited to) surveys, interviews, focus groups, discussion boards, user-testing, scientific research, and many more gigs.

Patients can receive rewards in a variety of ways including:

* “Cash,
* Savvy Points,
* Savvy Badges,
* Amazon Gift Cards,
* Visa Gift Cards, and
* Discounts Coupons.”

Savvy Coop offers two types of accounts for patients, a free account and a member account. The free account is available to everyone, but the member account is available only to co-op members.

For companies and researchers, they can schedule gigs on the platform to get feedback from patients.


In Savvy Coop’s model, patients have more control over their personal data because the:

* patients are co-owners of the enterprise;
* patients have a say in the co-op’s decision-making through voting;
* patients choose who to share their information with;
* patients receive remuneration for sharing their data; and
* patients are entitled to a profit-share from the co-op.³⁰


Additionally, the consumer view of greater control over how consumer data is used, and the possibility of receiving remuneration is actuated at Savvy Coop because patients retain control over the sharing of their medical information, and the opportunity to be remunerated for sharing the data they created."

(https://medium.com/digital-cooperative-research/youre-data-you-re-control-you-re-profit-5a181948011)

[[Category:Data Commons]]
[[Category:Cases]]
[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Health]]
[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]