
'''* Article: Distributed manufacturing. By Ijazul Haq, F. Franceschini. Benchmarking, 17 September 2019'''

URL = https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Distributed-manufacturing-Haq-Franceschini/0fd63a0fe1bcce8e4609cc5ab89c8befa4f9a30e

"This is first preliminary scale of its kind to evaluate the positioning of companies with respect to their DM capacity."


=Abstract=

The purpose of this paper is to develop a preliminary conceptual scale for the measurement of distributed manufacturing (DM) capacity of manufacturing companies operating in rubber and plastic sectors. 

A two-step research methodology is employed. In first step, the dimensions of DM and different levels of each dimension have been defined. In second step, an empirical analysis (cluster analysis) of database firms is performed by collecting the data of 38 firms operating in Italian mould manufacturing sector. Application case studies are then analyzed to show the use of the proposed DM conceptual scale.

'''A hyperspace, composed of five dimensions of DM, i.e. manufacturing localization; manufacturing technologies; customization and personalization; digitalization; and democratization of design, is developed and a hierarchy is defined by listing the levels of each dimension in an ascending order'''. Based on this hyperspace, a conceptual scale is proposed to measure the positioning of a generic company in the DM continuum. 

The empirical data are collected from Italian mould manufacturing companies operating in rubber and plastic sectors. It cannot be assumed that the industrial sectors in different parts of the world are operating under similar operational, regulatory and economic conditions. The results, therefore, might not be generalized to manufacturing companies operating in different countries (particularly developing countries) under different circumstances. 

This is first preliminary scale of its kind to evaluate the positioning of companies with respect to their DM capacity. This scale is helpful for companies to compare their capacity with standard profiles and for decision making to convert the existing manufacturing operations into distributed operations."

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]