* '''Book: [[Scale Theory]]: A Nondisciplinary Inquiry. Joshua DiCalglio.'''

URL =  https://bookshop.org/p/books/scale-theory-a-nondisciplinary-inquiry-joshua-dicaglio/16828172


=Description=

'''1.'''

“It’s a book bout how contemplating scale can transform us — how it’s one thing to understand the microcosm and macrocosm through our maps and another thing entirely to really sit with the mystery of how all of this is happening at once. We can conceptually differentiate ourselves from the rest of the cosmos, but scale makes it clear that at no point do we ever truly stand outside it all.
And this has enormous implications: contemplating scale is not merely an idle curiosity but an existential necessity. In an age of exponential AI, our future hinges on whether we can learn to overcome the tendency to colonize other scales with our abstractions and cultivate the capacity to recognize interdependency with the unthinkably small and large. How does truly understanding this change the way we live? Bewilderment is a rich place to start. Let’s simmer in it for a while…”


'''2. Publisher:'''

"“provides a foundational theory of scale that explains how scale works, the parameters of scalar thinking, and how scale refigures reality--that teaches us how to think in terms of scale, no matter where our interests may lie.

Joshua DiCaglio takes us on a fascinating journey through six thought experiments that provide clarifying yet provocative definitions for scale and new ways of thinking about classic concepts ranging from unity to identity. Because our worldviews and philosophies are largely built on nonscalar experience, he then takes us slowly through the ways scale challenges and reconfigures objects, subjects, and relations.

Scale Theory is, in a sense, nondisciplinary -- weaving together a dizzying array of sciences (from nanoscience to ecology) with discussions from the humanities (from philosophy to rhetoric). In the process, a curious pattern emerges: attempts to face the significance of scale inevitably enter terrain closer to mysticism than science. Rather than dismiss this connection, DiCaglio examines the reasons for it, redefining mysticism in terms of scale and integrating contemplative philosophies into the discussion. The result is a powerful account of the implications and challenges of scale, attuned to the way scale transforms both reality and ourselves.”

(https://bookshop.org/p/books/scale-theory-a-nondisciplinary-inquiry-joshua-dicaglio/16828172)


=More information=

Video conversation between the author and Michael Garfield via https://michaelgarfield.substack.com/p/h-15

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]