
'''= "We have collected a range of analytical and descriptive understandings of how ideas and practices get scaled".'''

=Discussion=

Mike Gismondi et al.:

"Meeting sustainability challenges requires proven innovations to be systematically advanced. We
cannot expect innovations to spread on their own as there are a lot of factors to consider; political
landscapes, socio-technical regimes, cultural narratives, and patterns of lifestyles, to name a few. The
diffusion and scaling of proven innovations must be actively sought out.

Conventionally, scaling is a deeply mechanical, profit driven, and typically centralized concept that
reflects 20th century Fordism (i.e. standardization). Within BALTA, we have broken down conventional
industrial notions of scaling to better reflect the characteristics of the social economy with the aim to
build a heuristic for the discussion of this central feature within our project. When we talk about
scaling, we discuss it in light of our ultimate interest in how the social economy contributes to
sustainability transitions to a steady state economy and how we can scale or diffuse the essence of
already proven innovations to make these transitions. It is not a question of how to replicate
innovation models, but how to translate these innovation concepts to new contexts that involves some
sort of adaptation or reinvention of the innovation.

Unlike the private sector which controls knowledge of its innovation through copyright and legal
patents, knowledge in the social economy is open and shared and these characteristics must be
reinforced when deciding on specific strategies for increasing scale of impact. Traditionally scaling out
meant increasing organizational size, however, Waitzer and Paul (2011) argue a new paradigm has
emerged that focuses on scaling social impact via some sort of collaboration and the use of networks
without necessarily increasing size of the organization behind it. The scaling lens is shifting “from
enterprise to ecosystem” (Elkington and Hartigan, 2008) to create mission focused ecosystems (a
similar distinction can be found in the NGO literature (Uvin et al., 2000)). This shift is occurring because
the social economy is in a central position to share information that the private economy cannot.
As we can see, the characteristics of the social economy imply a more organic approach to reaching
scale over more mechanical Fordist notions that have been more prevalent in the past. 


=Typology=

"In BALTA we have identified four ways of understanding the process of spreading knowledge. These
are: scaling up, out, down and deep. When discussing scaling up, it typically refers to increasing the
reach and impact of the particular innovation but still working from the existing context. It presumes
an innovation has already rooted and proved itself and now must institutionalize and overcome
overarching pressures at the regime level, i.e. the locus of established practices and associated rules
that stabilize existing systems. For instance, creating a system for the mobilization and structuring of
financing focused on expanding the application of the CLT model in a particular jurisdiction (county,
province etc.). Second, there is scaling out, which refers to the process of spreading or diffusing a
particular innovation. It entails the engagement of new collaborators and stakeholders to introduce
and establish the innovation on the ground in the new setting, i.e. the CLT innovation travelling from
the US to the UK, a process described in the Resilience Imperative book and then brought back to
Vancouver and being introduced/explored in Prince George and Victoria. Third, there is the more
straightforward concept of scaling down, which is to decrease the extent of unsustainable practices,
i.e. Carbon descent policy incentives.

Finally, there is scaling deep, which means dedicating time and resources to improve the effectiveness
of the innovation to address changes in structures and systems. Scaling deep recognizes social
structures and cultural meaning, their influence on blocking or enabling change and how various
elements in a structure must be engaged in order to alter or transform the ways in which deeper
systems drive unsustainable practices. These elements include power and material resources, formal
laws and codes and rules, but also what sociologists describe as the informal rules of social life such as
customary ways of doing things; meanings and metaphors or narratives that legitimate current practice 
and conventions. Change involves engaging the cultural schemas that infuse or underpin unsustainable
structures or practices. This entails the recognition of innovation as a process, not specifically an
outcome. An example of scaling deep is Climate Smart’s (Appendix 2, p. 25) enhancement of the
carbon accounting process through the creation of their user friendly online software. This
development was co-constructed with the partners, put control of measurement of change into hands
of the individual firm, and identified other elements of work process they wished to value and preserve
or change, which secured the sustainability and resilience of the Climate Smart mission in the individual
business. As a result, this “scaling deep” played a role in diffusion of the new ways of energy provision
and managing greenhouse gases."


=Source=

* Report: BALTA SIS Project. Conceptual framework and lenses. Mike Gismondi et al. Balta, 2013


[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Commons Transition]]