=Discussion=

(from a critique of the [[Dawn of Everything]])

Gary Feinman:

"In general, I do not observe humanity’s history to follow a strict progressive or linear course. A broad-brush trend, but one that has often been reversed (Feinman 1998), is the scaling up of human institutions and affiliations. Surely, the framing of  new  questions  must  encompass  the  expansive  growth  of  human  networks  of cooperation  and  collective  action.  Knowledge  of  human  history  and  its  various “dawns” requires understanding how people got things done, and for our species that is social (Kowalewski and Birch 2020:30): affiliations, institutions, networks, and  polities.  New  questions  should  investigate  the  diverse  ways  they  were/are organized,  as  well  as  the  factors  that  contributed  to  their  relative  degrees  of sustainability.   And   yet,   despite  a   scattershot   of  examples,   it   is   in   this   key fundamental   dimension   that   this   book   seems   thin.   The   most   persistently referenced    means    by    which    larger    affiliations    were    seen    to    form    was schismogenesis, a culture-historical process in which groups were seen to identify and define themselves in diametric opposition to their neighbors. Yet readers are left  largely  in  the  dark  when  it  comes  to  the  parameters,  social  mechanisms, boundaries,  scales,  and  dynamics  at  which  such  oppositions  are  argued  to  have been   manifested,   beyond   vaguely   inferenced   environmental   parameters  and specific historical events.

Rather  than  just  investigator  preference,  a  more  convincing  and  empirically grounded   foundation   might   be   the   recognition   that   humans   can   be   both unprecedented   cooperators   and   highly   selfish   (Blanton   and   Fargher   2016; Feinman 2013). As a consequence, human cooperation tends to be situational and contingent. The key question then becomes what factors promote different degrees and  forms  of  cooperation,  and  a  key  point  of  contention  concerns  scale.  The authors   (278–97)   basically   dismiss   a   raft   of   interdisciplinary   research   and empirical   findings   that   repeatedly   illustrate   that   '''human   organization   and leadership   generally   shift   and   differentiate   as   the   density   of   interpersonal interaction increases''' (e.g., Fletcher 1995; Hill and Dunbar 2003; Holland-Lulewicz et al. 2022). Although Graeber and Wengrow are on more solid footing when they argue  that  domestic  human  groupings  also  may  be  fragile and  that  small  human aggregations may not be restricted to close kin, these arguments do not refute '''the repeated  observation  that  when  human  groupings  in  sustained  close  contact exceed  certain  demographic  thresholds, organizational  adjustments  take  place''' (Feinman  2013,  2021).  Modes  of  leadership,  political  offices,  and  institutional arrangements can be created in widely different forms and involve lesser or higher degrees of economic stratification (even at comparable sizes), but past or present, some  kind  of  supra-household  institution emerges if  these  aggregations  are sustained, even for the Bronze Age historical context that the authors draw on to make their case (e.g. Hofmann et al. 2019).

Perhaps this line of argument seems esoteric and a matter for specialists, but sharing the book’s passion for seeing lessons in the past for the present and future, I   think   not.   Given   their   anarchistic   mistrust   of   human   institutions   and bureaucracies  (Appadurai  2022),  Graeber  and Wengrow  aim  to  dismiss  any necessary   links   between   scale   and   the   loss   of   personal   freedom.   Freed   of constraints  on  human  cognitive  capacities  and the  demands  of  scale, the  authors tout governance through self-organized, domestic autonomy that is not so far off from  a  kind  of  libertarian  ethos  (513).  But  at  great  scale,  an  overabundance  of individual  freedom  and  independence  may  be  antithetical  to  economic  equity (Blanton  et  al.  2021).  Might  it  be  more  cautiously  realistic  to  recognize  that  in today’s  world,   cooperative   governance   and   institutions   are   essential,   these political  associations  take  many  forms,  and  to  keep  them  equitable  requires  the persistent investments and participation of the citizenry?"

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4fz417t6)

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]