
=Concept=

==Typology==

Levels of Scaling, Sarah Queblatin, Sara Silva et al. :

There are "three levels of scaling innovations within a bioregion:

* Scaling up (branches and leaves) through means of impacting laws and policy

* Scaling wide (trunk) through the replication of solutions while ensuring
appropriateness to the context of people and place

* Scaling deep (roots) through practices that foster healing of relationships, and
transforming beliefs and values."

(https://ecolise.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Bioregional-Governance-Training-Guide.pdf?)



=The Book=

'''* Scale. Geoffrey West. Penguin/Random House, 2017'''

URL = https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/314049/scale-by-geoffrey-west/9781594205583/

=Description=

From the publisher:

"West’s work has been game-changing for biologists, but then he made the even bolder move of exploring his work’s applicability. Cities, too, are constellations of networks and laws of scalability relate with eerie precision to them. Recently, West has applied his revolutionary work to the business world. This investigation has led to powerful insights into why some companies thrive while others fail. The implications of these discoveries are far-reaching, and are just beginning to be explored. Scale is a thrilling scientific adventure story about the elemental natural laws that bind us together in simple but profound ways. Through the brilliant mind of Geoffrey West, we can envision how cities, companies and biological life alike are dancing to the same simple, powerful tune."

=More information=

* [[Geoffrey West on How Higher Scales Lead to Less Energy Per Capita Usage]]

* very detailed review with summary notes, http://www.askeladdencapital.com/geoffrey-wests-scale-book-review-notes-analysis/

[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Books]]