
'''= "a community of volunteers from around the world passionate about peer learning, openness, and the intersection of the two".''' [https://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/39060]

URL = http://schoolofopen.org/

=Description=

"The School of Open is a community of volunteers focused on providing free education opportunities on the meaning, application, and impact of “openness” in the digital age and its benefit to creative endeavors, education, research, and more. Volunteers develop and run online courses and offline workshops on topics such as Creative Commons licenses, open educational resources, and sharing creative works. The School of Open is coordinated by Creative Commons and P2PU, an active peer learning platform and community for developing and running free online courses."


=Status=

==2013==

Jane Park:

"Last year, we highlighted the work we put into materializing School of Open as a concrete entity with goals and people involved. This year, we actually launched the School with a full set of online courses and kick-off events around the world!

But we didn’t stop there. All year long, our volunteers have been contributing in so many fantastic and unexpected ways that it’s been hard to wrap our brains around all the activity. So here’s my attempt at collecting and distilling everything here, as a teaser for the new School of Open landing page that will happen in 2014.

'''The biggest thing you should note about the School of Open is that it is no longer just a set of online courses sitting on the P2PU platform. It is a global community and movement of volunteers developing and running online or hybrid courses, face-to-face workshops, and real world training programs''' — all with the purpose of helping people do what they already do better with the aid of open resources and tools.

In 2013, we

* Launched 12 stand-alone courses for anyone to take at any time, with or without others.

* Ran a total of 11 facilitated courses on topics such as: Copyright 4 Educators, Designing Collaborative Workshops, Open Science, CC licensing, Writing Wikipedia Articles, and Why Open?

* Conducted initial research on the impact of some of these courses and completed a research residency with the OER Research Hub in Milton Keynes, England

* Hosted multiple workshops, course sprints, and other events across 5 continents (in countries like England, Germany, Kenya, China, Sudan, Argentina, South Africa, the U.S.)

* Started School of Open Kenya, an after school program for high school students teaching about open educational resources, CC licenses, and the open culture that they engender

* Put on an engineering and design challenge incorporating open source and CC licensing education for university students in China

* Ran a two-week OER summer camp for kids on Luxi island, an island in rural China (more info to follow in a guest blog post)."
(http://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/41423)

More at [http://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/41423], including plans for 2014.


[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Education]]