
'''= The school of commons is a growing network of local schools (started in Ghent, Belgium in the summer of 2019), offering a modular series of workshops using tools for commoning'''

URL = https://schoolofcommons.be/

=Governance=

The SOC Network:

==Participants of the local schools==

Gent: Lies van Assche – Tom Domen – …

==Cases== 

– researched by the SOC

Used in School of Commons Gent – a Dutch program


===Soepcafé Dampoort===

Het soepcafé is een lokaal initiatief om met restgroenten soep te maken en te verdelen in de buurt.


===Gemeenschapsplek de Toekomst===

Een nieuwe plek in de maak nabij Boerenmarkt De Toekomst. Deze plek is nog in ontwikkeling en heeft tot doel de wekelijkse markt te versterken tot gemeenschapsplek.

===Waterlab===

Een prototyping lab in onze buurt dat onderzoek doet naar manieren om water te zuiveren en recupereren op buurtniveau.


===Freinetschool Spitaalpoortstraat===

Vanaf september opent een nieuwe freinetschool in de Spitaalpoortstraat voor 40 kinderen van het 1e middelbaar.


==Coaches==


[[Evi Swinnen]] – Karla Schimmel – [[Dette van Zeeland]] – [[Lucie Evers]] – Marieke Maertens



==Affiliated partners==


* [[Commons Lab Antwerpen]]

==Research partners==

[[Timelab]] – [[P2P Foundation]] – Howest – Vlaanderen Circulair


=Example=

==Ghent==

"Local School Gent, Belguim - Hosted by Timelab

Yearly evening school in 10 lessons of 3 hours

From Oct 3 until Dec 19, weekly on Thursday from 7pm to 10pm

12 participants work in 4 teams on a real and local case in the neighbourhood. You learn how to apply 8 patterns to the case in a practical manner so you can easily copy your learnings to your own project. The other participants and coaches of the School of Commons become your network of peers in learning and provide feedback .

12 students of partner Howest help your team to immlement the commoning process.

Language: Dutch

From October 3rd to December 19th, every thursdayevening from 19-22 p.m. except november first.

Venue: De Schuur, kogelstraat 34, 9000 Gent."


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Courses]]

[[Category:Belgium]]

[[Category:Flanders]]