'''* Book: Jean-François Dupeyron. L’école des communs. Le Bord de l'Eau, 2025.'''

URL = https://www.editionsbdl.com/produit/lecole-des-communs/


=Description=

In English:

The School of the Commons. Jean-François Dupeyron

"In an era of climate, social, and political emergencies, humanity needs more than ever to connect the issue of education with political principles aligned with a genuine social and ecological democracy. This book explores that essential connection, offering pathways for educational approaches, schools, and pedagogies inspired by the practices of the commons.

Various past and present experiences illustrate this reflection, including workers’ education movements, Zapatista schools, and the education of landless workers in Brazil. The argument also highlights the contributions of women and marginalized groups to educational debates while embracing non-Western perspectives. This approach demonstrates that it is both possible and necessary to discuss schools and reflect on education in a way that balances the voices of women and men while listening to perspectives from the periphery. Did we ever doubt it?

Ultimately, this essay in philosophy, anthropology, and the history of education seeks to go beyond the traditional public-versus-private divide, humbly proposing pathways toward a School of the Commons—a third way that aims to rebuild or reinvent the structure of schooling.

Jean-François Dupeyron is an emeritus associate professor of Philosophy of Education at the University of Bordeaux. He holds an agrégation in philosophy and is accredited to supervise research. His work primarily focuses on the philosophy of education and the history of educational systems.'


Original French-langage description from the publisher:

"À l’heure des urgences climatiques, sociales et politiques, l’humanité a plus que jamais besoin de connecter la question de l’éducation à des principes politiques conformes à une authentique démocratie sociale et écologique. L’ouvrage traite de cette connexion essentielle en présentant des pistes pour des éducations, des écoles et des pédagogies construites selon l’inspiration des pratiques des communs.

Diverses expériences passées ou actuelles illustrent concrètement la réflexion, telles celles des pédagogies ouvrières, des écoles zapatistes ou de l’éducation des travailleurs sans-terre au Brésil. De même, l’argumentation réhabilite la contribution des femmes et des subalternes au débat éducatif, tout en s’ouvrant largement à des modes de pensée extra-occidentaux. Cela permet de montrer qu’il est possible et souhaitable de parler rationnellement de l’école et de philosopher sur l’éducation en équilibrant la parole des femmes et des hommes, et en entendant des voix de la périphérie. Nous en doutions ?

En somme, cet essai de philosophie, d’anthropologie et d’histoire de l’éducation vise à outrepasser le duo classique entre public et privé pour proposer modestement des pistes en vue d’une école des communs, entendue comme une troisième voie permettant de reconstruire ou de réinventer la forme scolaire."

(https://www.editionsbdl.com/produit/lecole-des-communs/)

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Commons]]