
'''= New special interest group for construction of low cost scientific devices, exploiting new components, open source hardware projects, with particular interest in the Arduino platform and interdisciplinary applications.'''


=Description=

Proposed special interest group for construction of low cost
scientific devices, exploiting new components, open source hardware
projects, with particular interest in the Arduino platform and
interdisciplinary applications."
(http://www.docstoc.com/docs/34667068/SCICOMP-HOMEBREW-CLUB)

Interested in building stuff and DIY construction techniques?
We are starting a group which will meet after the SciComp meetings -
to talk about building low cost hardware and software devices and to
show details of ongoing projects.
If you are interested, contact Jim Haseloff at jh295@cam.ac.uk - or
simply come along to the SciComp meeting on 12 Feb 2009.

At the Feb 12 meeting, Vincent Rouilly and Tuur Van Balen will discuss
the use of the arduino platform for DIY hardware construction. The
Arduino platform is well suited to scientific work, where new sensors,
optics detectors and computers can be linked. Arduino is an
open-source electronics prototyping platform based on flexible,
easy-to-use hardware and software. It's intended for artists,
designers, hobbyists, and anyone interested in creating interactive
objects or environments. Arduino can sense the environment by
receiving input from a variety of sensors and can affect its
surroundings by controlling lights, motors, and other actuators. The
microcontroller on the board is programmed using the Arduino
programming language (based on Wiring) and the Arduino development
environment (based on Processing). Arduino projects can be stand-alone
or they can communicate with software running on a computer (e.g.
Flash, Processing, MaxMSP). See www.arduino.cc
(http://www.scicomp.org.uk/)


=More Information=

For more news about Physical Computing and DIY construction, see
http://www.synbio.org.uk/hardware/scientific-computing-news.html


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]