'''= "SBTN translates science into guidance for companies and cities so they can set science-based targets to ensure we remain within all Earth’s limits while meeting society’s needs".'''

URL = https://sciencebasedtargetsnetwork.org/


=Description=

[[Global Commons Alliance]]:

"Our well-being and survival depend on a healthy planet. It is therefore essential we live within the limits of Earth’s systems  – the global commons we all share – if humans and nature are to thrive.

Companies are already reducing their greenhouse gas emissions by setting science-based targets for the climate. We must adhere to the limits of all Earth’s systems as set out by science. SBTN translates science into guidance for companies and cities so they can set science-based targets to ensure we remain within all Earth’s limits while meeting society’s needs. This will help them go from doing “a little better” to doing “at least enough” to stay within these limits.

We need to transform the way we use natural resources alongside decarbonizing our economy. By setting science-based targets for all Earth’s systems, companies and cities can future-proof how they work and help reduce the risks that nature loss and climate change present."
(https://globalcommonsalliance.org/alliance-projects/science-based-targets-network/?)


=Status=

"We need a race to the top, led by pioneering companies. This will empower peers, suppliers and customers to follow suit and drive governments to take bolder action.

The change has already begun and action is gaining pace. Over a thousand companies worldwide are leading the zero-carbon transition by setting emissions reduction targets grounded in climate science through the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi). Hundreds of them have raised their ambition by committing to Business Ambition for 1.5°C."
(https://sciencebasedtargets.org/)

[[Category:Global Commons]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Science]]