

=Description=

Tibi:

"The scientific oeuvre represents the lifework of a scientist, or his/her entire contribution to our scientific knowledge. The entire oeuvre is presented in a structured way. This structure is not linear, as in a book. It is modular and interlinked internally, as well as with external sources of information. Its content is a mixture of text, graphic, video, sound, etc. And it is semantically labeled.  

It is also a dynamic entity, in the sense that the author can, at any time, manage it (improve, enrich, augment it). And a historical entity, all past versions of it are stored, and can be retrieved. 

The author is the only person who can change the slightest thing in his/her oeuvre. More than one individual can be considered as an author, and a single individual can coauthor more than one scientific oeuvre. 

The scientific oeuvre “lives” on the Internet, not necessarily on a single  server, and is accessible by everyone, from everywhere, anytime. All scientific oeuvres are built on a unique platform in order to facilitate integration into the semantic web, and to enable automatic information processes. 

Knowledge has a strong individual component and, in some sense, the scientific oeuvre belongs to its author. However, knowledge cannot be produced in a vacuum and without resources. We all need to be grateful to our family, to our teachers, to the society we leave in, as well as to all humans, dead or alive, that have contributed directly or indirectly to our collective knowledge. For this reason, the rights of the author to his creation must be limited. Knowledge is NOT diminished if shared with others, unlike material things. (Yes, one can lose some advantage by sharing knowledge with his opponents, but in this case we are not in the realm of science anymore.) For this reason, we cannot apply the same economical treatment to information and knowledge as to material goods. The retribution for knowledge production must be structured differently and the wrights to the knowledge created must obey its own set of rules. The scientific oeuvre must be offered to all! Nevertheless, the author has the exclusive wright to modify its oeuvre.  This remark seems to be self-evident for academia, where scientists are bound by a contract with society at large. It can be contested in the case of a private enterprise, where the knowledge creator is bound by a contract with his employer. This later contract gets its legitimacy from stimulating the economy and social development, by stimulating private enterprise. I would gradually phase out this view. "
(https://sites.google.com/site/tibisphilosophy/home/epistemology/the-scientific-oeuvre)


[[Category:Science]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]