
=Discussion=

David Bollier:

"The ... strategic approach I want to suggest for building a new polity supportive of the commons
is through an ongoing convergence and alignment of diverse system-critical social movements.

The failures of neoliberal capitalism are coming at the very time that promising new modes of
production, governance and social practice are exploding, especially through decentralized, selforganized
initiatives on open networks that can often out-perform both the market and state. The
people developing these new systems are essentially creating a new parallel economy –
sometimes by choice, sometimes by necessity, as in Greece and Spain. The innovators are not
politicians, CEOs or credentialed experts, but ordinary people acting as householders, makers,
hackers, permaculturists, citizen-scientists, cooperativists, community foresters, subsistence 
collectives, social mutualists and commoners: a vast grassroots cohort whose generative activities
are not really conveyed by the term “citizen” or “consumer.”

Through network-based cooperation and localized grassroots projects, millions of people around
the world are managing all sorts of bottom-up, self-provisioning systems. There are also many
new types of citizen-actors and mobilizations seeking system change, ranging from cultural surges
such as Occupy, the Arab Spring and the Las Indignados to more durable long-term movements
focused on cooperatives, degrowth, the solidarity economy, Transition Towns, relocalized
economies, peer production, and the commons. These movements are developing new visions of
“development” and “progress,” as seen in the buen vivir ethic in Latin America, for example, or in
“go local” movements in the US and Europe, and the FabLabs and makerspaces. The new
models also include alternative currencies, co-operative finance and crowd-equity investments to
reclaim local control, transition and indigenous peoples’ initiatives to develop sustainable postgrowth
economies, the movement to reclaim the city as a commons, and movements to integrate
social justice and inclusive ethical commitments into economic life. These movements are not only
pioneering new types of collective action and provisioning, but also new legal and organizational
forms. The idea of “generative ownership” as a collective enterprise is being explored by leaders
of co-operative finance, community land trusts, relocalized food systems and commons-based
peer production. Each is attempting to demonstrate the feasibility of various commons-based
ownership structures and self-governance – and then to expand the use of such models to show
that there are attractive alternatives that can mature into a new economic ecosystem.

The general approach here is to change the old by building the new. The demonstration of feasible
alternatives (renewable energy, cooperativism, relocalization, etc.) is a way to shift political
momentum, constitute new constituencies for system change, and assert a new moral center of
gravity. To work, however, the alternatives incubated outside the existing system must achieve a
sufficient coherence, intelligibility, scale and functionality.

The commons can act as a shared meta-language among these highly diverse groups because
the commons expresses many of the core values and priorities of many “system-change”
movements. Like DNA, which is under-specified so that it can adapt to local circumstances, the
commons discourse is general enough to accommodate myriad manifestations of basic values and
principles. More than an intellectual framework, the commons helps make culturally legible the
many social practices (“commoning”) that are often taken to be too small and inconsequential to
matter – but which, taken together, constitute a different type of economy. In this fashion, the
commons discourse itself has an integrative and catalytic potential to build a new type of
networked polity. 

Michel Bauwens, Founder of the P2P Foundation, and his colleague John
Restakis argue that the state can be reinvented as a “Partner State” in support of commons and
peer production:

- One the one hand, market competition will be balanced by cooperation, the invisible
hand will be combined with a visible handshake. On the other hand, the state is no
longer the sovereignty authority. It becomes just one participant among others in the
pluralistic guidance systems and contributes its own distinctive resources to the 
negotiation process … official apparatuses remain at best first among equals. The
state’s involvement would become less hierarchical, less centralized and less
directive in character. The exchange of information and moral suasion become key
sources of legitimation and the state’s influence depends as much on its role as a
prime source and mediator of collective intelligence as on its command over
economic resources or legitimate coercion.

The idea of the partner state is intriguing, but will require further theoretical elaboration and
investigations in how it might be politically actualized. One serious attempt at this in the context of
digital commons is the Commons Transition Plan prepared by Bauwens in conjunction with a
research project sponsored by the Government of Ecuador in 2014.
 
It attempts to envision state
policies that could help bring about “a society and economy that functions as common pools of
shared knowledge in every domain of social activity."
(https://www.foe.co.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/transnational-republics-commoning-reinventing-governance-through-emergent.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]