Comment on '''John Battelle's The Search''' and Eric Jackson's The PayPal Wars

"Google's success has been credited to several factors: the entrepreneurship of founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin; the relentless technological innovation; the aggressive "outflanking" strategies against competitors. Now that the Dotcom era has passed, the news pundits have their own explanations. John Battelle's The Search and Eric Jackson's The PayPal Wars are two of the best recent books to detail why Google and other new Internet services are redefining today's Internet."

(no source ?)


=Discussion=

==How AI is undoing the search-bargain on which the internet has hitherto depended==


"As OpenAI and other upstarts have soared, Google, which has about 90% of the conventional search market in America, has added AI features to its own search engine in a bid to keep up. Last year it began preceding some search results with AI-generated “overviews”, which have since become ubiquitous. In May it launched “AI mode”, a chatbot-like version of its search engine. The company now promises that, with AI, users can “let Google do the Googling for you”. Yet as Google does the Googling, humans no longer visit the websites from which the information is gleaned. Similarweb, which measures traffic to more than 100m web domains, estimates that worldwide search traffic (by humans) fell by about 15% in the year to June. Although some categories, such as hobbyists’ sites, are doing fine, others have been hit hard (see chart). Many of the most affected are precisely the kind that might have commonly answered search queries. Science and education sites have lost 10% of their visitors. Reference sites have lost 15%. Health sites have lost 31%. For companies that sell advertising or subscriptions, lost visitors means lost revenue. “We had a very positive relationship with Google for a long time…They broke the deal,” says Neil Vogel, head of Dotdash Meredith, which owns titles such as People and Food & Wine. Three years ago its sites got more than 60% of their traffic from Google. Now the figure is in the mid-30s. “They are stealing our content to compete with us,” says Mr Vogel. Google has insisted that its use of others’ content is fair. But since it launched its AI overviews, the share of news-related searches resulting in no onward clicks has risen from 56% to 69%, estimates Similarweb."

(https://economist.com/business/2025/07/14/ai-is-killing-the-web-can-anything-save-it)

[[Category:Companies]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Technology]]