


=Description=

The Quaero Forum asks the following key political questions, to ask of search engines:

"• What are the politics of the structure and image of search engines and their technologies?

• To what extent have search engines like Google, which started from the ideal of access to information, become the modus operandi of political bias? Can we envisage scenarios for the search engine as a public domain institution?

• What kind of hierarchy (if any) should be implemented when deciding what should go into a search engine’s database, and what is left out?

• Can contemporary web practices tackle the conventional static models used to archive and present (institutional) concepts of cultural heritage and democracy?

• Collaborative and participatory methods are increasingly placing the Demos as the force that structures information. Can we work towards a ‘politics of code & categorization’ that allows plural interpretations of data to coexist and enrich each other?

• How can concepts of digital and networked European cultural heritage reflect the political and social issues related to Europe’s changing borders?"
(http://michaelzimmer.org/2007/09/15/update-on-quaero-forum/)
=Discussion=


==Privacy in Search Engines==

Michael Zimmer explains how Google is collecting a wide range of personal data; thereby overcoming privacy through obscurity. Instead, we need value-conscious design.

Here are 8 recommendations to the European search engine project Quaero:

#"Quaero must be designed in such a way as to prevent any substantive response to a civil or criminal subpoena of user activity 
#Quaero must be designed so IP addresses and cookies cannot be associated with particular users or accounts 
#Query traffic must be encrypted to prevent ‘man in the middle’ monitoring 
#Quaero must provide transparency in the data it collects about users, how it is used, who uses it, and how long it is retained 
#Quaero must not engage in personalized or behaviorally-targeted advertising 
#Quaero must take steps to remove or obscure personally-identifiable images (faces, license plates, etc) from its searchable index 
#Quaero must provide individuals the ability to remove or obscure personally-identifiable data from its searchable index 
#Quaero must provide users the ability to view, edit, and delete any search history data associated with their account 
(http://michaelzimmer.org/2007/09/29/privacy-and-quaeros-quest-for-the-perfect-search-engine-threats-and-opportunities/)

Full presentation at http://michaelzimmer.org/files/Zimmer%20Quaero%20slides.pdf


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Technology]]