

=Bio=

'''Current Business Activities:'''

Main Shareholder, 
Gallehr Sustainable Risk Management GmbH, www.gallehr.de


'''Current Volunteer Activities:'''

Chairman, e5-European Business Council for Sustainable Energy, www.e5.org

Member Forschungsgruppe Ethisch Ökologisches Rating, http://www.ethisches-consulting.de


'''Vita:'''

Sebastian Gallehr was born on January 30th, 1965 in Hamburg/Germany. After high school he moved to Braunschweig to pick up studies in energy- and process-technology at the Technical University, from which he graduated as an engineer (master, Dipl.-Ing.) in 1996. Gallehr married in 1997 and since him and his wife enjoy raising their two children.
During his studies Sebastian founded his first private venture in the sector of sustainable energy. Several units followed throughout his career.

As manager and director of several SMEs as well as head of unit in a large corporation (Nuon), he gained business experience in the areas of renewable energies, emissions trading, energy supply, smart metering and energy management. Besides others, 1998 Sebastian has helped to establish the first 100% renewable energy supplier which he has joined as managing director from 2000 until 2002.

In parallel Sebastian established the GALLEHR+PARTNER® consulting approach. With the aim to be the Industry’s Navigator into the Low Carbon Economy, nowadays the Gallehr Sustainable Risk Management GmbH has developed into one of the leading consultant firms for carbon management services and economical sound renewable energy and energy efficiency models in Germany.

Since March 2002 Sebastian heads the e5-European Business Council for Sustainable Energy, since 2005 on voluntary basis. e5 was founded in 1996 as a business-focused initiative whose purpose is advocating the full potential of sustainable energy in and outside the EU based on the five principles: energy, economy, efficiency, environment and employment. Well aware that also large scale international renewable energy sources are crucial for a Non-Fossil Energy Europe, late 2008 Sebastian co-founded the DESERTEC Foundation.

As e5 representative, Gallehr has been chairman of the Europe INNOVA eco innovations panel under DG Industries in 2007 and 2008 and has had the responsibility for the SmartGrid part in the ICT pilot study Energy Efficiency of the DG INFSO. 

In the research sector Sebastian Gallehr has been Research Line Leader und Financial Auditor of the Global Climate Forum between 2006 and 2013 and is member of the Forschungsgruppe Ethisch Ökologisches Rating der Goethe Universität Frankfurt/Main.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]