

=Characteristics=

==Concrete Universality==

Sean Kelly:

"In contrast to the abstract universals that dominated the first Axial
traditions, the new Gaian identity exemplifies the real-ideal of concrete
universality. The universality of Gaia consists most obviously in the fact
that it is in and through Gaia that we live and have our being. Gaia is
the ground of what we all share in common. For the same reason, this
universality is concrete, to begin with, in the sense that the physical
systems studied by Earth System science constitute the shared, living
body of the entire Earth community. It is also concrete, however, in the
specifically Hegelian sense that it, or She, is auto-poietic or self-organizing
(the foundational insight of James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis’ Gaia
Theory), which is to say that Gaia is a Subject (as well as a communion
of subjects, and not a mere collection of objects).

The actualization of concrete universality that I see as the guiding
spirit of the Second Axial Age will depend upon the successful
coordination of multiple initiatives, both theoretical and practical,
across the full spectrum of human endeavor. Here I will focus on some
key features of the theoretical. 

If the First Axial Age was associated with the emergence of theoretic culture, with its second-order thinking,
metacognition, and radical mytho-speculation, the Second Axial Age
is marked by what could be described as third-order metacognition
and a new (planetary) radical mytho-speculation. 

Integrating the critical, reflexive virtues of first-Axial theoretic culture, the leading
edge of theory in the Second Axial Age recognizes the destructive
potential of the disembedded, disengaged subject (which reduces the
world to a mere collection of objects). It re-embeds the human subject
into the living Earth and cosmos — or rather renews consciousness of
the fact, and mystery, of its ontological consubstantiality with Earth
and cosmos — which are now seen, celebrated, and engaged with as a
communion of subjects. More radically, we can say that the radiating
center of the second Axial Age is constituted by an awareness  —  a
third-order metacognition — in a growing network of individuals and
communities, that ‘We live in that time when Earth itself begins its
adventure of conscious self-awareness’.

This awareness is informed and catalyzed by many distinct, if
overlapping, disciplines, including Earth System science, Big History,
the various strands of ecological science and environmental studies,
the field of religion and ecology, and the emerging transdiscipline of
integral ecology. For our purposes, I would single out the generative
contributions of Thomas Berry, one of the founders of integral ecology
and, along with Brian Swimme, Mary Evelyn Tucker, and others, bard
or prophet of a more coherent and inspiring Big, or better, Deep History."

(https://books.openbookpublishers.com/10.11647/obp.0186.18.pdf)




=History=

Sean Kelly:

While the idea of a Second Axial Age seems originally to have been
proposed by '''Thomas Berry''', the first extended treatment in print was by
'''Ewert Cousins''', who summarized his understanding as follows:

- Having developed self-reflective, analytic, critical consciousness in
the First Axial Period, we must now, while retaining these values,
reappropriate and integrate into that consciousness the collective and
cosmic dimensions of the pre-Axial consciousness. We must recapture
the unity of tribal consciousness by seeing humanity as a single tribe.
And we must see this single tribe related organically to the total cosmos.
This means that the consciousness of the twenty-first-century will be
global from two perspectives: (1) from a horizontal perspective, cultures
and religions are meeting each other on the surface of the globe, entering
into creative encounters that will produce a complexified collective
consciousness; (2) from a vertical perspective, they must plunge their
roots deep into the earth in order to provide a stable and secure base for
future development. This new global consciousness must be organically
ecological, supported by structures that will ensure justice and peace. In
the Second Axial Period this twofold global consciousness is not only a
creative possibility to enhance the twenty-first century; it is an absolute
necessity if we are to survive."


=Discussion=


==The Second Axial Age is an Age of Commons==

James Quilligan:

'The first Axial Age led to the inclusive expression of common
being through religion, the arts and culture. But it also resulted
in the divisive rationality of privatization, property enclosures
and utilitarian economics. If a new Axial Age is now dawning, a
synthesis must emerge from the unity and division of the past.
This new union can emerge only through a new expression of
value. Yet we don’t have to cast about looking for it: this value is
already here, needing only to be named, understood and practiced.
The commons may now be seen, at least in part, as a rediscovery
of the principles of freedom and equality which are
idealized but imperfectly expressed through modern free markets
and state-enforced justice. Unlike the Market State, however, the
commons cannot be coordinated by some ultimate authority exercising
control through a unified command structure. The commons
are a third dynamic—arising from the shared values and
meanings of people’s life-experiences—which includes but transcends
the market and state."

(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-one-common-being.pdf)


==The Differences between the First Axial Age and the Second Axial Age==

Sean Kelly:

The dominant strands of first Axial traditions tended to emphasize
the transcendent pole in the vertical dimension (as we see in Platonic
and the later Cartesian dualisms; Christian otherworldliness; Hindu
and Buddhist views of the ‘wheel of life’ as illusion or trap; in Chinese
cosmology, the immovable Pole star as symbol of Heavenly power and
virtue, or the Daoist immortals). In the extreme, according to Robert
Bellah, these dominant strands involved ‘the religious rejection of the
world characterized by an extremely negative evaluation of man and
society and the exaltation of another realm of reality as alone true
and infinitely valuable’.

 
At the same time, while the first Axial Age
involved a new consciousness of the universal in its noetic, cosmic, 
and ethical dimensions, the several axial epiphanies of the universal
remained rooted in the exclusive (ethno-linguistic) particularities of
their respective culture spheres, and therefore in both of these senses
the universal was abstract. ‘Great as the major figures of the axial age
were’, as Bellah would note in his last and greatest work,

- and universalistic as their ethics tended to be, we cannot forget that
each of them considered his own teaching to be the only truth or the
highest truth, even such a figure as the Buddha, who never denounced
his rivals but only subtly satirized them. Plato, Confucius, Second Isaiah,
all thought that it was they and they alone who had found the final truth.
This we can understand as an inevitable feature of the world so long ago.


A central task of the Second Axial Age, by contrast, involves the
articulation of new forms of universality which could mediate between
the particular culture spheres and help them confront their shared
predicament: the threat of planet-wide ecological and civilizational
collapse.

Despite the astounding synchronicity of first Axial Age, it was not
global or planetary in extent, and its various representatives were
largely unconscious of the parallel developments outside of their own
culture spheres. At the same time, however — and as I have argued in
detail in Coming Home — it was the destiny of one late, hybrid, shoot
(Christianity) of this first axial mutation to become the symbolic
catalyst or lure for the eventual emergence, some fifteen hundred years
later, of the Planetary Era (more commonly designated as the modern
period). It is with this specific genealogical line that we can discern an
answer to the question of the relation between the two Axial Ages: the
central symbols of Incarnation (of Spirit into matter, of the Logos into
Cosmos, of the eternal into time) and of God as Trinity (the Absolute as
internally differentiated) prefigure the deep structure of the movement
from the first to the second Axial Age, with Modernity as the middle
term between both Ages. 

The first Axial Age sets up the conditions of
possibility for the eventual emergence of the second. These conditions
include the reflexive and critical consciousness associated with
‘metacognition/theoretic culture’ (M. Donald); the ‘disembedding’ 
(Charles Taylor) of culture from the cosmos and of the individual
from the collective; and the lure of the universal (Eric Voegelin, Jan
Assmann).
 
At a deeper level, both ages can and should be seen as the
two poles of a single process, or rotating axis, moving from the abstract
to the concrete in three broad phases: 

(i) an initial identity (in this case,
structured around the central myth/symbol of Incarnation wedded to
the Greek intuition of the universal as logos/cosmos); 

(ii) a movement of differentiation — and later, dissociation (leading to the birth of modern
science, the modern disengaged subject, and the broader processes of
secularization; all of which bring about the birth of the Planetary Era
and the accelerating planetary crisis); 

(iii) a new Gaian, or Gaianthropic identity in the making.
 
The cultivation of this new identity is a central
task of the Second Axial Age, which itself can be seen as the ‘opportune
moment’ (kairos) for the actualization of the deeper telos of the 2,500-
year Axial Aion."

(https://books.openbookpublishers.com/10.11647/obp.0186.pdf)


=Periodization=

Sean Kelly:

" My proposal for the periodization of the larger arc that
encompasses the two Axial Ages is as follows.

* Axial Aion (c. 800BCE to present):

* First Axial Age (c. 800–200BCE)

* Planetary Era (c. 1500CE to present)

* Second Axial Age (Gaian epoch or Gaianthropocene) (c. 1945?–)"

(https://books.openbookpublishers.com/10.11647/obp.0186.pdf)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]