'''* Article: Another Turn on the Axis: Religious and Spiritual Evolution in the 21st Century. by Jim Kenney.  Kosmos, Fall | Winter 2011''' 

URL = http://www.kosmosjournal.org/CustomContentRetrieve.aspx?ID=4359809  

=Excerpts=	 

"In Crosscurrent, I argued that we are living in an
age of dramatically accelerated cultural evolution. Such transitions—
I call them ‘sea changes’—are powerful and progressive
unfoldings, marked by the movement of humankind’s dominant
values toward a closer fit with reality. Sea changes affect almost
every dimension of human experience and endeavor and they are
extremely rare. In riving, I suggest that the religious and spiritual
expression of the current cultural evolutionary sea change
can best be understood as a Second Axial Age. The First was
marked by the emergence of individual consciousness, making it
possible for humans to step forth from purely tribal existence.

The Second is giving rise to a new global consciousness. Still
acutely aware of our individual existence, we begin to recognize
our roles as global beings.

The great theologian Ewert Cousins, one of the first to explore the
idea of a Second Axial turning, emphasized its global character.
Karen Armstrong, one of the most respected chroniclers of the
great religions, also sees the signs and calls attention to the continuity
of the Second Axial with the First.

The flowering of a Second Axial Age could mean the most remarkable
evolutionary advance in the human search for meaning
since the birth of the great religions in the first millennium BCE.

But how can we be certain that such a transformation is actually
underway, that ours is indeed a time on the cusp? Is there a cogent
response to the new ‘cultured despisers’ of religion—those who
imagine that uncritical dogmatism, rabid intolerance, rejection
of science, and fanatical violence represent the authentic character
of human religiosity? What might the critics discover if they
responded to Schleiermacher’s gentle prompting and entered
into dialogue with those who have real insight into the human
spiritual quest? Might they begin to suspect that religion and
spirituality truly do evolve?

The following section briefly outlines a possible answer to these
several questions in the form of four organizing themes and
sixteen emerging evolutionary dynamics. These Axial markers
are already beginning to guide a new generation of religious
and spiritual inquiry, expression and action. As we reflect on
them, each one opens a new window onto our radically changing
cultural landscape.


'''The Axial Markers'''

The old ‘nature or nurture?’ controversy points up one of the most
e Axial Age was one of the most seminal periods of intellectual,
psychological, philosophical and religious change in
recorded history; there would be nothing comparable until the
Great Western Transformation, which created our own scientific
and technological modernity.

Today we are amid a second Axial Age and are undergoing
a period of transition similar to that of the first Axial Age…
All over the world, people are struggling with these new conditions
and have been forced to reassess their religious traditions,
which were designed for a very different type of
society. ey are finding that the old forms of faith no longer
work for them; they cannot provide the enlightenment and
consolation that human beings seem to need. As a result,
men and women are trying to find new ways of being religious.

Like the reformers and prophets of the first Axial Age,
they are attempting to build upon the insights of the past in
a way that will take human beings forward into the new
world they have created for themselves.

• awareness of the world, the cosmos, as a reality entire
• reflection on the transcendent and the nature of ultimate reality
• attention to a unitary God or core principle of the cosmos
• a new sense of the human individual as related to the
overarching whole
• exploration of the self and consciousness
• engagement with human mortality and a new focus on
salvation, liberation, or redemption
• emerging concern with compassion, empathy, ethics,
individual responsibility for the other, and social justice
important synergies in human social existence: the tempering of
biology by culture. 

Biological evolution equips us for self-defense
against the stranger, altruism toward the kin group and exploitation
of resources. Culture, on the other hand, expands our horizons
and deepens our insight and, in the process, alters our
behavioral patterns by changing our working understandings of
‘stranger,’ ‘kin’ and ‘resource.’ Since some of humankind’s earliest
religious questions addressed our relationships to the outsider,
the group and the environment, it’s unsurprising that any cultural
evolutionary advance would produce new insights and new behaviors
with respect to these critical dimensions of existence. 

The First Axial Age, for example, gave rise to human ethical concerns,
notions of social justice and reverence for the Earth.
Appropriately, the first three Second Axial themes address these
essential relationships. The first category of 21st-century evolutionary
development has to do with our broadening and deepening
relationships with ‘the other.’ The second is an extension of
the first, shaped by new understandings of peace and justice as
critical religious concerns. The third addresses our deepening
understanding of our responsibility to the Earth and the entire
planetary community.

The fourth theme has to do with the recognition of the vast global
landscape of spiritual practice and possibility. Perhaps the greatest
of the First Axial breakthroughs was the discovery of the personal
spiritual path and the rich variety of its tracings. The Second Axial
finds its sacred signature in what the late interfaith pioneer
Brother Wayne Teasdale described as ‘interspirituality …an attempt
to make available to everyone all the forms the spiritual
journey assumes.’ e Second Axial reawakening of the inner life,
it would seem, has a distinctively intercultural flavor.

The following list of Axial themes and markers is neither definitive
nor exhaustive. Each theme represents one of the most important
domains of 21st-century religious and spiritual advance;
each marker points up a particular evolutionary shitf that is already
well underway. It’s perhaps most useful to think of this
compilation as a guide for reflection, a map of critical action areas,
and—above all—an invitation to further exploration. Life in a period
of powerful evolutionary advance is never easy but always
energizing. And riding the new wave in is always preferable to
washing out with the old."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/CustomContentRetrieve.aspx?ID=4359809)

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Change Theory]]
[[Category:Evolution]]