
= technology used by the MaidSafe project


=Discussion=

Josef Cox:

"MaidSafe, who created a unique method of securely distributing data in a way that makes it virtually impossible to stop its flow.

The key part of MaidSafe is its Secure Access for Everyone (SAFE) network, which is powered by its participants' computers. A user's device—called a “farmer”—dedicates part of its computing power to keep the network running, and part of its hard-drive to store files. Parallels can be drawn with the Tor network, but this time, instead of only donating a portion of your bandwidth—something that SAFE also feeds on—you're parting with some of your computer's resources, too.

"In their own right, those farmers are the new Internet platform," says Irvine.

When a file is stored on the SAFE network, it doesn't just sit on one person's computer, waiting to be accessed. Instead, each file has multiple copies, which are divided up into tiny fragments and distributed amongst the network's farmers. Only the owner of the file has the ability to bring all of these parts together, decrypt the complete file and then view it. If a chunk is deleted—because, say, one of the network's computers becomes inactive or destroyed—the system autonomously makes additional backups from the remaining copies.

 
"You would actually have to power off whole routers to try to kill this system," says Irvine. "To lose data when MaidSafe is distributed, you'd have to switch off four continents simultaneously within about a 20ms time frame to possibly lose a piece of data."

The SAFE network is the epitome of what is being called the “decentralized Internet.” But as Jean-Philippe Vergne of Western University's Richard Ivey Business School told me, calling this technology "the Internet" can be misleading, especially when talking about decentralization."
(http://www.dailydot.com/technology/decentralized-internet-future/)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]