
'''* Policy brief: Securing the Commons. By Ruth Meinzen-Dick, Esther Mwangi, and Stephan Dohrn. CAPRi Policy Brief 4.'''

URL = http://www.capri.cgiar.org/pdf/polbrief_04.pdf


=Excerpt/Summary=

"Many natural resources are so-called common
pool goods. The physical nature of the resource presents
difficulties in excluding other users, yet the use of
the resource by one user decreases the supply available
to others. However, just because they are characterized
and managed by many users who are difficult to
exclude does not mean that the commons are automatically
subject to overuse and degradation. To the contrary,
resource users around the world have defined
rules and evolved norms for the regulation and conservation
of shared resources. Resource overuse and
degradation are not inevitable and are largely associated
with open access situations where these rights and
obligations are non-existent or have been weakened or
eroded by various pressures such as privatization and
individualization, state appropriation, population increase,
commercialization, or migration, among others."



=Policy Implications / Recommendations=


"'''1. Devolving authority to the lowest levels possible can improve the effectiveness of the management of common pool resources, if the state is willing and able to back the rules established at those levels'''

While broad principles may best be established at the
national level, and enforcement requires well-defined
mechanisms that are backed by the state, specific rules
and regulations should respond to cultural, political,
and ecological demands at local levels. This means
they should be adopted and implemented at the lowest
possible level of governance. Policies affecting the
way common pool resources are managed should also
define the broad processes of rights allocation and conflict
resolution. It is important to highlight the state’s
role in defending local rights against outsiders and
arbitrating between groups when local systems are
unable to resolve conflicts.


'''2. State recognition of common property systems is essential to enable those who depend on the commons to reap the benefits from these areas'''

To minimize or deflect external pressures and threats
on the commons it is essential that common properties
are formally recognized. The commons, much more
than individually-held properties, are at risk of appropriation
from both external and internal actors, usually
without adequate compensation for users. While formal
recognition can include registration of the rights of
all users as a means for securing their access and use
rights, it does not necessarily mean that group
resources can subsequently be used as collateral.
Records of rights should include secondary rights –
such as seasonal rights or rights to exploit only specific
resources in an area – and the ways different user
groups negotiate their rights with each other.



'''3. Strengthening individual property rights can undermine the existence of the commons'''

When strengthening private individual rights over
land, water, or other natural resources, third party
effects need to be taken into consideration as secondary
use rights might be cut off or undermined.
Mechanisms should be established for these users to
obtain a share in the benefits or receive compensation.
Rights registration systems that seek to minimize
restrictions on resource transfers may seem to be more
efficient, but if they do not accommodate the rights of
other customary users, they may reduce both equity
and the overall productivity of resource systems.



'''4. Devising strategies and mechanisms to strengthen group institutions, and making sure they are accountable and transparent for all members, can increase overall security of the commons'''

It is well-established that secure rights for the collective
are important in common property systems. It is
less recognized that the security of the individual within
the group is also relevant in the debate on securing
common properties. Insufficient security for individuals
may destabilize group functioning and effectiveness
of collective institutions, even where common
properties may be officially supported and encouraged.

Individual security within a collective setting
often requires 

(1) clear and enforced rules for access,
use and management of the resources, 

(2) clarity and certainty about the membership in the group, 

(3) effective enforcement and conflict resolution mechanisms.

Creating a climate of transparency and accountability
will provide group member assurance that they will
receive benefits from taking care of the commons.



'''5. Fostering innovative ways to diversify the livelihoods of commons users can help reach both equity and environmental stewardship objectives'''

Actively seeking income generating opportunities for
communities by identifying and supporting community
enterprises may generate benefits, which diversify
the range of livelihoods options as a basis for strengthening
community solidarity and incentives for shared
resource management. While there are risks that
increasing profitability will aggravate existing
inequalities or increase overharvesting and degradation
of the resource, there may also be opportunity to
design equitable benefit sharing arrangements that are
embedded within the community’s specific governance
arrangements.


'''6. Securing the commons requires empowering local communities to deal with outsiders'''


The commons do not exist in isolation, but are integrated
into national and global economies. But local
people cannot maintain their common resources if
powerful outsiders (e.g. timber concessionaires or
fishing trawlers) can take the resources with impunity.
Outside investors can be an important source of funds
and expertise to enhance the value of resources, e.g.
through ecotourism, but efforts are often needed to
build the capacity of communities to negotiate with
outsiders so that their resources are not used without
their informed consent, and local people receive an
appropriate share of the benefits. International policy
debates, including trade discussions, should also recognize
and respect other forms of property than individual
private property."


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Policy]]