
* Thesis: Seeds and the Law. Sectoral regulation governed by one business model. By Shabnam Laure Anvar.

URL = http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00335766/fr/


=Summary=


The seed supply chain is governed by a variety of business models. Seed regulation, however, is informed by just one single model. Current regulation, in France, is technical and market directing; geared to the specific needs of commercial high-yield agriculture varieties. Such regulation stands in the way of practices typical of other business models.
The aim of this study is to shed light on these relatively unknown regulations. To clarify the legal framework governing the seed supply chain from its draft through to its implementation, while considering its constraints and its consequences. Moreover, this study will show that all regulation planned or developed by regulatory bodies is shaped by the economic and institutional actors of the dominant model in line with their own interests and against the interests of other models. However, alternative regulation can be developed that guarantees the multiplicity, viability and specificity of each of the competing models.


=More Information=

Contact author via Shabnam Laure Anvar <shabnam.anvar@gmail.com>

Original French version: Semences et Droit. L'emprise d'un modèle économique dominant sur une réglementation sectorielle. [http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/33/57/66/PDF/20081030_These_Anvar_Tome_1_Semences_et_droit.pdf Tome 1]; [http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/33/57/66/PDF/20081030_These_Anvar_Tome_1_Semences_et_droit.pdf Tome 2]



[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:French]]

[[Category:Bibliographie]]