
URL = https://joinseeds.earth/ 


=Description=

Mammouth.AI:

“Chuck Harris's SEEDS Currency is a blockchain-based complementary currency designed to foster sustainability, community collaboration, and regenerative economics. It operates on a Bancor-like system, allowing for dynamic exchange rates between different community currencies while maintaining liquidity.”


=Characteristics=

Key Features of SEEDS Currency

==Complementary Currency System==

SEEDS is not meant to replace fiat money but to work alongside it, encouraging local and sustainable economic activity.
It is built on a proof-of-stake (PoS) blockchain (initially on EOS, later transitioning to its own blockchain).


==Bancor-Inspired Liquidity Mechanism==

Inspired by Keynes’ Bancor (a proposed supranational currency) and modern automated market makers (AMMs), SEEDS uses a reserve-based system to maintain liquidity.

Users can exchange SEEDS with other community currencies (or tokens) without traditional order books, using smart contracts to balance supply and demand.


==Regenerative Economics & Sustainability Focus==

SEEDS is designed to fund ecological and social projects through its "Harvest" mechanism, where a portion of transaction fees goes toward sustainability initiatives.

It encourages circular economies by rewarding users for contributing to regenerative practices (e.g., permaculture, renewable energy, local food systems.


==Decentralized Governance (DAO Structure)==

SEEDS operates as a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO), where token holders vote on proposals and governance decisions.

The SEEDS Foundation helps guide the ecosystem but does not control it centrally.


==Mutual Credit & Community Currencies==

SEEDS supports the creation of local mutual credit systems, where communities can issue their own currencies backed by trust and reciprocity.”

These currencies can be exchanged via the Bancor-like liquidity pools, ensuring interoperability.

[[Category:Money]]