

=Directory=

From the Tepsie report, [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece]]

"These involve groups of citizens that find innovative ways to express themselves by developing a 
new way of thinking about everyday life while putting these ideas into action. The main objective of
these networks is self- sufficiency and gaining control over factors or situations in order to improve
everyday life. 

• Apo Koinou (http://apokoinou.com/): Citizen’s movement in the city of Trikala, aiming to 
show that a "de-growth" process can be a response to the current crisis. Their argument is 
based on the fact that we can have a better life without having to consume/produce more. 
The specific movement aims to mobilise the citizens to adopt a new way of thinking and 
acting in their everyday life (to reduce consumption, to repair and use materials, to recycle 
etc.) as a response to the current crisis. 

• Atenistas (http://atenistas.org/): An open community of citizens of Athens who love their 
city and believe that they should no longer have to live with or accept some of its more 
negative aspects. For them Athens is not a "finished story" but a vast field of inventive and 
effective actions that will make them realise its enormous potential. They draw strength 
and energy from citizens, thousands of Athenians who want to do something for their city. 
They are a vibrant community, which through innovative and creative actions aims to 
transform Athens into a better place for living.

• Nea Guinea (http://neaguinea.org/): This initiative began in 
September 2009, with the key objective of regaining control over the 
basic things which are necessary for a decent life (food, energy, health, 
construction, clothing, etc.). Their key objective is the development of 
expertise in order for someone to be self-sufficient in response to 
his/her daily needs. Towards this end they try to disengage from the 
dominant production system, to create cohesive alternative structures 
and to resist the exploitation of labour, creating alternative, 
economically viable and socially fair procedures. 

• Saligaros (http://saligari.espivblogs.net/): Saligaros was created in 2009 in Athens by a 
network of citizens in order to investigate 
the possibilities and techniques of 
building with natural materials. Their 
main tool is self-education and teamwork. 
They are opposed to paid seminars and 
the commercialisation of any tool of 
collective self-sufficiency. They believe 
that knowledge should be spread freely. 
They are willing to share this knowledge 
through horizontal structures in the 
framework of social solidarity."

• Movement 136 (http://www.136.gr/): A citizen initiative which opposes the privatisation 
of water resources in Thessaloniki. Their alternative suggestion concerns the social 
management of water resources through cooperatives on a neighbourhood basis."


=More Information=

* [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece ]]


[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]