

==Description==

===Maslow===

"Maslow's message is that to achieve peak
experience people must move from self to other. Social
justice, generativity, and transformative thinking and acting
are all concepts that could be associated with this
orientation. The fundamental idea is that people must
move to a focus and concern for other people to achieve the
highest level of human nature. People who move beyond
self-actualization "are, without a single exception, involved
in a cause outside of their skin: in something outside of
themselves, some calling or vocation" (Maslow, 197 1 :42).
This view is supported by, among others, Erik Erikson
(1987) and Carl Rogers (1961). "
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metamotivation)

==Related==

===Frankl===

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Frankl

Frankl became one of the key figures in existential therapy and a prominent source of inspiration for humanistic psychologists.<ref name="Redsand2006">Anna Redsand (2006) Viktor Frankl: A Life Worth Living https://books.google.com/books?id=3AXDwL6HwRAC. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN: 9780618723430</ref>

Quote from Man's Search for Meaning:

"Again and again I therefore admonish my students in Europe and America: Don't aim at success - the more you aim at it and make it a target, the more you are going to miss it. For success, like happiness, cannot be pursued; it must ensue, and it only does so as the unintended side effect of one's personal dedication to a cause greater than oneself or as the by-product of one's surrender to a person other than oneself. Happiness must happen, and the same holds for success: you have to let it happen by not caring about it. I want you to listen to what your conscience commands you to do and go on to carry it out to the best of your knowledge. Then you will live to see that in the long-run - in the long-run, I say! - success will follow you precisely because you had forgotten to think about it."
[[wikipedia:Man's Search for Meaning]]

==More Information==
* https://digital.library.txstate.edu/bitstream/handle/10877/4089/fulltext.pdf

==References==
<references />

[[Category:Relational]]