
=Bibiography=

65. “Workers’ Management in Yugoslavia: A Comment’ (with V. Raškoviæ),
Journal of Political Economy, (1959), pp. 194-8.

66. “Autogestion, centralismo y planificacion”, Arauco, (1965), pp. 47-54 i
59-65.

67. “On the Theory of the Labour-Managed Firm”, The Florida State University
Slavic Papers, (1970), pp. 7-11.

68. “An Institutional Model of a Self-Managed Socialist Economy”, Eastern
European Economics, (1972), pp. 369-92. objavljeno i na španjolskom u
CEPLAN: Estudios de planificacion, 22 (1972).

69. “Appunti critici sulla teoria dell’impresa autogestita”, Est-Ovest, (1974), pp.
39-46.

70. “Workers” Management", Economic Analysis, (1976), pp. 197-216.

71. “Paths of Transition to Workers’ Management in Developed Capitalist
Countries”, Economic Analysis, (1977), pp. 214-36.

72. “Establishing Self-Governing Socialism in a Less Developed Country”,
Economic Analysis, 1-2 (1978), pp. 135-53. Preneseno i u World
Development (1981), pp. 951-64.

73. “Principes d’une théorie de la repartition en socialisme autogeré, Les cahiers
du seminaire Ch. Gide, Tome XIII (1979), pp. 60-85.

74. “Searching for a Strategy of Transition”, Economic Analysis and Workers",
Management, (1980), pp. 311-23.

75. “Observations on Actual Social-Economic Problems of Peru”, Economic
Analysis and Workers" Management, (1982), pp. 559-68.

76. “El establicimiento del sociallsmo autogestionario en un pais desarollado’,
Revista iberoamericana de Autogestión y Acción communal, (1983-4), pp.
117-40.

77. “Industrial Partnership: Utopia or Necessity?”, Economic Analysis and
Workers’ Management, (1986), pp. 251-6.

78. “Labour-Management and Neoclassical Economics”, Economic Analysis
and Workers’ Management, (1991), pp. 307-10.

=Source=

Article: V. Stipetic: Branko Horvat and Economic Science. Zb. Rad. - Sveuè. Rij., Ekon. fak. Rij., god. 21. Sv. 2 (2003), str. 7-28


[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]