'''Self-determined transactions = pricing determined by the buyer, not the seller'''


=Example: Jane Siberry's Sheeba Download store=


URL = https://www.sheeba.ca/store/

"WHAT ARE SELF-DETERMINED TRANSACTIONS?


NOT donations

NOT pay-what-you-can

NOT guilt-trips

NOT tests of your integrity

ARE TRANSACTIONS! You decide what feels right to your gut. If you download for free, perhaps you'll buy an extra CD at an indie band's concert. Or if you don't go with your gut feeling, you might sleep poorly, wake up grumpy, put your shoes on backwards and fall over. Whatever. You'll know what to do.


WHAT YOU WILL FIND AT SHEEBA STORE
FOUR choices on pop-down 'buy' button

1. free (gift from Jane)
   
2. self-determined (pay now)
   
3. self-determined (pay later so you are truly educated in your decision)
   
4. standard (today's going rate is about .99"
(https://www.sheeba.ca/store/)


'''Commentary from Boing Boing:'''

"Siberry posts the average payment rate for each song as you pull your payment option from the drop-down menu--another reminder that, Hey, you're more than welcome to steal this music but here's how other people have acted in the recent past. Methinks Ms. Siberry grasps the power of incentives quite well. This allows for at least a couple of interesting things to happen: people can decide what to pay after they hear the music, and see how much it's worth to them (it looks like people generally pay the most per song under this option); and it takes the variable-pricing scheme that economists love and puts it in the hands of the consumer, not the seller."
(http://www.boingboing.net/2005/11/28/jane_siberry_opens_b.html)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Music]]