'''* Paper: Mayo Fuster Morell, "Governance of online creation communities: Provision of platforms of participation for the building of digital commons, Self-provision model: Social forums case study. 
Internet & Politics section, ECPR General Conference, Potsdam, September 2009 "''' 

URL = http://internet-politics.cies.iscte.pt/spip.php?article308 [http://internet-politics.cies.iscte.pt/IMG/pdf/ECPRPotsdamFuster.pdf pdf]



=Abstract=

"This paper is dedicated to the analysis of the governance of online creation communities. Two components can be distinguished in online creation communities: a platform of participation around which the community is generated and the providers of such a platform. The analysis is centered in the several models of provision of the platforms of participation and the relationship established between the providers of the patform of participation and the community generated.

From a large-n analysis three models of provision resulted: i) a for profit and close provision; ii) a non profit and “formal” open provision; iii) and a non-profit and and “informal” open provision. Furthermore, they move alone a line between a service – oriented versus self – provision oriented approaches.

In a second part of the paper, the analysis is centered in the self-provision approach though the case of the social forums. It presents the organizational form characteristic of the social forum as a provider of platforms and the tensions (participation versus representation and individual versus organizations) emerged around the adoption of an online platform (openesf.net) and around the design of the protocols of participation online. Attention is also given to the actual data of participation related to those tensions."
(http://internet-politics.cies.iscte.pt/spip.php?article308)


=Excerpts=

Mayo Fuster Morell:


=Introduction to the Typology=

"How do the provider space and the community of participants at the platform relate to
each other? Which is the role of each in governing the OCCs?

Resulting from a large-N analysis, the OCCs can be classified in the way in which the
administrative space functions. 

There is a qualitative difference between 

1) the OCCs in which it is
possible for participants in the networking platform to be part of the administrative body and 

2) the one in which this option is not considered, 

in other words the “closed” administrative space and the “open” or accessible participative space. 

A distinction between profit and non-profit between the
formal seems also to be significant.

The “profit and formal closed admin or provision” model is characterized by performing
“technical aspects” (“technologically king”). It favors dimensions of information provision, usability
and technical accessibility, 

while the “open admin or provision” model is characterized by
performing more “political” aspects (“politically king”). It favors dimensions of transparency and
open knowledge management.


There is also a significant difference in the way in which the administrative space is open. A
“non-profit and formal open provision” model and an “non-profit and informal open provision model”
can be distinguished. The “formal open provision” is characterised by a positive performance of
transparency dimension and/or the presence of a board in the administrative space, while the
“informal open provision” is characterised by poor performance of the transparency dimension and/
or the absence of a board.


In sum, three models of provision result: 

i) a for profit and close provision; 

ii) a non profit and “formal” open provision; 

iii) and a non-profit and and “informal” open provision. 


Furthermore, they move alone a line between a service – oriented versus self – provision oriented format.

In the following section the way in which each model tent to frame the relationship between
the providers and the community will be presented .A case related to each of the three provision
models were considered. For the closed and profit provision the Flickr case; for open and non
proffit formal provision the Wikimedia case; and finally, for the open and non profit informal
provision the Social forums case.


...


'''* Non profit and “formal” open provision''': Social forums are based on a almost non-distinction
between the providers and the participants. The providers are a more or less self-selected part
of the participants. More than provision of platforms of participation, it seems to be a sense of
self-provision, self-organization or “adoption” of platforms of participation. The community “we”
(collective identity) is already formed before the platform is provided and this “we” decides to
self-organise to adopt an online platform of participation. In the case of OCCs promoted by the
Social forums, the OCCs are shaped and bridges by the collective identity of the Social forums
as a whole. From a web approach, it is characteristic of these type of OCCs a poorly
performance of transparency, however it seems connected, among other things, to its bridging
with other offline processes.

· '''* Non-profit and and “informal” open provision''': Wikimedia are based on an “intermedious” hybrid
form. Wikimedia foundation moves along a line of more closed or more open to community
involvement depending on the issue (eg for legal and funding it is closed, while for technical
maintenance it is more open). In some parts there is a separation between them and closeness
to community involvement and in other part there is an “overlap” between them.

Something that seems characteristic of community-driven governance
(Wikipedia and Social forums) is the relationship of cooperation and mutual support between the
providers and the community to the point of the creation of a space of overlapping or self-provision
in which it is difficult to establish a difference between the provider and the community. This is
different from a service-oriented model of governance (Flirck), which does not seem to have such
area of “overlapping” and community – provider collaboration.


==Social forums: Steps in the adoption of platforms of participation==

Information and communication technologies were important to communications for the
organization of a global level forum. And the building of an autonomous and independent
communication infrastructure is a strategy present at the GJM. In this regard, mail lists and
expositive-oriented websites have been used since the first WSF in January 2001 (Fuster Morell
2006). Since then several steps has been key in the decision to provide web platforms for
participation.

The first step in the adoption of a multi-interactive online platform was in 2003. During the
ESF II in Paris 2003, in order to give concrete answers to those who raised critiques about the
absence of final decisions in every social forum, an effort was made to collect a “Memory” of the
event, aiming to gather the outcomes of the different activities held in the Forum. Since then,
several platforms have been built in order to enable a collection of the social forum's “memory”.
The memory is also linked to the desire to systematize and democratize access to the information
and knowledge generated by the social forum process, so that not only organizers have access to
it.

The second step was in 2005 when for the V WSF, the decision was made to adopt more
participative methodologies to build the WSF program. The key points of the new methodology
were centered on defining the role of the forum as a merging space, rather than a director of the
movement. This translated, among other aspects, into the absence of plenaries put together by the
organizers of the WSF and instead the facilitation of self-organized activities. It also featured
rounds of consultation in defining the program. In order to do so, online tools were designed to
collaborate in the building of the forum program.

Finally, for the organisation of the "global day of action" on 26 January 2008 a technological
tool was developed. This year, instead of a classic WSF, a day of action was proposed which
would allow all movements and organisations to organise debates, demonstrations and symbolic
actions, among others. This decentralised action required coordination between movements and a
way to visualize those actions. A website was set up, with a world map on which every coalition,
movement or organisation could register and visualize their own actions.

...

What in some occasions appears as a “technical” divergence
around the use of technology are in fact clashes of political interest. In this regard, the goal of this
research area is to present how the technology adopted reflects the political goals of the forum.

Furthermore, this body of research on the politics of the technology at the Social forums is also
characterized by approaching the Social forums not as a monolithic actor, but a result of internal
contentions and collaborations. Following this argument, the literature of politics of technology at
the Social forums views the forums as an expression of diversity. Conflicts around technology
mirror conflicts over the nature of the forum itself and the political strategy to adopt within the
plurality of visions present at the forums. In this regard, the richness of the Social forums as a
meeting point of a plurality of views that conform an “ecology of diversity” is also reflected in the
diverse approach concerning the adoption of the NIT. In the Social forums there is a co-existence
of different political visions associated with particular uses and understandings of technology."



==Tensions==

"Two main tensions and points of confrontation could be distinguished in the combination of
representative and participation oriented logics at the forums regarding online platforms: One
concerning the protocols of openness versus close-control, and the other concerning the profile of
individual versus organizations.


==='''Tension: Openness versus control'''===

This opposition appears to be based on several aspects.

i) Linear accumulation over a closed formula versus openness to enlargement for change

ii) Communitarian control versus webmaster gate keeper control

iii) Offline versus online: Digital divide versus travel cost divide

iv) Open collaborative self-organized versus clear division of tasks


'''* i) Linear accumulation over a close formula versus openness to enlargement for change'''

There is a broader oppositional logic between those who wanted to maintain the actual
distribution of power between existing forces at the ESF, a fear of losing control over its role, a
growth strategy based on attracting more people via traditional interventions such as
communications to the Mass Media and alliances with established politics or by increasing
influence over it. And on the other hand, those who were willing to re-direct the role of the ESF to a
new politics based on participation, enlarging its bases through “horizontal” type of actors or new
type of collective actors (like online communities) and an assumption that conventional politics
were in irreversible crisis of and there is therefore a need to experiment with new forms.


'''* ii) Communitarian control versus webmaster gate keeper control'''

Openness does not assume lack of control, but a communitarian model of control.

Communitarian control is a model based on online open doors to any content and then
decentralized social control over the contents.

Instead the control model of the authorized gatekeeper is based on a central filter of the
information by the webmaster. The information accepted is the one that results from an “offline”
deliberation in the assembly or other sources of authority, like the organizational logistic
information from the working groups. It assumes that the deliberation is not hosted “online”.


'''* iii) Offline versus online: Digital divide versus travel cost divide'''

The representative of vertical organizations tends to be in favor of a gate keeper control
model because it does not cause conflicts with their role as representatives. However the
distinction between the two control models does not completely correspond to a “participative
versus a non participative approach”. It also has to do with a “offline” participation versus an
“online” participation and the distribution of resources that each type of participation require. The
sectors, which can afford cost of participation into EPAs, are more disposed to a model of “offline”
deliberation and conceive of collective action in only an “offline” capacity. Furthermore they do not
have the technical knowledge to use online tools. Sectors whoses bases had resources in the form
of technological knowledge to participate online and have scarce monetary resources are more
favourable to a model that presupposes the online participation.


'''iv) Open collaborative self-organized versus clear division of tasks and difficulty of integrating collaboration'''

A logic of collaborative administration and building of the contents of the website is opposed
to one of control over the organization of the contents of the website based a clear division of tasks
under the figure of the webmaster.


==='''Tension: Individuals versus organizations'''===

In the Social forums, there is an attempt to develop organization structures that would allow
individual subjectivities and contributions and the multi-faceted belonging and participation.
However, at the Social forums there remains a tension around individual participation.

One reason, the rise of individuals is a challenge to the idea present in some parts of the
social movements, “that individualistic type of cultures tend to produce ideology of success and
tendency for individual achievements. These views are reluctant to perceive positive effects in the
individualization in term of commitment and political engagement” (Interview Donatella della Porta,
2008).

Another reason, individual participation reduces arguments for the representative of vertical
organizations to maintain representative mechanisms and keep control over its bases.

A third reason is a lack of trust over the capacity of organization of a network model
structure versus a vertical and professional model."


==Conclusions: Social forums' provision of online and offline platforms of participation and the self-provision model==

The platforms of participation promoted by the Social forums are characterized by: 

i) a very broad mission (Chapter of Principles of the Social forums); 

ii) platforms that are open to anyone
who agrees with the broad mission; 

iii) the contents and program defined and “self-organized” by
the participants; 

iv) the organizers of the forum role is to provide the infrastructure, but not to
represent the forum community. 

All these four characteristic are also present in other type of cases
(such as Wikimedia and Flickr); however the forums as providers of platforms of participation have
a distinctive sense. The Social forum as a platform provider could be defined as a self-provision,
self-organization or adoption model because the forum is not provided by an external body, but by
engaged participants of the forum (in some cases self-selected and in others filtered by a
representational balance and/or intentional selection). At the Social forums, there is no clear
separation between providers and participants and they have similarities in their organizational
form.


===Tensions in self-provision approach===

However, social forum can be characterised as an hybrid form concerning its composition.

The Social forums are hybrid forms in their composition because the social forum hosts the “old”
traditional Left (political parties, trade unions, large NGOs), and the “new” - small anarchist groups,
“open space” advocates, and horizontal organizations with diverse ideologies. The diversity of
organizational and representational logics that host the forums result in tensions concerning the
adoption of online platforms of participation around two main axes: Individual versus organization
participation and open and versus close control.

In the self-provision approach characteristic of the Forum, there is not a clear cut between
platform providers and platform participants. In this regard; thee above tensions are not stressed in
the relationship between the platform provider and platform participants. Instead, in a service
oriented type of provision, where there is a clear cut between providers and participants and they
follow a different organizational form, these tensions are situated in the relationship between
platform providers and platform “users” or participants."
(http://internet-politics.cies.iscte.pt/IMG/pdf/ECPRPotsdamFuster.pdf)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Research]]