

=Description=


From Charles C. Manz and Christopher P. Neck. “Mastering Self-Leadership: Empowering Yourself For Personal Excellence (Prentice-Hall, ISBN: 0-13-
011087-6), 

URL = http://www.emergingleader.com/article4.shtml:

“This is not an article about the leadership of others. Instead, it is about something
more fundamental and more powerful---self-leadership. It is about the leadership that
we exercise over ourselves. In fact, we argue that if we ever hope to be effective leaders
of others, we must first be effective leaders of ourselves. To better understand the
process of self-leadership and how we can improve our capability in this area, we
should first explore the meaning of the word "leadership".

There are a seemingly endless number of definitions and descriptions of leadershiplargely
as a result of the vast number of persons who have researched and written on
the subject (and their equally vast and differing viewpoints). All of these descriptions
have some merit. However, in focusing on the idea of self-leadership, perhaps the
most useful definition of leadership is simply "a process of influence" .

This short definition is actually quite broad and meaningful. It recognizes not only the
importance of human influence in the determination of what we are and what we do,
but also the complex nature of leadership (that is, influence is not an isolated event,
but a process involving many parts). The existing literature on leadership is almost
universally focused on influence exercised by one or more persons over others (in other
words, influence exercised by "leaders" on "followers"). In taking an initial step toward
understanding and improving our own self-leadership, we must first recognize
that leadership is not just an outward process; we can and do lead ourselves. Indeed,
as the opening quotation suggests, our greatest potential source of leadership and influence
comes not from an external leader, but from within ourselves."


=Discussion=


"Self-Leadership In Practice: 

1 Self-leadership has been more broadly defined as "the
process" of influencing oneself to establish the self-direction and self-motivation
needed to perform. 

2 Research across a variety of settings, from the educational domain
to the airline industry, has shown that the practice of effective self-leadership by
employees can lead to a plethora of benefits including improved job satisfaction, selfefficacy,
and mental performance. 

3 Self-Leadership involves "leading oneself" via the
utilization of both behavioural and mental techniques. Behavioural self-leadership
techniques involve self-observation, self-goal-setting, management of antecedents to
behaviour (e.g., cues), modification of consequents to behaviour (e.g., self-reinforcement,
self-punishment), and the finding of natural rewards in tasks performed. Mental
self-leadership techniques involve examination and alteration of self-dialogue, beliefs
and assumptions, mental imagery, and thought patterns (habits in one’s thinking).
It is important to note that effective self-leadership is not founded on narcissistic or
"blindly" independent employee behaviours with total disregard to the work group or
organization. Rather, effective self-leadership involves a coordinated effort between
the employee and the group and/or organization as a whole.

4 Implicit in this view is a
potential trade-off or balance between the self-leadership of an individual employee
and the self-leadership of the work group and/or organization as a collective. This
suggests that effective self-leadership involves achieving an equilibrium between focusing
on the cohesiveness of a work group and/or organization and focusing on the
value and identity of each individual employee. Thus, self-leadership does not require
entirely autonomous behaviour without regard to the team or organization. Nor does
it require that the identity and value of each individual employee be entirely put aside
in favour of the work group or organization. Rather, an effective self-leadership perspective
would encourage individuals to find their own personal identity and mode of
contribution as part of establishment of a group or organization that produces synergistic
performance.

5 In sum, self-leadership provides considerable promise for taking the pursuit of employee
effectiveness to the next level. Indeed, effectively self-led employees, both behaviourally
and cognitively, may offer the best blueprint for achieving employee and
organizational effectiveness in the 21st century”.


=More Information=

#[[Leadingship]]
#[[Inner Democracy]]

[[Category:Governance]]