

=Context=

Note: [[Tine De Moor]]'s excerpts focus on a study based on historical materials mostly in the "High" Middle Ages in the Low Countries (Belgium, Netherlands) in Europe.


=Discussion=

[[Tine De Moor]]:

"The corporations were self-regulating for the most part and instead
of relying on external bodies to give relief they became self-help groups
of a sort, forming autonomous bodies often enjoying good relations with
local authorities. The fact that people formed groups is not in itself
striking, but that they themselves regulated and controlled the execution
of their own rules, including disciplinary matters, is less obviously to be
expected.

To make their collective projects work, guilds and commons relied
heavily for enforcement mechanisms on group norms, as opposed to
formal legal enactments. They designed most of the rules themselves, with
or without the involvement of the local powers, and that should not
surprise us: sociological research has proved that member involvement
in the design of rules offers a better guarantee of success.68 Members
supplemented these rules with impressive sets of ‘‘instruments’’ to make
their alliances work. I will not be going into detail about such things as
fining systems, but in the context of this article it is important to note that
members of these corporate institutions, both guilds and commons,
developed methods to protect their organizations from the functioning of
the free market. They tried to safeguard at least part of the production
market against the forces of the free market. It has often been assumed –
but as often highly contested – that they tried to achieve a complete
monopoly, but in practice it did not necessarily turn out like that.69
Notwithstanding strict written regulations, in practice there were many,
and often rather radical, exceptions to the guilds’ regulations that
prevented any form of monopoly from being established.


===‘‘A world within a world’’===

With a large set of rules, commoners and guild members tried to regulate
the behaviour of their fellows – to prevent them from free riding – and to
control the effect their surroundings could have on the behaviour of the
members. They developed a system of market regulation in order to
protect their ‘‘own little world’’. Measures were taken by both guilds and
commons to achieve a reasonable income for their members and to
eliminate the disruptive effects of the market, which was still at an early
stage of development when commons and guilds were set up in Europe.
Institutions such as guilds could make functioning within those settings
less risky, though without losing too many of the advantages the market
offered. ‘‘Prudence above all’’, one could say.

We can agree with Prak and Panhuysen that the fact of the guilds’
domination of the markets being incomplete does not necessarily point
towards an inefficient monopoly. They might not even have aimed to
completely monopolize their trades in the first place.71 As noted by
Panhuysen, guilds had a number of strategies to deal with these problems,
including strategies designed to give master tailors control over the most
profitable parts of their trade, while they were willing to compromise on
what were seen as peripheral activities.

One method used by guilds in their attempts to master product markets
was to form cartels. The number of conflicts concerning the right
to form cartels demonstrates the importance of them to the guilds
until the very eve of their abolition. The information about that and
the effects it had is limited, but there are indications that the guilds
managed to protect the market to a great extent, if not completely.73 The
question here is whether it was necessary for the guilds to dominate
markets completely. Would that have been an objective of a small-scale
organization aimed primarily at securing the income of its members who
had particular skills and who, because of their human capital, saw
themselves as being distinct from the less well trained ‘‘mob’’ who worked
in the rural economy? Was there much advantage to be gained from
a putting-out system when one does not have the capital to invest in
such a system? It seems that the guild system, and the system of common
land, each offered their members the advantages of scale in return for
cooperation.

Peasants too tried to limit the influence of the market on their
commons and their members. The background here is a continuous
struggle to prevent the over-exploitation of the common, although it is
usually supposed, primarily by non-historians such as Hardin,74 that
commons were traditionally always overgrazed. In fact, regulation of
the use of the common and rules to prevent or at least restrict the
commercialization of its assets were devised, with two main methods.4

One involved setting stints, or numerical limits, to the amount of
resource units per person, and implementing a price mechanism that
adjusted prices to the foreseeable pressure on the commons (payment per
head of cattle). Depending on the type of resource involved, various
types of rules limiting the influence of the market could be found on all
European historical commons. In general the amount of produce a
commoner was allowed to take was limited to a certain number of
resource units. In some cases the surface of the common was expressed i
terms of the number of units of cattle the pasture could feed. For example,
for the Wijkerzand common in the central Netherlands the total of
180 ‘‘shares’’ and their size in the grazing rights of the common appear to
have been laid down in the fifteenth century and have survived until today.

Often the shares of the commoners were limited not by the capacity of
the common but by factors directly related to aspects of the prevailing
subsistence economy and so unrelated to the wider commercial economy.
One such rule was the express prohibition of the sale of produce from the
common (wood, or milk from the commons’ cows) outside village borders,
which helped protect the most valuable assets of the common against
the negative side effects of the free market (commercialization and over-exploitation
in the case of the common). But protection of members against
the free market is in no sense the same as being against the free market.

Commoners could have participated in the free market regardless of their
activities on the common.

Commons developed other mechanisms to offer resources at a uniform
price, the intention being to foster greater equality within the organization.

Prices of what could be harvested were uniform and equal for all members,
but could be higher for non-members in cases where they were admitted.

That does not mean that prices for products were stable; they were adjusted,
not to the prices of the market but to the situation of the common. Evidence
can be found of commons that used an ‘‘internal market’’ to regulate the use
of their resources, so that when demand for resources (by members) was
high and threatened to become too high in comparison with what was
available on the common, prices per individual animal were raised to reduce
demand for cattle on the common.

The functioning of the guilds can be compared to that. Members of
guilds aimed to put their products on the market at uniform prices to
promote, though not necessarily of course to achieve, the highest possible
average income for those members. Prak, however, notes that the great
social differences between members of guilds indicates that there must
have been other factors at work to turn that optimal average into a
minimum wage.79 Neither guilds nor commons used the law of supply
and demand to set or change their prices, but used instead an internal
autonomously defined quality standard. Products of the same quality
were to be sold for the same price, which created a form of medieval
quality label. That not only made trade easier, it also prevented internal
conflicts from arising.

Gustafsson considers quality control a key organizing principle of
medieval guilds. The variability of quality as determined largely by the
individual craftsman’s skill would be changed only with the Industrial
Revolution, when the quality of products was made more homogeneous
through the use of machines.81 Meanwhile guilds were necessary to solve
the ‘‘quality problem’’ for traders in the emerging market economy.
Gustafsson sums up several methods used by guilds to control quality: the
examination of raw materials, scrutiny and regulation of production
processes, setting standards and instituting compliance inspections for end
products, and the use of marks to indicate a specific quality. One can
assume that by controlling quality themselves, the guilds achieved a
competitive advantage over free-market produce, as traders no longer had
to control the merchandise so intensively themselves; their guilds did that
for them.

The aim of offering the products of the guilds at uniform prices had an
effect similar to what happened on the common: those who complied
with the rules were assured of an income, probably not the best possible
price they might have received in a free market, but certainly a sustained
income. Guild members who decided to ignore the quality standard and
made goods of a lesser quality offered at lower prices threatened the
income of all the suppliers of better quality goods. That straightforward
social dilemma was solved by a multitude of rules and sanctions, to
prevent free riding by guild members. Richardson describes how the
members of guilds were dependent upon each other to achieve that
required income level: ‘‘[T]hey had a common theme. Guild members
acted to increase their incomes, and their efforts required action in concert.
Members had to cooperate. Each had to do his part for the guild to
attain his goals.’’

Ignoring the quality standards of the guild can be considered a user
strategy equal to overusing the resources of the common, either for
personal or commercial use. In both cases members abused the fact that
they belonged to a privileged group, such as commoners who would try
to put more than their share of cattle on the common, abusing their
legitimate presence there. Whether or not the abuse would be discovered
depended on the functioning of the commoners’ social control mechanisms.
Similarly, guild members could abuse their reputation as members of a
respected guild to offer products of poorer quality, with the pretence of
guild quality. Records exist of manufacturers who, while guild members,
preferred a low-quality-product strategy which conflicted with the general
strategy of their guild. Durability, for example, was important in the
manufacturing sector because products often needed to be sold over long
distances; if a product proved to be of lower quality, that could ruin the
reputation of a guild.

To prevent members from free riding, social control played an important
role in these institutions. We find evidence that members of commons could
be fined if they did not report it when they saw others cheating, such as by
putting too many cattle on the common, while guilds often required
members to set up shop in the same area in order to encourage socially
based control of each other.86 The so-called gradual sanctioning mentioned
by Elinor Ostrom in her list of design principles for durable common pool
institutions is found in both institutions’ methods of fining free riders.87
In both guilds and commons, the punishment could amount to permanent
expulsion from the organization.

Guilds held other trump cards to prevent free riding. Richardson
explains that craft guilds combined spiritual and occupational endeavours
because ‘‘the former facilitated the success of the latter and vice versa. The
reciprocal nature of this relationship linked the ability of guilds to attain
spiritual and occupational goals. By combining piety and profit the guilds
could overcome free-rider problems and achieve common goals.’’ 

That kind of bundling of endeavours,

- increased the pain of expulsion. People expelled from guilds with both craft
and Christian features lost both business and religious benefits. They lost not
only their colleagues but also their church, not only their partners but also their
preachers, not only their means of prospering in this life but also their hope of
passing through purgatory.

According to Richardson, the advantage of combining religious and
economic goals lay in the fact that the religious consequences of defection
could not be easily calculated as they might become obvious only in
the afterlife, so the religious goals of the guild added an extra tool of
enforcement. Richardson concludes that complex guilds, those combining
endeavours, deterred shirking better than simple, secular associations and
that the complex variants would be more profitable than the simple
ones."
(https://www.ris.uu.nl/ws/files/20096187/_PUB_SilentRevolution_IRSH_53_Suppl.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[From Medieval Guilds to Open Source Software]]


[[Category:P2P History]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]