'''Self-publishing'''

=Description=

"For the first time, '''print-on-demand''' companies are successfully positioning themselves as respectable alternatives to mainstream publishing and erasing the stigma of the old-fashioned vanity press. Some even make a case that they give authors an advantage -- from total control over the design, editing and publicity to a bigger share of the profits."
(http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/24/books/review/24GLAZERL.html? )

The article mentions  '''iUniverse''' and '''Booksurge'''. See also '''lulu.com'''.


=Examples=

Compiled from [http://www.bestcollegesonline.com/blog/2009/07/12/100-places-to-sell-and-share-your-knowledge-on-the-side/]:

* Scribd: Use this site to publish your great ideas, stories and instructional manuals online and share and sell them.

* Lulu: From traditional text to ebooks and more, this site offers many options to publish your own work.

* iUniverse: Here you’ll find tools to affordably publish your book.

* Blurb: Whether you want to put together a book of photos or of short stories, this site can help you do it.

* Fultus: Publish to paper, ebook or blook with this great self-publishing site.

* WordClay: With this site you’ll be able to publish, promote and distribute your book.

* Xlibris: Even if you know nothing about self-publishing, this site can help guide you through the process.

* formatpixel: Check out this site to publish online, from magazines to brochures, to share your ideas and products.

* Publetariat Vault: This online community and service will help you get your book out there and read by more people.

* BookSurge: Pay a visit to this site to learn how to publish, maintain your rights and make a profit."
(http://www.bestcollegesonline.com/blog/2009/07/12/100-places-to-sell-and-share-your-knowledge-on-the-side/)



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Resources]]