
=Directory=

List compiled by Richard Bartlett [https://hackmd.io/@yHk1snI9T9SNpiFu2o17oA/Skh_dXNbE?type=view]:

(the source article has all the links)

Temporary (e.g. campaigns, events):

* Barcelona en Comú published How To Win Back The City, one year after a coallition of grassroots activists won the municipal elections.
* How We Organize the Allied Media Conference (2017 edition). This zine was organized in 2013 by the Allied Media Projects to open source their methodology for convening what is now, in its 20th year, more than a 3,000 person conference themed around “media-based organizing” in Detroit, USA. The content of the conference is generated, coordinated, and selected in an impressively decentralized manner.
* HOFFNUNG 3000 - a self-organized festival. How do we organize ourselves in our social, artistic & theoretical communities? HOFFNUNG 3000 was not simply a festival but more of a process of organizing a festival, a festival that creates itself. Through each and every participant.
* How to Create a Rent Strike
* Repair Cafe is a place to meet and fix things together. Their handbook is available on a ‘pay what you want’ basis.
* TEDx organisers guide
* Awesome Foundation Wiki. Awesome Foundation is a network of autonomous groups who make micro-grants to people working on awesome projects.
* How to start a SOUP: a microgranting dinner celebrating and supporting creative projects.
* How to start a Food Not Bombs chapter: decentralised grassroots peace movement sharing free (vegan) food with hungry people.
* Cosecha is a movement for US immigrants. They operate with a transparent strategy & structure.
* Swarmwise by Rick Falkvinge, the tactical guide from the Swedish Pirate Party
* Ouishare Fest Toolkit- a guide to organizing a participatory festival.
* Guide to the Extinction Rebellion UK self-organising system

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Reference]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Politics]]