'''Self-determined pricing = system whereby potential buyers can try out a product for free, then pay the amount that they like, including paying nothing.'''

See also: [[Open Payment]] and [[Pay As You Want]]


=Description=

Described by artist Jane Siberry, who has been pioneering it on her site, at Sheeba.ca

URL = https://www.sheeba.ca/store/payhow.php 

"WHAT ARE SELF-DETERMINED TRANSACTIONS?

NOT donations - NOT pay-what-you-can - NOT guilt-trips - NOT tests of your integrity

ARE TRANSACTIONS - You decide what feels right to your gut. 

As of November 2005, you pay what you want for Sheeba’s music.

WHAT SHOULD I PAY?

It’s up to you. Really. Although they’re not meant as guidelines, you can see two prices for each download. One is the “standard" price, which is just the old catalogue price before we instituted Pay What You Want. The other is the average price recently paid by customers, which is displayed when you make a menu choice. But they’re not guidelines, just fun statistics, just like the percentages of customers who have chosen each style of payment.

DO I HAVE TO PAY ANYTHING?

No. If you want to download music for free, choose the “A gift from Jane" option, or just enter 0 as your price.

CAN I PAY MORE (OR LESS) THAN THE STANDARD PRICE?

Yes. If you enter a price that isn’t the standard price, the menu should change to say you’ve chosen the self-determined option. Good for you!

WHAT DO YOU MEAN, PAY LATER?

If you want to listen to your download before deciding how much it is worth to you, please go ahead. Choose the pay-later option, finishing checking out your shopping cart, and download your purchase. When you want to pay, click on “My Account" to see a list of your unpaid songs, choose a price and put the purchase back in your shopping cart.

HOW MUCH LATER?

Come back and pay when you’ve chosen your price. We will not nag or remind you.

ARE YOU KEEPING TRACK OF ALL THIS?

Our database tracks of how much each customer has paid for each download. We need to do this for accounting purposes, so that we can calculate the statistics we show, and so that we can tell you when you ask what downloads you haven’t paid for yet."
(https://www.sheeba.ca/store/payhow.php)


=Examples=

==Magazines [http://www.springwise.com/media_publishing/paywhatyouwant_magazine_subscr/]==

[http://www.pastemagazine.com/ Paste Magazine]

==Food==

From Springwise:

"[http://www.falter.at/web/wwei/detail.php?nr=5266  Der Wiener Deewan] serves five different Pakistani curries daily, three of which are vegetarian. Prices for drinks are fixed, but customers decide how much they'd like to pay for the food. Most pony up a fair price, and the restaurant doesn't seem to suffer from its unusual pricing plan. 

A bit of research shows that Der Wiener Deewan isn't the only restaurant to take a laissez-faire approach to prices: Melbourne's [http://www.lentilasanything.com Lentil As Anything] also lets customers pay what they can afford or what they think the meal was worth. The business now runs three locations in Melbourne and provides space for artists and writers. The [http://www.oneworldeverybodyeats.com One World Café] in Salt Lake City and the SAME Café ([http://www.soallmayeat.org So All Might Eat]) in Denver operate on a similar basis, and also let customers specify portion sizes (which isn't a bad idea for any restaurant). "


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Business Models]]