
=Description=

"Do you know the number of miles you've driven over the last five years? Every meal you've eaten? The number of browser tabs you've had open during the day compared with the amount of sleep you had that night? That's the kind of data collected by the new generation of self-trackers who descended on the Computer History Museum, in Mountain View, California, for the first annual Quantified Self conference over Memorial Day weekend.

About 400 hackers, programmers, entrepreneurs and health professionals came from across the globe, united by a desire to collect as much data as possible about themselves in order to make informed decisions regarding health, productivity and happiness. (One participant had logged X-rated information on the number of his sexual partners and duration of sexual activities. He went to a session on data visualization looking for an interesting way to illustrate that data.)

The self-tracking movement, which has sprung to life over just the last couple of years, is enabled in large part by both wireless sensing devices and smart phones. Many people already employ smart phone apps to track food intake and fitness, but a new generation of apps also tracks mood, meditation, migraines and other factors.

Beyond the smart phone, low power wireless transmitters are transforming existing objects, such as scales and pedometers, making tracking both effortless and easy to share. A Wi-fi enabled scale automatically tracks your weight and will even tweet the numbers—for those lucky few who really want to share.

Several commercial wearable monitors, such as fitbit and Bodymedia, employ accelerometers to track the wearer's movement, pairing that with specialized algorithms to calculate calories burned. Data is automatically uploaded to the internet, allowing users to track their progress and compete against each other for the most steps or highest activity levels."
(http://www.technologyreview.com/blog/editors/26869/)


=More Information=

#online guide to self-tracking tooks, http://quantifiedself.com/guide/
#quantified self conference, http://quantifiedself.com/conference/


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Relational]]