* '''Book: The Semantic Sphere: Computation, Cognition and Information Economy. Pierre Levy. Wiley-ISTE. 2011'''

Amazon: http://www.amazon.com/Semantic-Sphere-Computation-Cognition-Information/dp/1848212518/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1310836670&sr=8-1


=Description=

"New advances in digital media offer unprecedented memory capacities, an omnipresent channel of communication, and ever-growing computational power.
We must ask ourselves how we can exploit this medium in order to augment our own social cognitive processes for human development.

Through a combination of a profound knowledge of humanities and social sciences, and an understanding of computer sciences, Pierre Lévy proposes a collaborative construction of a global hyper-cortex, coordinated by a computable metalanguage.

By fully recognizing the symbolic and social nature of human cognition, we could transform our current, opaque, global brain into a reflexive collective intelligence."


=Contents=


1. General Introduction.


==Part 1. A Philosophy of Information==

2. The Nature of Information.

3. The Symbolic Cognition.

4. The Creative Conversation.

5. Toward a Mutation of Humanities and Social Sciences.

6. Information Economy.


==Part 2. Cognition Modeling==


7. Introduction to a Scientific Understanding of the Mind.

8. Computer Perspective: Towards a Reflexive Intelligence.

9. Overview of the Semantic Sphere IEML.

10. The Metalanguage IEML

11. The Semantic Machine IEML.

12. The Hypercortex.

13. A Hermeneutic Memory.

14. Humanistic Perspective: Towards Explicit Knowledge.

15. Observe the Collective Intelligence.


=More Information=

Written Interview in english: http://mastersofmedia.hum.uva.nl/2011/11/01/collective-intelligence-an-interview-with-pierre-levy/

Video interview in english, sub-titled in portugese, about collective intelligence and the semantic sphere: http://bit.ly/vwTUgi


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]