
=Description=

Alexandre Monnin:

"The ValueModels project which is part of the TCP-IP + Blockchain cooperative platform (also
submitted as a manisfestation d’intérêt) aims to create a new technical and methodological
framework to help detect value(s) and valuation practices and thence bridge the gap between
knowledge engineering and the Semantic Web on the one hand and Blockchains on the other.
This is done by developing a new approach to modelization in terms of valuation rather than
domains so as to foster collaboration among actors who share a compatible approach to valuation
by allowing them to implement new cooperative “value chains”. We believe ontology
engineering on the Semantic Web has mainly fostered interoperability among datasets rather true
cooperation among actors and institutions. To address this shortcoming, it is necessary to model
values and valuation practices rather than domains. Value chains among actor who hold
compatible value models may then be automated with Blockchains in order to support fruitful
cooperation and foster the advent of a sustainable economy which promotes recognition of the
diversity of valuation practices and maximizes the production of positive externalities."


=Discussion=

==The Scientific Context==

Alexandre Monnin:

"For many years now, the intended aim of the Semantic Web has been to expand the reach of
knowledge engineering by bringing it on the Web. One of the building blocks of the Semantic
Web is ontology engineering, in other words, the modelling of various domains with (logical)
knowledge representation language. Modelling a domain with a logical language makes it
possible to reason about it and generate new inferences and knowledge about the said domain:
this is called entailment. The main paradigm behind these languages and models is centered on
individuals and relations. What is missing though is a representation of how the same reality can
be “valuated” in many various ways by a host of different actors. In turn, this lack severely limits
the possibilities for genuine cooperation. Cooperation means more that interoperability. While the
focus of the Semantic Web from its inception has been to promote a mostly technical notion of
interoperability among datasets, this remains a far cry from creating adequate conditions for
cooperation amongst people and institutions.

Our hypothesis in this project is that cooperation requires other preconditions than market-based
exchanges. One could even say that the market allows for transactions in the absence of genuine
cooperation. That’s its strength. Cooperation on the other hand requires that the parties display
compatible assessments regarding the value of things (or how they proceed to value them). Being
able to measure the positive and negative externalities involved in one’s activities for instance
constitutes of good indicator to decide whether or not fruitful cooperation can be achieved. In
addition, the logic of valuation has to be made visible if cooperation among parties is to ensue.
The reasoning capacities of ontologies in this new context would help to identify new potential
value chains among cooperating parties and the Blockchain could be used (realistically for once)
in order to automate them. For institutions, modeling the way they attribute value to their activity
would allow them to track more precisely their true social impact which is neither limited to the
market (the value cannot be expressed as a price ), nor to budget guidelines (the operating cost of
an institution is not a good indicator when the task at hand is to evaluate its true cost, especially
when the latter generates positive externalities which are not taken into account and that will put
pressure on any budget whatsoever should it be shut down).

The lack of a truly “Social Semantic Web” may stem from the hope that from interoperability
cooperation will follow. Against this hypothesis, we propose a truly interdisciplinary project that
will tightly associate the social sciences to determine an appropriate framework to help bring in
to the light concrete valuation practices and implement value models so as to advance the shift
from market-based competition to valuation-based cooperation of shared “ecosystems”, typical of
the economy of functionality."


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]