

=Discussion=

"The Sendai Framework reflects the
certainty that in an ever more populous, networked
and globalizing society, the very nature and scale of
risk has changed, to such a degree that it surpasses
established risk management institutions and
approaches. Recent events - such as large-scale
prolonged droughts and heatwaves, financial and
commodity market crashes, large scale and long
term human migration, cybervulnerabilities and
political upheavals - carry the potential to generate
diverse types of damage and destruction simultaneously, to vital infrastructure and even to the life
support systems of very large parts of societies and
economies.

With non-linear change in hazard intensity and
frequency a reality, and now threatening all three
dimensions of sustainable development, the imperative for greater ambition and accelerated systemic
action pre-2030 to converge with the Sendai Framework is clear. The Sendai Framework compels new
conceptual and analytical approaches to improve
understanding and management of risk dynamics
and risk drivers at a range of spatial and temporal
scales. It requires particular emphasis on the interaction among physical, technological, social and
environmental hazards, and attention to “anthropogenic metabolism”. (Anthropogenic metabolism
means the systemic interaction between humans
and the environment that consists of the inputs,
outputs and stock of materials and energy required
to sustain physiological needs for food, air, water
and shelter, as well as the products, substances and
services necessary to sustain modern human life.

It emerges from the application of systems thinking
to industrial and other human-made activities, and
is central to sustainable development.)
Technical communities use models to better “see”
risk in the present or near future, and so the view
of risk is inherently shaped by the tools used to
describe it. Most models have been based on
historical data and observations, assuming that the
past is a reasonable guide to the present and the
future. That assumption is now rendered obsolete
on almost every frontier: by the sheer number of
human beings, never before seen on Earth; by the
changing climate; and by the dynamic and global
connectedness of biological and physical worlds,
individuals and communities."
(https://gar.unisdr.org/sites/default/files/chapter/2019-06/chapter_2.pdf)


=More information=

* [[Systemic Risk]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]