=Typology=


Richard Simpson:

"Sorokin's principal tool in analyzing cultures
and explaining their changes is his classification
of cultures and all their manifestations into three
main types: Sensate, Idealistic, and Ideational coupled with his concept of "logico-meaningful"
integration of cultural elements.

Events, relationships, and objects which are
logico-meaningfully integrated are those which
stem from the same value premises or criteria of
truth, which seem somehow to fit together into a
common Weltanschauung or cluster of attitudes.
Thus a Gothic cathedral, a treatise in scholastic
philosophy, and the allocation of greater prestige
to clergymen than to tradesmen are logico-meaningfully integrated because they all stem
from the religiously oriented culture mentality
which prevailed in medieval Europe. Similarly
integrated are the picture of a sparsely clad woman
on the jacket of a novel, a pragmatic philosophical
work, and an emphasis on material wealth as a
prime goal, because these reflect a mentality
oriented toward earthly and sensual pleasures.
Cultural items which are not consistent with any
pattern-which do not seem to "belong" with
other items-are called "congeries."

The three principal types of culture integrations
-Ideational, Idealistic, and Sensate-never exist
in pure form; they are ideal types. In recognition
of this Sorokin adds a Mixed category. Actually
there are only two polar types of culture mentalities, the Ideational and the Sensate. The
Idealistic is a mixed type combining the virtues
of the polar types without their vices.

The extreme Sensate mentality views reality
as that which is perceivable by the sense organs,
and no more. It is atheistic or agnostic. It does not
concern itself with the absolute or immutable,
believing that all things are in flux. Its underlying
goal is the mastery of the observable world for
the sake of physical gratification. Its epistemology
is empirical.

To the Ideational mentality, reality is immaterial, everlasting Being. Its objectives are
spiritual and its ways of achieving them involve
man's adjustment to the existing world rather
than his manipulation of the world to bring it into
line with his wishes. Faith and revelation are its
roads to truth.

The Idealistic mentality is a synthesis of
Ideational and Sensate elements with Ideational
predominating. It combines the best of the other
two mentalities with the addition of reason as a
way to knowledge. In the Idealistic view, reason
is a sort of apex in an epistemological triangle
with faith and sensory observation at the lower
points. Sorokin's own outlook is Idealistic."

(https://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-36d7-41d4-0000-000064b51e55/simpson_sorokin.pdf)


=More information=

* Lewis Mumford's plea for a balance between the
technological mastery of the objective world, in which
the twentieth century excels, and the inner and subjective as expressed in art, which he finds underemphasized in today's world, corresponds fairly closely
to Sorokin's encomium for the Idealistic culture mentality. See Mumford, Art and Technics (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1952). 

(note 6 at [https://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-36d7-41d4-0000-000064b51e55/simpson_sorokin.pdf])

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]