


=Description=

Teemu Arina:

"Serendipic learning can be seen as learning that is not based on outcome, but rather on process.

There are no learning goals or curriculum to follow, no classrooms other than third places (Oldenburg 1999) the individual engages in, no sages on stage other than who the individual chooses to be the sages on the stage and no walls other than the blending boundaries of virtual communities.

Serendipity is about the accidental – or guided – encounters of individuals in complex systems, where the dance of interaction among the nodes is defining the outcome.

There is no central body orchestrating the interaction on the decentralized social web, but there are
many of such in the realms of education.

Serendipic learning is not even in a direct relationship with education, which derives from the Latin verb educere, meaning "to lead forth”, characterized by the presence of a more knowledgeable entity leading the learners.

This is far from such symbiotic organisms that need each other – and thus I must reflect – we need to recognize the learners ARE the hidden untapped potential within educational institutions for innovation and creativity.

Our schools have failed to change quickly enough from top-down knowledge broadcasts to bottom-up learning support facilities opening doors to new perceptions.

An important transformation is to move away from just-in-case learning to just-in-time learning by:

a) knowing how to seek different points of view rather than just knowing a specific answer,

b) learning to build on the work of others rather than next to it and

c) building social capital in addition to human capital.

Parasitic learners operate in a multi-dimensional polychronic (many things at once) learning ecosystem, instead of a sequentially linear monochronic (one thing at a time) learning environment."
(http://www.masternewmedia.org/news/2008/02/13/learning_zeitgeist_the_future_of.htm)


[[Category:Education]]