= "a consensus mechanism which lives on blockchains. It is designed for Ostrom-like communities and requires a clear definition of membership. It quantifies justice and distributes it equally among the community members". [https://fabernautics.org/projects/serial-justice]


=Description=

[[Fabernautics]] explains:

"Serial Justice is a consensus mechanism which lives on blockchains. It is designed for Ostrom-like communities and requires a clear definition of membership.

It quantifies justice and distributes it equally among the community members.

It solves the scalability issue by getting people to vote one after the other only as much as needed ...
.
.. by the community members for which the answer matters.
.
.. to get statistically meaningful answer.

Voting less often enables having a better knowledge of each issue while producing deliberation (transindividuation and new human knowledge) .\

Since the deliberation is public, the justification of a vote counts as a contribution for which the members have a responsibility.


'''* How it works'''

A democratic token called Justice Token is periodically minted and all the community members are given the same amount.

Whenever "justice" (or more generally, "answers") is needed by any member, he can spend one Justice Token on a given question. This will request a randomly selected member to provide his answer to the question as a vote.

This process can repeat until there are enough votes to provide a statistically meaningful answer, at which point the answer can be considered to be effective."

(https://fabernautics.org/projects/serial-justice)

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Crypto Governance]]