Graphic representing people and projects active in the paradigm shift related to p2p developments.

By Tomi Astikainen and Tero Heiskanen, 2009.

==P2P Advocates==

David Bollier http://www.bollier.org/

Yochai Benkler http://www.benkler.org/

Francis Heylighen http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/HEYL.html

Douglas Rushkoff http://rushkoff.com/

Lawrence Lessig http://www.lessig.org/

Michel Bauwens http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Bauwens

Eric von Hippel http://web.mit.edu/evhippel/www/

Clay Shirky http://www.shirky.com/

Charles Leadbeater http://www.charlesleadbeater.net/

Axel Bruns http://snurb.info/

Michael Goldhaber http://www.goldhaber.org/

Thomas H. Greco http://www.reinventingmoney.com/

Cory Doctorow http://craphound.com/

Kevin Kelly http://www.kk.org/

David Weinberger http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Weinberger

Richard Stallman http://stallman.org/

Don Tapscott http://dontapscott.com/

Paul B. Hartzog http://www.paulbhartzog.org/

James Surowiecki http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Surowiecki

Howard Rheingold http://www.rheingold.com/

David Brin http://www.davidbrin.com/

Ervin László http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ervin_L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3

Tom Atlee http://www.taoofdemocracy.com/

Michael Linton http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Linton

Barbara Marx Hubbard http://www.barbaramarxhubbard.com/

Jean-François Noubel http://noubel.com/

Margrit Kennedy http://www.margritkennedy.de/index.php?id=&ord=0

Bernard Lietaer http://www.lietaer.com/

Riane Eisler http://www.rianeeisler.com/

Niall Ferguson http://www.niallferguson.com/

Charles Eisenstein http://www.ascentofhumanity.com/

Eric Harris-Braun http://eric.harris-braun.com/

Douglas Schuler http://www.scn.org/commnet/doug.html

Manuel Castells http://www.manuelcastells.info/

J.D Lasica http://www.jdlasica.com/

Dan Gillmor http://dangillmor.com/

Thomas W. Malone http://ccs.mit.edu/futureofwork/

Geoff Chesshire http://regenerosity.com/

Dave Pollard http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/

Rob Hopkins http://transitionculture.org/about/

Keith Hart http://thememorybank.co.uk/keith/

Ellen Hodgson Brown http://www.ellenbrown.com/

Richard C. Cook http://www.richardccook.com/

Ivan Illich http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_Illich

Elinor Ostrom http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elinor_Ostrom

Slavoj Žižek http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavoj_%C5%BDi%C5%BEek

Richard Barbrook http://subsol.c3.hu/subsol_2/contributors3/barbrookbio.html

Herman Daly http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herman_Daly

Sanjeev Goyal http://ideas.repec.org/f/pgo329.html#papers

Brad DeLong http://delong.typepad.com/

Daniel Dennett http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/incbios/dennettd/dennettd.htm

Geoffrey F. Miller http://www.unm.edu/~psych/faculty/sm_gmiller.html

Richard Dawkins http://richarddawkins.net/

Alvin Toffler http://www.alvintoffler.net/

Robin Hanson http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robin_Hanson

Max Keiser http://maxkeiser.com/

Dale Carrico http://amormundi.blogspot.com/

David Graeber http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Graeber

Juha Suoranta http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juha_Suoranta

Eric S. Raymond http://www.catb.org/~esr/

Paul Adler http://www-rcf.usc.edu/~padler/

Charles Heckscher http://www.heckscher.com/

Judy Wicks http://www.judywicks.com/

Joi Ito http://joi.ito.com/weblog/

Jon Lebkowsky http://weblogsky.com/

Steven Johnson http://www.eff.org/

James F. Moore http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_F._Moore

Tim Berners-Lee http://www.w3.org/

Alexander R. Galloway http://cultureandcommunication.org/galloway/

Dave Snowden http://www.cognitive-edge.com/

Richard Heinberg http://www.richardheinberg.com/Home.html

Pekka Himanen http://www.pekkahimanen.org/

Tere Vadén http://www.uta.fi/~fiteva/

Seth Godin http://sethgodin.typepad.com/

Peter Corbett http://www.istrategylabs.com/

James Robertson http://www.jamesrobertson.com/

Paul Grignon http://paulgrignon.netfirms.com/MoneyasDebt/ProducersComments.html

Peter t. Leeson http://www.peterleeson.com/

David D. Friedman http://www.daviddfriedman.com/

W. Brian Arthur http://www.santafe.edu/~wbarthur/

Shu-Heng Chen http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shu-Heng_Chen

Larry Sanger http://www.larrysanger.org/

Hunter Lovins http://www.natcapsolutions.org/

David Miliband http://www.davidmiliband.info/

Alan Rosenblith http://www.themoneyfix.org/

Linus Torvalds http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus_Torvalds

Michael Albert http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Albert

Nick Dyer-Witheford http://affinityproject.org/theories/dyerwitheford.html

Michael Heller http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Heller_%28law_professor%29

John Clippinger http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/jclippinger

Peter Barnes http://capitalism3.com/

Anup Shah http://www.globalissues.org/

Peter Joseph http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Joseph

Jacques Fresco http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacque_Fresco

Roxanne Meadows http://www.thevenusproject.com/

Bill Drayton http://www.ashoka.org/about/leadership


==P2P Organizations==

1.    p2pfoundation.net (purple) p

2.    www.openmoney.org (orange) p

3.    www.renaissance2.eu (green) p

4.    www.thetransitioner.org (orange) p

5.    onthecommons.org (grey) p

6.    www.theworldcafecommunity.org (turquoise) p

7.    thezeitgeistmovement.com (green) I

8.    unltdworld.com (purple) p

9.    globalspirit.org (green) I

10. www.worldforum.org (green) p

11. fcforum.net (brown) p

12. worldshift2012.org (green) p

13. www.anhglobal.org (turquoise) p

14. www.amnesty.org (turquoise) I

15. www.thelifeline.tv (blue) p

16. theactivist.org (red) p

17. the-hub.net (brown) I  

18. pioneersofchange.net (turquoise) p

19. www.ebbf.org (red) I

20. www.ashoka.org (blue) p à tässä oli aikasemmin berkana.org (vaihdoin tärkeempään)

21. www.aiesec.org (orange) I

22. www.kaospilot.dk (green) p

23. www.permaculture.org (grey) p

24. www.emancipating-education-for-all.org (blue) p

25. www.campusactivism.org (red) p

26. www.couchsurfing.org (purple) I

27. openknowledgenetworks.com (grey)p

28. www.global-arina.org (brown) p

29. www.wisedemocracy.org (grey) p

30. www.worldchanging.com (green)p

31. www.eff.org (grey) I

32. www.openworld.com (grey) p

33. www.justfortheloveofit.org (purple) I

34. transitionculture.org (grey)p

35. socialactions.com (purple)p

36. www.appsfordemocracy.org (brown) p

37. dufoundation.org (orange) p

38. www.co-intelligence.org (brown) p

39. http://www.earth-policy.org (brown) p

40. http://www.earthwatch.org (brown) I

41. http://www.un.org (blue) I

42. http://www.kiva.org (orange) I

43. http://www.wikimedia.org (grey) I

44. http://www.wiserearth.org (grey) p

45. http://www.webfoundation.org (brown) I

46. http://www.appropedia.org (brown) p

47. http://www.thealliancefordemocracy.org (blue) p

48. http://www.sunlightfoundation.com (grey)

49. http://neweconomics.org (orange)

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Movements]]