
'''= the Seva Cafe is a 'Pay-it-Forward Experiment in Peer-to-Peer Generosity' in Ahmedabad, India'''

URL = http://www.movedbylove.org/projects/sevacafe/

=Description=

By Khushboo Balwani:

"Seva Cafe launched in 2006 in Ahmedabad, India, as an experiment in peer-to-peer
generosity and the family model of sharing food. The whole organization is run on a daily
basis by seven to eight volunteers who make and serve meals to guests. Based on the
model of gift economy, the meals are served as an unconditional gift, with no price. Guests
may choose to pay or volunteer with the organization, but they aren’t required to do either.
The bill at Seva cafe reads “0/-” with only this footnote, “Your meal was a gift from
someone who came before you. To keep the chain of gifts alive, we invite you to pay it
forward for those who dine after you.” The entire financial process and operation is
completely transparent and run by the energy of giving. Seva Cafe is also famously known
as “Karma Kitchen” in many countries. It is part of a larger trend of pay-it-forward
restaurants."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=Status=

"Results:

• What started as a simple idea has turned into a full operation, running seven days
a week and serving around 60 guests daily.
• People are empowered and believe they have enough to offer."

(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=More information=

Resources:

* Moved by Love: http://www.movedbylove.org/projects/sevacafe/
* Freegan Pony, Paris: https://www.facebook.com/Freegan-Pony-1627473020835867/
* Selma Cafe, Ann Arbour: http://selmacafe.org/about/


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:India]]