<section begin=Intro />[[James Greyson]] [http://blindspot.org.uk/about/] proposes [[Seven Policy Switches]] and associated strategic commons to achieve a rapid reversal or multiple global problems. "Together the switches define a practical strategy for global security, for a serious attempt at revival of co-operation, ecosystems and prosperity." [http://blindspot.org.uk/seven-policy-switches/]

#Progress commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/first-policy-switch/]; replacing a less-bad vision of progress with 'positive development'. Global security (merged security goals such as climate security, international security, human security, economic security, etc) is proposed as a broad framework for the commons. Progress is increasing global security (currently in reverse).
#Learning commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/second-policy-switch/]; enabling open-mindedness by replacing prescriptive education of predetermined curricula with 'curiosity-led'. Collective capacity to learn (adding to and reshaping knowledge) is proposed as an element of the commons. 
#Resource commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/third-policy-switch/]; a simple micro-economic tool to replace linear (waste-based) economics with 'circular economics'. The world's material resource stock, which can be used and maintained as resources for the future, is proposed as an element of the commons.
#Co-operation commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/fourth-policy-switch/]; a simple macro-economic tool to replace conflict escalation with peace and co-operation escalation. Collective capacity for co-operation, which is diminished by the stock of weapons , is proposed as an element of the commons. 
#Ecosystem commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/fifth-policy-switch/]; replacing exploitive ownership with a world-wide merging of ownership and guardianship. A culture of belonging to the Earth (rather than the other way around) is proposed as an element of the commons. 
#Sharing commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/sixth-policy-switch/]; wealth-sharing by the mega-rich replacing a culture of scarcity with abundance. Collective capacity to share (rather than to concentrate wealth) is proposed as an element of the commons. 
#Money supply commons[http://blindspot.org.uk/seventh-policy-switch/], replacing privatised money-creation with public national and local money supply. Collective decisions about the creation and circulation of money is proposed as an element of the commons. <section end=Intro />


=Source=

* Article: [[Seven Policy Switches for Global Security]]. James Greyson. ENERGY OPTIONS IMPACT ON REGIONAL SECURITY. NATO Science for Peace and Security Series, 2010, Volume 00, 69-92, DOI: 10.1007/978-90-481-9565-7_3

URL = http://blindspot.org.uk/seven-policy-switches/
URL = http://www.springerlink.com/content/g715w8718726x736/

[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]