
=Discussion=

Mark Whitaker et al. :

"Current smart cities by themselves are unable
to handle up to 3 billion people by 2050 potentially
living in the ‘Shadow City,’ the unofficial slum
communities around the urban areas of the
world that are growing now (Neuwirth, 2004)
However, smart regions can be seeds for starting
to address social and environmental externalities
of the ‘shadow city’ that the world is developing.

The Commodity Ecology Mobile platform by
enfranchising these ‘smart regions’ can address
material handling problems of ‘Shadow Cities’
as they begin to arise as well. There are two
scenarios about the future, one pessimistic and one
optimistic.

For the pessimistic scenario, picture one future
for the year 2050, in which a handful of tiny, rich,
urban, and green-living populations enjoy their
late 20th century ideas of a ‘smart city’ in the year
2050 yet by then surrounded by the 21st century’s
inequalities of massive rural slums of “gray”
material degradation and misery without services.
Without policy change, this “tiny green city and
majority gray slum world” is the current track of
the world regarding urban, environmental, and
service infrastructural conditions for the year 2050.

Currently, people in rural hinterlands of the world
increasingly keep moving to be users of large city
infrastructures and social services and are in the
process affected by externalities of such cities. For
this scenario, without changing our developmental
path, it is expected we will live in a world with
an estimated 3 billion living in slum conditions
without land tenure rights in unplanned and legally
unrecognized communities around urban sites by
2050 (Neuwirth, 2004). Neuwirth writes that the
“‘shadow cities’ of the future” are here now. Over
one billion people from 2004 lived in “unauthorized”
urban slums, where the sole governmental action
toward them is the attempt to knock down their
homes and infrastructures and to deny them official
citizenship status or urban services. Some of the
billions “jumped,” and some were “pushed.”

Some moved to the growing city in their region.
In contrast, others were “pushed” from economic
shakeout from globalized development that
destroyed their desired local capacities to sustain
themselves regionally and economically.

laudable attempt to humanize these slum dwellers
in the eyes of the "official city" people and their
governments. However, we suggest we can do
better: extending a hand to them in ‘smart regions’
is an idea or technical capacity that failed to exist
in 2004 as Neuwirth was writing, given then the
low levels of distributed access to mobile ICT
networks. This is entirely different by 2019, even
for sub-Saharan Africa, and mobile ICT network
coverage will continue to grow into the world's less
developed areas. A 'smart regions' model employing
the Commodity Ecology Mobile platform’s view of
more civic deliberation on a circular economy is the
best hope for the future of these ‘shadow cities.' "

(https://scholar.kyobobook.co.kr/article/detail/4010028079805)

[[Category:Urbanism]]