
=Description=

Cui Zhiyuan:

In their effort to create a proper ownership form for rural enterprises, the Chinese
“peasant-workers” and their community governments have designed an ingenious
one: a “shareholding–cooperative system (SCS).”11 It is similar to James Meade’s
“labor–capital partnership” in that both systems have a labor share and a capital
share;12 however, the Chinese SCS is distinct in that the capital share itself is mainly
collective in the sense of belonging to the representative of the community – the
township and village governments. Thus the SCS in China’s rural industry may
serve to harmonize the interests of inside workers and outside members of the same
community. To give a sense of its working mechanism, I now describe briefly
one of the earlier experiments with the SCS in rural China.

In one locality where I conducted preliminary field research in the summer
of 1993, Zhoucun District of Zibo (Shangdong Province), the SCS was invented
in 1982 as a response to the difficulties of dismantling the collective properties of
the People’s Commune. The peasants found some collective properties (other than
land) to be simply physically indivisible. They decided to issue shares to each
“peasant-worker” on equal terms, instead of destroying the collective property
(such as trucks) to sell them in pieces (which had happened in many other regions).

Soon after, they realized (or conceded) that they should not divide up all collective
properties into individual shares to distribute to the current workforce, because the
older generation of “peasant-workers” had left the enterprises and the local government had made prior investments. Thus they decided to keep some proportion of
“collective shares” which would not go into individual labor shares. These
collective shares are designed to be held by outside corporate bodies, such as
local governmental agencies, other firms in and out of the locality, banks, and even
universities and scientific research institutions. 


The following figures show the
flow of profits of SCS in Zhoucun District:

* 10 per cent: Workers’ welfare fund
* After-tax profits of SCS firm – 30 per cent: Firm development fund
* 60 per cent: Share fund (collective and individual shares)


Clearly, the development of SCS is the joint product of two factors: 

(1) accumulated change of Chinese rural institutions (such as the dissolution of the
commune), and 

(2) accidental solutions to the indivisibility of People’s Commune’s
property. 

Therefore, the SCS has created an attitude of ambiguity among the
Chinese practitioners and scholars on China as to how to evaluate the potential of
this new form of property. As Karl Polanyi once said: “the contemporaries did
not comprehend the order for which they were preparing the way.”

As for James Meade’s “social dividend,” there is so far no Chinese experiment
in a similar spirit. However, it is my belief that China can benefit from considering
seriously Meade’s program of “social dividend” in establishing her own social
welfare system."

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


=Source=

* Essay/Chapter: Liberal socialism and the future of China. A petty bourgeoisie manifesto. Cui Zhiyuan. Chapter 9 of: The Chinese Model of Modern Development. Edited by Tian Yu Cao. [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Petit-Bourgeois_Socialism]


[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Open Company Formats]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]