Sharetribe is an open source software platform for creating your own online marketplace in the spirit of Airbnb, Uber or eBay.

URL = http://www.sharetribe.com/

=Description=

Sharetribe's software makes it easy for anyone to create their own online marketplace platform in one day, even without technical skills. It can be used by platform co-operatives, associations, individuals, startups, cities and municipalities, among others. The software is currently best suited for creating peer-to-peer marketplaces, like Airbnb or eBay, where individuals exchange goods or services, but it can also be used to create B2C marketplaces, where small professional providers offer their services to their customers.

Sharetribe's codebase is licensed with MIT license, which allows both commercial and non-commercial use of the software. The software can be downloaded from GitHub: https://github.com/sharetribe/sharetribe

=Business Model=

Sharetribe's software is maintained and developed mainly by a company called Sharetribe Ltd, majority of which is owned by its founders and employees. The business model of the company is similar to the business model of Automattic, the company developing WordPress. The company offers hosting of the software for those who don't want to touch the code at all or run their own servers, and charges a monthly fee for the hosting service.

By the end of 2016, Sharetribe Ltd had more than 600 individuals and organizations hosting their marketplaces on its paid version. There are no exact statistics on how widely the open source version is used, but by the end of 2016 it had been forked more than 600 times and it got downloaded on average 50 times per week.

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Finland]]