
'''* eBook: Shared Assessment. Mind Gymnasium. Denis Postle.'''

URL = http://www.mind-gymnasium.com/ebooks/PDFs/SharedAssessment.pdf (registration required)


=Description=

"Assessment typically re-iterates and reinforces hierarchical dominance. But how else to do it? This new paradigm approach to assessment sees the other people with whom we learn and work as responsible, with a capacity for self-direction and self-appraisal.

We all know that we are good at some tasks and activities and not so good at others. How do we validate the accuracy of our self-assessment? This ebook provides a recipe for getting feedback from peers that can be used in sport, education, art, music and work."
(http://www.mind-gymnasium.com/ebooks/PDFs/LTHSWebSpace05.htm)


=More Information=

* Related eBook: '''Self-Assessment''' 

URL = http://www.mind-gymnasium.com/ebooks/PDFs/Self_Assessment_Complete.pdf

"We are so used to being assessed by other people that the notion of self-assessment may seem strange or unrealistic. This ebook contains a series of sections that will enable you to scan some of the qualities and contents of your mind. Drop any idea that this is a test, it is more a way of taking a series of human condition snapshots, with some pointers in the selections on offer, to what might be relevant in the choices you make. They may or may not reveal something you didn’t know, or confirm something you suspected. It’s for you to decide."


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]