
'''* Report: Keeping Wealth Local: Shared Ownership and Wealth  Control For Rural Communities. By Marjorie Kelly''', Tellus Institute. With Shanna Ratner, Yellow Wood Associates. A report for the Wealth Creation in  Rural America project of the Ford Foundation.

URL = http://www.marjoriekelly.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/Keeping-Wealth-Local.pdf


=Description=

'This report is part of the Wealth Creation in Rural America initiative, funded by the
Ford Foundation. The aim of the initiative is to help low-wealth rural areas overcome
their isolation and integrate into regional economies in ways that increase their ownership and influence over various kinds of wealth. The initiative has produced nine
previous papers, which can be found at http://www.yellowwood.org/wealthcreation.
aspx. The goal of this report is to advance the initiative’s broad aim of creating a
comprehensive framework of community ownership and wealth control models that
enhance the social, ecological, and economic well-being of rural areas."


=About the Authors=

Marjorie Kelly (MKelly@Tellus.org) is a business journalist and consultant in
alternative enterprise design at Tellus Institute in Boston. She is co-founder of
Corporation 20/20, an initiative to explore enterprise designs that integrate social,
environmental, and financial aims. She was co-founder and for 20 years president
of the company publishing Business Ethics magazine. Kelly is a long-time Director
of Great Neighborhoods! Development Corp. and for many years was President of
the Board of Williamson Street Grocery Cooperative. She is author of The Divine
Right of Capital (Berrett-Koehler, 2001), and is at work on a new book on alternative
enterprise design.

Shanna Ratner (Shanna@Yellowwood.org)is the Principal of Yellow Wood Associates, Inc., a consulting firm located in St. Albans, Vermont, specializing in rural community economic development. She has over 24 years experience managing research
initiatives and analyzing rural economic development opportunities. She is working
with Wayne Fawbush of the Ford Foundation to integrate the Wealth Creation in
Rural America initiative. Ratner sponsored and edited this report, contributing many
of its key insights."


=More Information=

* The initiative has produced nine
previous papers, which can be found at http://www.yellowwood.org/wealthcreation.

* Report: Impact Investing for Rural Wealth Creation. Investing for financial returns  and community impact. By Marjorie Kelly, Tellus Institute. With Jessica Norwood, Emerging ChangeMakers Network.

URL = http://www.marjoriekelly.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/ImpactInvestingKellyNorwood.pdf

[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]