
'''= "an organization promoting the knowledge and collective awareness of the sharing economy".'''

URL = http://www.sharenl.nl/

=Description=

"Base: Amsterdam

Year of foundation: 2013

Commons orientation: Not based on commons principles
but follows a private consultancy model. It is not based on open
knowledge, but FLOSS and open collaboration are used through
the platform.

ShareNL is an organization promoting the knowledge and collective awareness of the sharing economy. It was founded in recognition of the lack of a commonplace for cities, individuals, governments, organizations and other stakeholders to exchange and to
build an overview regarding this field at different levels. Through
talks, workshops, consulting, research and events, ShareNL facilitates the exchange of knowledge and experiences between cities
and serves as a pilot project for the lessons and reflections for 
resilient approaches to urban challenges and new economic models.
Some of the projects that have been developed are in beta stage
and include Amsterdam Sharing City; the Sharing City Alliance, a
networking space for developing of the platform economy in cities;
a platform for the sharing economy; a bookstore; and a Lab for
platform economy innovation. However, it is not based on commons principles but follows a private consultancy model."
 
=Source=

Sharing Cities: A [[Worldwide Cities Overview on Platform Economy Policies]] with a focus on Barcelona. By Mayo Fuster Morell (ed.) et al. Dimmons Research Group, 2018.

URL = http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Netherlands]]