'''Shareholder Value may be [[Product]] or [[Profit]]'''

= An Observation =
[[Shareholder]]s should co-invest in the [[Physical Sources]] of the [[Product]]s that ''they'' need.

Because that [[Ownership]] becomes a chance to fill real needs.

The owners of those [[Physical Sources]] are automatically the owners of all future [[Object]][ive]s.

That [[Property]] is in the hands of the [[Consumer]]s that need the [[Output]] thereof.

They receive those fruits [[At Cost]].  [[Profit]] does not exist during this case.

Peers need some [[Personal Property]] that they can keep secret.

But we also need some [[Shared Property]] that we can use together for our '''own''' production.

The combination of these two types of ownership is small and needed for our survival.

We don't need the [[Proprietary]] property of the [[Capitalist]], because that is about keeping [[Price Above Cost]].  That is what we must make unimportant.



== Implementation ==
A group of potential [[Object User]]s choose to [[Invest]] for [[Use Value]] alone by collectively purchasing [[Land]] and [[Capital]] to become the literal and only [[Owner]]s of those [[Means of Production]].

Some of those very same people may have the skills to [[Operate]] or [[Fix]] those [[Tool]]s, and could pay with [[Labor]] in that case.

= Other Definitions =
----
''The value delivered to shareholders because of management's ability to grow earnings'' -- http://Investopedia.com/terms/s/shareholder-value.asp

''"The intentions of entrepreneurs and investors have evolved over time to include a desire to create social value as well as shareholder value," says Jay Coen Gilbert, co-founder of B-Lab, a Berwyn (Pa.) nonprofit that certifies mission-driven companies. "Corporate law has not evolved to serve these new needs." '' -- [[Low-profit_Limited_Liability_Company]]


'' '''Shareholder value''' is a business buzz term, which implies that the ultimate measure of a company's success is to enrich shareholders. It became popular during the 1980s, and is particularly associated with former CEO of [[General Electric]], [[Jack Welch]]. In March 2009, Welch openly turned his back on the concept, calling shareholder value "the dumbest idea in the world".<ref>Financial Times [http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/294ff1f2-0f27-11de-ba10-0000779fd2ac,dwp_uuid=c770f55e-0fac-11de-a8ae-0000779fd2ac.html 'Welch condemns share price focus'] (13 March 2009)</ref>''

''For a publicly traded company, Shareholder Value (SV) is the part of its capitalization that is [[Shareholders' equity|equity]] as opposed to long-term [[debt]]. In the case of only one type of [[stock]], this would roughly be the number of outstanding shares times current shareprice. Things like [[dividend]]s augment shareholder value while issuing of shares ([[stock options]]) lower it.
This ''Shareholder value added'' should be compared to average/required increase in value, aka [[cost of capital]].''

''For a privately held company, the value of the firm after debt must be estimated using one of several [[valuation]] methods, s.a. [[discounted cash flow]] or others.''

''This management principle, also known under '''value based management''', states that management should first and foremost consider the interests of shareholders in its business decisions. Although this is built into the legal premise of a publicly traded company, this concept is usually highlighted in opposition to alleged examples of CEO's and other management actions which enrich themselves at the expense of shareholders. Examples of this include acquisitions which are dilutive to shareholders, that is, they may cause the combined company to have twice the profits for example but these might have to be split amongst three times the shareholders.'' -- http://Wikipedia.org/wiki/Shareholder_value