'''= a great tool for connecting land owners and landless gardeners around the country.''' [http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/011103.html]

URL = http://www.sharedearth.com/

In March 2011, [[Landshare]] and SharedEarth merged to become: SharedEarth Globally

=Description=

'''1.'''

"website that connects land owners with gardeners and farmers. 

Land Owners: Share your land with only someone you trust and get free fruits, vegetables or flowers. No piece of land is too big or too small! 

Gardeners and Farmers: Get free access to land and grow what you love, share some of the produce with the land owner and keep the rest. 

Land owners get to make more efficient use of their land. Gardeners and farmers get access to land. Our community is built on the premise that we can create a greener, more organic and efficient world one garden at a time."


'''2.'''

"With the U.S. boasting its own version of Landshare with a capital L in SharedEarth, collaborative land users had some nice coverage. Then, back in March, the two organizations joined forces to become SharedEarth Globally and make it that much easier to match growers with land owners. Like Fearnley-Whittingstall, SharedEarth founder Adam Dell sees amazing potential for the model: “I think it scales all the way up to I’m gonna be a farmer, and all the way down to I have a fire escape on my building in New York, I’m growing some food and I can use some help. We’ve got a couple of gardening groups who have signed up. We’d love to get some churches. The Catholic Church is the largest landowner in America. I’d love if churches, synagogues signed up, and said 'We’ve got land, grow stuff! We’ll donate some of the produce to our food bank.' There are lots of iterations this can take.”
(http://shareable.net/blog/how-to-share-land)


=Interview=


Alex Pasternack, an editor at Motherboard.tv, recently interviewed  Dell to discuss SharedEarth.com’s launch, his views on the environment, and the power of the internet to bring people together. 

Here is an excerpt:

    
- "Who do you think will use SharedEarth? 

I think it scales all the way up to “I’m gonna be a farmer,” and all the way down to “I have a fire escape on my building in New York, I’m growing some food and I can use some help.” And we’ve got a couple of gardening groups who have signed up already. We’d love to get some churches. The Catholic Church is the largest landowner in America. I’d love if churches, synagogues signed up, and said “We’ve got land, grow stuff! We’ll donate some of the produce to our food bank.” There are lots of iterations this can take. 

    
- How do you see a model like SharedEarth’s taking gardening and agriculture over the next decade? 

I think SharedEarth is something that can be big and meaningful in its impact. It could be a global thing. Just imagine if we had 10 million acres of producing farmland. That would produce a lot of oxygen and consume a lot of CO2, it would generate a lot of interesting stories and a lot of interesting community connections and a lot of time well spent cultivating the land."
(http://www.motherboard.tv/2010/4/22/q-a-adam-dell-s-sharedearth-com-is-sharecropping-2-0-linking-green-thumbs-with-lonely-land)



[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]