
'''=  a website which helps South Australians reduce the cost of living and improve neighbourhood networks by making it easy to share, swap and do things together. The new website is the first of its kind in Australia.'''

URL = http://www.shareNsave.com.au 


=Description=

Sharon Ede:

"Share N Save makes visible the often hidden networks of co-operation and collaboration. By highlighting all the great work that communities are already doing, it invites more people to participate, encourages replication of existing activities and uptake of initiatives happening elsewhere, as well as sparking completely new ideas.
 
The website uses state-of-the art technology to make finding, listing, and starting sharing projects as easy as entering a postcode or clicking on an icon. Share N Save is accessible on all major smartphones with no need for additional software or apps to be installed.

The website continues to be developed with the aim of including one-to-one sharing, ‘haves’ (offers) and ‘wants’ (needs), a calendar function and other enhancements to build sharing networks.
 

Zero Waste SA wants as many groups as possible in South Australia to list their free sharing activities on the site. It also wants to encourage people to start their own sharing activities and to list these on the website.

 

The Share N Save program is as much about the outreach, engagement and network building as it is progressively building the online functionality of the website.
 
Zero Waste SA intends to create a network of ‘Sharing Connectors’ by identifying community leaders and information disseminators to act as a conduit for information between their communities, and as a means of disseminating information to/from Share N Save.
 
The website is promoted through social media, advertising and a partnership with New Ltd which publishes stories of local sharing activities.
 
“Worldwide, the sharing phenomenon is rapidly gaining momentum and is identified with the ‘new economy’ movement emerging in the wake of converging ecological, social and economic crises,” says Zero Waste SA’s Sharon Ede.
 
“It is a positive, tangible way for citizens to have real agency over their lives and communities, and has a range of potential benefits including reducing household costs, supporting health and wellbeing, less resource use, and fostering prosperity through relocalisation of economic activity.”


=Discussion=

Sharon Ede:

"ShareNSave is progressively mapping the sharing/collaborative economy in Adelaide and South Australia. So far, it is mostly desktop research, and we are gradually building the functionality of the site and the community engagement/outreach program.

Right now, our city does not have the uptake of digital platforms that others do, such as car and ride sharing. What we are doing is mapping those things that help people save both time and money, that build community connection, and which means people use less resources by better accessing what is already around them. The initiatives and groups we’re mapping at this initial stage are those that are non-monetised, or which operate on a not-for-profit/cost recovery basis.

We believe government can play a key role as an enabler of sharing, and would love to learn about others’ experiences and share our own."
(email April 2014)



=Status=

"So far, over 200 different activities are represented on the site, including:

 

·         Share and Swap – for trading and sharing items or services, such as swap meets for second-hand clothes or book swaps, fruit and vegetable swaps.

 

·         Borrow Things – for accessing without needing to own, such as nappy libraries, toy libraries and the Adelaide City Bike Share program.

 

·         Doing Things Together – for collaborating with others, such as community gardens, the Men’s Shed network, co-working, and group cooking."

 
=Source=

This profile was submitted by Sharon Ede, Senior Advisor – Zero Waste SA. 

Read more here: http://www.shareable.net/blog/south-australia-to-share-its-way-to-zero-waste


=More Information=

www.facebook.com/shareNsave

www.twitter.com/shareNsave 


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]