'''* Article: THE SHARING ECONOMY AS A MEANS TO URBAN COMMONING. By GUIDO SMORTO. COMPARATIVE LAW REVIEW – VOL. 7'''

URL = www.comparativelawreview.unipg.it/index.php/comparative/article/download/88/83

Paper presented at the 1st [[IASC]] Thematic Conference on Urban Commons. The City as a
Commons: Reconceiving Urban Space, Common Goods and City Governance, November 6-
7th, 2015, Bologna, Italy;

== Description ==

"Sharing economy and urban commons are inherently intertwined. New technologies and business models
for the production and consumption of goods and services are rapidly transforming cities across the world
in many ways: carsharing, ridesharing, short-term rentals, shared housing and workspaces. These not only
put into question how urban transportation and tourist accommodation are planned, but also disrupt
traditional local services, influence housing affordability and redesigning city spaces, thus often making
existing local rules obsolete. These profound changes raise many issues. What kind of city is molded by
peer-to-peer activities? Is a sharing economy the way to a commons-based urban economy? And what
kind of rules are required, if any?

This paper aims at examining the delicate relationship between a sharing economy and urban commons
and investigating how regulation can affect it. While part of the current debate is sometimes polarized
between devotees and decriers of peer-to-peer economic activities, many observers emphasize their
multifaceted effects. New technologies are potentially powerful tools for sustainable economic models based
on genuine sharing and cooperation, permitting optimum use of existing resources and reinforcing social
networks. However, many of these phenomena are characterized by conflicting tendencies. Elinor
Ostrom’s empirical findings about the design principles that can lead towards a successful common regime
give a great importance to the existence of rules in accordance with local circumstances and to a
participative decision process. Assuming the wide variety of peer-to-peer economic models and the
significant differences from city to city, we should appreciate, on a case-by-case basis, how these practices
impact on local economic growth, democratize access to goods and services, foster sustainable urban
development, influence the urban environment and impact on job creation and labor conditions, and we
should identify the distributive consequences on the city and its inhabitants (underserved neighborhoods,
people with disabilities, low-income communities). On that note, in order to instigate a truly commonsbased
urban economy it is critical to identify pros and cons of these practices in a given milieu and to
generate distinct strategies accordingly, resisting any temptation of “one-size-fits-all” solutions."

[[Category:Sharing]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Articles]]