
'''= a grassroots network for sharing innovators to discover together how to create as many sharing cities around the world as fast as possible.'''

URL = 


=Description=

From Mira Luna, Neal Gorenflo, and team Shareable.

Imagine a city where everyone’s needs are met because people make the personal choice to share. Where everyone can create meaningful livelihoods. Where fresh, local food is available to all. Where affordable housing and shared transportation are abundant. Where the poor are lifted up, the middle class is strengthened, and the rich are respected because they all work together for the common good.

Imagine a city where the people decide how the city budget is spent. Where the people own the banks, control credit, and create their own money. Where the people own the utilities that make green energy and internet access available to all.

Imagine a city where all this is possible without relying on the government or big banks. Where we don't have to beg leaders for change or sell ourselves out to “make it” at the expense of others. Where the more we share, the more we have. Where everyone wins.

Our dream at Shareable is that everyone gets to live in such a place. While ambitious, our dream is grounded in reality. Everything that's imagined above already exists. We know this because we’ve written about these pockets of sanity nearly every day for the last five years.     

What’s missing is there’s no single city where all these models are brought together. And until now there’s been few efforts to create such cities."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/join-the-sharing-cities-network)


=More Information=

* Video intro: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6WVFTBK-MTY


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]