
= Hub for the sharing economy in Seoul, South Korea

URL =  http://english.sharehub.kr/

=Description=

"Year of foundation: 2013

Commons orientation: This hub is based on a commons
approach, including open collaboration over the platform.

The Office of Social Innovation of Seoul created the Sharing
City project in 2012, in order to deal with different social, economic and environmental problems of the city. It promotes
the sharing-oriented platform economy to create new jobs and
increase incomes, reduce pollution, consumption and unnecessary waste, but above all, the hub has helped people to regain
confidence in institutions, improving the relationships between
citizens and government, and assisting to recover a sense of community. 


To achieve this sense of community, the Government
focused on creating the necessary bases and infrastructure
through implementing five main policies: 

(1) Promotion of the
sharing model, 

(2) Economic support to companies and enterprises, 

(3) Improvement of laws and institutions, 

(4) Creation of
a system of incentives for each district, and 

(5) Opening up of
public facilities (including data). 


Basically, the decision-making
process was handled through the creation of different advisory
committees, one focused on policies and another on institutions.
To support the promotion of the sharing model and to help
everyone to understand the value and the meaning of the platform economy, the Seoul city government and Creative Commons
Korea, created the ShareHub platform to promote sharing culture,
provide data about the collective economy and to make policy
recommendations that support collaborative organizations and
companies. This platform has different communication channels
(online and offline) which help to connect the government, sharing-oriented platform companies and citizens. Through the web,
these actors share information such as newsletters, lists of companies offering shared services and events related to the culture of 
sharing and policy development. The Hub organizes face-to-face
meetings aimed at entrepreneurs, activists, policy-makers and citizens, where they share ideas, build new ones, and offer training for
themselves regarding the platform economy."
(http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf)

=More information=

* [[ShareNL]]

=Source=

* Sharing Cities: A [[Worldwide Cities Overview on Platform Economy Policies]] with a focus on Barcelona. By Mayo Fuster Morell (ed.) et al. Dimmons Research Group, 2018.

URL = http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:South Korea]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]