

'''Book: The Sharing Solution. How to Save Money, Simplify Your Life & Build Community. Janelle Orsi & Emily Doskow. Nolo, 2009.''' [http://www.nolo.com/products/the-sharing-solution-SHAR.html;jsessionid=1933874D1410B1EBF417731E629C9F43.jvm1]

URL = http://www.sharingsolution.com/

an extremely practical handbook for people who want to organize or join sharing networks in their lives.




=Excerpts=


==Definition used==

"As we use the term, “sharing” refers to two or more people coming together
to pool property, resources, or obligations or to do or create something
together. In other words, the sharing arrangements we talk about in this
book are mutual and reciprocal. Everyone involved is giving something
and getting something, through endeavors like:

* co-owning property or pooling resources

* sharing use of property, either by taking turns or through
simultaneous use

* cooperating to perform a task, make decisions, share
responsibilities, or collectively purchase goods or services, and

* exchanging goods or services in a barter process."


Ways to share things:

"You may choose to share in many different ways, including:

• Shared ownership. Each sharer owns a part interest in something,
such as a house or car.

• Shared responsibility. The sharers agree to do something together,
like trade child care or hire a gardener.

• Shared use. The sharers all use something, even though everyone
might not have an ownership share."


==What is Sharing good for?==

From the introduction:

"For a variety of reasons, people are looking for ways of living that
are more sustainable—not only environmentally sustainable, but also
economically and personally sustainable. One of the most sustainable
choices we can make is sharing.

Sharing contributes to the greater good in lots of ways. First, it’s
nice. It can help people feel connected to their neighbors, coworkers,
and even strangers. It builds community and meets our needs in creative
ways. It sets a good example for our children.
Second, it’s economical. Almost every type of sharing we discuss in
this book will save you some money—sometimes more, sometimes less,
but always some.

Third, it’s green. Most kinds of sharing result in fewer resources
being used, and that’s good for the planet. Sharing also makes it possible
to afford more environmentally friendly choices, such as solar panels,
grey water systems, and community supported agriculture.

In many ways, sharing is already an integral part of our society. We
share the sidewalks, streets, and highways—and the cost of building and
maintaining them. We share public schools, public utilities, and public
services, all of which we pay for through our taxes."