

=Definition=

Adam Back:

"Sidechains are decentralized, peer-to-peer networks that provide useful security, risk, and performance enhancements for global systems of value exchange that don’t need intermediaries, central banks or other third parties. They are distributed ledgers that are interoperable with each other and with Bitcoin, leveraging the most secure blockchain and code infrastructure in an additive way. Sidechains enable innovators to safely develop new applications without jeopardizing Bitcoin’s core code and putting billions of dollars worth of digital currency at risk."
(https://blockstream.com/blog/)

=Description=

'''1. by Jon Evans:'''

"Sidechains are new blockchains which are backed by Bitcoins, via Bitcoin contracts, just as dollars and pounds used to be backed by cold hard gold. You could in principle have thousands of sidechains “pegged” to Bitcoin, all with different characteristics and purposes … and all of them taking advantage of the scarcity and resilience guaranteed by the main Bitcoin blockchain, which in turn could iterate to implement experimental sidechain features once they have been tried and tested."
(http://techcrunch.com/2014/04/19/bitcoin-2-0-unleash-the-sidechains/)


'''2. Jacob Payne:'''

"By using two-way pegging for an altcoin instead, you could now have an altcoin that was pegged to the value of a Bitcoin and “borrowed” it’s value, a concept which is what was termed a sidechain.

Instead of starting from scratch and organically raising it’s value from the market like all altcoins (including Bitcoin) have done to this day – a new altcoin can become a sidechain and simply peg it’s value to an already existing ledger such as Bitcoin.

To the more classically minded the closest layman description of this can be described as a cryptographically decentralized (non-fractional) IOU."
(http://cryptobizmagazine.com/sidechains-explained/)

=Discussion=

by Jon Evans:

"If sidechains take off, though — which will require some changes to the core Bitcoin protocol — this probably bodes ill for the existing altcoins. Not surprisingly, the proposal has attracted a fair amount of skepticism, not least from Vitalik Buterin, the chief scientist of Ethereum, who argues that sidechains require not just protocol changes but “the permission and active assistance of 50% of all Bitcoin mining pool operators.”

Why should you care? Two main reasons. One: because if Ravikant, Wilson, Andreessen, Hill, Back, etc. are correct, then in the long run, blockchain-backed cryptocurrencies could become the substrate of entire economies. Hill says: “I want to build a blockchain that could support a nation-state putting its national currency and phasing out paper dollars.”
(http://techcrunch.com/2014/04/19/bitcoin-2-0-unleash-the-sidechains/)


=Interview=

Crypto Biz Magazine’s Editor-in-Chief Soshi sits down with Sidechains-backer Austin Hill: 

"Soshi: '''What do you think will happen to existing alt coins if Sidechains are implemented as an extension to the Bitcoin protocol'''?”

Hill: I think it’s premature to predict. This is a fast moving storm, but they often say that even in a tornado that pigs can fly. Some of the alt coins, are pigs flying – supported by pump and dumpers willing to be the cowboys of the crypto currency space flouting laws. Some say that it’s easier to be a pirate then an admiral in the navy, but the danger to users who are unsuspecting victims in their artificial ponzi schemes will draw regulators and force things that are bad for the ecosystem.

Hopefully there will be a maturing. The algorithms that empower sidechains allow for that maturing to happen in a healthier way we believe, where scarcity races and innovation balance out.  A friend, Alan Kay once said that the best way to predict the future is to invent it.   But invention is a collaborative process.  Satoshi collaborated with the cypherpunks and Adam Back to improve as derivative software artistry.  Like all art, borrowing and using open, free ideas are a key part of innovation.   Hopefully the future will show that there doesn’t need to be a Faustian bargain between a single scarcity with Bitcoin and innovation.

Soshi: Have you been in contact with any existing altcoin developers, and have those developers expressed any interest in moving their alt-coin onto a Sidechain?

Hill: We have discussions within discussions.   When we convened the blockstream project we brought together the scientists and researchers who had invented and maintained the tech. It was our version of the Manhattan Project that gave birth to atomic energy and entire industries.   I wanted to make sure we started with the digital cash versions of Einstein, Oppenheimer, Feynman and Fermi or Teller.  If you look at the history of the Manhattan Project it had multiple sites, multiple collaborations between material science, math, algorithm automation and new project financing.   @theBlockStream project is similar. It is a hybrid company that has adopted “Can’t do Evil” at its core because we all feel the awesome responsibility for the power for new economic systems and we need to ensure we are responsible members of the community.

Soshi: We read that the Bitcoin development team have given a tentative nod to Adam Back  for sidechains implementation. What time line do you see for it being added as an extension to Bitcoin?

Hill:   When the time is right.  There is already test code being looked at on the test net for bitcoin.  There are timelines for the easy stuff and we are readying sidechain tests nets for people to test implementations before it would be adopted to the main Bitcoin core.  Responsible deployments with secure code development and multi-party web of trust are still needed and that takes time.

Soshi: What can’t be done with a Sidechain that can be done with an Altcoin? How much security risk — if any —  is imposed on Bitcoin’s existing block if making the necessary changes to  permit Sidechains?

Hill:  We’ve gotten some new math from Stanford that allows ZNARKS and use of well pairing constructs to allow for levels of security that solve the 51% attack issues as well as create a new platform for programmable trust and ethical mining.   We obviously believe that using the existing investment and power usage of the SHA-256 POW system makes the most sense as the timewarp attacks and Sybil attacks that altcoins are vulnerable too need to stop (they encourage thieves, con men and pump and dumpers to game the victims of cryptocurrencies).  So leverage the open hash rate of the planet for everyone’s benefit and the increased use of Bitcoin for trust economics is critical.

The scaling, decentralized model of trust and security concerns have been addressed by the @theblockstream scientists but we owe it to the community to publish the math and those findings before we start marketing one coin to rule them all type master of the coin messages.   We think that those who have marketed vaporware or slideware to project fund using alt coin economics are hurting the ecosystem so we won’t play that game."
(http://cryptobizmagazine.com/an-exlusive-question-and-answer-with-sidechains-austin-hill/)

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]