
'''* Article: Signaling Virtuous Victimhood as Indicators of Dark Triad Personalities. By Ekin Ok, Yi Qian, Brendan Strejcek, and Karl Aquino. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: Personality Processes and Individual Differences, Vol. 2, No. 999, 000, 2020.''' [http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000329 doi]

URL = https://scottbarrykaufman.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Ok-et-al.-2020.pdf


=Abstract=

"We investigate the consequences and predictors of emitting signals of victimhood and virtue. In our first
three studies, we show that the virtuous victim signal can facilitate nonreciprocal resource transfer from
others to the signaler. Next, we develop and validate a victim signaling scale that we combine with an
established measure of virtue signaling to operationalize the virtuous victim construct. We show that
individuals with Dark Triad traits—Machiavellianism, Narcissism, Psychopathy—more frequently signal
virtuous victimhood, controlling for demographic and socioeconomic variables that are commonly
associated with victimization in Western societies. In Study 5, we show that a specific dimension of
Machiavellianism—amoral manipulation—and a form of narcissism that reflects a person’s belief in their
superior prosociality predict more frequent virtuous victim signaling. Studies 3, 4, and 6 test our
hypothesis that the frequency of emitting virtuous victim signal predicts a person’s willingness to engage
in and endorse ethically questionable behaviors, such as lying to earn a bonus, intention to purchase
counterfeit products and moral judgments of counterfeiters, and making exaggerated claims about being
harmed in an organizational context."

[[Category:Identity Politics]]