
= a collective of thirty-five bestselling writers of idea books, business books, books that aim to articulate big global trends.

URL = https://www.facebook.com/thesiliconguild

=Description=

Molly Barton:

" I learned that Peter Sims (author of Little Bets) and Ori Brafman (author of Sway) had co-founded The Silicon Guild, a collective of thirty-five bestselling writers of idea books, business books, books that aim to articulate big global trends. Peter says that they ‘banded together… to coordinate resources, collaborations and tools, as well as to do experiments in the new world of publishing.”

Just a few months after launching, the Guild is actively promoting one another’s books and speaking events on Facebook, and just posted a job offer here for a Chief of Staff. Their first book is coming out next month – Tom Rath’s Are You Fully Charged?. Rath’s previous books have sold approximately 6 million copies. This is a highly professionalized version of what I envisioned could emerge when I built Book Country, and I’m eager to see what comes of it. 

 

The Silicon Guild writers have the opportunity to create the ‘Patterson effect’ for their readers – keeping readers engaged all year while each writes at his or her own pace. And by pooling their email lists and their social media followings — Vivek Wadhwa has 50,000 Twitter followers, Dan Ariely has nearly 90,000, and Charlene Li has 99,000 — they immediately have tremendous reach. Together they have five million social media followers across Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn. Beyond the obvious ability they have to promote books and speaking engagements, The Silicon Guild has the potential to become a global hub for expert conversation of big trends and ideas that impact business markets, tech advancements, and our professional and personal lives.

This could solve a reader problem that is more important than "discoverability." 

Discoverability is an issue for publishers, not readers. Readers discover books all the time and are typically overwhelmed by choice. What readers seek is a sense of validation and purpose in their book selection – of all the books I could read, what should I read right now and why? If you’re a fan of Dan Ariely and you’ve already read his latest book, The (Honest) Truth About Dishonesty, you’d probably feel filled with purpose reading a book he’s recommended by a fellow Guild member on a related topic.

The Silicon Guild is a prominent and sophisticated example of what I see as the beginning of a very big trend – the rise of writer collectives that have the potential to become "hubs" for various interest groups of readers.

With a direct nod to Peter Sims’ Medium piece on The Return of the Guild in December, ten writers co-founded The Military Writers Guild, a shared brand they created to “gather writers committed to the development of the profession of arms through the exchange of ideas in the written medium.”

Guild members are expected to regularly publish articles and blog posts in order to maintain their membership. They are also expected to give back to the community, by “helping develop writers and their content, as well as promoting completed content by Guild members.” Book publishing is not explicitly discussed in the Guild’s charter, though the Guild will give “a quarterly award for the best single blog post” and “an annual award for the year’s best blog.”

What if the Military Writers Guild also began reviewing and commenting on the books that appeal to the readers of their blogs – all the Tom Clancy books, all the war memoirs coming out, all the books about military efforts to combat ISIS?"
(http://www.thebookseller.com/futurebook/molly-barton-what-would-wu-tang-do)


[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]