
= means 'without domain' in english ; Sindominio is a radical technology collective

URL=http://sindominio.net/


=Description=

Sindominio intends to immerse itself in that multiverse which exists and organises itself within the web, in order to contribute to this space which embraces cooperation and communication as well as conflicts and struggles. In that multiverse where projects of great consequence can be found (one such example is the one which has led to the GNU/Linux operating system, which together with the Internet, constitutes one of the most impressive demonstrations of collective construction within Cyberspace) we need a GNU/Linux machine where we can experiment with free tools and cooperate, investigate and interchange knowledge with the virtual communities in the strategic field of software.

Sindominio also intends to co-ordinate itself and co-operate in depth with projects that are similar to ours; as is the case with the Italian ECN, , where the relationship and the level of implication between the telematic project and the realities which it co-ordinates is al-encompassing, and where the question of competing with other servers in terms of service, price, etc. is superfluous since they don't provide interconnectivity. It is important that those who participate in Sindominio don't become clients or simply users to whom service is given in exchange for money. Sindominio is a militant project which should be kept running through financial contributions - without wage-earners or people who must dedicate themselves full-time to the project. This implies developing a different culture, one that is less passive, the use of computers among people who function with alternative criteria. It also implies breaking with the concept of providing service, providing the capacity for personal judgement in order to adopt a critical stance before banal, commercial, or apolitical uses of the internet, and learning all that is positive from the virtual communities and from their gamble on political intelligence.

Above all, Sindominio is only an interesting and viable concept if it is used as a resource for groups in struggle. That is to say, as a tool for alternative communication for those groups and individuals who fight for self-management and promote autonomy from society in all its different shapes. In this sense, Sindominio will provide the physical foundation for projects such as that of the constantly developing UPA agency and Contr@infos or the centre of dissident literature, as well as mailing lists, e-mail and web-sites for all those dissident movements (that is to say, independent and self-managed, not institutional or party political ones) who want to become involved in the Sindominio project.

=Location=

|Country=Spain
|Location=40.46366700000001, -3.7492200000000366


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]