= "a decentralized ecosystem building a global marketplace for AI services".

URL =

=Description=

Sam Bourgi:

"SingularityNET is a decentralized ecosystem building a global marketplace for AI services. Along the way, it has secured partnerships with Mind Network and Filecoin Foundation, invested $53 million in a modular supercomputer dedicated to decentralized AGI, and completed a token merger with Ocean Protocol and Fetch.ai to unify efforts in decentralized AI development.

In 2024, Goertzel founded the [[Artificial Superintelligence Alliance]], the world’s largest open-source initiative dedicated to decentralized AGI.

SingularityNET and the ASI Alliance are “probably the only serious AGI R&D team outside of Big Tech, certainly the only one in the crypto space, and I don't mean any slight against others doing cool AI stuff in the crypto space,” Goertzel said.

...

For the next leap into AGI, Goertzel sees decentralization as a foundational safeguard against the monopolization and misuse of the technology. That principle is embedded in the architecture of SingularityNET, Hyperon, and the upcoming ASI Chain, a modular blockchain designed for decentralized AI.

His argument is that AGI must be decentralized from the ground up, not adopted later, if it is to benefit humanity rather than serve concentrated power.

“The way the post-AGI period goes may be quite different depending on whether the decentralized ecosystem plays a role in it or not,” he said."

(https://cointelegraph.com/news/ben-goertzel-ai-decentralization-interview)

[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]