
=Typology=


Bill Baue, Ralph Thurm, et al. :

"The Knowledge Life Cycle also encompasses both single- and double-loop learning, the concepts introduced by Chris Argyris and Donald Schön in the late 1970s:

• Single-loop learning occurs “whenever an error is detected and corrected without questioning or
altering the governing variables.” A thermostat illustrates single-loop learning – it follows a simple set
of rules (too cold: turn on; too hot: turn off) with no learning about the learning. In other words, it deals with symptoms, not root causes. “The core question is ‘Are we doing things right?’”

- Double-loop learning occurs “when errors are corrected by first examining and altering the governing
variables and then the actions.” Thinking “outside-the-box” exemplifies double-loop learning, as it
steps back to question underlying norms, rules, and assumptions. It thereby addresses both symptoms
and root causes. “The core question is ‘Are we doing the right things?’”


Building on this foundation and integrating Gregory Bateson’s notion of Learning I (linear), Learning II
(complex), and Learning III (hyper-complex), others have proposed the notion of triple-loop learning. For
example, Richard Hummelbrunner proposes triple-loop learning as a means of making “the value base of
evaluations more explicit”:

- Triple-loop learning can reveal critical values, that is, the values underpinning behaviour and cognition
patterns in a particular situation. These are often connected with power relations or issues of expertise and legitimacy – which in turn can be explored when reflecting on boundary choices. Critical
values inform evaluation criteria of equity (who benefits from an intervention and why?), as well as
aspects of sustainability (are the actors that are needed for sustaining effects adequately involved?) …
The core question is ‘How do we establish “rightness”? "

(https://www.r3-0.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/r3-0-Value-Cycles-Blueprint-Final.pdf?)