

=Discussion=

"Facebook Like and Google’s +1 buttons—micro-micro values based on attention and favorability that will someday convert in value to other measures.  How many Likes is a Facebook Credit worth? How many Credits make a Ven? How many Ven make a lasagna at the Olive Garden? How much do you have to Like the Olive Garden to get a lasagna? We’ll know soon.

This system of embedded values attached to all things represented on the Internet will turn the Internet itself into a pervasive exchange.  The idea of national currencies will become not just obsolete, but redundant, with no more currency meaning than the value of a “Like” or a banana or a reputation, which will all effectively speak to national currencies in a kind of common “mathematical language.”  Eventually, all of these things will be equally and instantly interchangeable.  It is tough to say how quickly or how slowly this will happen, but it is the single, inevitable consequence of the second phase of the Internet.  The first phase being the P2Pization of communications, already well underway.

This change will also happen faster than any of us can expect, because it is about simple numerical value, versus complex comms.  As most of us are now basically connected, the ability for rapid and mass adoption of new ideas and systems is possible at a multiplying rate, especially if it offers a radical shift in value creation as fundamental as this.  We are teaching the Internet to speak math—via causal links.

We need to urgently think about how the blurring of lines between currencies and everything else will affect us, our relationships, and our physical economies.  How we create and measure value is going through a change that has not been seen in over 600 years—since the emergence of the first systematic nationalized currencies. It is profoundly affecting the central vs. distributed control of value, and the archetypes that surround how we measure value.  It is a snowball today, but tomorrow it is an avalanche.  Just watch.

I don’t believe that the world will end up with a single global currency or a single reserve currency, but in the very near term a network of reserve currencies will allow humans to pick and choose new options for trade. In fact, they are already here, and those mentioned are just the first.  In the long term, these currencies, along with everything else of value, will be measured and represented on a unified system—most probably the Internet itself.  '''The result of this will be the end of currency and the emergence of Singular Value'''.

The rise of Singular Value implies more efficient capital markets and the potential for ongoing GDP expansion. It implies a hybrid of fixed asset values and the more efficient monetization of knowledge, which is continually expanding.  This combination could lead to an expanding supply of value relative to hard assets, which are almost certainly subject to peak resource pressure in the coming period anyway.  The tension between these two assets and their relative value will set the agenda for much going forward."
(http://techcrunch.com/2011/05/20/bitcoin-ven-and-the-end-of-currency/)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]