

=Source=

* book:  The [[Power of Neighborhood and the Commons]]

=Text=

PM:

"The trinity of the commons corresponds to
the political wisdom of the division of powers,
of checks and balances. It represents material
democracy and structural prudence,
which teaches us not put all your eggs in one
basket. Do not trust yourself too much.


Most of the different types of commons
and of activities can be distributed in six
modules:

* NEIGHBORHOOD 

* BOROUGH/TOWN

* CITY/REGION 

* TERRITORY

* SUBCONTINENT 

* PLANET


These modules are emergent entities, generated
by possible reintegration of functions,
minimization of transport,
economies of scale, communicative and
political considerations, general features of
stable, resilient systems. It is obvious, that
they must be interpreted according to local
conditions. The suggested modules are not
identical in every circumstance, but they
share more what Wittgenstein called “family
resemblance.”58 We must not think of
them as containers or gated communities,
but rather as clouds with a fuzzy silhouette,
as defined spaces and meeting points
at the same time.

There is an intrinsic connection between
functions and the size of the territories
they serve. The cooperative state of public
services works best in medium-sized territories
that can be integrated without excessive
use of energy for transportation.

What we need is a global secession of
medium-sized territories.

Big nations can be replaced by criss-cross
federations and coalitions of territories
that are defined by function, not by historical
fictions. Territories can be members of
sub-continental or global cooperatives for
specific purposes. Such communal enterprises
are already in existence, e.g. the
CERN, a cooperative effort of nations, big
and small. Unfortunately CERN isn’t subjected
to real democratic monitoring and
in this respect not a perfect model.

Sub-continental or global cooperation is
needed to develop the new ecological
products, modular components or materials
that can be used or assembled in territories
or even neighborhoods."
(http://www.o500.org/books/pm_power_of_neighborhood.pdf)


[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Global Commons]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]