'''= "The [[Integrated Reporting]] (multicapital) Framework categorises them as financial, manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural".'''

URL = http://integratedreporting.org/what-the-tool-for-better-reporting/get-to-grips-with-the-six-capitals/

== Description ==

HARVEY SCHACHTER:

"The MultiCapital Scorecard focuses on '''five''' types of vital capital:
* Natural: Air, land, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ecosystems and other natural biophysical resources that humans and non-humans rely on for their well-being;
* Human: Knowledge, skills, experience, health, values, attitudes and ethical duties;
* Social and relationship: Teams, networks and hierarchies working together and their shared knowledge, skills, experience, health and values;
* Constructed: Material objects, systems or ecosystems created by humans;
* Economic: This can be internal or external. Internal financial capital refers to the pool of funds available to a company, including debt and equity finance. External financial capital consists of all funds available to parties outside an organization that your company can choose to access.
(https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/careers/management/the-multicapital-scorecard-a-practical-guide-to-sustainability/article33849941/)

== Discussion ==

===A Capital Theory of Performance===

By Mark	W. McElroy and Martin P. Thomas:

"Along	with	the	rise of	multiple	capital	theory	as	a	rubric for	assessing the	
performance	of	organizations	has	come	a	growing	need	for	guidance	on	how	to	do	
so (GRI,	2013a;	Eccles	and	Krzus,	2015).	 Even	the	International	Integrated	
Reporting	Council’s (IIRC) <IR>	Framework for	integrated	reporting	(IIRC,	2013)	
and	the	Global	Initiative	for	Sustainability	Ratings’ (GISR) Ratings	Standard (GISR,	
2013),	two	new	standards	that	explicitly	call	for	capital-based	measures	of	
organizational	performance,	are principles-based	and	non-prescriptive	in	this	
regard.		Organizations	and	their	advisors,	instead,	have	been	left	to	their	own	
devices.

Addressing	this	need raises	some	basic	questions	about	the	substance	of	multiple	
capital	theory	and	how	it	can	or	should	be	operationalized.		What	does	it	mean,	for	
example, to	assess	performance	in	terms	of	multiple	capitals	and	how	might	one	do	
so	in	a	formal	or	structured	way? What	exactly	is	the	capital	theory	of	performance	
and	what	are	its	practice	implications?		Is	it	even	possible	to	operationalize	the	
Triple	Bottom	Line	(Elkington,	1997)?	
	
In	response to	these	questions,	we	have	developed	a	system	called the	MultiCapital	
Scorecard[i],	a	methodology informed	by the	view	that	the	performance	of	
organizations can	and	should be	assessed	in	terms	of	what	their	impacts	on vital	
capitals	are (Elkington,	1997;	Porritt,	2005;	McElroy	et	al,	2007;	McElroy,	2008;	
McElroy	and	Van	Engelen,	2012;	Gleeson-White,	2014).		This,	of	course,	is	not	an	
entirely	new	idea,	as	financial	performance	has	always	been	looked	at	in	this	way;	
non-financial	performance,	however,	almost	never	has and	yet	the	same	principles	
can	be	applied.	 In	a	very	real	sense,	then,	the	state	of	the	art	for	non-financial	
accounting is	only now	catching	up	to what	financial	managers	have	known all	
along:	that	performance	is	a	function	of	impacts	on	capital—albeit	economic	capital,
only, in	the case	of	financial	reporting.	
	
With	the	MultiCapital	Scorecard,	we simply	extend this	idea to	assessing	the	social	
and	environmental	performance	of	a	firm as	well.		And	when	we	do,	only	the	capitals	
and	the	stakeholders	involved	change.		Instead	of	focusing	only	on	a	firm’s	impacts	
on	economic	capital	for	the	sake	of	its	shareholders,	we	assess	impacts	on	all	vital	
capitals	for	the	sake	of	all	stakeholders.		This,	we	believe,	is	the	fundamental	essence	
of	integrated	measurement	and	reporting,	without	which	there	can	be	no	integrated	
thinking	or	management.		It	is	a	body	of	theory	and	practice	we	call multicapitalism."
(http://www.multicapitalscorecard.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/The_MultiCapital_Scorecard.pdf)

== [[Multi-Capital Accounting Standards]] ==

Bill Baue:

"There are currently three major new standards being established in the corporate community, and all of them are adhering to (multi-)capital theory, which arguably compels them to take account of impacts on the commons — or on capital resources that are shared amongst stakeholders. 

These three are:

#International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC)
#Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB)
#Global Initiative for Sustainability Ratings (GISR) ."

(http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/new_metrics/capitals-commons-dialogue-david-bollier-part-one)

===Integrated Reporting===

" <IR> is a process founded on integrated thinking that results in a periodic integrated report by an organization about value creation over time and related communications regarding aspects of value creation.

An integrated report is a concise communication about how an organization’s strategy, governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external environment, lead to the creation of value in the short, medium and long term."

* "The International Integrated Reporting Council ('the IIRC') 

is a global not-for-profit organization, incorporated in England and Wales. Company no. 07746254 with its registered office at The Helicon, Third Floor, 1 South Place, London, EC2M 2RB."

===Books===

====1. The [[MultiCapital Scorecard]]====

* '''The MultiCapital Scorecard.By Martin Thomas and Mark McElroy. Chelsea Green Publishing, 2017.'''

"The Consultants Martin Thomas and Mark McElroy have developed a format that provides a practical way to oversee such expansive sustainability. You choose what you wish to measure – what you feel is important – and even the weights you want to give to the various items. But they provide, thorough their MultiCapital Scorecard, a means for managing and evaluating that broader view of the organization.

It’s an important book because when you fall short of sustainability – an unpalatable workplace, polluting the environment, or being unproductive and winding up in the financial red – you are eroding capital, be it societal or corporate, and that’s destructive. And even if you find a multicapital approach wrongheaded or the authors’ system too elaborate, the method may include useful ideas you can borrow for your own situation."
(https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/careers/management/the-multicapital-scorecard-a-practical-guide-to-sustainability/article33849941/)


====2. Six Capitals, or [[Can Accountants Save the Planet]]====

'''* Book: Six Capitals, or Can Accountants Save the Planet? Rethinking Capitalism for the Twenty-First Century. By Jane Gleeson-White. W. W. Norton, 2015'''

URL = https://www.indiebound.org/book/9780393246674?aff=jenelks

"This is the story of a twenty-first-century revolution being led by the most unlikely of rebels: accountants. Only the second revolution in accounting since double-entry bookkeeping began, it is of seismic proportions, driven by the 2008 financial crash and our ongoing environmental crisis. The changes it will wreak are profound and far-reaching and not only will transform the way the world does business but also will alter the nature of capitalism.

While the wealth of nations and corporations has been vital to the global economy, increasingly the world is coming to realize that such endless growth is limited by the earth's resources and comes at a huge price to the planet and to human well-being. It simply cannot be sustained.

This revolution demands that we go beyond merely accounting for traditional financial and industrial capital and take account of the benefits and detriments to the natural world and society. It urges us to include four new categories of wealth: intellectual (such as intellectual property), human (skills, productivity, and health), social and relationship (shared norms and values), and natural (environment). Making them part of our financial statements and GDP figures may be the only way to address the many calamities we face.

Just two years ago this revolution seemed idealistic and unlikely. Today it is quickly unfolding. In 2012, the sea-change year, two key initiatives took root: an international movement to transform how corporate accounting is calculated and the rise of incorporating the effects on the environment to the accounting of national and global economies. Six Capitals tells the story of this coming new age in capitalism, evaluating its promise and the disaster that lies ahead if it is not implemented."

== More Information ==
* [[Multicapitalism]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]