
= Six aspects (governance, juridic, sharing, contribution, finance,partnership) that help to describe a commons-based initiative

URL = http://slides.com/unisson/unis

=More Information=

==Documentation==

Simon Sarazin:

'''1.'''

Here are the 6 ingrédients (we decided to use only 6 finally) :
http://unisson.co/tableau-des-ingredients/

Or also on wikibooks (it's the same data) : 
https://fr.m.wikibooks.org/wiki/Construire_des_communs/Synthese

Each ingrédient has a long page description inside the wikibooks.

For exemple for the governance :
https://fr.m.wikibooks.org/wiki/Construire_des_communs/Gouvernance

You also find on this page a sort of methodology to use this 6 ingrédients :
http://unisson.co/exemples/

With a spreadheet to answer all the questions when you developp à "common" : 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XIuFUfjY_-yBAvhyqjFZekd1hVJ9A_jdhuGiNbTtyBE/edit

And this graph to make it more visible :
https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BzUW0ZSBFWPeVG9mMFN5VTZOcEU/view

The encommuns.org platform can help to save each common analysis : 

For example : 
http://encommuns.org/#/p/832

This is explained here in english :
http://slides.com/unisson/unis


'''2.'''

Compilation of resources via Simon Sarazin:

Pour plus de clarté, le site unisson reprend les informations qui sont dans le wikibooks, et qui détaillent ingrédient par ingrédient les pratiques découvertes :

* https://fr.wikibooks.org/wiki/Construire_des_communs/Synthese
* https://fr.wikibooks.org/wiki/Construire_des_communs

Voici 2 exemples d'analyse utilisant ces ingrédients 

* Du programme Genivi : http://communs.lafabriquedesmobilites.fr/#/p/867
* De la coroutine : http://encommuns.org/#/p/832

Ainsi qu'un tableau "template" pour aider à réfléchir autour d'une ressouce https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XIuFUfjY_-yBAvhyqjFZekd1hVJ9A_jdhuGiNbTtyBE/edit#

Et un graphe : https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BzUW0ZSBFWPeVG9mMFN5VTZOcEU/view

==Translation==
''Translated from french to english by Veronique Kaluila (robin hood cooperative)''

This table presents six ingredients to be considered to build a free common, with each ingredient of the proposed resources. This tool will guide a reflection contributors to a common community and its partners involved in public or private types.

Pay attention that everyone has to make his own recipe and ajust the ingredients  ;-).  It's not a matter of imposing a framework for 'common'.

{| border=1 cellspacing=1 cellpadding=10 
| width=174 style='width:130.25pt;' | 
| width=152 style='width:113.85pt;' | '''Description'''
| width=175 style='width:130.9pt;' | '''Issues'''
| width=234 style='width:175.25pt;' | '''Resources/Exemples'''
|- 
| width=174 style='width:130.25pt;' | '''Governance''': How is thought 
governance to enable all to appropriate the common without reducing 
individual initiative?
| width=152 style='width:113.85pt;' |Your initiative progresses by horizontal collective 
decisions. The organization is transparent. All project information 
(economic, human, etc ...) are public. There are online information on 
project funding and status. The discussions, in particular strategic, are on 
"open" spaces where everyone can participate. There is display of 
members and possible contacts, and internal procedures. Spaces to go back and 
address the tensions exist, and a mode of decision making has been chosen.
| width=175 style='width:130.9pt;' | A well described governance fosters trust, inclusion 
of the greatest number. No clear decision process, the collective 
decision-making remains limited and is then often taken by some people 
without that clear. If the process has not been defined, the project takes 
the risk, overnight, to see people at the head of the initiative or new 
entrants decide alone the great changes of direction.
| width=234 style='width:175.25pt;' | Use a discussion list. Have an opportunity to go back 
tensions or improve the project with a process to make choices (consent, 
vote). For example, all major decisions are discussed at Wikipedia, with decision 
methods vary choice made by groups of people.
|- 
| width=174 style='width:130.25pt;' | '''Contribution''': How the project allows the contribution 
to all and in the long term? Which means to make the actions visible?
| width=152 style='width:113.85pt;' | Everyone can contribute to the project in 
kind and financially. The actions to be realized are visible and it is simple 
to come to propose improvements (for example, a link towards the information 
to contribute how, spaces of discussion). The used tools are easy and 
accessible to all (github, wiki, trello, etc. ...). Roles to play to make the 
project live are clear. It can be interesting to see if the collective 
attracted new members or if the collective lost members and why. The project 
posts indicators of his evaluation and updates them. The contributions of the 
participants are protected (free license, etc. ...)
| width=175 style='width:130.9pt;' | This promotes the contribution of all to the project 
and therefore a more rapid development of the initiative, and better 
adaptation to individual usage. If the project is appropriated, this avoids 
having competing projects that start because that can not be involved in this 
initiative.
| width=234 style='width:175.25pt;' | Establishment of "contribution Sessions" 
Tools Trello, Github, or Transifex translatewiki for languages, etc ... For 
example, Wikipedia encourages the contribution of each very simply. Example: 
By displaying the licenses used in free software, it is easy to get involved 
because the license protects the contributor.
|- 
| width=174 style='width:130.25pt;' | '''Partage/Sharing''': Who are the "common" close 
or similar? Have they been contacted to try to share with them? How the 
"common" is working to encourage its replication, its release?
| width=152 style='width:113.85pt;' | The project distributes its operating revenue to 
easily reproduce. It is thought of "modular" way (separation of 
concerns ") to build itself from other" common "or produce 
multiple new common appropriated rather than one that can not be reused. It 
is thought to pool with other relatives initiatives to avoid competition 
proceedings and to bring the forces around a common project.
| width=175 style='width:130.9pt;' | It is the ability to unite people around an issue 
that will help it develop quickly. Also, document operation allows the 
replication of the project by others and facilitates ownership of the concept 
by all. Successfully pooling is a key to the development of outbuildings,
| width=234 style='width:175.25pt;' | Share its 
recipes or "codes-sources"(-springs") thanks to the site http: 
// movilab.org for example. Join thematic working groups. For example, 
Disco Soup has posted all the information to easily start a discosoupe on its 
territory. As soon as an initiative starts, a 
monitoring job is to be realized to put itself in connection with people who 
have a similar project, or to join an already existing project. There 
is such an important pooling around the Wikipedia encyclopedia: Rather than 
hundreds of competing encyclopedias, the project managed to bring together a 
large number of players. Similar initiatives sometimes decide to get together 
to join forces.
|- 
|}


[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Commons]]