
=Characteristics=

Joseph Lindsay:

==Charismatic Trait==

"Polycentric Leadership is charismatic. Charisma includes a strong foundation and a strong set of core values. Charisma is more than just having charismatic personality. It involves strength of character, trustworthiness, and a faithful presence. 


==Communal Trait==

Polycentric Leadership is always communal in nature. Leading through COMMUNITY is integral to polycentric leadership. In the fellowship and family-like atmosphere of serving together, leaders gain perspective and insight from one another and are better able to function […]


==Collaborative Trait==

Polycentric Leaders lead in a collaborative way. COLLABORATION includes working together in a shared participative manner. Effective leaders must be collaborative in their approach, willing to work in team-centered paradigms where no one rises above the others […]


==Relational Trait==

Polycentric Leaders are relational leaders. RELATIONSHIP—spending time with one another, getting to know one another, and going beyond just working together—is imperative. Leading well involves a depth of relationship that goes beyond partnership or collaboration.


==Entrepreneurial Trait==

Polycentric Leadership exhibits a bold entrepreneurial spirit. Self-governance and freedom are crucial for local teams to operate effectively. ENTREPRENEURIAL FREEDOM engenders effective leadership. This is especially true for successful startups that thrive in a culture of risk-taking, […]


==Diverse Trait==

Polycentric Leadership leverages diverse leaders and styles. Leaders who value and recognize DIVERSITY are able to work across regions, networks, and cultures. The diversity of leadership gifts described in Ephesians 4 is paramount."

(https://polycentricleadership.com/about/)

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Articles]]