'''[http://www2.physics.utoronto.ca/~logan/ Robert K. Logan]. THE SIXTH LANGUAGE:
Learning a Living in the Internet Age'''

First chapter available here at
http://www2.physics.utoronto.ca/~logan/6thch1.doc

Author page at
http://www2.physics.utoronto.ca/~logan/


=Description=


"The Sixth Language updates the work of Marshall McLuhan by applying his
ideas to the communications revolution taking place due to digital
information technology.  Logan's work interweaves ideas which touch on
language, education, work, social class, information technology and
management theory.  He establishes the theoretical background for his
study with a succinct and very readable summary of McLuhan's ideas.

Logan develops a new theory of language by showing that a language is
not merely a system of communication but also an information processing
tool. He goes on to show that speech, writing, mathematics, science,
computing and the Internet form an evolutionary chain of verbal
languages.  A new language evolved each time the informatic capacity of
the previous set of languages was exhausted.  Math and writing arose to
deal with the information overload associated with economic
transactions of the agriculture based city states of Sumer.

The schools that evolved to teach the new math and writing skills gave
rise to scholarship and a new form of information overload ensued.
Science or organized knowledge arose to deal with the new information
glut created by the teachers in the newly established schools. 
Computing developed out of the need to cope with the information
overload created by science and the Internet was the response to the
info overload and need for greater connectivity of computing.

As Logan weaves his tale of the development of language he also shows
how new educational, social, political and economic institutions arise.
  
He then develops a theory of social class based on the notion that
agriculture created the aristocratic class; and literacy, the middle
class.  He then speculates as to whether computers will give rise to a
new social class - computerate class.

Turning to education Logan shows how the evolution of language led to
the evolution of education.  He explains that the reason our schools
are so out of touch is that they are Industrial Age institutions trying
desperately to meet the needs of the Internet Age and the Knowledge
Era. He suggests a radical new way of remedying the malaise of
education by proposing that the core curriculum focus on the generic
skills associated with the use of the six languages of speech, writing,
math, science,computing and the Internet. He contends that the actual content of the
curriculum, the topics that are studied are not important and should be
chosen to cater to the students' interests.  Once students have
mastered the six languages they are then in a position to learn
whatever topics or material they require for their work or their
personal interest.

Logan proposes an equally radical rethinking of training and education
in the work place. He shows how information technology has completely
changed the way in which we work and learn; and more importantly, he
exposes how the relationship between work and learning has also
changed.  He explains that one can no longer earn a living by putting
in time; but instead, one must now "learn a living'.  The only form of
job security is life long learning and a set of up-to-date skills that
are in demand.  His call for life long learning re-echoes the theme of
McLuhan's earlier work and that of today's business management
literature.

Logan shows how McLuhan's work, Understanding Media, published over 30
years ago anticipated Toffler's observation of the crucial role of
knowledge in the production of wealth (Toffler, The Third Wave, 1980 &
Powershift, 1990), Hammer and Champy's technique of business process
re-engineering (Hammer and Champy, Reengineering the Corporation,
1993), Tapscott and Caston's notion of the extended enterprise
(Tapscott and Caston, Paradigm Shift, 1993), Senge's idea of the
learning organization (Senge, The Fifth Discipline, 1993) and finally,
Drucker's ideas of post-capitalist society and the demise of the
dominance of the nation
state (Drucker, Post-Capitalist Society, 1993).

Logan  shows how the Internet recaptures the spirit of oral culture. 
He demonstrates that the new level of connectivity requires more than
the mere re-engineering of business processes such as marketing,
advertising, sales, customer support, and market research.  According
to Logan, it requires an actual alignment of these processes because of
the way in which they are integrated by the Internet.  Logan also
suggests that the Internet has become an environment where learning and
work come together and that this medium gives rise to the need for
knowledge management and collaboration as well as being an essential
tool for its practice."
(from a text distributed by Geert Lovink via Nettime)


=Bio=

A Brief Biography of Dr. Robert K. Logan

Dr. Logan obtained his B.S. from M.I.T. in 1961 and his Ph.D. also from
M.I.T. in 1965. He spent two years at U. of Illinois as a research
associate and came to the University of Toronto in 1967.  He is
Professor Emiritus of Physics. He served as a member of the board of
the McLuhan Program at U of T.

He was cross-appointed to the Curriculum Department of the Ontario
Institute for Studies in Education where he conducts research in
computer applications in education and the social impacts of technology
and communications.  He was a seniour fellow at the Faculty of
Environmental Studies at York University where he taught and conducted
research in the area of the cross impact of science and the
environment.  He is an active member of the Pugwash movement.

He was a policy advisor to Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau and
has edited two collections of essays on Canadian politics, The Way
Ahead for Canada; and Canada's Third Option.


=Key Books to Read=


Dr. Logan is the author of three books on communications cum
linguistics:

The Alphabet Effect (Wm. Morrow 1986; 2nd edition Hampton 2004)

The Fifth Language: Learning a Living in the Computer Age (Stoddart
1995)

The Sixth Language: Learning a Living in the Internet Age (Stoddart
Press, Toronto, 2000) which won the Suzanne K. Langer Prize of the
Media Ecology Association.

He has also authored:

Collaborate to Compete: Driving Profitability in the Knowledge Economy
(Wiley 2004).


=More Information=

A selection of his writings can be accessed on the following Web page:
http://www.physics.utoronto.ca/undergraduate/SCI_199Y/readinglist.html

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Education]]