
'''= SketchChair is a free, open-source software tool that allows anyone to easily design and build their own digitally fabricated furniture.'''

URL = http://www.sketchchair.cc/

=Description=

DIDIY:

"SketchChair is a free software (a.k.a. open source) tool that allows anyone
to easily design and build their own digitally fabricated furniture. Within
the program, you can upload chairs you have created, adding them to a
growing collection of open-source designs in the SketchChair Design
Library.

Any of these chairs are freely available to be downloaded and edited by
anybody, allowing chair designs to evolve as users continually refine and
modify them."


=Characteristics=

DIDIY:

==Community==

"There is a wiki for instructions of use and a design library for sharing
designs made with the tool. The software’s source code is at their github
repository.


==Licensing==

Many of the designs in the library are under a non-free open license: CC
BY-NC-SA. The software is under the GNU GPL."


==Indicators of impact==

• Google Incoming Links (sketchchair.cc): 14.600.
• Alexa Global Rank (sketchchair.cc): 1.671.413.



=Business Model==

DIDIY:

"Revenue models 

• They ran a successful Kickstarter campaign (2011) for the initial
development.
• Voluntary donations through their user registration page.
• Custom development.


Modes of production 

Do it yourself and peer production.


=Governance models=

• The project is owned by Diatom Studio Ltd: http://diatom.cc.



[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:P2P Hardware]]