

=Description=

'''1. Jason Kottke:'''

"Slow television is the uninterrupted broadcast of an ordinary event from start to finish. Early efforts included burning Yule logs on TV around Christmas and driver's views of complete British rail journeys (not to mention Andy Warhol and the pitch drop experiment), but Norwegian public television has revived the format in recent years. The first broadcast was of a 7-hour train trip from Bergen to Oslo, which was watched at some point by ~20% of Norway's population. "
(http://kottke.org/14/04/slow-tv)


2. Wikipedia:

"Slow television, or Slow TV, is a term used for a genre of live "marathon" television coverage of an ordinary event in its complete length. Its name is derived both from the long endurance of the broadcast as well as from the natural slow pace of the television program's progress.

The concept is a modernization of artist Andy Warhol's slow movie Sleep from 1963, which showed poet John Giorno sleeping for five hours and twenty minutes. The concept was adapted to local TV broadcast in 1966 by WPIX, to VHS video tape in 1984 by the British company Video125, to satellite TV in 2003 by Bahn TV, and to live TV in 2011 by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation.

The latest evolution of the concept started with the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation's coverage of the, at that time, longest professional rail fan driver's eye view, showing the complete 7-hour train ride along the Bergen Line (Bergensbanen) on 27 November 2009.[1] It was followed by the live coverage of the Hurtigruten ship MS Nordnorge during its 134-hour voyage from Bergen to Kirkenes starting on 16 June 2011.

Both events received extensive attention in both Norwegian and foreign media, and were considered a great success with coverage numbers exceeding all expectations and record ratings for the NRK2 channel."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slow_television)


[[Category:Media]]