
=Description=

"In his recent book The Value of Nothing: How to Reshape Market Society and Redefine Democracy, Raj Patel documents how the Mexican Zapatistas are practising slow politics, using village-wide assemblies and rotating governing councils to draw all community members into decisions about local governance."
(http://www.newstatesman.com/uk-politics/2010/05/government-term-pace-ministers)


=Excerpt=

Raj Patel:

"In the fifteen years since that declaration, they’ve won land — by
some estimates over half a million acres21 — built primary health care
facilities and made schools for the tens of thousands of people in
their “liberated” territory. Their greatest victory, however, has been
to build what has been hailed as a highly successful experiment in
democracy and justice. I came to Chiapas to talk to the representatives
of the Juntas de Buen Gobierno (the Good Government Councils,
or Juntas for short). And when I met them, they were wearing
their signature accessory— ski masks.

Beyond the rather obvious reason that they don’t want to be hunted
by the Mexican government— a fate that seems increasingly likely
with the recent expansion of military forces in Chiapas — there’s another
explanation for the masks. The foundation of Zapatista democracy
is the village, which is usually anywhere between fifteen
and one hundred families. They hold regular assembly meetings
that everyone is allowed to attend, and at which everyone is encouraged
to speak. At the meeting, the village appoints two or sometimes
four responsables, men and women equally represented, who act both
as local authorities and as representatives to a regional municipality
(of about fifteen to one hundred villages). Together these municipalities
select a pool of members from all villages to be on their Junta
de Buen Gobierno — there are five in total, covering all Zapatista controlled
territory. Once selected, the members leave their villages
to serve at the Junta’s headquarters for one week out of every six, for
a term of three years. After that, they’ll never serve again. With constant
rotation, faces change all the time, but the Junta’s function remains
the same.

The room of balaclavas is a sign that indigenous people are engaging
in democracy without its most infectious symptom— elections.
Rather than sitting in individual air- conditioned offices in front of
large portraits of themselves, these demo cratic officials serve their
communities anonymously, with their faces hidden by the masks of
the office they have assumed. The ski masks also serve another political purpose. They are a reminder that when you visit the Junta,
you aren’t there to see a par tic u lar person— you came to see the
people. The masks reveal that the most important face in the room is
yours. There’s still accountability, though— the Juntas sometimes
publish denuncias, open letters denouncing a human- rights violation,
as they did recently when the Mexican army, allegedly looking for
marijuana fields while conducting “the war on drugs,” destroyed the
main collective cornfield in the town of La Garrucha. In these cases,
the Junta members will sign their real names, but when they’re working,
the mask is a mantle of office.

At the entrance to the Zapatista territories, there’s always a sign
that says “Está usted en territorio rebelde zapatista. Aquí manda el
pueblo y el gobierno obedece.” (You are in rebel Zapatista territory.
Here the people lead and the government obeys.) This is in marked
contrast to the famously corrupt Mexican ruling party, the PRI (Institutional
Revolutionary Party, which, despite its name, is structurally
more aligned with the U.S. Republican Party, or the British Conservatives).

As one Junta member explained, “In Mexico, the federal
government tries to buy your vote, the PRI gives out soda to buy
your conscience. Here, we don’t get paid — we do it because we have
been chosen.” They were at pains to stress that they weren’t there by
choice. When they are at the Junta’s headquarters, they need to find
someone to take care of their fields or their children, and yet, without
exception, they said it was important to do.

Conducting an interview with a Junta is unusual. Names, ages,
occupations and personal opinions are off- limits, because they’re irrelevant
(see above). I was asked to present a written list of questions,
they privately pondered their collective response and I was invited
back to hear every member of the Junta take a turn answering. This
takes time. Not for nothing is the name of the five Zapatista Junta
headquarters “Caracol,” snail. I asked one of the Juntas why. “Three
reasons— first, the snail walks slowly but surely; second, our ancestors
blew through a conch shell to call a meeting together; third, the
shape of the shell shows how information goes in and out of the
Caracol, and that’s how we work: by listening and exchanging.”

Those familiar with the Slow Food movement will see some similarity
here. Slow Food’s philosophy rejects the acceleration that capitalism
has brought to food, insisting that food should be produced in
consonance with the environment and with a respect for the labor
that produces it. Not fast food but Slow Food. If you’ve ever tried Slow
Food, you’ll know what a sublime and transformative experience it
can be. Although the Slow Food movement has the reputation of being
a middle- class supper club, its DNA is radical, and has a resonance
with the Zapatistas — it shares the notion that everyone has the right to
participate in, and enjoy, the world around them, and that genuine
democracy takes time. 


What Zapatistas are practicing is slow politics. Visitors and nongovernmental
organizations trying to work with the Zapatistas can get a
little impatient with the process of constant consultation, discussion
and deliberation. It doesn’t feel efficient, and NGOs get frustrated at
being made to wait, but that’s because they’re making a mistake in
valuing time. It’s not as if the Zapatista government isn’t capable of
swift responses. You wouldn’t want deliberative emergency service,
and the Zapatistas have two ambulances and a clinic that provide
prompt and universal coverage. But to decide justice and politics takes
time — you wouldn’t rush a criminal trial, or cut short the presentation
of evidence in order to reach a verdict more swiftly, and it’s the same
with politics. Urgency is quick. Insurgency takes much longer.
It’s a point I heard made rather clearly. “People know that we declared
war fifteen years ago,” one of the masked men offered. “But
what people also know is that the shooting war lasted only twelve
days. Much more important was the political war. It takes time to
build a secondary school— first we had to build all the primary
schools. There’s nothing that happens overnight. It takes time to find
the form.”

And, again, the form isn’t obvious, or even found the first time.
“We didn’t know what we were doing,” said a woman whose eyes
suggested she might be thirty. “We didn’t know if a government run
like ours was even possible. But we’ve shown that it can be.” That
the process works better if people spend more time on it is a finding
only recently discovered by psychologists and behavioral economists.
In one paper, researchers quote Henry Ford’s autobiography, where
he states that “time waste differs from material waste in that there
can be no salvage.” What the economists demonstrate, and what
the Zapatistas know, is that with a correctly structured system, you
can build a great deal of trust between participants by taking time
together.

The Juntas have been so successful in their deliberative democracy
that ordinary non-Zapatista Mexicans seek their advice. The
Zapatistas will receive anyone. Such is their reputation for impartial
deliberation that their governing body is trusted by citizens and state
alike to resolve cases ranging from divorce to grand theft. Local
people prefer the Juntas’ deliberations to the federal court system,
where the case will be decided on the basis of which side was better
able to bribe the officers of the court.23 The justice that the Zapatistas
offer is transformative justice rather than punitive. There is a jail
that is mainly used for drunks, but incarceration is not the solution
for most problems. The kinds of punishments that the Junta recommends
are warnings, duties of care and community service. In one
case involving the theft of over $40,000 from a truck carrying the
salaries of local government employees, the Junta first tracked
down the robbers, forced them to return the money to the government
and then deliberated over their sentences. It was decided that
sending them to jail would only hurt their families, who would have
to work in the fields without the robbers’ labor, so they were sentenced
to 365 days of community service, with half the time allowed
to tend to family fields, and the rest spent on public work. This is, of
course, a million miles away from the prison industry in the United
States, which leads the world in incarceration in the name of “public
safety.”

The Juntas are also involved in commoning, figuring how to
share resources from land that they have reclaimed from large landholders.
Balancing the economic needs of the community and the
ecosystem’s ability to sustain them is a delicate art. One Junta has
restrictions on chopping down healthy trees (and, if it needs to be
done, three are planted in each tree’s stead). Revenues are shared
between communities and the Junta."

[[Category:Mexico]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Governance]]