* Article: The New Way Of The Future: Small, Local, Open And Connected. by Ezio Manzini 

URL = [http://www.lcsi.smu.edu.sg/downloads/SocialSpace2011-The%20New%20Way%20of%20the%20Future%20Small,%20local,%20open%20and%20connected%20-%20Ezio%20Manzini%20.pdf]


=Introduction=

Ezio Manzini:

"There is an urgent need to promote new
economic models, new production systems
and new ideas of well-being. To define and
implement these new models is, of course,
very difficult. But it is not impossible. And we
do not have to start from zero.

Indeed, over the last few decades, a
multiplicity of social “actors” (including institutions,
enterprises, non-profit organisations, as well as individual citizens
and their associations) have proved
themselves capable of acting outside of the
mainstream economic models and, in so
doing, provide benchmarks that might well
provide the answers to the most pressing
concerns and challenges of our time.

What do these ways of living and producing
look like?"


=Excerpts=

Ezio Manzini:

"These three examples of a new kind of relationship between
farmers and citizens and between food and agriculture
are emblematic of a larger wave of social innovation3 that
is taking place around the world. Not only are we seeing a
new way of eating emerging, a new relationship between
production and consumption and between the city and the
countryside is being established.

Elsewhere, we find a collaborative service where elderly
people organise themselves to exchange mutual help
and, at the same time, promote a new idea of welfare.

Neighbourhood gardens are set up and managed by citizens
in a way that improves the quality of the city and its social
fabric; while family groups share services that not only
reduce economic and environmental costs, they also create
new forms of neighbourhoods.

We also see the emergence of other interesting cases: New
forms of social interchange and mutual help (such as the
local exchange trading systems and time banks); systems
of mobility that present alternatives to the use of cars (from
car sharing and car pooling to the (re)discovery of the
urban benefits offered by bicycles); and the development
of productive activities based on local resources and skills
which are linked into wider global networks (such as the
establishment of fairs and direct trade networks between
producers and consumers). The list continues to grow
around the world and reaches out to touch just about every
area of daily life."


==The SLOC Scenario==

"Whilst these cases may be marginal in quantitative terms,
in qualitative terms, they are extremely meaningful. In fact,
they can be regarded as viable experiments in sustainable
ways of living. Of course, they assume different significance
in different societies and places, but their independent
occurrences in such disconnected situations and locations
raise the possibility that they, in fact, constitute a first set
of spontaneously developed sustainable features. In other
words, they are the building materials for developing
sustainable alternatives to the unsustainable ideas of well-
being, production and economy that dominate today.


===Characteristics===

In regard to human well-being, a closer look at these promising
cases reveals another fundamental common characteristic;
each compensates for a decrease in the consumption of
products with an increase in other qualities. The latter relates
to the physical and social environments with the rediscovery
of the common good and healthier relationships with the
community. For the first time in a long time, the individual
and his social capabilities and responsibilities assume a
central role. In other words, the focus shifts from the wider,
amorphous whole to the smaller specifics of a system
designed for the human scale. Such systems, by their nature
must be small, comprehensible and manageable. Once this
is in place, they can then begin to connect with one another
and interact with other similar smaller systems to reconstruct
the whole. I call this complex relation between being small
and open system, [[Cosmopolitan Localism]].

This new relationship between the local and the global—in
which new, local but connected systems of production and
consumption are emerging —can take different specific
forms: The sustainable usage of local resources (from
natural environments and agriculture to craftsmanship and
local knowledge); the realisation of symbiotic production
processes (from zero waste systems to industrial ecology
districts); and the development of distributed systems
(from power generation to manufacturing and to the
whole economy). What unites these diverse phenomena
is that each exemplifies a connected local model in which
knowledge, money and decision-making power can circulate
in worldwide networks, but also in which they remain in the
hands of those who produce them.

...

Thanks to the promising experiences accumulated to date, we
are able to outline a new scenario that lies at the intersection
of three main innovation streams: The green innovation (and
the environmentally friendly systems it makes available); the
spread of networks (and the distributed, open, peer-to-peer
organisations it generates); and the diffusion of creativity
(and the original answers to daily problems that a variety of
social actors are conceiving and implementing). I refer to this
intersection as the SLOC Scenario, where SLOC stands for
small, local, open, connected. These four adjectives neatly
synthesise a socio-technical system—or more accurately, a
distributed production and consumption system—in which
any global system is, in fact, a “network of locals”—that is, a
mesh of connected local systems, the small scale of which
makes them comprehensible and controllable by individuals
and communities.

The SLOC Scenario is useful because it gives a clear
direction of where to look for sustainable solutions, in which
sustainable solutions necessarily refer to the local (and the
community of which this local is a vital part) and to the
small (with all the possibilities of relationships, participation
and democracy that the human scale makes possible). At
the same time, it tells us that to implement solutions, we
have to consider these small entities and their localities in
the framework of the global network society in which the
local and the small are both open and connected. This
change in the nature of the small and local has enormous
implications; with the new networks, it is now possible to
operate on a local and small scale in a very effective way. The
goal—especially in the modern complex and fast-changing
environment—is to transition out of our current crisis in
economy and environment towards a society that is both
knowledge-based and sustainable.

The four keywords so central to SLOC—small, local, open
and connected—are meaningful because they are, at the
same time, visionary, in the sense that they generate a
vision of how society could be. By their very nature, they
are comprehensible and easily understood by everybody,
and they are also viable because they are supported by
major drivers of change such as the complex relationships
between globalisation and localisation, the power of the
Internet and the diffusion of new forms of organisation that
makes it possible.

These four words are also important not just because
they synthesise 20 years of study and case studies, but
also because they clearly indicate that there is no hope for
designing sustainable solutions without starting from the
twin notions of local and of community. Conversely, there
is no hope of implementing sustainable solutions without
considering the greater framework of a globalised network
society."


==The Global Scaling of Small Group Dynamics==

"Today the small can be
influential at the large scale as a node in a global network.
And the local can break its isolation by being open to the
global flow of people, ideas and information. In other words,
today we can say that the small is no longer small and a local
is no longer local, at least in traditional terms.

This change in the nature of the small has enormous
implications, for better and for worse. Perhaps the most
potentially beneficial implication is that the global network
makes it possible to operate on a local and small scale in
very effective ways, because, as we will see, the networked
and flexible systems that emerge provide the only possibility
for operating safely in the complex, fast changing, highly
risky contemporary environment.


==The Global Scope of the Local==

"Similar considerations apply to the notion of the local and
to the related notion of place. In the last few decades, there
have been long and important debates about how the
globalised flow of goods is bringing about the end of places
and localities,6 and it is indeed important to recognise how
the flow of goods creates a crisis for traditional places and
promotes the spread of homogenised “non-places”. But
these observations do not capture the entire complexity of
the new reality where a growing number of people are actively
searching for local traditions and for new forms of locality
rooted in the modern context of global interconnectivity.
Given the new meanings that the terms “small” and “local”
are assuming in the network society, it is useful and important
to consider their implications on the architecture of the
emerging socio-technical systems: The distributed system
architecture."


=More Information=

# [[Sustainable Everyday Project]] http://www.sustainable-everyday.net and DESIS, http://www.desis-network.org ; SEP, http://www.sustainable-everyday.net.
#E.F Schumacher, Small is Beautiful, Economics as if People Mattered (London: Blond and Briggs, 1973).
#Francois Jegou and Ezio Manzini, [[Collaborative Services]]: Social innovation and design for sustainability, (Milano: Polidesign,
2008).


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]











=Examples=

==Ainonghui, Farmers’ association, Liuzhou, Guangxi ([[China]])==

"In 2005, in Liuzhou, Guangxi (China), a group of citizens
found that they could not access good, safe food in the
ordinary markets. They went to some villages, about a
two hour drive from the city, and found that traditional
agriculture models, though struggling, still survived in
the remote countryside. With the intention of helping
the poor farmers and developing a stable channel of
good, organic food, they found a social enterprise,
Ainonghui.

Today, this farmers’ association manages four organic
restaurants and a community organic food store. By
selling traditionally sourced food to the citizens, they also
educate them on what traditional/organic agriculture is
and (re)introduces a sustainable lifestyle into the city.
Thanks to Ainonghui and the direct links it has created
between citizens and farmers, the incomes of farmers
are now better able to sustain traditional farming while
allowing them to lead a better and respected life. What’s
more, several farmers have returned to the countryside
to join in the organic food network."


==Little Donkey Farm, Beijing, China==

"Started in 2008, Little Donkey Farm is China’s first
community-supported agricultural model. Located
in a suburb of Beijing, about two hours drive from
the city centre, the farm has, to date, 200 members
who share the farm activities and 400 members who
subscribe to a weekly home delivery of a box of farm
produce. Already, the farm is the hub of an innovative
food network in Beijing with increasing numbers of eco-
friendly and organic farms joining.

The ultimate goal is to turn Little Donkey Farm into a
platform for selling farm produce while promoting a
sustainable, organic lifestyle. Different events, including
countryside fairs and farmers’ markets are held on
the farm, while lectures and training programmes are
organised to further diffuse the message of organic
agriculture technology."


==Hansalim, South Korea==

"Launched in 1986, Hansalim is a Korean food
cooperative. As of August 2010, it boasts 2,302,000
consumers and 2000 producers from 19 different
regions in South Korea. 2009 sales amounted to €100
million.

Hansalim (Korean for “save all living things”), aims to
preserve the ecosystem while rebuilding communities
where producers and consumers are connected. In
an effort to support sustainable agriculture, 76% of
the sales goes to producers and the balance is ear-
marked as the cooperative’s operating costs. Hansalim
runs an e-commerce platform where all the products
of the cooperative can be ordered and delivered to
consumers."



[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:South Korea]]

[[Category:China]]

[[Category:Cosmo-Local Production]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Localization]]