
=Description=

Seth Mullendore:

"{Little batteries replacing big power plants is more than just a theory in California. Southern California Edison selected a portfolio of energy storage projects as an alternative to a 262-megawatt gas peaker plant that the utility had originally chosen to meet local resource needs. Opposition by local and state environmental justice groups forced the utility to reconsider its support for another power plant in the already environmentally overburdened community of Oxnard, California. The portfolio of alternatives does include a big battery – a 100-megawatt system – but it also includes 14 megawatts of aggregated small systems from the home storage company Swell Energy.
Some utilities are promoting small systems to reduce their costs. Vermont utility Green Mountain Power (GMP) has implemented several battery storage programs for its customers. Through their latest offering, the Resilient Home program, GMP customers can get a Tesla Powerwall for $15 per month, or two Powerwalls – enough to support the entire home in a grid outage – for $30 per month. According to GMP president and CEO Mary Powell, the utility has a vision of placing “a battery system in every single home.” A grant from the Vermont Low Income Trust for Electricity is even paying for 100 batteries to be installed in low-income households that are dependent on electricity for medical needs. GMP already has more than 1,000 home battery systems in place across its network. Last year, the utility saved over $750,000 by tapping into those systems and a large battery installation to reduce peak electricity demand. Similar battery programs are in place in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, and have been proposed in Connecticut."
(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/small-solar-battery-storage-systems-toppling-power-seth-mullendore/)

[[Category:Energy]]