
=Discussion=

For background, see: [[Structural Archetypes for Group Organization]]

==Ultra-brief summary of the Small Group Method==

MFLB:

"That Consensus process
is used for all intra-group decision making 
*and* to setup the basis for executive process decision making. 

That Executive process is used for all extra-group decision making. 

That Democratic process is used as a check on, and spontaneous  transition from, 
executive process back to consensus process."
(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


==Detailed Description of Small Group Method:==

"Consensus process decision making is used for:.

      - 1; selecting/electing the individual who will act as the 
      facilitator and/or chair of the consensus process itself. 

      - 2; defining or redefining the membership, internal structure, 
      named intent, values, objectives, dreams and aspirations, etc, 
      of the group. 

      - 3; selecting/electing the individual who will act as a focus of 
      responsibility and authority for a specific group external range 
      of action. 

Consensus methods are always used to define all decisions 
in relation to the being of the group itself, the basis 
of choice for its actions, and the focus of responsibility 
and authority to implement those actions. 

Consensus methods are never used for decisions specific to 
implementing an external action of the group, nor are they used 
for suspending or withdrawing authority/responsibility from a 
previously selected focus.  Consensus process methods also 
cannot be used to moderate the process of consensus itself. 

Executive process (meritocratic) decision making is used for:. 

      - 1; the implementation of a specific group external action. 

      - 2; how to best enable the consensus decision making 
      process during a group meeting. 

Executive process methods are always used to define all 
decisions in relation to the action, the doing of the 
group itself.  Executive process, as mediated by a consensus 
selected focus person acting in accordance with consensus 
process resolved intents, is used to implement selected group 
activities externally and to facilitate the consensus process internally. 

Executive process is never used to make any decision relating 
to the being of the group. 

Democratic process, which is based on a spontaneous majority 
vote of those present in any majority gathering of the group, 
is used to make only two kinds of decisions:. 

      - 1; whether to immediately suspend the currently pending 
      executive process (i.e., to indefinitely suspend the authority 
      of the currently acting focus person) and return directly to 
      a consensus decision making process; this has the effect of 
      transitioning the group from 'doing' back to 'being'. 

      - 2; whether to immediately suspend the currently pending 
      consensus decision making process, with respect to a particular 
      stalled decision, and elect a different consensus facilitator. 

Democratic process is used as a check on both the consensus 
process and the executive process of the group and is used 
for no other purpose.  Voting decisions are of exactly two 
kinds: 1) whether to have a vote, and 2) whether to dismiss 
the currently selected focus person.  Both of these decisions 
are yes/no (boolean).  Whenever a majority requests a vote, 
a vote is held.  A vote can be requested by a gathered majority 
of the group at any time.  A majority result on a vote can be 
used to immediately revoke the executive process authority 
of a previously selected focus person or consensus facilitator, 
(allowing for a new consensus facilitator to be elected by 
consensus, if needed)."

(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


==Notes on the group action/identity distinction==

"Insofar as the method of sustainable small group formation
described above is characterized on a being/doing distinction 
(the identity of the group as contrasted with the action of 
the group), it is important to be able to clarify which 
group decisions (interaction events) are to be classified 
as belonging to which category (intra-group or extra-group 
interactions).  The clarity of this resolution is essential 
as it defines which choices are within the scope of the 
consensus decision making process and which decisions are 
within the scope of the executive decision making process. 

The basis for the distinction is found in the notion of 
observability.  If the effects and consequences of a decision 
are concretely visible to people who are not members of the 
group, then the decision/choice is regarded as external and 
part of the action of the group (extra-group interactions). 
Otherwise, by default, all remaining decisions are considered 
to be internal (intra-group interactions). 

Implicit in this description is the assumption that all 
group internal processes (the internal communications of 
the group used to establish and consummate consensus process) 
are maintained in a manner NOT visible to non-members.  The 
reason for this apparent secrecy associated with consensus 
process is associated with the need for the group identity 
to be internally (rather than externally) defined.  External 
agencies with visibility to the group internal process would 
likely attempt to use this information to influence the 
internal dynamics of the group.  Such influence would allow 
non-members to functionally act as if possessing the privileges 
of group membership, this weakening the significance of 
membership, and thus the identity, of the group itself. 
Insofar as the notion of membership is always, inherently, 
and explicitly defined as isomorphic with the being of the 
group, it is always an internal decision and should not 
visible to group outsiders (even by indirection and inference). 
As such, all communications associated with group consensus 
process are considered to be private to the membership of 
the group itself."
(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


==Structural integration into larger group forms==

"As outlined above, the hybrid dynamic of group organizational
process using combined consensus, executive, and democratic 
decision making methods is only directly applicable to small 
groups.  The reason for this limitation is twofold. 

1) Insofar  as consensus decision making implies and usually requires full 
communication between all members of a group, and where the 
number of inter-member messages rises geometrically in proportion 
to the number of members, the communicative bandwidth required 
of each member can quickly rise beyond the carrying capacity of 
that individual.  

2) Where executive process requires an explicitly 
defined focus and range, the selection of that focus and its 
degree of asymmetry must be commensurate with the grain size 
of the group (ie, exactly one member).  Where the level of 
focus asymmetry is too high, the demand stress on the selected 
individual can exceed the available capabilities of that 
person and/or require the formation of subgroup counsels; the 
added complexity of which does not translate very efficiently 
when considering the democratic process override on executive 
process. 

Given these constraints, the hybrid process can only validly 
be applied directly to groups in the range of 6 to 30 members 
(extreme limits) with groups of 10 to 16 members being 
considered optimal.  However, larger organizations can be 
composed of smaller ones by re-identifying the small group 
itself as a member cell in a larger meta-group similarly 
organized and constituted in aggregate as with each small 
group.  This process can be continued for any number of 
levels of scale so as to be able to form coherent 
organizations of any number of individuals operating in 
aggregate.  This composition method defines a specifically 
bottom-up topology for larger groups (grassroots organizations). 

Insofar as the interactions between groups in forming 
a composition meta-group are effectively external to the 
groups themselves, the action of intergroup communications 
within the context of the meta-group need to be mediated via 
executive process.  This has the implication that the 
individual cell groups must be internally healthy enough 
so as to select one of their internal members to act as a 
liaison in communications with other groups on behalf of 
the local membership.  This in effect constitutes a form 
of local group representation, where the representative is 
effectively immediately answerable to the represented cell 
group by democratic override and consensus process. 

Also, insofar as the communicative bandwidth limits identified 
above will apply to the representative individual, it is 
important that some composition constraints be observed: 

      - 1; The number of component cell groups in any meta-group 
      must not exceed the communicative capacity limits of a 
      representative individual, and therefore, each meta-level 
      can consist of at most 20 or so component groups.  It is 
      preferred that different focus representatives be elected 
      for each compositional level so as to not exceed the 
      capabilities of any specific group member (Note; this is 
      particularly relevant where meta-groups are themselves 
      combined into meta-meta-groups). 

      - 2; The membership decision of a cell group within a meta-group, 
      insofar as it is an aspect of the being/identity of both the 
      cell group and the meta-group, must be made by positive consensus 
      at both group levels.  The choice of the cell group to belong to 
      a meta-group, as determined by the cell group, is not the decision 
      of the elected representative, but is the result of an achieved 
      cell group consensus.  From the perspective of the meta-group, 
      the membership of the cell group is defined by the consensus 
      of all of the participating cell groups as mediated through 
      their elected representatives.  Only where both conditions hold 
      is cell membership in the meta-group established. 

Finally, it is noted that in the same manner that a single 
individual can be a member of multiple groups (although this is 
not necessary nor desirable), so also can specific cell groups 
have membership in multiple meta-groups.  In this manner networks 
of interchange can be created for arbitrarily complex structures. 
This has the distinct advantage that while the specific structure 
is everywhere clear, there is no concentration of organizational 
complexity (or points of failure) at any particular locus within 
the overall system."
(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)

[[Category:Peergovernance]]