'''= SMERA, SME Rating Agency of India Limited'''

URL = http://smera.in

=Description=

Hans Schuhmacher: 

"SME Rating Agency of India Limited (SMERA) is a
joint initiative by SIDBI (Small Industries
Development Bank of India), Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services India Private Limited (D&B)
and several leading banks in the country. SMERA
is the country's first rating agency that focusses
primarily on the Indian SME segment. SMERA's
primary objective is to provide ratings that are
comprehensive, transparent and reliable. The
ratings facilitate greater and easier flow of credit
from the banking sector to SMEs.

SMERA's ratings are based on comparisons of
SMEs, financial as well as non-financial aspects
are taken into account. Parameters are dynamic
and updated regularly. The costs of a first-time
rating for a small company amount to 120 EUR,
significantly bigger companies pay 190 EUR.
Businesses that are not members of the official
small entrepreneurs agency NSIC have to pay
three times these amounts. Meanwhile. SMERA
collaborates with 28 leading banks and financial
institutions.

SMERA also conducts ratings of MFIs that are
based on their financial and social performance. In
October 2008, SMERA's CEO advised Indian
SMEs to realise that economic sustainability is the
order of the day and recommended investments in
sustainable technologies."


=Source=

* Climate Justice as Business Case: Innovative Business Models for the Transfers of Climate-Friendly Technologies. By Hans Schuhmacher, with support from Julio Lambing et al. European Business Council for Sustainable Energy. Preliminary English version. 06 December 2009 [http://www.e5.org]


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Ecology]]