'''= SMart (.be, .eu, etc ..) is a new type of labor mutual for freelance workers, based on a mutualization and pooling of resources, which started in Belgium and is expanding to other European countries''' [http://smart-eu.org/about/]

URL = http://smart-eu.org/ [http://smartbe.be/]


=Description=

"SMart was set up as a non-profit organisation in 1998 in Belgium (BUT IS NOW A COOPERATIVE). Its founders were convinced that solutions could be designed that would allow creative professionals to work on their projects without being overwhelmed by administrative burdens and the worry of unpredictable cash-flow. Social innovation, to support and change the creative sector, is at the heart of this initiative and its three cornerstone values.

* Non-profit: Advocating social economy: Our model is based on solidarity and pooling of means.

* Need-based: Providing solutions that fit needs expressed: We offer services based on need and stay affordable.

* Democracy: Encouraging solidarity, mobility and involvement: Our users are our stakeholders and governors."


'''2. Kevin Stark:'''

"SMart is a social enterprise founded in 1998 in Belgium. The project's aim is to simplify the careers of freelancers in cities across Europe where SMart operates. These days, there are many freelancer services — cooperatives, coworking spaces, unions — but at the time of its inception, SMart officials were focused on one subsection of this workforce: artists. "That's how we started," says Lieza Dessein, a project and community manager for SMart. "What we realize is that a lot of artists have the same kind of issues when they are working. For example, a band would make up a contract. The band would actually pay the musicians with that single contract. And they had very irregular revenues."

Dessein said the original idea was to take all the bookkeeping and other administrative tasks off of the artist. "The solution that they came up with was, OK we will just make up a company,” she said. “So instead of every artist needing to develop its own legal entity to be able to work, we will just share a company with the artists."

Today, setting-up a coworking platform is not uncommon, but at the time it was a bold idea. Over the years, SMart expanded to provide services for many other types of freelancers, and changed with the evolving nature of work."
(https://www.shareable.net/blog/how-the-european-social-enterprise-smart-is-creating-a-safety-net-for-freelancers)


'''3. Michel Bauwens'''

SMart belongs to the legal category of [[Business and Employment Cooperatives]], also called "labour mutuals". Freelancers pay a percentage of their income (2%) into a mutual guarantee fund, that allows the mutual to pay invoices within a week, after which it then carries out the payment procedures with the clients for a standard 'factoring' fee. This more regular income then allows freelancers to pay themselves their own salary, and after reaching tresholds, to become a official employee of the organization, while retaining their full autonomy. This allows a non-subordinate form of labor, but also allows freelancers to get the benefits that go with the status of being employed. SMart's leadership also promotes a cooperative and mutualist values agenda. In 2016, they moved to the legal status of a European Cooperative, which started operating in ten EU countries, and they were likely to reach 100,000 members by the end of 2016.

At the P2P Foundation we consider labour mutuals of the type of SMart to be a crucial bridge between the precarious statutes of independent workers and the protections of the social state available for the 'salariat', i.e the waged workers."


'''4. Pat Conaty et al.:'''

"The Belgian SMart (Société Mutuelle d’Artistes) has produced a system that is
essentially the same as the CAEs, with the individual being an “employee” of SMart,
but without any guaranteed wage. By doing so they pay the Belgian equivalent of
PAYE and NI, thus allowing their members to obtain the benefits usually reserved
for employees (such as for example access to unemployment benefit) and as in the
CAEs, SMart handles the invoicing, salary deductions and tax payments for them.
Since 2001, SMart has guaranteed payment for all work invoiced through the
system, underwritten by mutual funds built up within the organisation. Members
are paid within seven days, and don’t have to worry about defaulters.
                                                            

SMart also provides members with professional liability, accident at work, and
mobility insurances, which comes as part of the package. One contract through the
system per year is enough to ensure coverage by SMart’s insurance all year.
SMart is not subsidised in any way, and so charges a levy of 6.5 per cent of the
invoiced fee to cover the cost of all its services including the insurance and payment
guarantee. This, plus workspace rental, is the organisation’s only income, and is
sufficient to break even and also put some funds into reserves and future growth."
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Trade_Union_and_Cooperative_Strategies_for_Organising_Precarious_Workers)


'''5. Working Together report:'''

"According to Working Together, the report, commissioned by Co-operatives UK and The Co-operative College, and supported by the Network for Social Change, Wales Co-operative Centre and the Institute for Solidarity Economics, identifies ‘co-operative solutions’ as well as partnerships with trade unions as a way of ensuring a fair deal for workers in an expanding gig economy.

It calls for the UK to replicate the ‘umbrella co-operative model’ for supporting freelancers and other precarious workers and points to Belgium-based SMart. The non-profit organisation enables precarious workers operating in the freelance sector to obtain a range of welfare benefits – including unemployment benefit.

SMart also provides its 70,000 plus members with tax support and advice. Sarah de Heusch Ribassin, Project Officer for the Development Strategy Unit at Smart, said: “Many of those who were self-employed found the legislation around taxes to be so complex and were afraid to do things wrong.
“SMart offered an alternative that meant they no longer had to worry about making errors that would affect their income.”
(https://www.uk.coop/sites/default/files/uploads/attachments/working-together_final_web-version.pdf)


=How SMart Works=

By Alex Bird


:

"SMart	has	produced	a	system	to	give the	precarious,	intermittent	workers	who	
manage	their	own	career	paths	in	direct	contact	with	customers	or	outsourcers,	
access	to	the	salaried	legal	status.	It offers workers	the	opportunity	to	build	or	
preserve	their	social	rights	by	allowing	them	to	obtain	the	benefits	usually	reserved	
for	employees (such	as	for	example	access to	unemployment	benefit ).

==THE	CONTRACT==

The	Contract is	the	oldest	of	the	online	tools	SMart	has	developed	to	enable	
individual	members	to	manage	their	businesses.	It	does	this	by	the	simple	
mechanism	of	converting	their	own	self-motivated,	self-controlled earnings	into	a	
salary.	By	doing this	it	allows	the	individual	to	operate	what	is	in	effect	his	or	her
own	cost	centre	within	a	larger	co-op	accounts	system.	They	have	online	access	to	
their	own	space	in	the	system,	within	which	they	post	their	contracts,	and	send	out	
order	forms.	These are	converted	into invoices	that	are	sent	out	in	he	name	of SMart	
on	their	behalf,	and	SMart	chases	and	collects	the	payment.	This	is	then	converted
to	a	payment	to	them	via	the	equivalent	of	a	PAYE	employment	system.	They	are	
salaried,	but	not	employed in	the	normal	sense.	They	have	a	sort	of	“zero	hours	
contract”	but	they	control	their	hours	and	therefore,	what	they	get	paid.

The	member	can	also	chose	to	smooth	their	“salary”	over	the	year	based	on	
anticipated	income,	so	that	they	get	paid	a	set	amount	each	month,	making	their	
personal	financial	affairs	easier	to	manage.	This	is	an	idea	first	used	by	the	
Coopératives	d’Activités	et	d’Emploi	in	France,	with	which	SMart	has	strong	links.
Since	2001,	SMart	has	guaranteed	payment	for	all	work	invoiced	through	the	
system,	underwritten	by	mutual	funds	built	up	within	the	organisation.	Thus,
members	are	paid	within	7	days,	and don’t	have	to	worry	about	defaulters.

This	has	not	been	without	its	difficulties.	SMart	recruited	many	hundreds	of	“Take	
Eat Easy”	cycle	couriers.	SMart	were	involved	in	negotiations	with	the	company,	and	
helped	secure	an	agreement	to	pay	the	couriers	per	shift,	rather	than	per	delivery,	
just	as	“Deliveroo”	do.		However,	in	July	2016	“Take	Eat Easy”	went	into	bankruptcy,	
partly as	a	result	of	competition	from	Deliveroo,	and	SMart’s	guarantee	fund	lost	out	
to	the	tune	of	€340,000.	This	was	a	financial	shock	to	SMart,	but	one	that	it	is able	to	
weather,	having	built	adequate	reserves	over	time.

SMart	also	provides	members with	professional	liability, accident	at	work,	and	
mobility insurances,	which comes	as	part	of	the	package.	One	contract	through	the	
system per	year	is	enough	to	ensure	coverage	by	SMart’s	insurance	all	year.
SMart	charges	a	levy of	6.5%	fee	to	cover	cost	of	services	and	development	of
mutualised	services in	Belgium,	(although this	varies	between	6.5%	and	8.5%	
depending	on	which country the	member	operates in).

The	Production	Associes  tool	was	introduced	on	January	1st 2015 to	replace	the	
original	software	that	operates	the	Contract.	This	is	a	new		“3	in	1"	online	tool	to	
charge	for	work	for a	client.	Every	member	has	access	online	24/7	to	a	personal	
space	to	run	his	or	her	affairs.


One	data	entry	by	the	member	generates	the	official	order	(which	must	be	co-signed	
by	the	member	and	their	client)	the	contract	established	between	the	worker	and	
other	associates	and,	the	invoice	for	the	work	done.


With	this	new	tool	the	member	can:-

• Send	invoices to	customers	via	pre-formatted	contracts	based	on	estimates,	
partnership	working,	development	agreements,	etc.
• Pay	funds	into	the	activity	budget	from	diverse	funding	sources
• Pay	for production	costs	related	to	the	implementation	of	the	activity
• Recover	VAT on	the	purchase	invoices	issued	in	the	name	of	SMart
• Exercise	their rights	as	an	employee	(temporary	or	permanent)	or	as	an	
author and	thus	benefit	from	better	social	protection	


SMart	also	offers	an	online Budgetary	Tool that	helps	the	member	to	manage	
projects	effectively by:-

• Costing	purchases	and	expenses
• Calculating	cash	flows
• Identifying	material	costs
• Calculating	labour	requirements	(personnel	and	hours)
• Identifying	technical	and	regulatory	requirements	such	as	Intellectual	and	
property	rights,	grant	conditions,	etc.


==The 'Activities' Management Module==

Activities are	mini-structures	to	administer	and	bill	collective	projects,	whilst	
maintaining employee	status for	all	the	workers	involved.

The	Activities management	tool	allows	members to	manage	a	budget	dedicated	to	
their	project without	having	to	create	a	company,	society	or	association.	They	do	this	
within	SMart,	which	provides	all	the	services	they	need.

This	system	allows	them	to	finance	contracts	of	employment	for	other	staff	
members,	to	pay	business	expenses	or	to	pay	duties	and	taxes.	It	is	adapted	to	the	
needs	of	workers,	who,	whilst	essentially	acting	as	self-employed,	work collectively	
with	others	in	a	non-hierarchical	way.	

It	allows	working	with	a	group	of associates,	the	repayment	of	a	wide	range	of	
professional	fees,	the	receipt	and	management	of	public	subsidies,	and	billing for	
copyright	fees,	any	other	costs, or	the	sale	of	works	of	art.
The	share	of	Smart’s	business	taken	by	the	SMart	Activities model	has	grown	
steadily.	For	the	first	time	in	2014,	the	amounts	charged	for	Activities exceeded	
those	for Contracts.	This	change,	which	is	even	more	evident	in	2015,	shows	that	
SMart	is	becoming	increasingly	a	shared	enterprise,	in	which	the	members	are	likely	
to	develop	all	of	their	professionals	projects	through	the	Activities model.


• Exercise	their rights	as	an	employee	(temporary	or	permanent)	or	as	an	
author and	thus	benefit	from	better	social	protection	
SMart	also	offers	an	online Budgetary	Tool that	helps	the	member	to	manage	
projects	effectively by:-
• Costing	purchases	and	expenses
• Calculating	cash	flows
• Identifying	material	costs
• Calculating	labour	requirements	(personnel	and	hours)
• Identifying	technical	and	regulatory	requirements	such	as	Intellectual	and	
property	rights,	grant	conditions,	etc.

==SHARED	WORKSPACES==

Since	its	inception,	SMart	has	had	the	will	to	help	creatives professionalise.	For	a	
number	of	years	now	it	also	rents out	shared	workspace.	Its	first	premises	at	Rue	
Emile	Féron in	the	Saint	Gilles district	of	Brussels	have	expanded	by	acquisition	of	
adjoining	properties	over	the	years including	the	Brussels	Art	Factory.


Other	centres	have	been	opened across	Belgium at:-

• LaVallée	(Molenbeek)
• Le	centre	de	Création	des	Tanneurs	(Liège)
• L'ancienne	Brasserie	Haecht	(Liège)
• Espaces	Mutualisés	Vivegnis	(Liège)
• Centre	de	Création	des	Belneux	(Mons)


These	are	a	mixture	of	freehold	and	leasehold	properties,	but	all	are	let	to	artists	and	 creative	on	similar,	all-inclusive terms."


Source: SMart.Be A	Co-operative	for	the	Self-Employed. One	of	a	series	of	case	studies	by
Alex	Bird, May 2017; More info via www.alex-bird.com

=Governance=

Sergio Giorgi:

"Formally speaking entities in Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, Spain, Austria are all cooperatives registered under the national cooperative Law. The youngest one is SMart … in Belgium! SMartBe is legally a cooperative since 2016: it was originally established as a not-for profit organization in 1998.

In Hungary, Sweden, and The Netherlands SMart partners have all endorsed core values and principles of social economy (no profit, no distribution of dividends, participative governance avoiding absolute majority by any a single stakeholder) and formally registered under different legal forms (limited company, not-for-profit, foundation respectively in the aforementioned countries).

We really expect all successful SMart entities to converge towards the adoption of a cooperative status, and users to become members and take a stake in strategic decisions; we believe that the cooperative is the status that matches our governance and social enterprise model at best."
(email, August 2017)

(http://smart-eu.org/about/)


=History=

==The creation, history and evolution of SMart into a cooperative labour mutual==

Summarizing from Sandrino Graceffa:

SMart was started as a non-profit in the 90s, called "Les Passions Unies", offering administrative services to artists. It became a membership organization in 1998, with 50 members. Today it has 80 staff members in Belgium alone. It added legal defense and advocacy as its core activity. It was an active partner in the creation of a new law for artists in 2002, accepting project-based work ('a la commande'), but within the salary condition.

''Cette assimilation de l’artiste au salarié en dehors de tout lien de subordination amènera SMart a développé un rôle de tiers-payant, entre le prestataire et son donneur d’ordre.” (p. 97)''

In 200?, after a general assembly vote, it set up a mutual guarantee fund, allowing it to guarantee payment within 7 days.

This has extended SMart's field of membership beyond cultural workers. Since 2004, it has extended its job mgt services to 'enterprise management' ('le cycle de l'entreprise'). This 'Activity' structure has now surpassed that of 'Contracts'. In 2015, it introduced an experiment to allow permanent salaries for a undetermined time (CDI contracts). SMart also noted in 2015, that 10% of the invoices by its Belgian membership consisted of international engagements, stimulating the creation of branches abroad (France and Sweden first). This led to its transformation as an alliance of European cooperatives, which means members are now also co-owners. SMart Belgium , the last to legally join in January 2017, went through a cultural process, 'SMart in Progress', to achieve this cultural change.

Source:  Refaire le monde du travail. Une alternative à l'Uberisation de l'Économie. Par Sandrino Graceffa. SMart, (see [[Re-Inventing Work Through Collective Enterprises for Autonomous Workers]] for a summary of the whole booklet)

=Interview=

Kevin Stark interviews Lieza Dessein:


"Dessein spoke with us about the evolution of the project.

'''* Kevin Stark, Shareable: I'm a freelancer in Chicago, and to my knowledge, we don't have an organization that is as comprehensive as SMart. If I were moving to Brussels, how would you pitch me on the program?''' 

Lieza Dessein, SMart EU: We are a shared company. It's quite important for us. We have over 90,000 members here in Belgium alone. And active members on a yearly basis, we are around 20,000. Active members are members who log in between one and three times a year. All of that together in 2016, they billed to our company in Belgium 136 million euros. We're operating in nine European countries.

The development of the project in European countries is quite different from country to country. They're not all that far developed as Belgium. Belgium is the mother house. For 20 years, we’ve had a full range of services. Our business model is a patient one. We grow steadily and smoothly and build up the community inside each country. We make sure that everything we are doing is under a legal frame that exists in that country, and we need also to adapt it to the culture in each country and in the communities. I would say, we haven't changed all that much but we have shifted with the realization that the work environment has changed.

I love the lifestyle associated with freelancing and the freedom to work on a wide range of projects. The only rub for me is the stability and the lack of community. What's different about SMart?  

We have a whole range of services, and the most important one is that people who work with us to guarantee that they will be paid in seven days after the end of a contract — even if the client hasn't paid yet. We have a mutualized salary guarantee fund, and we take care of the debt collection for the freelancers as well. We share the company with our freelancers. We become the employer of all our freelancers and take on the responsibility linked to the employer status. The reason why we decided to become the employer of the freelancers is that for the moment it's very difficult for freelancers to access social protection and the best social protection you can get is linked to the employment contract. And, if we manage to put everybody on the employment contract they have easier access to social protection as well.


'''* How has the project evolved over time?'''

Smart means Societe Mutuelle pour ARTistes (mutualized company for artists). It was a company that aimed to take over the administrative burden linked to artistic entrepreneurship. Little by little we developed a tool that could cover a wider range of professions and we opened up to all freelancers. It's an evolution that little by little you realize that you have a tool that can serve a whole new community that you weren't planning to serve. There was this shift to make in the mind. We were saying, "Is it actually possible?" Because it's a little bit frightening to say. I'm focused on musician, artist people in the theater. And it's like you can have a grasp of that reality, and suddenly you get people working in the care service — everything that's related to massage, yoga. We have I.T. consultants, and you get all those different professions. For the advisors, it could be overwhelming. We really rationalized: What are the needs of that community as a whole? What are the needs? They are the same as the freelancers. Along with shifting our mindset, we also strengthened our team with advisors coming from a wide range of different professions to make sure we have people who have a good grasp on particular professions.


'''* What were some of those needs?'''

Our members have an irregular income, multiple clients, being an employee and then becoming an employer, develop different skills and jobs. We have a very fractured job environment where they will work a lot during the year and then not always in the summer. If you really take the whole community and say what are the needs? Instead of focusing on the differences — they need this, and they need that. At one point to say, where are the similarities? If you look at not from the perspective of differences but on a perspective of similarities. We needed to open up our services. Because freelancers — and artists — are evolving in complex legal issues, are confronted to a lot of administration and the risks involved in individual entrepreneurship are high.


'''* SMart was evolving with the changing nature of work?'''

The workforce is more and more scattered and individualized. And you have all those individual entrepreneurs and the old school way of doing things is to say: I'm an individual entrepreneur,so I will set up my own legal entity. I will go for my own little office somewhere lost in city.

If you scale that model you can see that you are facing very isolated society where every individual is on their own and facing the same kind of difficulties. How do I set-up a company? How do I make myself known? How do I meet fellow people that are working in the same field? How do I find clients? Suddenly if we say, let us take over the administration, and then if you need training we have training sessions. And for the moment we are also investing in work spaces. We are really looking into different ways of bringing back [collectivism] among that scattered workforce. How do you reinvent solidarity amongst individual entrepreneurs? How do you make people create a community that eases their entrepreneurship? How do we reinvent the social protection for all workers?"

(https://www.shareable.net/blog/how-the-european-social-enterprise-smart-is-creating-a-safety-net-for-freelancers)


=More information=

* Book: Refaire le monde du travail. Une alternative à l'Uberisation de l'Économie. Par Sandrino Graceffa. SMart, 

see [[Re-Inventing Work Through Collective Enterprises for Autonomous Workers]] for a summary of the whole booklet

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Belgium]]
[[Category:Europe]]