
=Description=

Summary with the assistance of ChatGPT:

"Social Systems Labs contributions to the open-source ecosystem.

At Social Systems Lab, we’re dedicated to crafting open-source solutions that foster community-driven innovation. Our work focuses on building tools that empower individuals and groups to collaborate, govern, and create impact collectively. We believe that technology should serve as a means to strengthen social bonds, foster inclusivity, and democratize access to resources. Our contributions to the open-source ecosystem are rooted in these principles, ensuring that our projects are accessible, adaptable, and responsive to the needs of communities around the world.

Our first project, VIBE, is a self-sovereign identity app that places control back into the hands of users.With VIBE, individuals manage their own information, relationships, and access rights, ensuring that data is shared on a peer-to-peer basis rather than controlled by third parties. This approach not only protects users from data misuse but also empowers them to build identity and trust on their own terms.

Our second project, Circles, is a pro-social networking platform designed to support community governance and collaboration. It features tools for democratic decision-making, integrated video conferencing, and more, all aimed at empowering communities to create impact on their own terms.

Our third project, the Altruistic Wallet wallet, is designed to be the economic engine for the open-source ecosystem. It addresses a longstanding challenge: how to sustain and grow open-source projects. Through the Altruistic Wallet wallet, financial benefits from software, hardware, and community contributions are distributed in a decentralized and democratic manner. This approach ensures that resources are continuously reinvested into the ecosystem, fostering ongoing development and growth. By empowering the community to decide where funds are allocated, we create a financial system that supports and evolves the open-source world, ensuring that it remains vibrant and sustainable.

Together, these projects create a self-reinforcing loop of empowerment, collaboration, and growth, driving a vibrant and sustainable open-source future."

(Provided by Kim Chapple, February 2025)


[[Category:Free Software]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Research]]