
= concept for a new [[Computing Regime]] proposed by David Hakken


=Description=

David Hakken:

"many of computing's problems derive from
failing to make CISs socially robust enough. That is, they don’t
endure because of inadequate or improper attention to the social in
one or more elements of the melange of design, implementation,
and/or maintenance. This research suggests that greatly
increasing their social robustness could mean significant
improvement in how they work.

In our view, the failure to make computer-based information
systems more socially robust and therefore more enduring is not a
matter of oversight. Rather, it is connected to important aspects
of how computing, in both disciplinary and “in practice” aspects,
has come to be socially constructed. An almost exclusive focus
on technical virtuosity, for example, has obscured the need for
social virtuosity.

Given this professional history, computer-based information
systems (CISs) will not become socially robust merely by
recognizing that they are not and wishing them to become so;

- discussion of some recent forms of
computing, notably Free/Libre and/or Open Source Software
development projects, “Web 2.0” practices, and Participatory
Design: We content that it is not enough, as systems in these
forms do, to alternate some social with the predominantly
technical moments. Even these quasi-socially robust forms of
computing, while suggestive, remain insufficiently robust socially
for reasons ultimately very similar to those hampering other CISs.

basic approaches to CISs need to be reconstructed if they
are to become socially robust enough. To illustrate how this
might be done, we present a conception of computing in which the
social and the technical are effectively intercalated. This
conception provides a vision powerful enough to base sufficiently
socially robust computing. We draw on the Science, Technology,
and Society literature to conceptualize a possible future
relationship between social and the technical moments in these
disciplines, that of “intercalation” [1]. In a state of intercalation,
the various moments that make up a profession operate in mutual
respect but often at some distance from each other. We argue
that, as it would create enough conceptual space for more
enduring information systems, intercalation of the social and the
technical is the most plausible and yet still worthwhile condition
for the computing disciplines to aim at"
(iSchool poster proposal, 2010)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]