

=Discussion=

Excerpted from Dmytri Kleiner:

"Social struggles are not won by clandestinity and intrigue, but by mass 
struggle. The major social victories of history, the civil rights movement, 
the labour movement, the feminist movement, and many others, had the effect 
they had because of mass support and the mass mobilization of supporters, 
not because of heroic secret missions conducted by clandestine 
revolutionaries.

This myth of the adventurist, intriguing, even ruthless revolutionary is 
very powerful, Chernyshevsky, Nechayev, Bakunin, Edlridge Cleaver, Lenin 
and many other seminal revolutionaries believed strongly in this view, yet 
despite the inspirational role these people played, the degree to which 
they accomplished what they set out to is quite limited. Lenin and the 
Bolsheviks could be a counter example, since everything from secret 
identities to armed robberies colour their history, it was not until their 
path united with the popular movements against Russian participation in 
WWI, among other causes of unrest, that they ultimately prevailed.

Clandestine operations imply a kind of vanguardism that acts on behalf of 
the masses without their knowledge and consent. The actual role of secret 
operations are necessarily limited to acts of sabotage, symbolic 
“propaganda by deed,” or perhaps actual criminal activity used to finance 
capacity building in the movement. While these sorts of acts may be at 
times justifiable and even necessary, they can not play primary roles as 
they do not ultimately directly contribute to mass organization, and most 
activists, myself included, will not be participating in such activities. 
In most cases, such activities will hurt the movement, or at least be 
counter-productive.

Technologies designed to help build mass movements do not need to focus on 
privacy or cryptography, as the messages must be open and public, movements 
are powerful exactly because they take a public stand. A secret 
demonstration is not a demonstration of social power, it can only be 
perhaps an act of annoyance to the rulers, not a threat to them, it can, at 
best, be source of inspiration for the masses, but never anything more.

In terms of the safety of activists, of course each case can be different, 
and in particular cases I have no doubt that privacy or anonymity may have 
helped keep an activist safe. However, to me the very act of standing 
against rulers is inherently dangerous and the belief that they need to 
know the truth to hurt you is false. All they need is an identity, the rest 
they can plant or fabricate out of whole cloth. Identify must be know if a 
movement is to be a mass movement, and the leaders of such movements must 
proudly stand among the masses. Thus, safety born of secrecy is most likely 
illusory."
(http://www.dmytri.info/secrecy-mass-uprising-fluidnexus-and-stammtisch/)

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Politics]]