

=Text=

Read: Social Media and Social Revolutions: what is their relationship? By Michel Bauwens

URL = http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/social-media-and-social-revolutions-what-is-their-relationship/2011/02/02


=Discussion=


==Zeynep Tufekci==
 
"A debate has been raging on the role social media — especially Facebook and
Twitter— played in the apparently successful uprising in Tunisia. Most of the
discussion seems to be centered around the use of the term “Twitter Revolution.”

People will be using social media tools as an integral part of politics during
those times that politics takes to the frontstage like uprisings and elections.
Evgeny Morozov’s argument is that these tools are not the best suited for
promoting democracy, especially in authoritarian regimes, because they also
strengthen the surveillance, propaganda and censorship. As I argued in many
places, however, they also strengthen capacity for political action through
multiple means:

'''1- Social media lower barriers to collective action''' by providing
channels of organization that are intermeshed with mundane social interaction
and thus are harder to censor.


'''2- Social media can help create a public(ish) sphere in authoritarian regimes''', thereby lowering the problem of society-level prisoner’s dilemma in which everyone knows that many people are unhappy but the extent to which this is the case remains hidden as official media is completely censored.


'''3- Social media helps strengthen communities as it is the antidote to isolating technologie'''s (like suburbs and like televison) and community strength is key to political action.


'''4- Social media seems to have been key allowing the expatriate and exiled community to mobilize and act as key links between rest of the Arab sphere as well as Francophone parts of Europe and ultimately the rest of the world'''


'''5- Social media can be a key tool for disseminating information during a crisis.'''

As we saw in the case of Iran, Burma, Moldova, Tunisia and others, the world had
a strong sense of what was happening not because there were many reporters on
the ground covering the events but because thousands of citizens armed with
basic cell phones could record and transmit in real-time the situation on the
ground. Yes, such reports are inevitably chaotic, and yes, the ability to
disseminate information is not a sufficient cause for success, but it is surely
a necessary one.


In that sense, I respect Jillian’s sensitivity to any wording that seems to take
the credit away from the accomplishment of the Tunisian people that came at a
great human cost. However, as a material cause, as a key part of the media and
information substrate in which the events took place, it seems clear to me that
social media was crucial. About 20 percent of Tunisians have Facebook accounts
which remained uncensored throughout the crisis.
I find it hard to believe that the ability to disseminate news, videos, tidbits,
information, links, outside messages that easily, transparently and without
censorship reached one in five persons (and thus their immediate social
networks) within a country that otherwise suffered from heavy censorship was
without a significant impact.

To say that social-media was a key part of the revolution does not necessarily
mean that people used GPS-enabled phones to coordinate demonstrations; that is
simplistic and misses the point in which social media shapes the environment in
general. What it means is that the people acted in a world where they had more
means of expressing themselves to each other and the world, being more assured
that their plight would not be buried by the deep pit of censorship, and a
little more confidence that their extended families, their neighbors, their
fellow citizens were similarly fed up."
(http://technosociology.org/?p=263)



In another blog entry, Zeynep examines the internet's potential from the regime's
point of view, i.e. the 'dictator's dilemma':

"1- The capacities of the Internet that are most threatening to authoritarian
regimes are not necessarily those pertaining to spreading of censored
information but rather its ability to support the formation of a counter-public
that is outside the control of the state. In other words, it is not that people
are waiting for that key piece of information to start their revolt – and that
information just happens to be behind the wall of censorship–but that they are
isolated, unsure of the power of the regime, unsure of their position and
potential.


2- Dissent is not just about knowing what you think but about the formation of a
public. A public is not just about what you know. Publics form through knowing
that other people know what you know–and also knowing that they know what you
know. (This point was developed through a Twitter discussion with Dave Parry).
Yes, all those parts of the Web that are ridiculed by some of the critics of
Internet’s potential–the LOLcats, Facebook, the three million baby pictures, the
slapstick, talking about the weather, the food and the trials and tribulations
of life–are exactly the backbone of community, and ultimately the creation of
public(s).


3- Thus, social media can be the most threatening part of the Internet to an
authoritarian regime through its capacity to create a public(ish) sphere that is
integrated into everyday life of millions of people and is outside the direct
control of the state partly because it is so widespread and partly because it is
not solely focused on politics. How do you censor five million Facebook accounts
in real time except to shut them all down?


4- The capacity to selectively filter the Internet is inversely proportional to
the scale and strength of the dissent. In other words, regimes which employ
widespread legitimacy may be able to continue to selectively filter the
Internet. However, this is going to break down as dissent and unhappiness
spreads. As anyone who has been to a country with selective filtering knows,
most everyone (who is motivated enough) knows how to get around the censors. For
example, in Turkey, YouTube occasionally gets blocked because of material that
some courts have deemed as offensive to Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founding
father of Turkey. I have yet to meet anyone in Turkey who did not know how to
get to YouTube through proxies.


5- Thus, the effect of selective filtering is not to keep out information out of
the hands of a determined public, but to allow the majority of ordinary people
to continue to be able to operate without confronting information that might
create cognitive dissonance between their existing support for the regime and
the fact that they, along with many others, also have issues. Meanwhile, the
elites go about business as if there was no censorship as they all know how to
use work-arounds. This creates a safety-valve as it is quite likely that it is
portions of the elite groups that would be most hindered by the censorship and
most unhappy with it. (In fact, I have not seen any evidence that China is
trying to actively and strongly shut down the work-arounds.)


6- Social media is not going to create dissent where there is none. The apparent
strength of the regime in China should not be understood solely through its
success in censorship. (And this is the kind of Net-centrism Morozov warns
against but that I think he sometimes falls into himself). China has undergone
one of the most amazing transformations in human history. Whatever else you may
say about the brutality of the regime, there is a reason for its continuing
legitimacy in the eyes of most of its people. I believe that the Chinese people
are no less interested in freedom and autonomy than any other people on the
planet but I can also understand why they have, for the most part, appear to
have support for the status-quo even as they continue to have further
aspirations and desires.


7- Finally, during times of strong upheaval, as in Egypt, dictator’s dilemma
roars. The ability to ensure that their struggle and their efforts are not
buried in a deep pit of censorship, the ability to continue to have an honest
conversation, the ability to know that others know what one knows all combine to
create a cycle furthering dissent and upheaval. Citizen-journalism matters most
in these scenarios as there cannot be reporters everywhere something is
happening; however, wherever something is happening there are people with cell
phone cameras. Combined with Al-Jazeera re-broadcasting the fruits of
people-powered journalism, it all comes down to how much force the authoritarian
state is willing and able to deploy – which in turn, depends on the willingness
of the security apparatus. Here, too, social media matters because, like
everyone else, they too are watching the footage on Al-Jazeera. Their choice is
made more stark by the fact that they know that history will judge them by their
actions–actions which will likely be recorded, broadcast and be viewed by their
citizens, their neighbors and their children and grandchildren."
(http://technosociology.org/?p=286)


==Mathew Ingram==

 
"Is anyone really arguing that Twitter and Facebook caused the revolutions in
Tunisia or Egypt, or even the earlier public uprisings in Moldova or Iran for
that matter? Maybe cyber-utopians somewhere are doing this, but I haven’t seen
or heard of any. Theargument I have tried to make is simply that they and other
social media tools can be incredibly powerful, both for spreading the word —
which can give moral or emotional support to others in a country, as well as
generating external support — as well as for organizational purposes, thanks to
the power of the network. As Jared Cohen of Google Ideas put it, social media
may not be a cause, but it can be a powerful “accelerant.”Did Twitter or
Facebook cause the Tunisian revolt? No. But they did spread the news, and many
Tunisian revolutionaries gave them a lot of credit for helping with the process.


Did Twitter cause the revolts in Egypt? No. But they did help activists such as
WikiLeaks supporter Jacob Appelbaum (known on Twitter as @ioerror) and others as
they organized the dialup and satellite phone connections that created an ad-hoc
Internet after Egypt turned the real one off — which, of course, it did in large
part to try and prevent demonstrators from using Internet-based tools to foment
unrest. As Cory Doctorow notedin his review of Evgeny Morozov’s book, even if
Twitter and Facebook are just used to replace the process of stapling pieces of
paper to telephone poles and sending out hundreds of emails, they are still a
huge benefit to social activism of all kinds.

But open-network advocate Dave Winer made the key point: it’s the Internet that
is the really powerful tool here, not any of the specific services such as
Twitter and Facebook that run on top of it, which Winer compares to brands like
NBC. They have power because lots of people use them, and — in the case of
Twitter — because they have open protocols so that apps can still access the
network even when the company’s website is taken down by repressive governments
(athough they didn’t mention Egypt or Tunisia by name, Twitter co-founder Biz
Stone and general counsel Alexander Macgillivray wrote a post about the
company’s desire to “keep the information flowing).

In the end, the real weapon is the power of networked communication itself. In
previous revolutions it was the fax, or the pamphlet, or the cellphone — now it
is SMS and Twitter and Facebook. Obviously none of these things cause
revolutions, but to ignore or downplay their growing importance is also a
mistake."
(http://gigaom.com/2011/01/29/twitter-facebook-egypt-tunisia/)



[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Articles]]