
* Report: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung 2012: Social Growth – Model of a Progressive Economic Policy 

URL = http://www.fes.de/cgi-bin/gbv.cgi?id=08836&ty=pdf

=Description=

"The window of opportunity for replacing the market fundamentalist model is already closing fast. However, there is still a chance to transform the debate by means of a new, progressive economic policy model. The concept of »Social Growth« is the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung’s (FES) proposal for this progressive economic policy model. The aim is to develop a growth model that combines prosperity for all with sustainability and justice. Its primary target is Germany, but it is also intended to apply to Europe and globally. »Social Growth« should be based on the following ten-point programme:

   1. Guarantee a stable supply of credit with effective financial market regulation.
   2. Use education policy to boost the forces of growth and expand opportunities for all.
   3. Open up new areas of growth with industrial policy.
   4. Strengthen the position of employees by means of minimum wages and co-determination.
   5. Fund public tasks properly and fairly by reforming tax policy.
   6. Stabilise the economy and the debt situation by means of an anti-cyclical fiscal policy.
   7. Strengthen forces for growth in Europe by means of a robust public financial architecture.
   8. Provide more stability in the Eurozone by means of economic policy coordination.
   9. Ensure Decent Work for all by means of European and global standards.
  10. Manage Globalisation by means of a new economic and monetary Order.

The recommendations can be found in detail in the study."


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Policy]]