
=Description=

""To demonstrate constructive social libertarian project, Kharkiv AST organization has produced a short description of the libertarian principles of social transformation (libertarian revolutionary program):

1) Networking government - a method of constructing a form of direct democracy and social order in which all questions of social life are solved by autonomous (independent) social institutions (municipalities, councils, trade unions, labor groups, meetings, local residents, communities, cooperatives, etc.) without creating a permanent representative bodies (parliament, government and other public authorities). Decisions relating to a large number of people taken at the Congress / Council of Delegates selected different groups of people based on the imperative mandate (strictly limited powers to delegate, beyond which he can not go, the ability to recall / replacement delegate at any time, and maintaining close contact with the delegate team that minimizes the possibility of abuse devolution). Congresses / tips can be held at the level of the team, region, country and the planet.

2) Cooperation - production method based on the individual members of the economic work units and eliminating wage slavery. The aim of cooperation is to improve the welfare of members of cooperatives and economic development in general, and not the creation of capitalist profit. Cooperative farm is based on a uniform distribution among all participants of the cooperative powers of labor participation and performance. Cooperative farming is a form of self-defense at the same time workers and prototype of a new libertarian society, which will replace capitalism.

3) Free Agreement (contract method) - regulation of social relations based on a voluntary and mutual coordination of interests, bypassing centralized legal regulations. To regulate the relations, the norms set by their actual perpetrators. Free agreement excludes the possibility of abuse of the bodies and persons excluded from direct execution (parliament, courts, executive agencies, etc.), and most fully in the interests of direct participants in social relations.

4) Consensus - way of making decisions through general agreement without objection in principle. Consensus is used as an alternative to voting based on subordination of the minority to the majority, the spirit of rivalry and alienation of a significant part of society so adopted decisions. Agreement is achieved through compromise and mutual concessions." 
(http://avtonomia.net/2014/01/26/rezolyutsiya-ast-har-kov-prichiny-narodnogo-vosstaniya-libertarnaya-programma-sotsial-ny-h-preobrazovanij/)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Politics]]