
=Description=

"Social participation refers to collective
activities that individuals may be
involved in as part of their everyday
lives. This might include: being a
member of a community group, a
tenants’ association or a trade union;
supporting the local hospice by
volunteering; and running a study
group on behalf of a faith
organisation. Others have variously
called this kind of social
engagement ‘associational life’,
collective action, or civil, horizontal
or community participation."
(http://pathwaysthroughparticipation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/Pathways-literature-review-final-version.pdf)


=Typology=

"In the UK, what we have called social
participation – the associations people
form between and for themselves –
has its roots in a number of broad
traditions:

• Informal self-help and solidarity, such
as the informal reciprocity and
sharing of neighbourly help;

• Mutual aid, including more organised
associations providing help to
members such as craft guilds, trade
unions, credit unions and friendly
societies; and

• Philanthropy and voluntary service, to
improve lives of people deemed ‘less
fortunate’ (Gilchrist, 2004)."

Associational activities are grouped according to:

• types of organisations and distinct
interests (e.g. motoring, trade
unions or professions);
• organisations or activities
bringing people together in
sports and leisure;
• causes (such as environmental
and social welfare);
• culture (such as the arts, music
and hobbies); and,
• social, women’s, ethnic and
residents’ organisations.

Associational activities are further distinguished as being:

• (passive) membership in
organisations; and,
• (active) participation in the running
of an organisation and volunteering.
Also included under associational
activities are the following:
• participation in informal networks
(e.g. book reading groups;
pub quiz teams; child care
groups); and,
• personal support networks
beyond the family (e.g. shopping
for neighbours; volunteering
with meals on wheels; visiting
old people; and involvement
in self-help groups).
(http://pathwaysthroughparticipation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/Pathways-literature-review-final-version.pdf)


=Discussion=

"This social side of participation
is generally understood as the
participation that takes place through
associations in civil society – ‘the arena
of uncoerced collective action around
shared interests, purposes and values’
(London School of Economics, 2004)
or ‘the space for activity not
undertaken by either the state or the
market’ (CarnegieUK Trust, 2007: 9).
Participation in associational life is
generally seen as being positive. A
diverse, independent and vibrant civil
society is considered an important
counter-check to the operations of the
state and the market (de Tocqueville,
2000). It fosters ties and shared norms
between people, or ‘social capital’
(Putnam, 2000), which many claim has
a range of positive outcomes on
communities and individuals (Portes,
1998; Ockenden, 2007). It can develop
people’s confidence and sense of selfdetermination
(Bandura, 1997), and lastly but importantly, humans enjoy
being connected – it is a major
determinant of well-being (Parker, 2007).

The normative element of participation
(i.e. participation as a ‘good thing’)
comes out strongly in the literature
(Field, 2003; Cornwall, 2008).

However, there are a number of
dangers or caveats to this (Field,
2003). Alongside fostering cohesion
and social capital, participation can be
exclusionary and divisive (Putnam,
2000; Field, 2003). Not all participation
can be seen as contributing to what
might broadly be viewed as the ‘social
good’. As Carothers (2000: 20)
observes, ‘recognising that people
in any society associate and work
together to advance nefarious as
well as worthy ends is critical to
demystifying the concept of civil
society’. Examples might include
violent direct action movements
(Doherty et al., 2003) or extreme
rightwing and neo-Nazi activism (Linden and Klandermans, 2007)."
(http://pathwaysthroughparticipation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/Pathways-literature-review-final-version.pdf)


=More Information=

See also: [[Public Participation]]


[[Category:Participation]]