
'''= methodology for territorial planning an social procurement, in French: 'Territoire Socialement Responsable'.'''

URL = http://www.revesnetwork.eu/tsr.php


=Description=

"The concept of TSR originates from the works carried out by REVES, European Network of Cities and Regions for Social Economy.

Since its creation, in 1996, REVES has been working at local level on the development of participative democracy and cooperation against a competitive vision of the territory. Its fight for social inclusion, cohesion and quality of life as well as for a more responsible approach for social enterprises brought REVES to the definition of "territorial social responsibility" TSR.

From 2002 onwards, REVES has developed a methodology for local democracy that conjugates the operational logics of representative systems with the need for community participation, aiming to promote and support processes of changing. These efforts led to the present publication.

REVES involves local authorities and social economy enterprises in research and conception of new methods for local planning, the development of local welfare systems based on good governance, participation and, in particular, building up the sense of a widened social responsibility.

TSR is a methodology for local planning that integrates social, economic, cultural and environmental dimensions. It is based on a process of participatory governance, which aims for improvement of quality for a whole community on a given territory, through greater social cohesion, sustainable development, economic efficiency and wider democracy.

The stakeholders of TSR are local authorities, social economy and other enterprises, civil society and citizens, implicated in an interacting system."
(http://www.revesnetwork.eu/tsr.php)

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]