
'''* Article: SOCIAL AND INTRASOCIAL TOOLS FOR ESTABLISHING A GLOBAL COMMONS. By JOSEPH DILLARD. Integral World,'''

URL = http://www.integralworld.net/dillard27.html

==Description==

"John Heron, a facilitator and trainer in co-operative enquiry and an early contributor to Integral World, presents in "Notes on Spiritual Leadership and Relational Spirituality", an interesting discussion of the problematic nature of spiritual relationships and what can be done to improve them. This essay builds on Heron's foundation by discussing the importance of generating an interior, intrasocial democracy in order to strengthen, on a personal level, fundamental characteristics of respect, reciprocity, trustworthiness, and empathy, in order to support the development of a collective commons."

==Excerpt==

Joseph Dillard:

"“What is the appropriate role of the self?” Following Heron, we might say that creative self-leadership over our lives and destinies occurs when we launch and empower co-operative collectives of intrapsychic roles and intrasocial emerging potentials. This is not so much a matter of charisma as of having a suitable methodology and using it. Once we have established both types of collectives, we become increasingly transparent, interpreting experience less and allowing these collectives to interpret, run the show, and diversify both roles and interpretations freely. This enhances the flourishing of autonomy and co-operation both intrapsychically and intrasocially, within mesocosmic collectives, and in relationship to the sacred."

===From the Conclusion===

Joseph Dillard:

"This essay has attempted to build on Heron's emphasis on LR mutual co-enquiry as a fundamental strategy for building a collective commons which is itself necessary to stop and reverse the exploitation of people, resources, and the planet. It presents the argument that the development of an interior, intrasocial and microcosmic democracy will strengthen balance and creativity in individual members of collectives, increasing the likelihood of mutual understanding, cooperation, and success. For an example of a methodology that generates such an approach it refers to Integral Deep Listening, a methodology developed by the author." 

==More information==

... is available at [https://www.integraldeeplistening.com/ Integral deeplistening] and [https://www.dreamyoga.com dreamyoga]. 

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]