

=Directory=

"“Social kitchens” or “soup kitchens” were formed as a response to the current economic situation. 
They are informal social structures organised by groups of citizens aiming to offer food to 
immigrants, homeless, unemployed and poor. The volunteers that run the social kitchens are 
responsible for cooking, serving and collecting the food either from restaurants or citizens that 
want to contribute with donations. 

• El Chef (http://www.elchef.gr/): The social kitchen El Chef 
was created by a group of citizens in Athens in 2007. Initially 
it was focused on migrants and now offers food to Greeks 
who live on the breadline. It is not a charity and it does not 
treat people who have been affected by the crisis as
unfortunate and hungry. Its goal is to cultivate solidarity and to inspire and shape other 
forms of social reality as a response to the current crisis. 

• The other Human (http://oallosanthropos.blogspot.gr/):
"The Other Human" was conceived when a group of 
citizens noticed that people of various ages, nationalities, 
and social levels were rummaging through rubbish at
public food markets to find food they otherwise couldn't 
afford to buy. The first obvious response was to cook their 
own food from home and distribute it in public market 
places. Later on they decided to cook on site for people 
and to eat the cooked food together. This way they could all come together trying to break 
through any feeling of shame or embarrassment. "The Other Human" is an act of solidarity 
with fellow Greeks. These actions are not philanthropic or charity. Their motto is that “We 
cook "live", we eat together and we live together. It is a lunch with our fellowman on the 
street”. 

• Xanadu (http://xanadu.espivblogs.net/): A citizens group focusing on the development of 
social relationships based on principles such as equality, collective and individual 
responsibility, and solidarity. Activities include social kitchen, self-education, workshops, 
festivals etc. 

• Helping.gr (http://www.helping.gr/active.aspx): A website providing information on free 
food spots within the country. 


(source: [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece]])

=More Information=

* [[Informal Citizen Networks in Greece]]

[[Category:Greece]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]