'''* Book: The [[Sociology of Revolution]]. Pitirim Sorokin.'''

URL = 

=Summary= 

by Richard Simpson:

"The Sociology of Revolution (1925) is strongly
colored by Sorokin's revolutionary experiences.

He explains revolution, not in terms of historical or
socio-economic movements as commonly conceived
by writers on revolution, but as a destruction of the
precarious balance between reason and disorganized antisocial instincts, with uncontrolled impulses
coming to the fore. Since revolution results from
the victory of man's upset biological drives over
civilized reason, violent revolution is a disaster.

Sorokin does not attempt to explain why unreason
overcomes reason at certain times but not at
others; his analysis is essentially psychological
rather than sociological or historical. This book
bears the imprint of Freud, Pavlov, Pareto, and
others who stress the non-rational aspects of
behavior. A behavioristic influence is manifested
continually; Sorokin speaks of reflexes of property,
the stimulus to obedience, the reactions to authority. His main purpose is to chart the course of
internal events in typical revolutions. Every
revolution, he says, follows a cycle of license,
reaction, repression, and new equilibrium. The
belief seems implicit that no revolution really
alters the state of affairs materially; the French
Revolution, for example, is treated not as a
triumph of democracy or of the bourgeoisie but
simply as a temporary outburst of animalism
like every other revolution."

(https://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-36d7-41d4-0000-000064b51e55/simpson_sorokin.pdf)


=More information=

* "'''Man and Society in Calamity (1942)''' is a study in
pathological human behavior. It extends the
findings of The Sociology of Revolution into new
areas of social life. In the four major varieties of
social calamities-famine, pestilence, war, and
revolution-there occurs a "polarization" of types
of action. Most people become bestial and degraded, sinking so low in famine as to eat their
own children, while a few people are ennobled and
made altruistic by the crisis."

(https://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-36d7-41d4-0000-000064b51e55/simpson_sorokin.pdf)


[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]