
=Description=

By the editors of the podcast series: F ucking Cancelled:

(interview by Rhyd Wildermuth)


"'''Jay LeSoleil'''

The nexus is a term we came up with as a placeholder, and then we ran with it. We needed a way to describe the thing that we were critiquing. It’s this collection of ideas, of practices, and it doesn't name itself. The closest it gets to naming itself is “social justice culture.” It's the woke world, social justice land, the politics of the progressive queer left. It's this mixture, or more a coming together, a nexus, of three main phenomena: identitarianism, cancel culture, and social media. At the point where these things meet, where they influence each other, where they come together, you find the nexus, and it has replaced a socialist left in North America, the rest of the Anglosphere, and increasingly the world.


'''Clementine Morrigan'''

It functions a lot more like a fundamentalist religion than politics. For politics and ideology, you are allowed to at least disagree. Leftists have always been fighting each other, different types of socialists mad about this and disagreeing about that, but they are constantly writing and explaining up why they don't agree with each other. In the nexus, social justice culture presents itself as fundamental truth you are not allowed to disagree with.

That’s one of the main rules within the nexus: you aren't allowed to disagree with it.

Also, disagreeing with it in is framed as harm, as a type of violence. If you express any disagreement, even when not positioning yourself as the ultimate truth but merely expressing principled disagreement grounded in a history of leftist thought, it doesn't matter. If you are disagreeing with any of the main ideas of the nexus, you will be framed as a bigot, as somebody actively causing harm, as someone who cannot possibly be on the left.

It's like really become an article of faith: people they don't even necessarily know why they think what they think, they just know that it's the “correct” thing to think if you want to be a moral and good person. In that way, it's a lot more like a religion than a politics, because people don't actually know why they think what they think. They're just articulating faith... "

(https://rhyd.substack.com/p/the-realign-episode-08-clementine?)


=More information=

* Video via https://rhyd.substack.com/p/the-realign-episode-08-clementine?

[[Category:Identity Politics]]