
'''= Social franchising is the application of commercial franchising concepts to achieve socially beneficial ends, rather than profit'''


=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"In the first sense, it refers to a contractual relationship wherein an independent coordinating organization (usually a non-governmental organization, but occasionally a governmental body or private company) offers individual independent operators the ability join into a franchise network for the provision of selected services over a specified area in accordance with an overall blueprint devised by the franchisor. Once joining the network, operators are given the right to employ previously tested incentives including: professional training, use of brands or brand advertisements, subsidized or proprietary supplies and equipment, support services, and access to professional advice. Members also gain beneficial spin-off effects such as increased consumer volume and improved reputation due to brand affiliation. Franchisees must adhere to a range of requirements including: providing socially beneficial services, meeting quality and pricing standards, undergoing mandatory education on provision of services, subjecting outlets to quality assurance mechanisms, reporting service and sales statistics, and occasionally, paying fixed or profit-share fees. Social franchises have been used for primary health services, pharmaceutical sales of essential drugs, HIV testing and counseling, and reproductive health services in the developing world.

A second application of social franchising is as a means of enabling social enterprises and the social economy to create more employment for disadvantaged people and achieve social aims. This is done principally by enabling joint working and knowledge sharing and transfer. The European Social Franchising Network has identified over 60 social franchises of this type in Europe, which employ over 13,000 people and more recently in 2012 The International Centre for Social Franchising identified 140. The largest of these is De Kringwinkel in Flanders employing 5,000 people. Others, like the Le Mat hotel and tourism social franchise or the School for Social Entrepreneurs operate in more than one country. Social franchising provides an opportunity to rapidly grow the sector to the benefit of disadvantaged people and society more generally."
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_franchising)


=More information=

* see also: [[Solidarity Franchising]]

* Manuals and how-to's recommended by Michael Lewis:

"Here are some basic resources on franchising of social enterprise type models. 

1.  This is a Canadian introduction. It provides a good overview and has a few case studies. It includes a social replication readiness test, which may be useful.

https://ccednet-rcdec.ca/sites/ccednet-rcdec.ca/files/from_social_enterprise_to_social_franchise_-_an_introductory_guide_to_achieving_scale_through_replication.pdf 


2.  This second one covers some of the same ground but a bit more detailed. It was developed by the Van City Community Foundation  

https://www.vancitycommunityfoundation.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/FOSE_PreRpt_2016-02-11%281%29.pdf


3.  This is the UK 10 step manual.  Quite detailed.

https://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/Handlers/Download.ashx?IDMF=eac7b04d-7dfb-4516-9fc7-542713a6ff0f

[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Open Company Formats]]