
=Example=

==MacAfee==

Nilofer Merchant:

"Customer service outside the perimeter. Typically an in-house cost center, service is usually viewed as a necessary evil and constantly targeted for “efficiency.” Over time, notable service firms built outsourcing capacity in India, Malaysia, Singapore and elsewhere to allow any firm to have a global service workforce at low cost. Sometimes lost in that process was the expertise that previously came from experienced in-house employees.

McAfee did something transformative to their service exchange by using social. McAfee formed a strong bond of commitment with the hundreds of unpaid technical experts in the larger marketplace who know (and like) McAfee’s platform of solutions. They invited these “McAfee Maniacs” to participate in much of McAfee’s web-based technical support. The most prolific Maniacs posted responses numbering in the thousands.

These experts participate for a number of reasons: keeping their skills current, building a body of work for their own IT support business, and some for altruistic reasons. McAfee’s competitors were spending between 3-7% of their overall SG&A expenses on service; McAfee’s became virtually zero, directly boosting the dollars they could contribute to R&D and other innovation efforts.

And did McAfee or its customers lose something in this change? Hardly. Indeed, McAfee gained a first line of defense of loyal, committed experts cooperating in the viability of the platform. Customer satisfaction didn’t decline. There is probably no better defense shield than passionate market experts co-opted with a company — and for free."
(http://nilofermerchant.com/2012/02/23/social-means-freedom-for-better-or-worse/)


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]