
=Discussion=

==The State of SRI, 2012==

By Woody Tasch ([[Slow Money]]):

'To look at some of the growth statistics
provided by the Social Investment Forum, you
would conclude that SRI is making substantial
inroads into the capital markets. From
1995 to 2005, assets under management
using one or more of the three core socially
responsible investment strategies, screening,
shareholder advocacy, and community
investing rose from $639 billion to $2.29 trillion.
During that same period, the number of
socially screened mutual funds rose from 55,
with assets of $12 billion, to 201, with assets
of $179 billion.

Despite the dramatic increase in the number
of socially screened mutual funds, however, the
overall increase in the SRI assets is far less
impressive when viewed against the increases
that occurred in total investment assets
under the processional management in the
United States from 1995 to 2005- from $7
trillion to $24.4 trillion. Even if one considers
SRI’s percentage of total assets, roughly
10 percent, to be impressive, and even if one
takes at face value a recent study by Mercer
Consulting indicating that three-quarters of
all money managers think that social investing
will pervade the financial sector within
a decade, the imperfections inherent in SRI
cannot by ignored.

Critics of SRI point out that its pursuit
of competitive returns leads inevitably to
watered-down screens resulting in the fact
that some 90 percent of the Fortune 500
companies make it into an SRI portfolio. For
instances, a fast-food company or an oil company
or a mining company may be deemed
“best of class” for some of their corporate governance
practices, but this does not address
the basic problem that Paul Hawken identifies:
“If you are going the wrong way, it doesn’t
matter how you get there.”

The core issue that the SRI industry
is not confronting is the macro problem of
economic growth, which manifests itself at
the micro level of individual portfolios and
individual investments as the problem of competitive
returns. Professional managers are
measured on their financial performance,
and it is no different for those who incorporate
social and environmental criteria. The
result: elaborate strategic machinations and
metrics designed to demonstrate that you
can “do well while doing good,” which in
other parlance might be called “having your
cake and eating it too.”

“The industry has hooked people on the
idea,” Hawken wrote in a controversial 2004
critique, “that SRI funds should do as well as
or better than other mutual funds, and then
they have to demonstrate it, which leads to
portfolio creep- the dumbing down of criteria
and the blurring of distinctions between what
is or is not a socially responsible company.”

To fully consider the social and environmental
responsibility of a company, qualitative
distinctions and exogenous factors must
be considered with respect to its business. Is
a company promoting conspicuous consumption?

Is it furthering a global brand at the
expense of local enterprise? Is it directly or
indirectly exacerbating rural-urban migration?
Is it benefiting from the utilization of
natural resources at an unsustainable rate? Is
it reducing cultural and biological diversity?
(http://catalystsdr.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Catalyst_Issue10_031412_WEB.pdf)


==Alternatives for SRI: Designing for a [[Restorative Economy]]==

Woody Tasch:

"What is needed is a new form of financial
mediation- intermediation whose ultimate
goal is to empower investors, entrepreneurs,
and farmers as agents of restoration and preservation
in their local communities.

It will require experimentation with portfolio
design: For instance, can the risks of investing
in small food enterprises be mitigated by
investing in farmland? What about sustainably
managed timberland in the region? What
are by traditional investment criteria disparate
sectors become elements of an integral
strategy for investing, or, what Paul Muller
calls “reinvesting”- in fertility and health.

We are turning a compost pile. 


The following design questions are emerging:

• Can we design ways for regional investors
to invest in regional food enterprises?
Could there even be Slow Money Bonds,
similar to municipal bonds, but investing
in local food systems?

• Can portfolios of SFEs deliver positive
rates of return to investors? Is public or
private subsidy required?

• What is the difference between “local”
and “regional”?

• If Denmark has a single CSA that is as
large as all of those in the United States
combined, what does this say about the
entrepreneurial opportunities to connect
U.S. farmers and U.S. consumers?

It falls to us to undertake a new project
of system design: the creation of new forms
of intermediation that can catalyze the transition
from a commerce of extraction and
consumption to a commerce of preservation
and restoration.

Within and beyond the world of food,
there is an increasingly robust wave of entrepreneurial
activity around such principles
and concerns. Hundreds of mission-driven
early-stage companies every year seek capital
through the Investors’ Circle (www.investorscircle.
net). Scores of cities are organizing
chapters of the Business Alliance for Local,
Living Economies (www.balle.org); BALLE
is incubating the concept of local stock
exchanges. B Lab is incubating legal guidelines
for B corporations and formulating an
entrepreneurial strategy for accelerating the
growth of a B sector (www.Bcorporation.net).
The Fourth Sector Network is exploring the
development of “for-benefit” organizational
forms and governance structures."
(http://catalystsdr.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Catalyst_Issue10_031412_WEB.pdf)


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]