'''The following blog entry in Centrality Journal about the evolution of Social Software, distinguishes three periods, culminating in Software 3.0, in which social software is becoming goal-oriented.'''

URL = http://www.centralityjournal.com/archives/david_hornik_on_social_networks_30.html

"Social Networks 1.0 were built during the late 1990s to enable the initial set of consumer services that created such excitement about the promise of the web. Services like eGroups/OneList, ICQ, Evite and many many more relied upon groups of users organizing and communicating on the web through coordinated networks. Those networks were not explicitly described as such but they were the underpinnings of these communications platforms.

Social Networks 2.0 began in the early 2000s when entrepreneurs got to thinking about the nature of their online networks and the power that could come of making those networks explicit. Services like Friendster, Tribe, Orkut, LinkedIn, Spoke emerged to allow users to organize their recreational and business networks. The focus of those services as they were first built was to enable the creation, growth and management of an explicit social network. In other words, '''the consumer experience of Social Networks 2.0 was around the creation and discovery of the network itself, rather than a particular use of that network.'''

I believe that we are now in Social Networks 3.0. After a fair bit of excitement and energy around pure play social networks, it became clear that the building and management of a social network was not, in and of itself, a compelling consumer experience. In a nod back to the earliest instantiations of social networking, entrepreneurs have come to realize that social networks are enablers of other compelling consumer experiences. Thus, social networks are becoming an important ingredient of all sorts of consumer experiences. Social networks inform the conversations that take place among friends on LiveJournal. Social networks enable the discovery of new music on MySpace. Social networks enhance the multi-player gaming experience at Xfire. Social networks now empower recruiting on LinkedIn. And '''dozens of new social networks are emerging to enable specific, valuable consumer experiences that are enhanced by the underpinnings of the network."''' 

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]