
'''* Social Rights Are Human Rights. BUT THE UK SYSTEM IS RIGGED. by Professor Paul Hunt. Centre for Welfare Reform, 2018'''

URL = https://www.centreforwelfarereform.org/uploads/attachment/584/social-rights-are-human-rights.pdf


=Description=

From the summary:

"The UK human rights system is rigged. It is rigged
in the sense that it privileges civil and political rights and neglects
social rights. Although social rights are important to everyone, they are
especially vital to disadvantaged individuals and communities.
Social rights include the rights to an adequate standard of living,
afordable housing, food, education, an equitable health system, and
social security based on respect, not sanctions. There is evidence that
they improve the lives of individuals and communities. Social rights are
emancipatory and position us all as rights holders, not service users.

Across the world, civil society groups are organising around social rights.

A huge literature now looks at a wide range of issues through the ‘lens’
of social rights. Some countries are including social rights in their policy
making. In many countries, social rights are routinely argued before the
courts. Social rights encounter powerful opposition, but they are gaining
momentum.

The UK has accepted legally binding international obligations to promote
and protect social rights, and the British government supports these
human rights in the United Nations. But the UK does not currently support
explicit social rights at home, where they remain largely invisible.
The Labour Party is better placed than ever before to do something about
the hypocrisy and injustice of this rigged system. Jeremy Corbyn explicitly
afrms social rights. The Labour Party’s Manifesto is closely aligned with
social rights without explicitly mentioning them.

This pamphlet explains how explicitly referring to social rights would
strengthen the manifesto’s bold social policies. It provides case studies
from Belfast, Leith, York and elsewhere demonstrating the roles that social 
rights can play. It also identifies and addresses some of the arguments
that are used to privilege civil and political rights and marginalise social
rights.

The Human Rights Act must be robustly defended. But it is not an either/
or situation. It is possible to stoutly support the Human Rights Act and
favour better protection for social rights. There is evidence that a system
encompassing all human rights will attract more public support than one
which includes only some human rights.

The conclusion sets out how to advance social rights in the UK. The Labour
Party can make a major contribution by explicitly linking the manifesto’s
progressive social policies with social rights. We must name social rights,
talk about them and take them seriously. We need a deliberative process
which is bottom-up, inclusive and participatory, which will allow us to
chart the best way forward.

Social rights are not the preserve of lawyers and other technocrats. They
are not just about going to court. Explicit social rights have the power
to dignify and emancipate individuals and communities. They can shape
policies and practice. There is evidence of their positive impact. Why not
use them?"

=Contents=

#Social rights are human rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
#Social rights in action - seven case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
#The UK human rights system is rigged against social rights . . . . . . . . . 25
#Which arguments are used to privilege civil and political rights and marginalise social rights? 27
#“Don’t worry, we implicitly deliver social rights” . . . . . . . . . 29
#For the Many not the Few, Labour Party Manifesto, 2017 . . . . . . . . .  . . 30
#Benefits of including social rights in the manifesto . . . . . . . 33
#The way forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3


=Excerpt=

From the foreword by Paul Mason:

"As early as 1938, those who designed the current economic order
understood that the state would become their main tool; that markets do
not create and maintain themselves but have to be imposed and re-imposed
through law, regulation and, where necessary, coercion.

In the face of this, the concept of workers’ rights - which has guided the
activities of the main counter-power within capitalism, the labour movement
- has proved insufcient. As the progressive left fightback unfolds in Europe,
the idea of social rights has gained traction.

Plataforma de Afectados por la Hipoteca (PAH) is a social movement for the
realisation of the right to housing in Spain. During the country’s economic
crisis, banks began to evict homeowners, thousands of families lost their
homes, and many became homeless. PAH emerged in Barcelona and quickly
spread to other parts of Spain. It organised peaceful protests, successfully
delaying or halting many evictions. Crucially, PAH used the right to housing
to galvanise popular resistance and this contributed to positive changes in
law and policy.

It is just one example of the way social justice movements are using the
internationally protected and formally stated social rights to legitimise
resistance, such as the rights to an adequate standard of living, afordable
housing, accessible education, an equitable health system, and social
security based on respect, not sanctions.

This report explains what social rights are, why they are especially important
to disadvantaged individuals and communities, and why they are so little
known in the United Kingdom. It gives real-life examples from Leith, Belfast,
York and elsewhere demonstrating the roles that social rights can play.
As we resist austerity and prepare for a transformative change in British
politics, we need to expand the tools at our disposal.

Social rights are not a panacea, but this report, which outlines both the
concept and its application, is a useful starting point if we want to expand
our debates about strategy and tactics, learning from successful social
movements beyond Britain’s borders."
(https://www.centreforwelfarereform.org/uploads/attachment/584/social-rights-are-human-rights.pdf)

[[Category:Rights]]

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]