
=Description=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: 

"A new [[Crowdsourcing]] or rather crowd
harnessing approach that can be observed in the media practice and also by
independent users is the [[Social Media Content Curation]] approach. With the term
social media content curation the authors denote the new approach for creation of
content based on social media that goes beyond simple and automatic
aggregation. According to (Rosenbaum 2011), “… curation is about adding value
from humans who add their qualitative judgment to whatever is being gathered and
organized.” Rosenbaum (2011) furthermore adds: “Curation is about selection,
organization, presentation and evolution. While computers can aggregate content,
information or any shape or size of data, aggregation without curation is just a big pile of
stuff that seems related but lacks qualitative organization.” According to (Rotman et. al.
2011) curation deals with large corpora of content from diverse sources and
connotes the activities of identifying, selecting, verifying, organizing, describing,
maintaining, and preserving existing artifacts as well as integrating them into a
holistic resource. Curation thus, is a symbiosis of human and machine efforts. The
experts performing curation tasks are called curators, and in context of media
content curators. Rosenbaum (2011) cites in his book Rohit Bhargava's curation
manifesto, to describe a content curator as “… someone whose job it is not to create
more content, but to make sense of all the content that others are creating”.

Social-media content curation means creating of new media genres and
content based on input from social media. Curated social media content is an
innovative content genre that consists of original contributions from both online
sites of media outlets and social media such as tweets from microblogs, posts
from social networks and videos from video sharing platforms. The selected
original contributions are glued together to a story with background and context
information provided by the curator (author). Social-media curated content is
emerging in different formats such as books (for example the Quakebook was
created based on contributions from social-media related to the earthquake in
Japan), print articles, video and audio formats. Compared to the crowdsourcing
platforms that require input from human contributors, curated content is
assembled half-automatically from existing contributions of users in social media.
Another characteristic of social media content curation is the real-time collection,
selection and classification of contributions made by users."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]