

=Discussion=

Hilary Wainwright:

"First, the political importance of a new social trade unionism. It is rarely reflected upon, but the centralised hierarchies that still persist in parts of the public sector were originally modelled on the armed forces. Such anal, top-down forms of management have all too often suppressed the insights and know-how of the frontline staff who deliver services and who have daily contact with the people who use them. Resistance to privatisation shows signs of changing this, leading to an assertion of power by frontline workers, and increasingly the public they serve.

In Newcastle, for example, the threat to privatise the homecare service led carers and cared-for alike to think out loud about what is essential to good care. The picture of care services that emerged was full of skilled improvisation and good will. There are many hidden qualities to good care - like continuity, disrupted by privatisation, and adaptability to the needs of the client. The range of support provided by a good carer is mental as well as physical but choice, and with it dignity for the client, has often been blocked by bureaucratic routines. The distinct needs of Asian and other ethnic minority clients are part of good care, so is the importance of improving pay and status of carers as it is getting more difficult to attract people to the service. In the resistance to privatisation, the unions are now working with service users and their families to create a charter for improved homecare that will set out the alternative to privatisation and cost-cutting, which is undermining the quality of care.

This is just a glimpse into how the social efficiency of a service could improve if clients and frontline workers had real influence on how it is delivered. Similar improvements would be gained from pooling the knowledge of the train drivers, signalmen, guards and rail users who are campaigning for the railways in Britain to be owned and controlled by the public. Their case for public ownership is not dogma, and it's not about any old form of public ownership. They want to pool their frontline knowledge and skill to meet the needs of the public. This approach conflicts directly with privatisation. Private businesses with all their requirements for commercial confidentiality could never allow such participatory democracy to flourish. New Labour's privatisation plans would merely replace the closed hierarchies of the traditional public sector with the secrecy of the private. Resistance based on alliances of users and frontline workers putting forward alternatives to make public services more accountable and responsive, is a powerful way of winning public support.

The unions need to go further in reaching out to the public and recognising the knowledge of the user-led campaigns which spring up around valued services. Unions also need to consider forms of devolved public provision run by accountable social enterprises that are not out to make a profit, and are prepared to create new kinds of companies involving users, workers and council or parliamentary representatives.

This issue of the social economy and its political significance also arises from tensions between New Labour's interpretation of 'community' and the interpretations rooted in the past two decades of neighbourhood struggles over land, employment, housing and community facilities. An aspect of New Labour's 'third way' was a commitment to 'empowering communities' at the same time as spitting venom at local elected councils. The thinking - not very coherent, the result of a mixture of influences, including the serious need for local government reform - was to reduce the powers of local councils by further reinforcing already centralised systems of funding and applying a simultaneous pressure to privatise. At the same time, the government, from the Cabinet office itself, encouraged community self-help in the poorest areas. This selective support for 'community-led' regeneration was a way of addressing the problems of Mrs Thatcher's worst victims without tackling Britain's grossly unequal distribution through taxation and increasing social security and unemployment benefits.

People don't forget their history - of community development, trade union organising, environmental, feminist and anti-racist campaigning - and as a result, given resources and opportunities, they have a way of taking things into their own hands and moving in directions impossible to predict. One direction that is emerging out of these micro-environments of expansion and community control is social enterprises, funded from various sources of public or lottery money and run for the local community rather than for profit. In Luton, for example, an eclectic range of community activists are mixing the libertarian, communal self-help ethic of the anti-capitalist movement with the collectivist traditions of the labour and tenants movement to create a whole zone of inter-connected co-ops and social enterprises. They are using government money to buy an empty factory on their estate and create the infrastructure for this imaginative project.

The social and political integrity of this and other initiatives are vulnerable in the longer run to the corporate predators who could quickly move in to the profitable sides of the social economy once public funding and other kinds of support are no longer forthcoming. These projects illustrate what kind of economic and social organisation a new kind of state could sustain. At the same time, however, they need the support of others, beyond their particular neighbourhood, to survive and to bargain with the existing state and economy. They need to be part of a political process involving the trade unions, political and community activists and a democratic local state."
(http://www.tni.org/article/notes-towards-new-politics-0)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Politics]]