

'''= conference theme 2019: "What happens to a group or community that moves from a hierachical to a more decentralised working model'''?"

URL = http://socialtools.us/?

=Description=

"Decentralisation is a term that is currently en vogue. It is often mentioned in conjunction with block-chain technology and cryptocurrencies. We nevertheless want to focus our attention on the social implications of decentralisation processes. What happens to a group or community that moves from a hierachical to a more decentralised working model?

This event is for everyone trying to work in such a way: members of artistic collectives, co-ops, startups, NGOs, companies, museums, activist networks and so on. We have worked with Pixelache for many years to adapt a decentralized model. We came up with some of our own solutions that worked out, but struggled with some basic issues. We have realised that we are not alone with this struggles, and that those challenges are rather common to any group trying to move away from a traditional command-and-control structure.

We set up the Socials Tools conference in 2018 in order to invite speakers and workshop hosts that can help us and others with this transformation, to move “from disorganisation to decentralised organising” (Rich Bartlett)

While the 2018 Social Tools conference tried to give a broad overview of issues of decentralised organising, the 2019 conference will focus on 3 patterns that were discussed last year but that need a more extensive and thorough discussion: POWER. MONEY, CONFLICT. 

Power imbalances can be found in almost any organisation, so how can we talk about them and deal with them? How can we avoid “toxic” power but embrace “healthy” power?  How do we track and compensate contributions in  decentralised organisations? How do we balance paid, pro bono and volunteer work? How do we acknowledge invisible work and care work?

When trying to move towards a more decentralised way of working, conflict is almost inevitable. How can we deal with it? What patterns and tools are available for addressing conflict?

Those and many other similar questions will be addressed. Welcome to join us to this collective learning journey."

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]