=Discussion=

Felix Stalder:

"What is speciﬁc to the second index is the last dimension of surveillance, social sorting. David Lyon develops the concept in the following way:
Codes, usually processed by computers, sort out transactions, interactions, visits, calls and other activities. They are invisible doors that permit access to, or exclude from participation in a myriad of events, experiences and processes. The resulting classiﬁcations are designed to inﬂuence and manage populations and persons thus directly and indirectly aﬀecting the choices and chances of data subjects.

Rather than treating everyone the same, social sorting allows matching people with groups to whom particular procedures, enabling, disabling or modifying behavior, are assigned. With search engines, we encounter this as personalization. It is important to note that, as David Lyon stresses, “surveillance is not itself sinister any more than discrimination is itself damaging.”32 Indeed, the basic purpose of personalization is to help search engines to improve the quality of search results. It enables them to rank results in relation to individual user preferences, rather than to network topology, and helps to disambiguate search terms based on the previous path of a person through the information landscape. Personalization of search is part of a larger trend in the informational economy towards “mass individualization”, where each consumer/user is given the impression, rightly or wrongly, of being treated as a unique person within systems of production still relying on economies of scale.

Technically, this is a very diﬃcult task for which vast amounts of personal data are needed, which, as we have seen, is being collected in a comprehensive, and systematic way. A distinction is often made between data that describes an individual on the one hand, and data which is “anonymized” and aggregated into groups on the basis of some set of common characteristics deemed relevant for some reason. This distinction plays an important role in the public debate, for example in Google’s announcements in September 2008 to strengthen user privacy by “deleting” (i.e. anonymizing) user data after nine rather than 18 months.33 Questions have also been raised about how easily this “anonymization” can be reversed by Google itself or by third parties.34 In some cases, Google oﬀers the option to disable cookies or use Chrome’s Incognito mode (“porn mode” in colloquial usage), but instructions how to do this are well hidden, diﬃcult to follow, and arguably only relevant for highly technologically literate users. Moreover, the US-American consumer group Consumer Watchdog has pointed out that “Chrome’s Incognito mode does not confer the privacy that the mode’s name suggests”, as it does not actually hide the user’s identity. It is important to note that even if Google followed eﬀective “anonymizing” procedures, this would matter only in terms of surveillance understood as personal tracking. If we understand it as social sorting, this has nearly no impact. The capacity to build a near inﬁnite number of “anonymized” groups from this database and to connect individuals to these small groups for predictive purposes re-integrates anonymized and personalized data in practice. If the groups are ﬁne-grained, all that is necessary is to match an individual to a group in order for social sorting to become eﬀective. Thus, Hier concludes that “it is not the personal identity of the embodied individual but rather the actuarial or categorical proﬁle of the collective which is of foremost concern.” In this sense, Google’s claim to increase privacy is seriously misleading.

Like virtually all aspects of the growing power of search engines, personalization is deeply ambiguous in its social eﬀects. On the one hand, it promises to oﬀer improvements in terms of search quality, further empowering users by making accessible the information they need. This is not a small feat. By lessening the dependence on the overall network topology, personalization might also help to address one of the most frequently voiced criticisms of the dominant ranking schemes, namely that they promote popular content and thus reinforce already dominant opinions at the expense of marginal ones. Instead of only relying on what the majority of other people ﬁnd important, search engines can balance that with the knowledge of the idiosyncratic interest of each user (group), thus selectively elevating sources that might be obscure to the general audience, but are important to this particular user (set). The result is better access to marginal sources for people with an assumed interest in that subject area.

So far so good. But where is the boundary between supporting a particular special interest and deliberately shaping a person’s behavior by presenting him or her with a view shaped by criteria not his or her own? As with social sorting procedures in general, the question here is also whether personalization increases or decreases personal autonomy. 


Legal scholar Frank Pasquale frames the issue in the following way:

Meaningful autonomy requires more than simple absence of external constraint once an individual makes a choice and sets out to act upon it. At a minimum, autonomy requires a meaningful variety of choices, information of the relevant state of the world and of these alternatives, the capacity to evaluate this information and the ability to make a choice. If A controls the window through which B sees the world—if he systematically exercises power over the relevant information about the world and available alternatives and options that reaches B—then the autonomy of B is diminished. To control one’s informational ﬂows in ways that shape and constrain her choice is to limit her autonomy, whether that person is deceived or not.

Thus, even in the best of worlds, personalization enhances and diminishes the autonomy of the individual user at the same time. It enhances it because it makes information available that would otherwise be harder to locate. It improves, so it is claimed, the quality of the search experience. It diminishes it because it subtly locks the users into a path-dependency that cannot adequately reﬂect their personal life story, but reinforces those aspects that the search engines are capable of capturing, interpreted through assumptions built into the personalizing algorithms. The diﬀerences between the personalized and the non-personalized version of the search results, as Google reiterates, are initially subtle, but likely to increase over time. A second layer of intransparency, that of the personalization algorithms, is placed on top of the intransparency of the general search algorithms. Of course, it is always possible to opt out of personalization by simply signing out of the account. But the ever increasing range of services oﬀered through a uniform log-in actively works against this option. As in other areas, protecting one’s privacy is rendered burdensome and thus something few people are actively engaged in, especially given the lack of direct negative consequences for not doing it.

And we hardly live in the best of all worlds. The primary loyalty of search engines is – it needs to be noted again – not to users but to advertisers. Of course, search engines need to attract and retain users in order to be attractive advertisers, but the case of commercial TV provides ample evidence that this does not mean that user interests are always foregrounded.

The boundary between actively supporting individual users in their particular search history and manipulating users by presenting them with an intentionally biased set of results is blurry, not least because we actually want search engines to be biased and make sharp distinctions between relevant and irrelevant information. There are two main problems with personalization in this regard. On the one hand, personalization algorithms will have a limited grasp of our lives. Only selective aspects of our behavior are collected (those that leave traces in accessible places), and the algorithms will apply their own interpretations to this data, based on the dominant world-view, technical capacities and the particular goals pursued by the companies that are implementing them. On the other hand, personalization renders search engines practically immune to systematic, critical evaluation because it is becoming unclear whether the (dis)appearance of a source is a feature (personalization done right) or a bug (censorship or manipulation).

Comparing results among users and over time will do little to show how search engines tweak their ranking technology, since each user will have diﬀerent results. This will exacerbate the problem already present at the moment: that it is impossible to tell whether the ranking of results changes due to aggregate changes in the network topology, or due to changes in the ranking algorithms, and, should it be the latter, whether these changes are merely improvements to the quality, or attempts to punish unruly behavior.39 In the end, it all boils down to trust and expediency. The problem with trust is that, given the essential opacity of the ranking and personalization algorithms, there is little basis to evaluate such trust. But at least it is something that is collectively generated. Thus, a breach of this trust, even if it aﬀects only a small group of users, will decrease the trust of everyone towards the particular service. Expediency, on the other hand, is a practical measure. Everyone can decide for themselves whether the search results delivered are relevant to them. Yet, in an environment of information overload, even the most censored search will bring up more search results that anyone can handle. Thus, unless the user has prior knowledge of the subject area, she cannot know what is not included. Thus, search results always seem amazingly relevant, even if they leave out a lot of relevant material.

With personalization, we enter uncharted territory in its enabling and constraining dimensions. We simply do not know whether this will lead to a greater variety of information providers entering the realm of visibility, or whether it will subtly but profoundly shape the world we can see, if search engines promote a ﬁltering agenda other than our own. Given the extreme power diﬀerential between individual users and the search engines, there is no question who will be in a better position to advance their agenda at the expense of the other party.

The reactions to and debates around these three diﬀerent kinds of surveillance are likely to be very diﬀerent. As David Lyon remarked,
Paradoxically, then, the sharp end of the panoptic spectrum may generate moments of refusal and resistance that militate against the production of docile bodies, whereas the soft end seems to seduce participants into stunning conformity of which some seem scarcely conscious.

In our context, state surveillance facilitated by search engine data belongs to the sharp end, and personalization to the soft end where surveillance and care, the disabling and enabling of social sorting are hard to distinguish and thus open the door to subtle manipulation."

(http://felix.openflows.com/node/113)


=More information=

* Read about the [[Second Index]]

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]