
'''= SocialMap is a community-based, social networking platform that uses Google Maps.'''

URL = http://social-map.com/

=Description=

"SocialMap offers powerful web-based community building and marketing features including: location and event mapping, user-generated content with sharing, forums, social networking tools and built-in SEO for ultimate visibility.


'''Why SocialMap?'''

The SocialMap platform was designed to serve a wide range of markets and user groups. It is built using modern development tools and tested over a variety of active installations. As a platform, it can be customized to look, feel, and behave in the most effective way for specific markets. 

SocialMap is not only Search Engine friendly, but every installation is compatible with Google Analytics tracking, so you’ll always know exactly how people are getting to, and using the website tool.
 

'''Who is SocialMap for?'''

SocialMap was created to help solve the problems we encountered on the web within the communities we are a part of. Through its humble beginnings as a national Happy Hour finder, then a Knitting store locator, we noticed regions and groups that had a passionate user base, but were very underrepresented online. Existing websites and search engines were not only dated in their technology but lacked the ability for users to interact with the information presented.

We've now made the SocialMap platform available and open to be licensed by companies, communities and individuals who recognize a similar absence in their market. Through custom installations of SocialMap, we can help strengthen your brand while providing your customers a useful, web-based tool they can quickly become a part of and interact with often."
(http://social-map.com/)


[[Category:Geography]]