'''social search tools are internet wayfinding services informed by human judgement.'''


=Description=

From Chris Sherman at http://searchenginewatch.com/showPage.html?page=3623153 :

"Wayfinding, because they're not strictly search engines in the sense that most people know them. And human judgement means that at least one, but more likely dozens, hundreds or more people have "consumed" the content and have decided it's worthy enough to recommend to others. Social search takes many forms, ranging from simple shared bookmarks or tagging of content with descriptive labels to more sophisticated approaches that combine human intelligence with computer algorithms."
(http://searchenginewatch.com/showPage.html?page=3623153)



=History=

"We've always had social search, even from the early days of the internet. Before the emergence of the first search engines in 1993 or thereabouts, people relied on pages with links to their favorite sites. One of the first was created by web inventor Tim Berners-Lee, and it's still online—though most of the links on the page have been long broken.

Yahoo, one of the first directories of web sites, was created by a team of human editors who surfed the web and wrote up brief descriptions of the sites they found. The Open Directory Project, the Librarians' Index of the Internet and the U.K. based Resource Discovery Network are all directories of web sites created by people, and all have been around since the early days of the web.

You can argue that even algorithmic search engines, which rely on automated software based crawlers and indexing systems, are social search systems to a degree—after all, the software is written by people and incorporates judgments about quality, relevance and importance of web sites.

Indeed, Google's famous PageRank algorithm, which analyzes the link structure of the web and assigns more importance to pages with many "high quality" links pointing to them, is fundamentally a form of social search. Why? Because PageRank is relying on the collective judgement of webmasters linking to other content on the web. Links, in essence, are positive votes by the webmaster community for their favorite sites."
(http://searchenginewatch.com/showPage.html?page=3623153)


=Discussion=

==Why social search won't make it (for now)==

"Fundamentally, no matter how many people get involved with bookmarking, tagging, voting or otherwise highlighting web content, the scale and scope of the web means that most content will be unheralded by social search efforts. The web is simply growing too quickly for humans to keep up with it.

That doesn't mean that social search efforts aren't useful—in most cases, they are. It simply means that people-mediated search will never be as comprehensive as algorithmic search.

Another problem arises with tagging. Despite the popularity of tagging, especially with the web 2.0 mob, tags are not a panacea for categorizing and organizing the web. When used properly, tags can be very helpful in describing web content.

But problems arise with the inherent ambiguity of language—words often have multiple meanings, and people can have different interpretations of the same word.

The web lacks what librarians call a "controlled vocabulary," a set of terms that have specific, unambiguous meanings that can be used in a uniform, consistent fashion by everyone tagging web content. Without this controlled vocabulary, tagging ultimately remains a chaotic, messy process.

Another factor is human laziness. Even if a controlled vocabulary were available, not everyone would take advantage of it. We've always had the ability to add tags and other metadata to our Microsoft office documents, and yet how many people do this?

We also have a problem with idiots and spammers. Some people, no matter how well intentioned, will simply do a poor job of labeling content. Others will deliberately mislabel content to attempt to fool search engines. In both cases, it's difficult for software to recognize this spuriously labeled content. In social search, it's difficult to filter the noise from the signal.

Despite these problems, social search still holds promise for improving our overall information seeking and consuming activities on the web. Ultimately, it's likely that a combination of algorithmic search and the various types of social search systems will fuse into a hybrid that will work really well for a satisfying wide variety of information needs."
(http://searchenginewatch.com/showPage.html?page=3623153)


==Benefits of Social Search==


Brynn Marie Evans:

"The benefits of social search (on the web) are mostly theoretical at this point, although there is mounting evidence that social interactions provide critical support during search and problem solving. For example, people can provide solutions (advice, guidance, assistance), pointers to databases or other people, validation and legitimation of ideas [3, 5], and can serve as memory aids.

Plus, social interactions are useful for more than conveying knowledge or supplying certain facts. People can help with problem reformulation and brainstorming. “Guided participation” is a process in which people co-construct knowledge in concert with peers in their community [4]. Social psychologists have recently found that social discussions facilitate subsequent cognitive performance. These findings suggest that social interactions could naturally aid users in web search tasks, although we cannot predict how these interactions will play out in practice.

Several “flavors” of social search solutions already exist on the web, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. Some services are collective harvesters, presenting content based on popularity or emerging topics (Digg, OneRiot), or re-ranking search results based on user annotations (WikiaSearch, Google’s SearchWiki). These solutions, although available instantaneously, may lack relevance or validity since they are pooled from anonymous users across the web. Others try to connect searchers to experts (Yahoo! Answers, MetaFiler, Aardvark), providing personalized answers but at a serious cost (a time delay). Searching through social networks is another solution that has the potential to be both personalized and expedient. For example, a search in FriendFeed first returns content that your friends have shared with the system. Delver presents data shared by your social graph (elsewhere) intermixed with their search result listings. Undoubtedly Facebook and Google (who arguably have social graph data through Gmail contacts) are also considering solutions in this direction. While these solutions must require a lot of computing power (among other social smarts), I believe that a personalized social graph solution, if integrated with Google, will be the most successful in addressing real search problems."
(http://brynnevans.com/blog/2009/01/30/why-social-search-wont-topple-google-anytime-soon/)


==The Limitations of Social Search==

Brynn Marie Evans:

"One concern with these existing social search tools (and others) is that they aren’t quite the solution to the search problem yet. Do these services address real user needs? Is this the type of social support that will be most useful during difficult queries or failed search attempts? As this is yet to be determined, it’s worthwhile reviewing the current limitations of social search.

An obvious limitation is that information from social resources may not be as complete or thorough as information stored in large search engine databases. This is an issue of scale and scope. A social search only solution will lack either the scale or the scope that a Google search can provide. This criticism is not entirely a fair, however, if social inputs are used primarily to augment regular result listings, instead of replace them.

A narrower scale and scope may actually be advantageous by helping searchers in one of two ways. First, since we naturally seek information from other people directly, receiving suggestions of experts or friends to help with a certain problem may be quite useful. Second, socially-filtered data may be more trustworthy, especially if the filtered information comes from people you know.

On the other hand, a searcher may not have knowledgeable or available contacts for a given query. In these circumstances, passively receiving social recommendations may be a good solution. My current work is looking at the tradeoffs between asking friends directly for help and receiving somewhat anonymous replies from large social networks (a la social recommendations) during search and sensemaking tasks. These strategies provide complimentary support for searchers: While the latter may present a diverse set of views on a topic (establishing breadth), the former may help develop depth on individual topics.

Finally, social inputs won’t be the right solution for every user query. Certain questions are likely to be improved by social search (experience-, opinion-based, and tacit information), but others may be hindered. Open-ended, exploratory queries may benefit from social inputs, simple navigational ones may not [5]. To avoid cluttering the interface or cognitively overloading the user, an optimal solution would deliver social solutions appropriate to the target circumstance. Will this type of inference and personalization be possible with search tools?

'''Concluding remarks'''

On the whole, social search is still in its infancy. Even Google, which has been around for 10 years, continually tweaks its search algorithms. It’s naive to think that we will have truly viable, integrated social solutions to the search problem over night.

Unfortunately, current social search tools are fairly crude, presenting solutions to (more simple) algorithmic problems instead of to user problems. This is not to say that the work of social search engines is a easy, but rather that they may be working on the wrong questions. Very few current social tools integrate with Google (with a few exceptions, whose value has yet to be demonstrated: CloudLet and Qitera). Since it’s unlikely that users will rush to adopt new search tools at this point, an integrated, combined approach (Google + social) seems more practical.

Beyond this, we need to know more about how social inputs, interactions, and passive social recommendations can address user needs during search, to help focus targeted solutions to real problems. I believe that Google search will continue to be a part of this solution; I also believe that social search has the potential to supplement Google in powerful ways."
(http://brynnevans.com/blog/2009/01/30/why-social-search-wont-topple-google-anytime-soon/)

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]