
Typology from Niklas Luhman.


=Typology=

From Jonas Andersen:

"According to Luhmann, social systems operate by way of communication, and as there are different types of communication processes, '''social systems are subdivided into three different categories; interactions, organizations, and societies'''. Luhmann made this categorization from the reality he experienced in the 1970’ies and -80’ies, and later we will see how it might need a slight adjustment in order to fit our understanding of network structured communication systems. 


But for now, lets look at Luhmann’s three different types of communication systems. 

'''Interactions are characterized by participation of at least two psychic systems interacting by communication'''. The two systems are structurally coupled through a sign system such as a language, which makes communication probable. According to Luhmann these two psychic systems must be present at the same time at the same place. Because they dissolve as soon as these premises are not met, interactions form the least complex and least stabile type of social communication systems. (This is of course one of the points that need revising after the spread of digital networks such as the internet.)


'''Organizations have a built-in common goal or purpose'''. This means that there are a number of preconditions to be fulfilled by communicators in an organization if exclusion is to be avoided. In organizations there is a connotative understanding of purpose that is defined and negotiated through communication. In practice the system often delegates the responsibility of defining its purpose to special members, which it calls management, or to a general assembly. 

In Luhmann’s theory of social systems societies form yet another emergent systemic level analogous to the three systemic levels illustrated above (Kneer & Nassehi 1997 p. 46 ff.). A new emergent level emerges cybernetically when a system is something more, or rather different, than the sum of its components. '''Societies are made up of a hyper-complex number of organic, psychic, and social systems making them so complex that a new level of observation is needed in order to reduce their complexity in a meaningful observation'''.  In other words societies function differently from the other types of systems while still containing members of those types."
(http://dotjonas.net/wordpress/?page_id=7)


[[Category:Relational]]