
'''Book: Mark Buchanan. The Social Atom.'''

= what makes the social world so complex isn't individual complexity, but the way in which people interact


=Review=

Howard Rheingold:

"Mark Buchanan, in contrast, uses a telescope to look at new research into
the ways individual behaviors add up to emergent phenomena at the population
level. Buchanan, a physicist, a contributor to *strategy+business*, a *New
York Times* columnist/blogger, and a former *Nature* and *New
Scientist*editor, argues in *The Social Atom* that "scientists are learning that what makes the social
world so complex isn't individual complexity, but the way in which people
interact, in often surprising ways, to create patterns." He writes, "Very
simple behavior, when repeated in the interactions among many people, can be
the source of exceedingly rich and surprising outcomes."

On the basis of that observation, he calls for a new type of study -- "social
physics" -- that looks at the origins of collective social patterns in the
same way that the study of physics looks at the dynamics of materials and
forces. "We can make great progress in building a science of the human world
if we learn to look for patterns in the human world as we do in the rest of
nature. And if we try to explain them as the natural collective outcomes of
ordinary behavior of human beings," he writes.

Although Buchanan writes about economies, demographics, and social patterns,
and not about the Internet, there is certainly no richer environment to test
his thesis than the World Wide Web. Analytics as practiced today on the Web
represents a sophisticated form of pattern recognition that reinforces
Buchanan's observation that "our collective behavior follows mathematical
patterns of surprising precision."

Because *The Social Atom* lays out a provocative new explanatory framework
for the relationship between individual actions and social phenomena, based
on systematic observations of how people behave, I endorse this book, even
though I still mistrust the metaphor of social science as physics. "Social
science" is a meta-narrative itself -- a label that uses semantics rather
than logic to situate the messy and often unpredictable phenomena of human
behavior in the rigorously measurable realm of physics. I'm still not sure
that the "social physics" that Buchanan proposes, based as it is on studying
how simple actions of individuals can lead predictably to complex social
outcomes, is ever going to be as precise as the name "social physics"
implies. One example is Buchanan's reference to the work of economist and
Nobel Laureate Thomas Schelling that uses simple models of individual
decision making to explain "white flight" and other instances of ethnic
self-segregation. As Buchanan notes, this is not an example of deliberate
racism, but of the phenomenon that results when individuals don't want to be
in the minority, thus influencing their neighbors' decisions and
inadvertently setting off a cascade of similar actions. Although this is a
key insight, it does not prove that more knowledge about emergent patterns
of behavior will enable more precise prediction of individual actions.
Nevertheless, the evidence Buchanan cites -- "why the rich get richer,
cheaters get caught, and your neighbor usually looks like you," in the words
of the subtitle -- has caused me to question my previous assumptions about
which human behaviors are intrinsically unpredictable and which simply
indicate that our social study instruments have failed to detect patterns.

The rich may get richer for mathematical, rather than just social or
political, reasons -- although, of course, those with more wealth have the
means to attain greater social status or political power. The mathematical
part is the "power law" of probability distribution (better known now as the
80/20 rule) first elucidated by economist Vilfredo Pareto a century ago.
Twenty percent of the world's rivers convey 80 percent of the water. Twenty
percent of the world's population enjoys 80 percent of its economic wealth.
This power law is observable on the Internet (the popularity of blogs, sales
of books on Amazon) as it is in many other earthly phenomena.

Whether or not a science of social physics emerges from the scattered
provocative findings about cooperation that Buchanan finds in economics and
biology, game theory and computer science, anyone seeking to strategize
about business these days would do well to understand how individual choices
can add up to society-wide trends."
(http://www.strategy-business.com/press/article/07408g?pg=0)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]