
'''= analyzing digital traces with the aim of uncovering fundamental patterns in social dynamics and coordinated human activity.'''

URL = http://www.sociopatterns.org/


=Description=

"We increasingly use digital media and computational devices in our daily activities and leave behind a sizable amount of digital traces while doing so. The proliferation of mobile devices and the incorporation of various sensing technologies in these devices, will further add to this growing trail of data. The possibility to mine and analyze these data, and the scale at which this can be done on contemporary computer systems, affords a novel, data-driven approach in the investigation of various aspects of human behavior.

SocioPatterns is an interdisciplinary scientific research project that adopts this data-driven methodology with the aim of uncovering fundamental patterns in social dynamics and coordinated human activity.

To achieve its scientific goals, the SocioPatterns project also considers the development of new means for obtaining pertinent but unavailable data. The first major result in this respect is the SocioPatterns sensing platform, which was developed to obtain longitudinal datasets on face-to-face contact events with the desired scale and resolution.

The SocioPatterns sensing platform employs wearable electronic badges to sense sustained face-to-face proximity between persons –a proxy observable for social contact– with a fine spatial and temporal resolution. It has so far been utilized in fourteen deployments in which the SocioPatterns team was directly involved. Further deployments are being prepared. The platform has additionally been adopted by other research groups and commercial entities which have deployed it and/or are preparing future deployments. Complementing the development of this sensing platform, the SocioPatterns team also works on the development of tools and techniques to facilitate the representation, analysis and visualization of the data obtained from this platform."
(http://www.sociopatterns.org/)

[[Category:Relational]]


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Technology]]