

'''Book: Athina Karatzogianni and Andrew Robinson: [http://www.amazon.co.uk/Power-Resistance-Conflict-Contemporary-World/dp/0415452988 Power, Resistance and Conflict in the Contemporary World]: Social Moments, Networks and Hierarchies, Routledge Advances in International Relations and Global Politics, London and New York: Routledge, September 2009'''

 
=Description=

From the publisher:
 
"This book examines issues of organisation in resistance movements, discussing areas including the integration of the world system, the intersection of networks with discourses of identity, and the possibility of social transformation. The analysis includes a very rich pool of empirical examples being drawn by more than 50 countries and more than 30 resistance groups. Drawing on theory by Deleuze and others on the structure of hierarchies and networks, Athina Karatzogianni and Andrew Robinson seek to reinterpret World Systems Theory in order to engage with issues of power, resistance, and conflict in the contemporary world. The authors engage with the world-systems, contemporary scholarship in global politics, and new concepts: global cities, bifurcations, hegemonic transitions, the relationship between capitalism and the state, the position of East Asia, active and reactive network movements and more besides. They develop new theory to interpret empirical cases of resistance and conflict including:

 
1) high-level theory about how to analyse contemporary global politics (abstract-concrete, rhizomes, world system, simulation, non-war, alienation)

 
2) discussion of the functioning of abstract social logics (state, capitalism, network vs. hierarchy, active vs. reactive)

 
3) discussion of specific assemblages of abstract social logics into specific types of social phenomena or assemblages (globalisation, global cities, neoliberalism, social movements, shanty-town politics, indigenous politics)

 
4) analysis of specific instances of these social phenomena in particular times and places (Afghanistan, Iraq, anti-terror paranoia, political Islam, specific indigenous and activist movements).

 
Power, Resistance and Conflict in the Contemporary World will be of interest for students and scholars looking for a comprehensive new theorization of the forces at work in global politics.  A framework which crosses the boundaries between international relations, international political economy, comparative politics, conflict studies, social movement studies and critical theory to produce a study of a scope uncommon in this age of disciplinary separations.

 
=Author Bios=

* Dr Athina Karatzogianni is a Lecturer in Media, Culture and Society at the University of Hull, UK. She is the author of The Politics of Cyberconflict (2006), and editor of Cyber Conflict and Global Politics (2009). Athina has also written on crossdisciplinarity, the free/open source software movement, and war coverage in global hotspots.

email: athina.k@gmail.com http://www.hull.ac.uk/humanities/media_studies/staff/athina_karatzogianni/index.html

 
* Dr Andrew Robinson is Researcher at the School of Politics and International Relations at the University Nottingham, UK. He has written on a diverse set of subjects, such global exclusion and the war on terror, and numerous articles and reviews on contemporary political theory focusing on writers such as Deleuze, Negri, and Sartre. email: ldxar1@gmail.com


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]