'''* Essay: Designing Freedom, Regulating a Nation: Socialist Cybernetics in Allende’s Chile. By EDEN MEDINA. . Lat. Amer. Stud. 38 , 571–606'''

URL = http://informatics.indiana.edu/edenm/EdenMedinaJLASAugust2006.pdf [http://www.academia.edu/1391031/Designing_freedom_regulating_a_nation_socialist_cybernetics_in_Allendes_Chile]


==Abstract==

"This article presents a history of ‘[[Project Cybersyn]]’, an early computer
network developed in Chile during the socialist presidency of Salvador Allende
(1970–1973) to regulate the growing social property area and manage the transition
of Chile’s economy from capitalism to socialism. Under the guidance of British
cybernetician Stafford Beer, often lauded as the ‘father of management cybernetics’,
an interdisciplinary Chilean team designed cybernetic models of factories within
the nationalised sector and created a network for the rapid transmission of economic data between the government and the factory floor. The article describes the
construction of this unorthodox system, examines how its structure reflected
the socialist ideology of the Allende government, and documents the contributions
of this technology to the Allende administration."


=Excerpts=

Eden Medina:

"Beer acknowledged the difficulties of achieving real-time economic
control, but emphasised that a system based on a firm understanding of
cybernetic principles could accomplish technical feats deemed impossible
in the developed world, even with Chile’s limited technological resources.
Once Allende gained a familiarity with the mechanics of Beer’s model, he
began to reinforce the political aspects of the project and insisted that
the system behave in a ‘decentralising, worker-participative, and anti-
bureaucratic manner’.

When Beer finally reached the top level of his system-
atic hierarchy, the place in the model Beer had reserved for Allende himself
the president leaned back in his chair and said, ‘At last,
el pueblo.’

With this succinct utterance, Allende reframed the project to reflect his ideological
convictions and view of the presidential office, which often equated his
political leadership with the rule of the people. By the end of the conver- sation, Beer had secured Allende’s blessing to continue the project."

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]
[[Category:Chile]]
[[Category:Cybernetics]]
[[Category:Complexity]]