
= '''this movement is about redirecting our giving to create real social transformation - not just "feel good" charity.''' 

=Description=

From http://www.greenmoneyjournal.com/article.mpl?articleid=231&newsletterid=1:

"Only five percent of private donations goes to social change causes. These are the groups that brought us sustainable agriculture, equitable pay, and countless other movements with which the SRI world is deeply bonded. Sustaining vibrant movements requires inspiration. It also requires money.

Currently, most U.S. philanthropy is directed to recipients such as universities, traditional health care, and human services. Traditional philanthropy, including (perhaps surprisingly) grant making by many community foundations, often fails to reach the very poor. Social change philanthropy, by contrast, tackles the root causes of social ills. It seeks to solve social problems rather than throw money at symptoms.

The 2001 book Robin Hood Was Right offers illustrations of the contrast between traditional giving ("charity") and social change philanthropy ("change"). Rather than funding Toys for Tots (charity), a social change orientation funds organizers fighting for a living wage so that parents can afford to buy the toys themselves. Instead of responding to a disability telethon, social change givers support disability advocacy groups pushing officials to make buildings accessible."
(http://www.greenmoneyjournal.com/article.mpl?articleid=231&newsletterid=1)

=Examples=

"Change, Not Charity!" is the tagline of the Funding Exchange (FEX), a national network of 16 social change funding organizations. The first FEX member groups emerged in the 1970s as an alternative to a stodgy philanthropic world, where wealthy foundation trustees made ill-informed funding decisions in isolation from the communities they were ostensibly serving. FEX grants supported local nonprofits fighting the city dump, advocating for domestic workers, or organizing tenants - in other words, carrying on the movements that traditional foundations fail to support. More importantly, FEX democratizes philanthropy by handing grant making decisions to a board of activists that represent the diversity of the affected community.

Models such as FEX have since grown to include over 100 groups that Changemakers calls the "community-based public foundations." Rather than obeying standard counsel to fund a traditional community foundation or to set up a private foundation, SRI folks might consider supporting one of these alternative foundations fighting for true social change. These are some of the only foundations willing to support the anti-war movement. By the way, about half of these foundations maintain an SRI investment policy! (For a state-by-state guide to community-based public foundations go to- www.changemakers.org) 
(http://www.greenmoneyjournal.com/article.mpl?articleid=231&newsletterid=1)


=More Information=

SOCIAL CHANGE PHILANTHROPY RESOURCES:

For Individual Givers

#Changemakers - http://www.changemakers.org.
#Funding Exchange - http://www.fex.org
#More Than Money - http://www.morethanmoney.org
#Resource Generation - http://www.resourcegeneration.org

For Corporations & Workplace Giving

#Wise Giving - http://www.wisegiving.org
#The Center for Corporate Citizenship at Boston College - http://wwww.bc.edu/centers/ccc
#Choice in Giving - http://wwww.choiceingiving.org

=Key Books to Read=

#Inspired Philanthropy: Your Step By Step Guide to Creating a Giving Plan by Tracy Gary and Melissa Kohner (Jossey-Bass Publishers, 2002)
#Robin Hood Was Right: A Guide to Giving Your Money for Social Change by Chuck Collins and Pam Rogers with John P. Garner (W.W. Norton & Co., 2001) 


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]